NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GOVERNMENT ADVERTISING AND MEDIA COVERAGE OF CORRUPTION
SCANDALS
Rafael Di Tella
Ignacio Franceschelli
Working Paper 15402
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15402

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2009

We thank Bharat Anand, Pablo Boczkowski, Matthew Gentzkow, Igal Hendel, Aviv Nevo, Lucas
Llach, Francisco de Santibañes, Ines Selvood, Jesse Shapiro, Andrei Shleifer and seminar participants
at the 2010 Strategy and the Business Environment Conference, CIfAR and Northwestern University
for helpful comments and discussions; as well as Micaela Sviatschi and Victoria Nuguer for extremely
helpful research assistance. The first author was a member of the board of Poder Ciudadano during
parts of our sample period. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Rafael Di Tella and Ignacio Franceschelli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Government Advertising and Media Coverage of Corruption Scandals
Rafael Di Tella and Ignacio Franceschelli
NBER Working Paper No. 15402
October 2009, Revised July 2010
JEL No. K42,L82
ABSTRACT
We construct measures of the extent to which the 4 main newspapers in Argentina report government
corruption in their front page during the period 1998-2007 and correlate them with the extent to which
each newspaper is a recipient of government advertising. The correlation is negative. The size is considerable:
a one standard deviation increase in monthly government advertising (0.26 million pesos of 2000)
is associated with a reduction in the coverage of the government’s corruption scandals by 0.31 of a
front page per month, or 25% of a standard deviation in our measure of coverage. The results are robust
to the inclusion of newspaper, month, newspaper*president and individual-corruption scandal fixed
effects as well as newspaper*president specific time trends.
Rafael Di Tella
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field Rd
Boston, MA 02163
and CIFAR
and also NBER
rditella@hbs.edu
Ignacio Franceschelli
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
nacho@northwestern.edu

Introduction
The media plays an important role in modern democracies. For example, it provides
a large proportion of the information with which policymakers and voters make
decisions, as well as analysis and editorial content that may influence the conclusions
reached by potential voters (see, for example, Lippmann, 1922).1 Understandably, the
possibility that there is bias in the media has worried economists, as well as many
social and political commentators on both sides of the political spectrum (see, for
example, Goldberg, 2001, Alterman, 2003). A recent literature has developed
different measures of media bias and analyzed how they might behave in equilibrium.
Beyond the possibility of ideological influences on the media, some have worried
that financial motivations of media companies might lead them to bias their content
in exchange for advertisement or other type of transfers (see, for example, Hamilton,
2003 , Reuter and Zeitzewitz, 2006). Given that in many settings the government is
the largest advertiser in the media, this is particularly troublesome as there is
evidence that the introduction of investigative reporters and mass media, at least in
some cases, was associated with increased government accountability and lower
corruption.2
In this paper we focus on a particular aspect of the media, namely the relationship
between front page coverage and monetary transfers. Specifically, we study daily
newspaper coverage of corruption scandals involving the government across the 4
main newspapers in Argentina during the period 1998-2007. We also obtain the
amount spent by the government on advertisement in each newspaper, each month.
We find that there is a negative correlation between the amount of front page space
devoted to coverage of corruption scandals and the amount of advertisement money
paid to the newspaper each month. The size seems large: a one standard deviation
increase in government advertisement is associated with a reduction in coverage of
corruption scandals by 0.31 of a cover per month, or 25% of a standard deviation in
our measure of front page coverage. Our results are robust to the inclusion of
newspaper and month fixed effects and of government-newspaper interactions,
suggesting that within a particular newspaper, and during a particular government,
adverse coverage is negatively correlated with government advertising. This solves
the central identification problem in the literature, whereby media (newspapers) that
are close to the advertiser (government) give favorable coverage and friendly
advertisers (governments) give more funds to media (newspapers) that are
Work on the effects of news contents includes Besley and Burgess (2002), Stromberg (2004), Gentzkow and
Shapiro (2004), Gentzkow (2006), della Vigna and Kaplan (2007), Dyck, Volchkova and Zingales (2008),
Gerber, Karlan and Bergan (2008), inter alia.
2 For example, Gentzkow, Glaeser and Goldin (2006) show how the American newspaper industry became
more informative thanks to an increase in scale at a time corruption declined and argue that the rise of the
informative press was one of the reasons why the corruption of the Gilded Age was sharply reduced during the
subsequent Progressive Era.
1

2

ideologically close and none of it is motivated by material concerns. Similar results
obtain when using alternative measures of coverage that allow us to control for news
event dummies (i.e., scandal fixed effects). Given that we have data on individual
news events, we are able to study coverage of scandals using alternative measures,
such as the number of scandals the newspaper has not yet reported but that others
already have (Hide), front page coverage of corruption scandals that were reported by
just one newspaper (which we call Front Pages Incidents) and coverage regarding
scandals that were widely reported (by at least two newspapers, which we call Front
Pages Affaires). We also find that the correlation between government transfers and
the reporting of corruption disappears when we focus on the advertising that is not
channeled through a government centralized agency or when we study the coverage
of scandals by non-political actors.
Our definition of bias is related to the measures derived in the recent literature on
the topic. Two of the most influential are Groseclose and Milyo (2005), who focus
on the possibility that some media outlets quote as source the same think tanks as
partisan politicians and find that the vast majority of outlets is biased to the left; and
Gentzkow and Shapiro (2006) who focus on the possibility that some media outlets
use the same expressions and language as partisan politicians and find that
newspaper slant is influenced by its reader’s ideological inclination.3 Whereas these
measures are (broadly) absolute, it is possible to calculate a rough measure of bias by
examining the relative intensity with which they cover a specific issue. In our case,
we calculate an average reporting of corruption (that may be calculated for a certain
newspaper; or for a certain moment; or for a certain newspaper during a particular
period of time), and observe if newspaper reporting is different than this average
when government advertising is relatively high. Thus, if all papers are biased, we do
not detect it with our tests.
Previous work has focused on the correlates of related measures of media bias. For
example, Larcinese, Puglisi and Snyder (2007) study how newspapers who tend to
endorse Democratic candidates systematically give more coverage to high
unemployment when the incumbent president is a Republican than when the
president is Democratic, compared to newspapers with a pro-Republican
endorsement pattern. In other words, identification comes from comparing
reporting on a common event across different newspapers, a similar empirical
strategy to the one we follow. Two papers that are particularly close to our study
given their focus on the effect of advertising on coverage, are Reuter and Zitzewitz
(2006) and Gambaro and Puglisi (2009). Both papers study the extent to which the
media biases its content to benefit private sector advertisers, a common claim in the
See Ansolabehere, Lessem and Snyder (2006) for work on bias using explicit endorsements of newspapers in
the US and Baum and Gussin (2007) for work on the subjective component of bias. For theoretical work on
media bias see Mullainathan and Shleifer (2005), Baron (2006) and Besley and Prat (2006).
3

3

popular press for which there was no systematic evidence (see, for example, Baker,
1994 and Hamilton, 2004). Reuter and Zitzewitz (2006) find that mutual fund
recommendations are correlated with past advertising in three personal finance
publications but not in two national newspapers, even after controlling for several
fund characteristics, total advertising expenditures, and past mentions. They note
that future returns are similar for mutual funds that are predicted to have been
mentioned in the absence of bias, and conclude that in this case the cost of
advertising bias to readers is small. Gambaro and Puglisi (2009) match newspaper
coverage of a sample of companies in Italy with the amount of advertising each
company has acquired. They find that the number of articles mentioning that
company is positively associated with the amount of advertising, especially when
interacted with data on the press releases issued by the companies. Finally, Puglisi
and Snyder (2008) use automatic keyword-based searches to study the relative
frequency with which close to 200 newspapers cover a set of 35 scandals in the US.
They find that newspapers endorsing Democratic (Republican) candidates tend to
give relatively more coverage to scandals involving Republican (Democratic)
politicians.4
Some authors have stressed the possibility of reduced government accountability
when the governments influence the media. Djankov, et al (2003) document
widespread government ownership of the media around the world, and a positive
correlation between public ownership of the media and several measures of poor
government performance (see also, Brunetti and Weder, 2003). An important paper
for us is Besley and Prat (2006) as they present a model where the government can
pay a media outlet to suppress a story. In equilibrium, capture is less prevalent when
there are a large number of media firms and high transaction costs. In their model
they assume that only verifiable information gets to be printed and that once one
firm prints it, there is no point in preventing others from following suit, so there are
no equilibria in which the government bribes some outlets but not others.5 We note
that with non-verifiable pieces of news this is not always the case, both because
rational consumers of the media become more certain about the truth of an event
widely reported and because some “impressionable” consumers may think a piece of
news is more likely to be true when it is repeated (i.e., even when it is clear that it is
the same report; on message repetition see, for example, Petty and Cacciopo, 1981).

Gentzkow, Glaeser and Goldin (2006) study how the coverage of scandals changed over time in the US.
This is plausible and there is evidence that legal decisions in the US take precisely this view See, for example,
the evidence discussed in Gentzkow and Shapiro (2005) about the futility of government injunctions against
publication of items already revealed by one newspaper during the deliberations prior to the Supreme Court’s
decision on New York Times Co. v. United States (403 U.S. 713 [1971]). But the alternative assumption of readers
consuming only one publication is also attractive in some settings (see for example the discussion in
Mullainathan and Shleifer, 2005).
4
5

4

Several authors have studied the role of the media during periods of political change.
For example, Gehlbach and Sonin (2008) discuss the media in postcommunist Russia
and its response to the needs of the Kremlin and the growth in the size of the
advertising market. Such country studies reveal that governments use a variety of
ways to influence the media, from the passing of favorable laws to media firms (or
affiliated companies), to threats of legal action against journalists, to business favors,
amongst others. McMillan and Zoido (2004), for example, document the use of
several of these instruments in the case of Peru when Vladimiro Montesinos was the
head of intelligence agency. Note that politicians’ with long standing business
connections with the media have lower transaction costs in their interactions with
the media. The case of Berlusconi in Italy is a case in point (see, for example,
Durante and Knight, 2009). Finally, we do not review work in communications,
although there have been several authors who have also emphasized the possibility
of bias arising from a desire to keep access to sources of information even in
developed countries (see, for an example, Bennet 1990).
In Section II we provide some background information on government interference
in the media in Argentina and anecdotal evidence on the role of government
transfers in the form of advertising. We also discuss our data and how it was
constructed, as well as our empirical strategy. Section III presents our main results
while section IV offers a brief discussion. Section V concludes.

I.

Background, Data and Empirical Strategy

II.a. Background and Institutional Setting
Governments in Latin America have used several different strategies to influence
media content, and previous work has emphasized how these influences might
generate biased coverage (see, for example, Alisky, 1981, Boas, 2005, Canizalez,
2009, inter alia). Previous work by NGO’s on the subject in Latin America and, in
particular, Argentina documents many direct violations of media freedom, including
legal harassment and personal attacks against journalists (see, for example, Browne
and Fitzpatrick, 2004 and ADC/Justice Initiative, 2008).6 The ADC/Justice Initiative
report also documents indirect forms of interference such as access to privileged
information and, in particular, financial pressure through withdrawal of public

In a recent case an unprecedented number of tax inspectors (over 200) were sent to investigate tax and
accounting violations at Clarín the day after Clarín reported on a corruption scandal at the tax authority. See
Clarín, September 11, 2009, as well as all the 3 other newspapers in our sample.
6

5

advertisement by the government. The case of Argentina is no exception. The report
summarizes the situation in Argentina in 2003-08, as follows:
“The national government regularly abuses its advertising powers, including
through excessive allocations to political favorites and denial of advertising in
retaliation for critical coverage. Such abuses are even more marked at the local
level, where media are, as a rule, more dependent on provincial and municipal
advertising.”
An earlier report focused exclusively on Argentina, investigated the conditions at the
national level and in four Argentine provinces between April 2003 and August 2004
(ADC/Justice Initiative, 2005). It concludes:
“We found an entrenched culture of pervasive abuse by provincial government
officials who manipulate distribution of advertising for political and personal
purposes … The effects of such abuses are especially insidious when public
sector advertising is critical to the financial survival of media outlets, as is
common in many Argentine provinces such as Tierra del Fuego, where on
average, print and other media outlets receive approximately 75 percent of their
advertising income from government agencies. Provincial governments, in
particular, routinely use their control of advertising resources as financial sticks
or carrots, whether it is to bankrupt an annoying publication or to
inappropriately influence content.”
The report documents several instances of full interruption of provincial government
advertisement in critical newspapers (and, in one case, the simultaneous tripling of
advertisement spending in a competitive newspaper). The federal government, unlike
provincial governments, is legally required to use competitive bidding at some stage
of the process, although this is rarely enforced.7 Legal actions have been pursued and
in September 2007, Argentina’s Supreme Court ruled that the provincial government
of the Neuquén province violated the free speech rights of the Río Negro newspaper
by withdrawing advertising in retaliation for critical coverage, while the province of
Tierra del Fuego issued a decree reducing the discretion in the allocation of
advertising contracts.
While we focus on government advertising, financial pressure can be exerted through
several different channels. A newspaper’s financial position can be affected by
government rules and regulations and their enforcement, for example concerning
their distribution. The position of the owners can also be affected, either directly
(particularly when they are indebted) or indirectly (particularly when they have other
“The actual contracting of advertising for most agencies is done by the government’s news agency, Télam,
which uses no competitive process whatsoever”. ADC/Justice Initiative (2005)

7

6

large business interests). Examples of this strategy are observed in Argentina during
our sample period. For example, an article in the The Economist (2006) contrasts
national and provincial media and reports:
“The national media are less dependent on public advertising, but have received
other favours. The government has been particularly kind to the Clarín Group,
Argentina's largest media conglomerate. After the devaluation of the peso in
2002, the group -like many other Argentine companies- defaulted on its dollar
debts. When its creditors threatened to take it over, Congress passed a law
capping any foreigners' stake in "cultural goods" at 30%. The government has
also extended for ten years the group's cable-television licenses. Perhaps not
surprisingly, Clarín, Argentina's biggest-selling daily has tended to back the
government.”
Finally, it is unclear how independent from the public sector is private advertising in
Argentina. A large part of what is typically included under private sector advertising
is undertaken by firms with close ties to the government. In many cases this is direct,
as is the case with state owned firms. Although in principle this could be measured,
such an approach is complicated by the fact that the government has minority
positions in several large companies (such as the company owning the main airport
concession). In other cases, companies are privately owned (fully), yet their business
is heavily affected by government decisions on tariffs (such as public utilities), or on
regulations (such as banks, pension administrators and other financial institutions).
In Argentina in 2005, the Secretary of Media (one Enrique Albistur) explained that a
magazine that was particularly critical of the Kirchner government (Noticias) was to
receive no government advertising as a result of a “political decision” (see
ADC/Justice Initiative, 2008). After they sued the government for discrimination,
the editor noted that private ads fell to half of their original volume, while the
circulation of its publication grew steadily. Indeed, one of the characteristics of small
developing countries is the relatively large influence of the government on business.8

II.b. Data
We develop several measures of the intensity of coverage of government corruption
scandals by newspapers. The simplest measure is Front Pages, the total space in the
front page of a newspaper devoted to reporting on corruption scandals involving the
federal government.9 Specifically, we focused on the four main newspapers in
See Gentzkow, Glaeser and Goldin (2006) and Petrova (2008) for the role of private advertising in the
development of an independent media in the US.
9 This approach is both simple and has been used previously (at least broadly; see, for example, Chomsky and
Herman, 1988 and Yu, 2008).
8

7

Argentina (Clarín, La Nación, Página 12 and Ámbito Financiero), which represent 74%
of the total circulation of national newspapers in Argentina and are the core of the
non-yellow press sector. Two of them have lower circulation and are clearly at
opposite ends of the political spectrum: Página 12 on the left, with relatively large
coverage of themes related to human rights violations, particularly under the military
dictatorship, and Ámbito Financiero on the right end of the spectrum, with ample
coverage of financial news. The other two newspapers have wider circulation
(approximately 10 times more on average on a given day), and are at the political
center, with Clarín, somewhat to the left of La Nación, but we note that radio and TV
shows reproduce (in some form) the content of these newspapers, so the true
influence of these newspapers is not proportional to their circulation.10 For each day
in our sample period, and for each newspaper, a research assistant measured (using a
computer) the area covered by any front page article that dealt with any corruption
scandal that involved members of the current administration (e.g., the president or
the ministers) and then divided it by the total area of the front page. This daily
measure, which oscillates between 0 and 1, can then be aggregated up to a monthly
measure to create Front Pages (which oscillates between 0 and 30). Figure 1 shows the
front page of one day and illustrates how Front Pages is constructed. Table A
describes the top 20 scandals in our sample in terms of front pages occupied in the
four newspapers on the day the story broke, the month it broke and in the full
sample. The number one scandal in our sample is the accusation that government
officials bribed a group of senators in exchange for their legislative support in the
year 2000. On the day it broke, it occupied 2.9 front pages out of a possible 4. On
the month it broke, it occupied the equivalent of 17 front pages, with the equivalent
of 43.9 front pages during the corresponding presidency (De la Rua’s). Note that
these numbers comfortably exceed those of other scandals. While this empirical
measure is not automated, it is still reasonably reliable in that it involves front pages
and measuring of space with a computer rather than content analysis (see Puglisi and
Snyder, 2008, for a discussion).
We also developed measures of corruption coverage that exploited information on
individual scandals. There are 254 different scandals in our data base that appear in
994 front pages. The raw data on individual scandals (presented in Figure 2A)
reveals that over 150 of them were reported in only one newspaper. It is possible to
construct a simple measure of the speed with which newspapers break negative news
for the government. Hide is the total number of corruption scandals of the current
administration already reported by at least one newspaper that have not yet been
reported by each newspaper per month.

In several early morning and late night TV shows it is common that the main headlines (front page) of these
newspapers are read, with equal time given to each. In some of them these are discussed in some detail.
10

8

We can also exploit the data on individual scandals using a measure similar to Front
Pages, but considering only the space of the front page devoted to an individual
corruption scandal (Figure 1 also illustrates how Front Pages Scandal is constructed).
Thus, Front Pages Scandal is the total amount of space in the front pages of the month
devoted to covering a particular corruption scandal of the current administration.
Several corruption scandals are covered each month and the intensity with which
each of these is covered varies across newspapers.
Our measure of influence by the government is Government Advertising, the total
spending per month on advertising in each newspaper by the government, in
millions of pesos of the year 2000. Government spending on the four main
newspapers (which are the ones covered in this paper) for 2003-4 was of a similar
magnitude to spending on television stations (and approximately 10 times more than
on radio) (see page 116 in ADC/Justice Initiative, 2005). Table B includes
information regarding the 20 most expensive advertising campaigns over the 20002007 period. We observe that government advertisement covers a wide range of
activities which include requests for bids on government contracts, public
announcements, the promotion of government accomplishments and even political
statements. In addition, Figure 2B reveals that it is extremely rare for the government
to publish a specific advertisement in all four newspapers. In fact, this happened for
less than 500 out of the 5,313 advertising campaigns in the 2000-2007 period.
Most contracting by the government in the advertising area is handled by Télam, the
national government’s news agency, which reports directly to the president’s office.
Government agencies make a request to Télam, which then decides where to place
the ads. The legal framework for the placement of ads by Télam (basically a collection
of government decrees) is “complex and ambiguous”, allowing complete discretion
by government officials who are able to regularly avoid the use of competitive
bidding, often using explicitly the argument of urgency (ADC/Justice Initiative,
2005). The few agencies that handle their advertising autonomously are the National
Tourism Office, the National Lottery, the Federal Administration for Public Income and the
National Bank.11 In Table C we explore the advertising allocation for both types of
national agencies. The discrepancies are significant for Ámbito and La Nación during
the Duhalde presidency and for Clarín, La Nación and Página 12 during the Kirchner
presidency.12 We will study this issue in more detail further in the paper.
The data we use on government spending on advertising was obtained from
Fundación Poder Ciudadano, an Argentine NGO who, in turn, obtained it from the
government’s Secretaría de Medios de Comunicación de la Nación after a formal application
The exempted national agencies are able to contract their own advertising (including production and space),
independently of Télam, and to define their own advertising processes. (ADC/Justice Initiative, 2005)
12 We do not have information at the advertising campaign level for the Menem presidency.
11

9

process. This NGO is quite influential in Argentina, and its involvement makes it
more likely that the data is high quality.13 The series starts in January 2000, but given
that we have data on coverage from April 1998, we constructed a measure of
government advertising ourselves in order to extend our data on government
advertising back two years (until April 1998). We did this in two steps. First, we
randomly took two days each month and manually measured (with a digital camera)
for each of the four newspapers, the total space taken up by government advertising
(in the full edition). We constructed the measure for three overlapping months
(January, February and March 2000) so as to be able to convert space (in
centimeters) to a peso measure of government advertising.
Figure 3 presents the raw data on total corruption coverage per month (Front Pages)
and total spending on advertising by the government per month (Government
Advertising). Vertical red lines separate the four presidencies: Carlos Menem until
December 1999, followed by Fernando De La Rua until early January 2002, followed
by Eduardo Duhalde until May 25th, 2003, followed by Nestor Kirchner until
December 2007. It can be observed that newspapers report relatively more
corruption scandals in the early and later part of the sample period, with the lowest
amount of scandals reported during the middle of the sample (the Duhalde
presidency). It is also apparent that government advertising goes up over time. The
most likely explanation is the stronger fiscal position of the government following
the 2001 crisis. These changes in government advertising where also broadly in
proportion to the ideological proximity of the government and the newspaper
(calculated using data on the ideology of the government voters and the newspaper's
readers). The Economist magazine summarizes the general view:
“One of the government's tools is money. The robust recovery in Argentina's
economy since its collapse of 2001-02 has boosted tax revenues. That has
brought an eightfold increase in the real value of the federal publicity budget (to
$46m in 2006) since Mr Kirchner took office in 2003. Argentine governments
have a long tradition of funneling official advertising to sympathetic media and
withholding it from others.” (The Economist, 2006)
Figure 4 plots for each newspaper the residuals of Government Advertising and Frontpage
after regressing both variables on newspaper and month dummies. Focusing on the
residuals allows for an easier comparison of the data. The large month and
newspaper fixed effects would otherwise overshadow the within variation in
Frontpage and Government Advertising. It is noticeable from the data that government
For example, the data can withstand a formal auditing process. Founded in 1989, this NGO has focused on
government transparency and became the Latin American Chapter for Transparency International when the latter
was launched in the mid 1990’s. It has organized presidential debates on the topic (for example in 1999), has
promoted legal actions against the government and has organized national campaigns to bring about change in
specific areas.
13

10

advertising within a newspaper changes even within a presidential period. For example,
we observe that government spending on Clarín plummets during the middle of the
Kirchner administration. Note that in developed countries it is natural to consider a
presidential period as only one regime, thus a control for newspaper-president
interactions would not leave variation of Government Advertising. In contrast, in our
sample, a one standard deviation in Government Advertising within the 16 presidentialnewspaper units is 0.17, similar to the between standard deviation (the overall
standard deviation is 0.26). Newspapers also change their relative reporting over time
within a presidency (for example, Ámbito tends to report less corruption scandals in its
front page than other newspapers during the middle of De la Rua government).
To obtain a more detailed analysis of the interactions between each newspaperpresident pair we regress Front Pages and Government Advertising on month, newspaper
and newspaper-president interactions dummies. Here the newspaper-De la Rua
interactions are the excluded categories. Figures 5 and 6 show the 95% confidence
intervals for the newspaper-president interactions fixed effects. Regarding the
assignment of government advertising the Página 12-Kirchner and Clarín-Kirchner
interactions stand out in comparison to La Nación-Kirchner and specially ÁmbitoKirchner fixed effects (Figure 5). In relation to the reporting of corruption we
observe significant changes in the behavior of the two smallest and most ideological
newspapers (Figure 6). Since the contents of newspapers (large or small) affect the
television and radio agenda, the government might be interested in silencing even the
smallest and most ideologically distant newspaper. In comparison to the De la Rua
period the Página 12-president interaction is larger (more reporting) during the
Menem administration and smaller during the Duhalde and Kirchner governments.
With respect to Ámbito we observe a larger interaction effect in the Duhalde and
Kirchner presidencies.

II.c. Empirical Strategy
We start by estimating an OLS regression of the form

Front Pagesmj = α Ln(Government Advertisingmj+1)+ j +m+ µmj
where Front Pages is the total amount of front page space devoted to covering
corruption scandals of the current administration in month m, in newspaper j;
Government Advertising is the amount of money spent by the government on
advertising in month m and in newspaper j; while θ is a newspaper dummy;  is a

11

month dummy and μ is an error term. We study other specifications, including one
which adds newspaper-president interactions dummies.1415
The second approach exploits information on the individual scandals. The first is
similar to the specification above, but instead use Hide, Front Pages Incidents or Front
Pages Affaires as the dependent variable. The second is an OLS regression of the form

Front Pages Scandalsmj = α Ln(Government Advertisingsmj+1)+ j +m+s+ smj
where Front Pages Scandal is the total amount of front page space devoted to covering
corruption scandal s of the current administration in month m, in newspaper j; λ is a
scandal fixed effect and ω is an error term. We also include other specifications,
including one which adds to the above equation different dummies for each different
newspaper under each president.
Note that our measure of government influence is restricted to financial influence
and leaves out an enormous array of other strategies that range from physical
intimidation to access to information (which are discussed in section IIa).16 Note
further, that within financial influence, we focus on one narrow activity –namely
government advertising- while section II.a. mentions several other forms of financial
influence for which we have anecdotal evidence (at least), including ownership laws,
which have in fact been used in Argentina involving the newspapers in our sample.
We do not have a lot of information about the co-movements in these other
measures of influence and government advertising. These alternative measures are
unlikely to be perfectly correlated and/or there may be some substitution between
alternative forms of influence (the standard errors may be too large and there may be
a downward bias in the point estimate of α in the two equations above).
Three theoretical predictions can be made with respect to α, the main parameter of
interest. The benchmark is α=0, which occurs when the media is independent and
unaffected by government advertising.
One alternative is that α <0, with some variations within this regime. On the one
hand, a negative correlation could be revealing a situation where the media is
“motivated” by money and tilts reporting to favor the government in exchange for
On the need to include time effects as newspaper content has changed during the digital age, see, for
example, Boczkowski and de Santos (2007). On matching in commercial advertising, see Anand and Shachar
(2004).
15
Similar results are obtained if we do not use a logarithm specification over Government Advertising.
16 The strategies (and their effectiveness) differ by country. For example, differential access to information is
frequently observed, in part because laws granting access have stalled during our sample period. For example in
Argentina, a freedom of information bill supported by press groups died in Congress in 2005. Changes
introduced by the Senate required those requesting information to explain their reasons, to file an application
similar to an affidavit, and, in some cases, to pay a fee. See Committee to Protect Journalists (2006).
14

12

government advertising. On the other hand, there is the possibility that α is
identifying a different relationship as outlined by previous work in this literature:
firms (or governments in our case) of a particular type may direct advertising towards
particular media to reach particular readers without expecting a quid pro quo from the
latter; and the media of particular type may appreciate, and hence give particular
coverage to these firms (or governments) (see, for example, Reuter and Zitzewitz,
2006 and, in particular, Anand and Shachar, 2004). Fortunately, our data set is
sufficiently rich as to allow us to include government-newspaper interaction fixed
effects that filters out the main source of potential bias: and ideological proximity
fixed effect. One further possibility exists: the bias outlined above may operate at the
level of particular news events. In that case, we have the possibility of including
government-newspaper-scandal fixed effects.
An alternative is α>0, which is strange from the point of view economic incentives:
higher transfers go to the newspapers that give wider coverage to corruption
scandals.17

II.

Results
III.a. Main Estimates
In Table 1 we present our basic set of estimates, which are based on Front Pages, the
total coverage of (any) corruption scandal, per month per newspaper. We present the
simplest possible specification, including only our measure of government transfers
as there aren’t many measurable and plausible confounding sources of variation. In
subsequent specifications we add dummies that capture the level of ideological
proximity between the president and each newspaper, as well as other specifications
that study the robustness of the basic correlation. In all the regressions included in
the paper we use Newey-West standard errors to allow for autocorrelation and
heteroskedasticity.18
In column (1) we find that the coefficient on Government Advertising is negative and
significant at the 1% level, indicating that coverage of corruption scandals within
newspapers is lower when government spending on advertising is high (we also
include a set of month dummies). Column (2) adds a set of newspaper times
president interaction dummies (i.e., includes a set of 16 dummies, one for each
newspaper-president pair). The coefficient on Government Advertising in column (2) is
negative and significant at the 1%, suggesting that even within a certain newspaper
and president regime, reporting of government corruption occupies less front page

Perhaps to avoid criticism of attempting to influence the media (although in such a scenario α=0 should be
enough). In Borges’ short story The Bribe, an academic obtains the favor of a senior colleague by being openly
critical of his work (anticipating the latter’s desire to appear unbiased).
18 Similar results are obtained if we use Prais-Winsten standard errors.
17

13

space when government advertising is relatively generous. It is worth noting that the
coefficient drops to half of its value after including the interaction dummies. This
result suggests that the ideological proximity between government and newspaper is
also a factor in explaining both the distribution of advertising and the reporting of
corruption scandals.
In order to get some sense of the size of the correlation, we note that a one standard
deviation increase in government advertising (0.26 million pesos of 2000) is
associated with a reduction in coverage of corruption scandals in the month by 0.31
of a cover, or 25% of a standard deviation in Front Pages.19
Further tests suggest that these findings are robust. While the next subsection
explores this in more depth, here we anticipate some simple results. In column (3)
we add a time trend for each newspaper-president pair. The time trend consist of a
linear function over the number of months the government has been in office, which
is then interacted with the 16 newspaper-president dummies (similar results are
obtained with a quadratic time trend). The coefficient of interest in column (3) is
again negative and significant at the 10% level.
For the 2000-2007 period it is possible to separate Government Advertising into
advertising executed or not through the centralized agency, Télam. It is reasonable to
assume that the agencies that manage their advertising autonomously will put more
weight on their own marketing priorities and less weight on the national government
political agenda.20 In Table 2 we repeat the regressions performed in Table 1
replacing Government Advertising by either the advertising channeled through Télam or
by the resources placed by the exempted national agencies. The results suggest that
only the government transfers managed by the centralized agency are correlated with
the reporting of corruption.
In Table 3 we repeated the regression included in column (2) in Table 1 excluding
either one newspaper or one president at a time. The eight new regressions yielded a
negative coefficient over Government Advertising. The coefficient is, however,
statistically insignificant in the specification where the Kirchner presidency is
excluded. Note that in this specification the number of observations is almost
halved. We find that the main coefficient is largest in absolute terms when we
exclude Clarín, the newspaper with largest circulation, followed by La Nación (the
second largest circulation), then Página 12 (the third newspaper in terms of
circulation in our sample; but see the discussion on sources for circulation numbers
in Section IV) and then Ámbito. In other words, coverage of scandals in the
We evaluate the increase in Government Advertising at its mean value (0.23).
This assumption is supported by the fact that, as its conflict with the media intensified, the national
government decided in 2009 to eliminate these exceptions and force all federal organisms to channel the
advertising through a centralized agency.
19
20

14

newspapers with the largest circulation seems to be the least sensitive to government
advertising. There are fewer differences in the main coefficient of interest when we
exclude one president at a time. The coefficient is smallest in absolute terms when
we exclude Kirchner.
The first column in Table 4 explores the timing by including a lagged measure of
Government Advertising. Both current and lagged Government Advertising enter with
negative coefficients, while current levels seem to have a stronger connection to
corruption coverage. It is also possible that the advertising-coverage connection
takes place at a lower frequency. To provide a partial evaluation of this possibility in
columns (2) through (6) we run the basic specification using longer lags. Although
the large standard errors do not allow for more precise conclusions, the data do not
suggest that our use of specifications in current levels in Table 1 is obviously
wrong.21
Column (7) in Table 4 includes a measure of lagged coverage. It reveals that the
autoregressive component is not particularly large (it is slightly smaller than a
quarter). The main coefficient on Government Advertising is negative and significant at
the 5%, suggesting that after controlling for previous coverage, current coverage is
negatively correlated with current Government Advertising.
Within the theories of “motivated” reporting (by which we mean reporting that is
not independent of monetary transfers; see section II.c.), both corruption (whereby
the government offers money to newspapers to reduce adverse coverage) and
extortion (whereby a newspaper exaggerates unfavorable coverage until the
government pays up) are possible. Note that, in both cases, the negative correlation
we are uncovering means that the discretional regime for making government
transfers to newspapers introduces distortions in reporting.22 Nevertheless, the
Granger analysis performed in Table 5 suggests that it is the government the one that
leads and not the other way around.
Finally, Table 6 investigates the correlation between government transfers and
coverage of scandals by non-political actors. Our database contains coverage of
scandals in which trade unions, the police, the church or a group of low income,
often unemployed individuals were involved.23 There are 321 scandals involving
It would be possible to disaggregate the advertising data at the daily level (the data from Poder Ciudadano is
tabulated per advertisement, but it includes the month and not the date in which the advertisement was
published). This would allow us to perform the regressions in Table 1 at the daily level.
22 Note that in models with full information the estimated effect would be identical under either form of
motivated reporting. In Reuter and Zitzewitz (2006) the results for one publication that does not have
advertisements (Consumer Reports) can be used as a possible benchmark (although interestingly the sample of
funds recommended by Consumer Reports also comes from firms that spend relatively more on advertising).
23 This group known as “piqueteros” has become a mildly important social actor in Argentina (it is like a trade
union of the unemployed).
21

15

these groups, which are covered in the front page 941 times. The correlations
reported in Table 6 are statistically insignificant, suggesting that not all coverage of
scandals is negatively correlated with government transfers.

III.b. Robustness: Measures of Coverage using Data on Individual Scandals
We next explore the robustness of our findings exploiting the fact that we have
information on individual scandals, which allows us to develop different measures of
coverage of corruption.
Table 7 separates front page coverage of corruption scandals that were reported by
just one newspaper (which we call Front Pages Incidents) from coverage regarding
scandals that were widely reported (by at least two newspapers, which we call Front
Pages Affaires). The coefficient on Incidents is negative and significant at the 1% level in
column 1 and at the 18% level in column 2. Meanwhile the coefficients on Affaires
are both negative and significant at the 1% level. We know that by construction the
coefficients on both Affaires and Incidents add up to the corresponding coefficient
when Front Pages is used as the dependent variable. Using the coefficients in column
2 in Table 1 and in columns 2 and 4 in Table 7, we observe that Affaires accounts for
81% of the estimated correlation (0.81=1.33/1.64) and Incidents accounts for only
19% (0.19=0.31/1.64). Therefore, we detect that most of the computed correlation
is originated from the reporting of scandals extensively reported in the media.
Table 8 reports results using Front Page Scandal, the number of front pages per month
accounted by the space granted to coverage of a specific scandal by a newspaper.
Columns (1-5) include newspaper and month fixed effects as well as a set of other
president-newspaper-scandal fixed effects combinations. In all of the regressions the
association with Government Advertising is negative and significant. Regressions (2-5)
include a president-newspaper interaction. In columns 3 through 5 we add a time
trend for each newspaper-president pair. Scandals fixed effects are included in
columns 4 and 5. To see the size of the effect, note that the coefficient on regression
(5), which also controls for newspaper-scandal interactions, is -0.017. This suggests
that an increase in Government Advertising of one standard deviation is associated with
a decrease in coverage of a particular scandal of 2.7% of a standard deviation in the
Front Pages Scandal variable.
Table 9 looks at a measure of the speed of reporting. Hide is a measure of the extent
to which newspapers do not report news items that are negative to the government.
Specifically, Hide counts the number of corruption scandals already reported by some

16

other newspaper but not yet reported by this newspaper.24 We do not find a robust
and significant association between our measure of coverage (Hide) and Government
Advertising. This result suggests that the correlation between government advertising
and the reporting of corruption is not driven by the decision concerning when to
first report a scandal but by the amount of space devoted to its treatment over time.
In the next section we study the relation between reporting of corruption and
newspaper readership as a possible explanation for this result.

III.

Discussion
An interesting and important question concerns the reputational costs for
newspapers arising from biased coverage (see, for example, the discussion in
Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2006). On the one hand, it is possible to retain models
where bias is visible to readers who compare the contents of daily publications if one
relaxes the assumption of full verifiability (see, for example, Besley and Prat, 2006).
Alternatively, the costs of biasing coverage are low if different readers consume
different newspapers (see, for example, Mullainathan and Shleifer, 2005).
Unfortunately, we do not have sufficient data for a full investigation of this issue. We
do, however, have some data on circulation for the two main newspapers (Clarín and
La Nación). These two have a much wider circulation than the other two newspapers
in our sample so, financially, the issue is particularly relevant for these two
publications.25 Table 10 presents the correlation between circulation and Front Pages
or Hide. The results suggest that there is a positive and statistically significant
relationship between circulation and corruption coverage. Using the coefficient in
column (1) in Table 10, we note that one standard deviation increase in Front Pages is
associated with 1.35 million extra papers sold in the month. Meanwhile, one standard
deviation decrease in Hide is associated with a 2.57 million increase in circulation per
month.26 The higher cost in terms of readership associated with not ever having
reported scandals could explain the distinct relation between Government Advertising
and Front Pages versus Government Advertising and Hide documented in Table 1 and 9
respectively. Newspapers may be prone to decrease the number of front pages and
space devoted to a corruption scandal by the government, but due to a higher

We also experimented with other definitions of Hide and reached similar conclusions. For example, similar
results obtain if we define the variable only for scandals that were reported by at least two papers.
25 The average circulation in the first half of 2007 of Clarín and La Nación is 284,000 copies per day versus
approximately 20,000 for Página 12; estimates from ADC/Justice Initiative (2008). Our source for Clarín and
La Nación is the Instituto Verificador de Circulaciones. Self reported data on daily circulation by Página 12 is 97,000,
whereas for Ámbito is 85,000.
26 Note that these amounts are relatively large since average monthly circulation for Clarín in our sample is
13.54 millions, and for La Nación is 5.06 millions.
24

17

readership loss they may be hesitant to delay the reporting of a scandal that has
already appeared in others newspapers.
Of course, the media should be extremely unhappy about a regime with the
characteristics we describe, as it involves biasing coverage for financial gain. Indeed,
we collected evidence of several instances of journalist complaints concerning the
regime with discretional government transfers (dressed as advertising). As just one
example, consider an editorial in Clarín entitled “Abuses with Public Advertising”. It
complains that the practice of public advertising has been transformed into a means
of providing carrots and sticks in exchange for favorable coverage, and that there are
“no objective parameters governing the distribution of public advertising nor adequate controls over
the way money budgeted for this use is actually spent”.27
We do not offer any further interpretation of our findings, except to note that 1)
several authors have argued that profit motives of media companies’ compromise
coverage; that 2) we have presented evidence consistent with such “motivated
coverage” in the presence of government transfers;28 and that 3) this has implications
for work considering how media firms affect the formation of beliefs. For example,
Bennet (1990) emphasizes the need by reporters to have access to government
sources and Chomsky and Herman (1988) make the argument that for-profit media
must cater to advertisers to stay in business. This is consistent with the results of
Reuter and Zitzewitz (2006) concerning biased investment recommendations.29 The
evidence presented in this paper concerns size and timing of coverage, which is apriori less serious from the point of view of an individual’s financial standing, but
27 See, “Abusos con la Publicidad Oficial”, Editorial, Clarín, 22 de Julio, 2009. See also, “La Publicidad Oficial
como Censura”, La Nación, 14 de Abril, 2007. Of course such rhetorical evidence should be interpreted with
caution. While several policy proposals have been made to reform the system, we note that the problems
outlined in the paper can be avoided and the stated objectives of the program (“to provide information of the
acts of government”) can still be achieved by removing discretion in the allocation of funds. For example, by
fixing the amount going to each media outlet, or by allowing funding to depend on some predetermined
formula (for example, based on historical data on circulation).
28 While we have not produced a full-fledged theory of what is driving changes in government advertising, we
point out that the inclusion of government-newspaper interactions solves the main problem of identification in
the literature whereby government ideology drives favorable coverage and newspaper ideology drives funds and
there is no quid-pro-quo (even implicitly). To test this hypothesis we construct a variable that interacts the
government’s revenue level and a government-newspaper ideological proximity variable. The ideological
proximity variable is created by using the space in each newspaper devoted to human rights abuses and the leftright self-placement by the government voters in the Latinobarometro Survey. As expected the interaction variable
has a positive and significant correlation with the advertising managed by Télam. Moreover, the correlation
disappears once we focus, instead, on the advertising not channeled through the centralized agency. Finally,
using the government’s fiscal position times ideological proximity as an instrument for Government Advertising
suggests that a casual interpretation of the main results of the paper is appropriate. For example, the coefficient
in column 1 in table 1 is -6.081 (standard error=1.271).
29 Given their focus on financial returns they can derive a cost to readers from following the biased
recommendations of the publications under study. They note that future returns are similar for mentioned and
not mentioned funds, and conclude that the cost of bias to readers is small. In our case there is a financial cost
of bias to the newspaper in terms of circulation, and to the reader in terms of information.

18

which may affect the reader’s political positions, at the very least because it
influences the salience of particular pieces of news and the extent of priming on
these negative (from the government perspective) pieces of news. In the Argentine
context, Di Tella, Galiani and Schargrodsky (2008) study how priming, of the type
that appear in the newspaper coverage studied in this paper, influence political
beliefs.30 Specifically, they note that groups treated with a news report (i.e., that are
read a newspaper report with negative comments on the water privatization that are
made by the president which are demonstrably untrue) change their beliefs about the
privatization of the water services in the direction reported by the newspaper. Of
course, hard measures of coverage (such as size and timing) might also be correlated
with other dimensions of coverage, such as framing, which might have a more
sizeable influence on beliefs (see, for example, Entman, 1989). Indeed, if framing
and editorial content also prove to be sensitive to public funding, media bias might
help explain broader changes in beliefs. For example, economists who are puzzled by
the popular backlash against market reforms might note that these took place during
a period when the government both, moved to the left, and increased considerably
spending on advertisement in the media. Finally, note also that we can detect
reduced coverage but not if coverage is eliminated.

IV.

Conclusions
The media is potentially important in exercising control over abusive government,
particularly in countries with high levels of corruption and weak legal systems.
Accordingly, governments often try to influence the media through actions that
range from outright censorship and intimidation, to favors and transfers. In this
paper we provide a description of one aspect of the connection between the media
and the government in Argentina 1998-2007, namely that concerned with monetary
transfers to newspapers and their coverage of negative news events.
We focus on coverage of government corruption scandals in the front page of the
main four newspapers in the country. Advantages of focusing on corruption include
that news events can be clearly classified as favorable or unfavorable to the
government (independently of its political color), and that it is a topic that appears
with relative frequency in the front page, with substantial variation in the amount of
space devoted to it, both over time and across newspapers. Thus, the proportion of
the front page occupied by the report on the current government’s corruption gives

The news report used in that study was originally published in Clarín in 2005, which is covered in our sample.
The importance of beliefs in the determination of economic systems has been emphasized by several authors
(see, for example, Piketty, 1995, Benabou and Tirole, 2006, Alesina and Angeletos, 2005, inter alia). There is also
growing evidence on the variability of beliefs across groups and over time (see, for example, Alesina, Glaeser
and Sacerdote, 2001, Di Tella, Galiani and Schargrodsky, 2007, Giuliano and Spilimbergo, 2009, inter alia).
30

19

one measure of the intensity of negative coverage (per day per newspaper). This can
be aggregated at the monthly level to give a measure of how intensely a particular
newspaper has provided negative data on the government. We also have monthly
data on government transfers in payment for public advertising to each newspaper,
so we can estimate the correlation between transfers of money and front page space
devoted to coverage of corruption scandals. The main estimate is negative and
significant, even after controlling for newspaper and month fixed effects, as well as a
set of other specifications. For example, the negative correlation survives the
inclusion of a president-newspaper interaction dummies, suggesting that even within
a certain newspaper and within a certain presidential period, front page coverage of
news events that are unfavorable to the government is smaller when transfers are
relatively high. The fact that the main coefficient is halved when we include the
interactions fixed effects suggests that the ideological proximity between government
and newspaper is also important to both the distribution of advertising and the
reporting of corruption scandals. Nevertheless, the size continues to be considerable:
a one standard deviation increase in monthly government advertising (0.26 million
pesos of 2000) is correlated with a reduction in the coverage given to government
corruption scandals in the month by 0.31 of a cover, or 25% of a standard deviation
in our measure of front page coverage.
We also construct several measures of coverage that exploit information at the
scandal level, something that allows us to present a broader picture of how the
government’s discretional advertising regime biases coverage. These measures
include Incidents (coverage of scandals that were reported by just one newspaper),
Affaires (coverage of scandals that were reported by at least two newspapers) and
Hide (which counts the number of scandals already reported by some other
newspaper but not yet reported by this newspaper). We provide a measure of the
extent to which biased coverage is costly to newspapers in terms of reduced
circulation for about half our sample. Finally, we find that only the government
transfers that are channeled through a centralized agency are associated with a
reduction in the reporting of corruption and also that the coverage of scandals by
non-political actors is not correlated with government advertising.
Overall, our findings are consistent with a model where newspapers bias reporting in
favor of the government in exchange for transfers without prohibitively large
financial costs arising from reduced circulation.

20

Scandal B
Scandal A

(Bribery IBMBanco
Nación)

(Arms
Trafficking
to Croatia)

Figure 1: Front Page Clarín 8th October, 1998. The construction of Front Pages involves adding for a
particular newspaper and for a particular month the fraction of each front page in the month devoted
to covering corruption scandals of the current administration. Here, we considered Area(A+B)/Total
Area as the contribution of october 8th to the measurement of Front Pages for Clarín in October 1998.
Similarly, the Area(B)/Total Area is the October 8th contribution to the measurement of Front Pages
Scandal for Clarín, October and the bribery scandal of IBM-Banco Nación; similarly the
Area(A)/Total Area is the October 8th contribution to the measurement of Front Pages Scandal for
Clarín, October and the bribery scandal of Armas.

21

0

50

100

150

200

250

Number of scandals by number of newspapers
that ever mentioned it

1

2

3

4

0

500

1,000

1,500

2,000

2,500

Number of advertising campaigns by number of newspapers
included in the campaign

1

2

3

4

Figure 2: Properties of coverage of corruption scandals and advertising by the government

22

Main Newspapers

Government Advertising

Frontpage

Figure 3: Government Advertising and Frontpage aggregated values for the four newspapers.

23

Ambito

Government Advertising

Clarin

Frontpage

La Nacion

Government Advertising

Government Advertising

Frontpage

Pagina 12

Frontpage

Government Advertising

Frontpage

Figure 4: Residuals of Government Advertising and Frontpage after regressing both variables on
newspaper and month dummies.

24

.8
.6
.4
.2
0
A

CL

LN P12

A

CL

LN P12

A

CL

LN P12

Figure 5: Newspaper-president interactions fixed effects -95% confidence intervals- obtained from
an OLS regression of Government Advertising on newspaper, month and newspaper-president
interactions dummies. The excluded categories are the interactions for the De la Rua presidency.

25

3
2
1
0
-1
-2

A

CL

LN P12

A

CL

LN P12

A

CL

LN P12

Figure 6: Newspaper-president interactions fixed effects -95% confidence intervals- obtained from
an OLS regression of Frontpage on newspaper, month and newspaper-president interactions dummies.
The excluded categories are the interactions for the De la Rua presidency.

26

Table A: Top 20 Corruption Scandals according to Front Page Space
Alleged Offender

Alleged Offense

Date first
reported

Number of front pages
in the 4 Newspapers
Day
Month
Govt.

SIDE (De la Rua)

Bribery

23-Aug-00

2.9

17.0

43.9

President and Cabinet (Kirchner)

Falsification of documents

6-Feb-04

0.1

0.1

15.2

President and Cabinet (Kirchner)

Bribery

15-Mar-07

0.2

0.3

12.4

President and Cabinet (Menem)

Illicit enrichment

19-Nov-98

0.3

1.3

7.5

President and Cabinet (Kirchner)

Money laundering

26-Jun-07

0.1

0.1

7.3

President and Cabinet (Menem)

Violent Crime

15-May-98

0.1

6.8

7.0

President and Cabinet (De la Rua)

Concealment

12-Feb-01

0.3

5.6

6.8

President and Cabinet (Menem)

Arms Trafficking

30-May-98

0.2

1.2

6.8

President and Cabinet (De la Rua)

Bribery

19-Aug-00

0.1

0.1

6.5

President and Cabinet (Kirchner)

Poor performance

5-Jan-04

0.4

0.4

6.0

President and Cabinet (Kirchner)

Money laundering

9-Aug-07

0.9

5.2

5.3

President and Cabinet (Menem)

Misappropriation of public funds

19-Apr-98

0.1

4.4

5.1

PAMI (Menem)

Poor performance

10-May-98

0.2

0.2

3.5

SIDE (Kirchner)

Poor performance

24-Jul-04

1.3

3.4

3.4

President and Cabinet (De la Rua)

Theft

8-Mar-00

0.8

0.8

3.2

President and Cabinet (Menem)

Misappropriation of public funds

16-May-99

0.1

3.2

3.2

President and Cabinet (Menem)

Poor performance

20-Feb-99

0.8

3.1

3.2

President and Cabinet (Kirchner)

Violent Crime

18-Aug-07

0.1

2.9

3.0

President and Cabinet (Menem)

Racketeering

20-May-98

0.2

0.5

2.8

President and Cabinet (Menem)

Racketeering

3-Jun-99

0.8

2.5

2.7

27

Table B: Top 20 Government Advertising Campaigns according to Total Spending
(Period 2000-2007)
Organism

Type

Title

Month

Total
spending

Nr of
appearances

Ministry of Economy

Bid

Bond exchange

Jan-05

0.69

21

National Bank

Achievements

Institutional

Dec-04

0.50

27

Minister of Federal Planning and
Public Utilities

Achievements

Public works

Sep-04

0.40

11

Ministry of Economy

Announcement

Central wholesale fruit and
vegetable market

Feb-07

0.40

10

Ministry of Economy

Announcement

Central wholesale fruit and
vegetable market

Mar-07

0.40

12

Ministry of Economy

Announcement

Central wholesale fruit and
vegetable market

Apr-07

0.40

12

Ministry of Economy

Announcement

Fruit and vegetables

Jan-07

0.32

13

Presidency

Achievements

First year in office

May-04

0.31

13

Minister of Labor, Employment
and Social Security

Achievements

Reduction in under the counter
jobs

Mar-07

0.31

12

Minister of Federal Planning and
Public Utilities

Achievements

Road construction

May-05

0.30

5

Minister of the Provinces

Announcement

Safety

Apr-04

0.29

8

Presidency

Achievements

First thirty days in office

Jun-03

0.28

4

Minister of Federal Planning and
Public Utilities

Achievements

House construction

Sep-04

0.27

7

Minister of Education

Achievements

Law of Education

Sep-05

0.26

9

Secretary of Culture

Announcement

Congress of Spanish

Nov04

0.26

20

Social Security Institute

Bid

Medical services

Feb-00

0.25

7

Agency for the Control of
Highways Concessions

Bid

Highway

Jul-06

0.25

8

Federal Administration of Public
Income

Announcement

Tax education

Mar-04

0.24

1

Presidency

Political Statement

Protests organized by farm
unions

Dec-06

0.23

10

Secretary of Culture

Announcement

Credits

Apr-00

0.23

7

Note: Total spending is in millions of pesos of the year 2000.

28

TABLE C:
Average of the Fraction of Government Advertising assigned to each Newspaper over the
different Advertising Campaigns
(Period 2000-2007)
President

Newspaper

Advertising not
conducted by
TELAM agency

Advertising
conducted by
TELAM agency

Difference

Ámbito

0.133
(0.035)

0.115
(0.009)

0.017
(0.068)

Clarín

0.524
(0.084)

0.496
(0.014)

0.028
(0.101)

La Nación

0.247
(0.064)

0.297
(0.012)

-0.050
(0.087)

Página 12

0.094
(0.062)

0.089
(0.008)

0.004
(0.059)

Ámbito

0.178
(0.043)

0.079
(0.012)

0.099**
(0.041)

Clarín

0.475
(0.055)

0.486
(0.024)

-0.010
(0.075)

La Nación

0.220
(0.055)

0.349
(0.023)

-0.128*
(0.071)

Página 12

0.124
(0.049)

0.077
(0.012)

0.047
(0.041)

Ámbito

0.065
(0.010)

0.062
(0.002)

0.002
(0.009)

Clarín

0.717
(0.018)

0.369
(0.005)

0.347***
(0.019)

La Nación

0.135
(0.014)

0.257
(0.005)

-0.121***
(0.017)

Página 12

0.081
(0.011)

0.309
(0.005)

-0.228***
(0.019)

De la Rúa

Duhalde

Kirchner

Note: Standard errors in parenthesis * denotes significant at the 10% level, **
denotes significant at the 5% level and *** denotes significant at the 1% level.

29

Table D: Summary Statistics
Variable
Front Pages
- between

Units

No. of Obs.

Mean

Std dev

Min.

Max.

Fraction

Total= 468
n=4

0.60

1.25
0.35

0
0.37

7.91
1.13

1.21

-0.53

7.65

0.26

0

1.37

- within
Government Advertising
- between

t=117
Millions of

Total= 466

Pesos of 2000

n=4

0.10

0.09

0.33

t=117

0.25

-0.09

1.27

0.16

0

7.6

- within
Front Pages Scandal

Fraction

Total=18,064

0.23

0.01

- between

n=1,016

0.08

0

1.01

- within

t=17.77

0.15

-0.46

7.34

18.49

0

104

Hide

Counts

Total= 468

23.59

- between

n=4

3.55

18.44

26.50

- within

t=117

18.23

-2.90

101.09

0.41

0

3.73

Front Pages (1 paper)

Fraction

Total= 468

0.14

- between

n=4

0.13

0.03

0.33

- within

t=117

0.39

-0.18

3.54

1.07

0

7.65

Front Pages (2 at least)

Fraction

Total= 468

0.45

- between

n=4

0.23

0.28

0.80

- within

t=117

1.05

-0.34

7.48

0.76

0

7.41

Front Pages Other

Fraction

Total= 468

0.48

- between

n=4

0.44

0.17

1.13

- within

t=117

0.65

-0.64

6.76

4.49

4.28

18.11

Circulation

Millions

Total= 234

9.30

- between

n=2

6

5.06

13.54

- within

t=117

1.45

6.62

13.87

Note: All variable definitions are contained in the appendix.

30

TABLE 1:
Total Coverage of Corruption Scandals and Government Advertising
(1)

(2)

(3)

-3.303***
(0.682)

-1.652***
(0.643)

-1.008*
(0.589)

Newspaper

YES

YES

YES

Month

YES

YES

YES

Newspaper x president

NO

YES

YES

Newspaper x president x time trend

NO

NO

YES

Adjusted R2

0.45

0.60

0.62

N of Observations

466

466

466

117

117

117

4

4

4

Ln(Government Advertising+1)

Fixed Effects

Max Number of Months
Max Number of Newspapers

Note: Each column is a separate OLS regression (Newey-West standard errors
in parenthesis). * denotes significant at the 10% level and *** denotes significant
at the 1% level. The dependent variable is Front Pages, the number of front pages
devoted to corruption in each newspaper in a month. Government Advertising is the
amount of money spent on advertising by the government in each newspaper
each month, in millions of 2000 pesos.

31

TABLE 2:
Total Coverage of Corruption Scandals and Government Advertising
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Télam

Télam

Télam

Autonomous

Autonomous

Autonomous

-2.398***
(0.707)

-1.718***
(0.679)

-1.129*
(0.610)

-2.283
(1.779)

0.115
(1.454)

0.007
(1.483)

Newspaper

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Month

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Newspaper x president

NO

YES

YES

NO

YES

YES

Newspaper x president x time trend

NO

NO

YES

NO

NO

YES

Adjusted R2

0.51

0.54

0.55

0.46

0.52

0.54

N of Observations

384

384

384

384

384

384

Max Number of Months

96

96

96

96

96

96

Max Number of Newspapers

4

4

4

4

4

4

Ln(Government Advertising+1)

Fixed Effects

Note: Each column is a separate OLS regression (Newey-West standard errors
in parenthesis). * denotes significant at the 10% level and *** denotes significant
at the 1% level. The dependent variable is Front Pages, the number of front pages
devoted to corruption in each newspaper in a month. Government Advertising is the
amount of money spent on advertising by the government in each newspaper
each month, in millions of 2000 pesos.

32

TABLE 3:
Total Coverage of Corruption Scandals and Government Advertising
Newspaper excluded
Ámbito

Clarín

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.592*
(0.338)

-3.120***
(1.200)

Adjusted R2

0.76

N of Observations
Max N Months

Ln(Government Advertising+1)

Max N Newspapers

President excluded

La Nación Página 12

Menem

De la Rúa

Duhalde

Kirchner

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-2.005***
(0.772)

-1.520**
(0.778)

-1.740***
(0.679)

-1.694***
(0.652)

-1.660***
(0.648)

-0.531
(1.704)

0.54

0.56

0.49

0.54

0.62

0.60

0.63

350

349

350

349

384

370

398

246

117

117

117

117

96

93

100

62

3

3

3

3

4

4

4

4

Note: Each column is a separate OLS regression (Newey-West standard errors
in parenthesis). *** denotes significant at the 1% level. The dependent variable is
Front Pages, the number of front pages devoted to corruption in each newspaper
in a month. Government Advertising is the amount of money spent on advertising
by the government in each newspaper each month, in millions of 2000 pesos. All
regressions include newspaper, month and newspaper-president interactions
fixed effects.

33

TABLE 4:
Timing: Lagged Government Advertising and Lagged Coverage of Corruption
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)
0.236**
(0.100)

Front Pages (t-1)
Ln(Government Advertising+1)

-1.459*
(0.873)

Ln(Government Advertising(t-1)+1)

-0.336
(0.759)

-2.159**
(1.005)

-1.943*
(1.047)

-1.822*
(1.032)

-1.749*
(1.016)

0.201
(0.535)

Ln(Government Advertising(t-1-t-3)+1)

0.103
(0.476)

Ln(Government Advertising(t-1-t-4)+1)

0.054
(0.443)

Ln(Government Advertising(t-1-t-5)+1)

0.023
(0.420)

Ln(Government Advertising(t-1-t-6)+1)

N of Observations
Max N of Months
Max N of Newspapers

-1.277**
(0.548)

0.442
(0.611)

Ln(Government Advertising(t-1-t-2)+1)

Adjusted R2

-1.704*
(1.000)

0.60

0.59

0.58

0.58

0.58

0.58

0.62

460

454

448

442

436

430

462

116

115

114

113

112

111

117

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

Note: Each column is a separate OLS regression (Newey-West standard errors
in parenthesis). * denotes significant at the 10% level and ** denotes significant
at the 5% level. The dependent variable is Front Pages, the number of front pages
devoted to corruption in each newspaper in a month. Government Advertising is the
amount of money spent on advertising by the government in each newspaper
each month, in millions of 2000 pesos. Government Advertising (t-1-t-i) takes the
value of Government Advertising in the previous i months. Front Pages (t-1) takes the
value of Front Pages in the previous month. All regressions include newspaper,
month and newspaper-president interactions fixed effects.

34

TABLE 5:
Granger Analysis of Coverage of Corruption and Government Advertising
Dependent Variables
Front Pages

Front Pages (t-1)

Government Advertising

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.237**
(0.101)

0.206*
(0.110)

0.214*
(0.115)

-0.003
(0.003)

-0.002
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.003)

0.049
(0.077)

0.061
(0.076)

0.000
(0.003)

0.001
(0.003)

Front Pages (t-2)

-0.044
(0.074)

Front Pages (t-3)

-0.000
(0.003)

F value for Front Pages lags

5.50**

3.35**

2.20*

0.96

0.26

0.08

Ln(Government Advertising+1) (t-1)

-0.916*
(0.491)

-1.345
(0.885)

-1.208
(0.995)

0.689***
(0.094)

0.512***
(0.103)

0.497***
(0.118)

0.631
(0.908)

1.445
(0.990)

0.268**
(0.122)

0.241**
(0.124)

Ln(Government Advertising+1) (t-2)

-1.307
(1.000)

Ln(Government Advertising+1) (t-3)
F value for Advertising lags

N of Observations
Max N of Months
Max N of Newspapers

0.058
(0.076)

3.48*

1.85

2.73**

52.72***

28.99***

19.96***

460

456

450

460

454

448

116

115

114

116

115

114

4

4

4

4

4

4

Note: Each column is a separate OLS regression (Newey-West standard errors
in parenthesis). * denotes significant at the 10% level, ** denotes significant at
the 5% level and *** denotes significant at the 1% level. The dependent variable
is Front Pages, the number of front pages devoted to corruption in each
newspaper in a month. Government Advertising is the amount of money spent on
advertising by the government in each newspaper each month, in millions of
2000 pesos. All regressions include newspaper, month and newspaper-president
interactions fixed effects.

35

TABLE 6:
Total Coverage of Corruption by the Police, the Church and Unions and Government
Advertising
(1)

(2)

-0.373
(0.258)

-0.489
(0.427)

Newspaper

YES

YES

Month

YES

YES

Newspaper x president

NO

YES

Adjusted R2

0.46

0.48

N of Observations

466

466

117

117

4

4

Ln(Government Advertising+1)

Fixed Effects

Maximum N of Months
Maximum N of Newspapers

Note: Each column is a separate OLS regression (Newey-West standard errors
in parenthesis). The dependent variable is Front Pages Other, the number of front
pages devoted to scandals by members of the Police, Trade Unions and the
Church in each newspaper in a month. Government Advertising is the amount of
money spent on advertising by the government in each newspaper each month,
in millions of 2000 pesos.

36

TABLE 7:
Coverage of Corruption (Incidents and Affaires) and Government Advertising
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Incidents

Incidents

Affaires

Affaires

-0.910***
(0.251)

-0.314
(0.226)

-2.393***
(0.517)

-1.338***
(0.490)

Newspaper

YES

YES

YES

YES

Month

YES

YES

YES

YES

Newspaper x president

NO

YES

NO

YES

Adjusted R2

0.09

0.33

0.53

0.60

N of Observations

466

466

466

466

117

117

117

117

4

4

4

4

Ln(Government Advertising+1)

Fixed Effects

Max N of Months
Max N of Newspapers

Note: Each column is a separate OLS regression (Newey-West standard errors
in parenthesis). *** denotes significant at the 1% level. In columns (1) and (2),
the sample is restricted dependent variable is Front Pages Incidents, the total
number of front pages devoted to any corruption scandal that was reported by
only one newspaper, in each newspaper in a month. In columns (3) and (4), the
dependent variable is Front Pages Affaires, the total number of front pages devoted
to any corruption scandal that was reported by at least two newspapers, in each
newspaper in a month. Government Advertising is the amount of money spent on
advertising by the government in each newspaper each month, in millions of
2000 pesos.

37

TABLE 8:
Coverage of Individual Corruption Scandals and Government Advertising
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.077***
(0.014)

-0.031**
(0.013)

-0.020*
(0.011)

-0.020*
(0.011)

-0.017*
(0.010)

Newspaper

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Month

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Newspaper x president

NO

YES

YES

YES

YES

Newspaper x president x time trend

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

Scandal

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

Scandal x newspaper

NO

NO

NO

NO

YES

Adjusted R2

0.02

0.02

0.03

0.10

0.12

17,920

17,920

17,920

17,920

17,920

Max N of Scandals

254

254

254

254

254

Max N of Months

117

117

117

117

117

4

4

4

4

4

Ln(Government Advertising+1)

Fixed Effects

N of Observations

Max N of Newspapers

Note: Each column is a separate OLS regression (Newey-West standard errors
in parenthesis). * denotes significant at the 10% level, ** denotes significant at
the 5% level and *** denotes significant at the 1% level. The dependent variable
is Front Pages Scandal, the number of front pages devoted to a particular
corruption scandal in each newspaper per month. Government Advertising is the
amount of money spent on advertising by the government in each newspaper
each month, in millions of 2000 pesos.

38

TABLE 9:
Speed of Coverage of Corruption Scandals and Government Advertising
(1)

(2)

Hide

Hide

30.089***
(5.418)

-0.015
(2.266)

Newspaper

YES

YES

Month

YES

YES

Newspaper x president

NO

YES

Adjusted R2

0.80

0.93

N of Observations

466

466

117

117

4

4

Ln(Government Advertising+1)

Fixed Effects

Max N of Months
Max N of Newspapers

Note: Each column is a separate OLS regression (Newey-West standard errors
in parenthesis). *** denotes significant at the 1% level. The dependent variable is
Hide, the number of “hides” (defined as a corruption scandal that has already
broken but is not yet reported by the newspaper) per month. Government
Advertising is the amount of money spent on advertising by the government in
each newspaper each month, in millions of 2000 pesos.

39

TABLE 10:
Newspaper Circulation and Coverage of Corruption
(1)
Front Pages

(2)

1.087***
(0.379)
-0.139***
(0.017)

Hide

Fixed Effects
Newspaper

YES

YES

Month

YES

YES

Adjusted R2

0.92

0.94

N of Observations

234

234

117

117

2

2

Maximum N of Months
Maximum N of Newspapers

Note: Each column is a separate OLS regression (Newey-West standard errors
in parenthesis). *** denotes significant at the 1% level. The dependent variable is
Newspaper Circulation, the number of editions sold by each newspaper in a month,
in millions. Front Pages is the number of front pages devoted to corruption in
each newspaper in a month. Hide is the number of “hides” (defined as a
corruption scandal that has already broken but is not yet reported by the
newspaper) per month.

40

Description of the Variables

Front Pages: The total amount of space in the front pages, in a particular newspaper and in a
particular month, devoted to covering corruption scandals of the current
administration. The unit is the number of front pages (0 to 30). Source: Authors’
calculation.
Government Advertising: Total spending per month on advertising in each newspaper by the
government, in millions of pesos of the year 2000. Source: Fundación Poder Ciudadano.
Front Pages Other: The total amount of space in the front pages, in a particular newspaper and
in a particular month, devoted to covering scandals by trade unions, the police, the
church and the “piqueteros” (group of low-income and unemployed workers). The
unit is the number of front pages (0 to 30). Source: Authors’ calculation.
Front Pages Scandal: The total amount of space in the front pages, in a particular newspaper
and in a particular month, devoted to covering a particular corruption scandal of the
current administration. The unit is the number of front pages (0 to 30). Source:
Authors’ calculation.
Front Pages Incidents: The total amount of space in the front pages, in a particular newspaper
and in a particular month, devoted to covering corruption scandals of the current
administration that were reported by only one newspaper. The unit is the number of
front pages (0 to 30). Source: Authors’ calculation.
Front Pages Affaires: The total amount of space in the front pages, in a particular newspaper
and in a particular month, devoted to covering corruption scandals of the current
administration that were reported by two or more newspapers. The unit is the
number of front pages (0 to 30). Source: Authors’ calculation.
Hide: The total number of corruption scandals of the current administration already reported
by at least one newspaper that have not yet been reported by each newspaper per
month. Source: Authors’ calculation.
Circulation: Number of editions per month sold by newspaper, in millions. Source: Instituto
Verificador de Circulaciones.

41

References
Alesina, Alberto, Ed Glaeser, and Bruce Sacerdote, (2001) “Why Doesn’t the US have a European
Style Welfare State?,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, II, 187-277.
Alesina, Alberto, and George-Marios Angeletos (2005) “Corruption, Inequality and Fairness”, Journal
of Monetary Economics 52, no. 7, 1227–44.
Alisky, Marvin (1981) Latin American media guidance and censorship, Ames: Iowa State University
Press.
Alterman, Eric (2003) What Liberal Media?: The Truth About Bias and the News, New York: Basic
Books.
Anand, Bharat and Roni Shachar (2004) “Advertising, the Matchmaker”, working paper no 264206.
Ansolabehere, Stephen, Lessem, Rebecca, and Snyder Jr., James (2006) "The orientation of
newspaper endorsements in U.S. elections, 1940-2002" Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 1(4),
393-404.
ADC/Justice Initiative (2005) “Buying the News: A Report on Financial and Indirect Censorship in
Argentina”, Legal Policy Series by Asociacion por los Derechos Civiles and The Open
Society, available at http://www.justiceinitiative.org/db/resource2?res_id=103032
ADC/Justice Initiative (2008) “The Price of Silence: The Growing threat of Soft Censorship in Latin
America”, Legal Policy Series by Asociacion por los Derechos Civiles and The Open Society,
available at http://www.soros.org/initiatives/osji/articles_publications/silence_20080811
Baron, David (2006) “Persistent media bias”, Journal of Public Economics, 90, 1-36.
Baum, Matthew A. and Phil Gussin (2007) “In the Eye of the Beholder: How Information Shortcuts
Shape Individual Perceptions of Bias in the Media”, Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 3: 1-31
Bennet, Lawrence (1990) “Towards a Theory of Press-State Relations in the US”, Journal of
Communication, 40, 2.
Besley, Timothy and Robin S. Burgess, (2002) “The Political Economy of Government
Responsiveness: Theory and Evidence from India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4), pp.
1415–51.
Besley, Timothy, and Andrea Prat, (2006) "Handcuffs for the grabbing hand? Media capture and
government accountability", American Economic Review, 96(3), 720-36.
Boas, Taylor, (2005) “ Television and Neopopulism in Latin America: Media Effects in Brazil and
Peru”, Latin American Research Review, 40, 27-49.
Boczkowski, P., and M. de Santos (2007) “When more media equals less news: Patterns of content
homogenization in Argentina's leading print and online newspapers”, Political Communication,
24, 167-190.
Browne, Marcela and Mariel Fitzpatrick (2004) Manual de Monitoreo de Medios en Periodos
Electorales, Fundación Konrad Adenauer and Fundación Poder Ciudadano.
Brunetti, Aymo and Beatrice Weder (2003) “A free press is bad news for corruption”, Journal of Public
Economics, 87 (2003) 1801–1824.
Canizalez, Andres (2009) Tiempos de cambio: política y comunicación en América Latina, Caracas:
Universidad Católica.
Chomsky, Naom and Edward Herman (1988) Manufacturing Consent: The Political Economy of the
Mass Media, Pantheon Books.
Committee to Protect Journalists (2006) “Attacks on the Press 2005: Argentina”, February 16,
http://cpj.org/2006/02/attacks-on-the-press-2005-argentina.php
DellaVigna, Stefano and Ethan Kaplan (2007) “The Fox News effect: Media bias and voting”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3), 1187-234.
Di Tella, Rafael, Galiani, Sebastian and Ernesto Schargrodsky (2007) “The Formation of Beliefs:
Evidence from the Allocation of Land Titles to Squatters”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
122, no. 1 (February), pp. 209-41.
Di Tella, Rafael, Galiani, Sebastian and Ernesto Schargrodsky (2008) “Reality versus Propaganda in
the Formation of Beliefs about Privatization”, NBER working paper 14483.
42

Djankov, Simeon; McLeish, Caralee; Nenova, Tatiana and Andrei Shleifer (2003) “Who Owns the
Media?” Journal of Law and Economics, 46(2), pp. 341–81.
Durante, Ruben, and Brian Knight (2009) “Partisan control, media bias, and viewer responses:
Evidence from Berlusconi's Italy”. NBER Working Paper No. 14762, March.
Dyck, Alexander, Volchkova, Natalya and Luigi Zingales (2008) “The Corporate Governance Role of
the Media: Evidence from Russia” The Journal of Finance, 63(3), pp. 1093-135.
Entman, Robert M. (1989) “How the Media Affect What People Think: An Information Processing
Approach,” The Journal of Politics, 51, no. 2, 347-70.
The Economist (2006) “No criticisms please, Caressing and cajoling the messenger”, 16 January.
Gambaro, Marco and Riccardo Puglisi (2009) “What do ads buy? Daily coverage of listed companies
on the Italian press”, Department of Economics University of Milan working paper n. 200936.
Gehlbach, Scott and Konstantin Sonin (2008) “Government Control of the Media”, mimeo.
Gerber, Alan, Karlan Dean and Daniel Bergan (2008) “Does the Media Matter? A Field Experiment
Measuring the Effect of Newspapers on Voting Behavior and Political Opinions”, American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, forthcoming.
Gentzkow, Matthew (2006) “Television and voter turnout”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121 (3), 93172.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Edward L. Glaeser, and Claudia Goldin (2006) “The Rise of the Fourth Estate:
How Newspapers Became Informative and Why it Mattered”, In Corruption and Reform:
Lessons from America's Economic History, Edward Glaeser and Claudia Goldin, Editors.
NBER/University of Chicago Press.
Gentzkow, Matthew A. and Jesse M. Shapiro (2004) “Media, Education and Anti-Americanism in the
Muslim World.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(3), pp. 117–33.
Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse Shapiro (2006) “Media Bias and Reputation”, Journal of Political
Economy, 114 (2), 280-316.
Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse Shapiro (2006) “What Drives media Slant? Evidence from U.S. Daily
Newspapers”, forthcoming Econometrica.
George, Lisa and Joel Waldfogel (2006) “The New York Times and the Market for Local
Newspapers”, American Economic Review. 96(1) 435-47.
Giuliano, Paola and Antonio Spilimbergo (2009) “Growing up in a Recession: Beliefs and the
Macroeconomy”, September, NBER wp 15,321.
Goldberg, Bernard (2001) Bias: A CBS Insider Exposes How the Media Distort the News, New
York: Regnery Publishing.
Groseclose, Timothy and Jeff Milyo (2005) “A Measure of Media Bias”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Vol. 120, 1191-1237.
Hamilton, James T. (2003) All the News That’s Fit to Sell: How the Market Transforms Information
into News. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Larcinese, Valentino, Puglisi, Riccardo, and James Snyder (2007) “Partisan Bias in Economic News:
Evidence on the Agenda-Setting Behavior of U.S. Newspapers” NBER Working Paper No.
13378, September.
Lippmann, Walter (1922) Public Opinion New York, Harcourt, Brace.
McMillan, John and Zoido, Pablo. (2004) “How to Subvert Democracy: Montesinos in Peru.” Journal
of Economic Perspectives , 18(4), pp. 69–92.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Andrei Shleifer. (2005) “The Market for News”, American Economic Review,
Vol. 95, pp. 1031–1053.
Petrova, Maria (2008) “Newspapers and Parties: How Advertising Revenues Created an Independent
Press”, mimeo, New Economic School, December 12.
Petty, Richard and J. Cacioppo (1981) Attitudes and Persuasion: Classic and Contemporary
Approaches, Dubuque, IA: Brown.
Piketty, Thomas, (1995) “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
CX, 551-584.
43

Puglisi, Riccardo and James M. Snyder (2008) “Media Coverage of Political Scandals”, mimeo MIT.
Reuter, Jonathan and Eric Zitzewitz (2006) “Do Ads Influence Editors? Advertising and Bias in the
Financial Media”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, February, Vol. 121, No. 1, 197-227
Stromberg, David (2004) “Radio’s Impact on Public Spending.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1),
pp. 189–221.
Yu, Mimi (2008) “Media Bias in Taiwan through the lens of the Presidential Corruption Scandal:
New Bias Measure and Evidence from Taiwanese Daily Newspapers”, mimeo Harvard
University.

44

