                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE AREA AND POPULATION OF CITIES:
              NEW INSIGHTS FROM A DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVE ON CITIES

                                         Hernán D. Rozenfeld
                                            Diego Rybski
                                            Xavier Gabaix
                                          Hernán A. Makse

                                        Working Paper 15409
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15409


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2009




This work is supported by the NSF through grant SES-0624116 and DMS-0527518. We thank L.H.
Dobkins and J. Eeckhout for providing the data on MSA and M. Batty for providing data on GB and
useful discussions; C. Briscoe and R. Tumarkin for help with the manuscript; and S. Brakman, M.
Davis, G. Duranton, H. Garretsen, E. Rossi-Hansberg, Y. Ioannides, P. Krugman, C. van Marrewijk,
P.-D. Sarte and seminar participants at NYU, Princeton and the Richmond Fed for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Hernán D. Rozenfeld, Diego Rybski, Xavier Gabaix, and Hernán A. Makse. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Area and Population of Cities: New Insights from a Different Perspective on Cities
Hernán D. Rozenfeld, Diego Rybski, Xavier Gabaix, and Hernán A. Makse
NBER Working Paper No. 15409
October 2009
JEL No. D30,D51,J61,R12

                                             ABSTRACT

The distribution of the population of cities has attracted a great deal of attention, in part because it
sharply constrains models of local growth. However, to this day, there is no consensus on the distribution
below the very upper tail, because available data need to rely on the “legal” rather than “economic”
definition of cities for medium and small cities. To remedy this difficulty, in this work we construct
cities “from the bottom up” by clustering populated areas obtained from high-resolution data. This
method allows us to investigate the population and area of cities for urban agglomerations of all sizes.
We find that Zipf’s law (a power law with exponent close to 1) for population holds for cities as small
as 12,000 inhabitants in the USA and 5,000 inhabitants in Great Britain. In addition the distribution
of city areas is also close to a Zipf’s law. We provide a parsimonious model with endogenous city
area that is consistent with those findings.


Hernán D. Rozenfeld                                 Xavier Gabaix
Levich Institute                                    New York University
City College of New York                            Finance Department
140th Street & Convent Avenue                       Stern School of Business
New York, NY 10031                                  44 West 4th Street, 9th floor
hernanrozenfeld@gmail.com                           New York, NY 10012
                                                    and NBER
Diego Rybski                                        xgabaix@stern.nyu.edu
City College of New York
140th Street & Convent Avenue                       Hernán A. Makse
New York, NY 10031                                  City College of New York
diego.rybski@pik-potsdam.de                         140th Street & Convent Avenue
                                                    New York, NY 10031
                                                    hmakse@lev.ccny.cuny.edu
1     Introduction
This paper builds on a recently-proposed algorithm to construct cities based on geographical
features of high-quality micro data (Rozenfeld et al. 2008), rather than informative but
somewhat arbitrary legal or administrative definitions. It allows us to take a fresh look at
key quantities in urban economics, namely the population and the area of cities. We find that
Zipf’s law for population holds quite well, and well below the very upper tail of the city size
distribution, where it had been shown to hold to a good degree of approximation (Gabaix
and Ioannides 2004). We also find that the distribution of city areas follows a power law,
with an exponent close to 1, the Zipf value. These findings help constrain further theories of
cities and theories of geography. We present a baseline parsimonious model of cities, which
features endogenous city area, and is consistent with these two key stylized facts, as well as
others.
    A key difficulty in studying cities is finding a practical way to define them (Zipf 1949;
Krugman 1996; Eaton and Eckstein 1997; Dobkins and Ioannides 2001; Eeckhout 2004;
Soo 2005; Batty 2006). A canonical method involves defining Metropolitan Statistical Areas
(MSAs) obtained in the USA from the US Census Bureau (U.S. Census Bureau 2009). MSAs
are defined for each major agglomeration, and attempt to capture their extent by merging
administratively defined entities, counties in the USA, based on their social or economic ties.
For instance, the MSA of Boston includes not only the administrative unit of Boston, but also
adjacent Cambridge, MA. MSAs derive their appeal from a strong economic logic, but their
construction requires qualitative analysis and is very time-consuming. Therefore, MSAs have
been constructed only for the 276 most populated cities in the USA, and the corresponding
Zipf’s law has been documented only for the upper tail of the distribution (Gabaix and
Ioannides 2004; Soo 2005).
    Two main alternatives to the MSAs have been proposed in the literature. One method
is to use administrative or legal borders of cities to define the so-called “places” as done
by Eeckhout (2004) and Levy (2009). The analysis of 25,359 places in the USA has suggested
that Zipf’s law holds in the upper tail (Levy 2009) but fails in the bulk of the distribution,
as legally defined cities follow a log-normal distribution rather than a power-law (Eeckhout
2004, 2009). The advantage of this definition is that it allows the study of the distribution
of cities of all sizes. Still, it is problematic to define cities through their fairly arbitrary legal
boundaries (the places method treats Cambridge and Boston as two separate units), and
indeed, this is why researchers prefer agglomerations such as MSAs whenever such constructs
are available. A second approach is to construct cities from micro data (Holmes and Lee
2009; Duranton and Overman 2005; Mori, Nishikimi and Smith 2008; Michaels, Rauch and
Redding 2008). In particular, Holmes and Lee (2009) consider cities to be individual cells
of six-by-six miles, for which the tail of the city size distribution is much less fat-tailed than


                                                  2
Zipf’s law. However, this is probably because constraining cities to areas of six-by-six miles
makes it nearly impossible to find a very large city. Hence, because of these methodological
difficulties, the shape of distribution of agglomerations beneath the few hundred largest cities
is still an open problem.
    Here we build on an algorithm, the City Clustering Algorithm (CCA), that was recently
introduced in (Rozenfeld et al. 2008) and based on previous studies done by Makse, Havlin
and Stanley (1995) to build cities “from the bottom-up”. The algorithm defines a “city”
as a maximally connected cluster of populated sites defined at high resolution. Namely, a
population cluster is made of contiguous populated sites within a prescribed distance ℓ that
cannot be expanded: all sites immediately outside the cluster have a population density
below a cutoff threshold. Rather than defining a city as one cell, as done by Holmes and Lee
(2009), our method defines an agglomeration as a maximally connected cluster of potentially
many cells.
    We find that Zipf’s law holds, to a good approximation, in the USA and GB, for both
populations and areas. We also find that density has only a weak correlation with population
and area. We propose that the two facts of Zipf’s law for populations and areas could serve
as tight constraints on models of cities. As we can measure area, we wish to model it. Hence,
we provide a parsimonious urban model that incorporates areas, and generates Zipf’s law
for areas and populations.
    In Section 2 we present the analyzed data and explain the CCA. In Section 3 we present
our results for the population distribution of CCA clusters in the USA and GB. We also
compare the CCA clusters with US Census MSAs and places and present a formal test of
robustness of our clustering method. In Section 4 we show the results of the area distribution
of CCA clusters in the USA and GB and present a study of the correlations between densities,
areas, and populations for CCA clusters. In Section 5 we propose a model that can integrate
the findings, and we summarize our conclusions in Section 6.


2     Data and Methods
2.1    Raw data
The data for the USA consists of the location and population of 61,224 points located
throughout the area of the USA (U.S. Census Bureau 2001). Each point corresponds to
a Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) census tract code (National Institute of
Standards and Technology 2008) generated by the US Census Bureau ranging in population
from 1,500 to 8,000 people, with a typical size of about 4,000 people. FIPS codes are uniquely
specified by 11 digits. The first 2 digits correspond to the state code, the next 3 to the county
within the state, and the next 6 correspond to the census tract code. For example FIPS
36061016500 corresponds to New York State (36), New York County (Manhattan, 061),

                                               3
census tract 016500 which is an area ranging from 58th Street to 60th Street and from 8th
Ave. to 9th Ave. Figure 1 shows all FIPS for Manhattan Island in New York City and
its surroundings. The location of the FIPS is not always equidistant. For instance the
shortest distance between two FIPS is about 100 m as in appears in Manhattan, while in
less populated areas like Wyoming, FIPS can be separated by about 100 km.

                                                   CCNY




                                                              Harlem

                  Hudson                                       Central Park
                  River

                                                               East River
                     NYU




Figure 1: Raw data for Manhattan. In this plot we show all FIPS codes corresponding
to Manhattan Island obtained from the raw data for the USA. Each point corresponds to a
FIPS code specified by the US Census Bureau.

    The data for Great Britain (GB) is uniformly gridded at high resolution. It consists of a
grid with cell size 200 m overlaid on the area of GB for which the population in each cell is
given. The source of the GB data is the ESRC (The 1981 and 1991 population census, Crown
Copyright, ESRC purchase 2009) and is composed of 5.75 million square cells comprising a
total population of about 55 million inhabitants in 1991. Given that the GB data is more
fine-grained that of the US, it is arguably higher-quality. All datasets and results used and
presented in this work may be downloaded from our web page.

2.2    The City Clustering Algorithm (CCA)
We start this section by providing a detailed explanation of the CCA (Rozenfeld et al.
2008). In Fig. 2a we show four steps of the CCA when it is applied to the USA. To define
a CCA cluster, we first locate a populated site. Then, we recursively grow the cluster by
adding all nearest-neighbor sites (populated sites within a distance smaller than the coarse-
graining level, ℓ, from any site within the cluster) with a population density, D, larger than
a threshold D∗ . The cluster stops growing when no site outside the cluster with population
density D > D∗ is at a distance smaller than ℓ from the cluster boundary. In this work, to


                                              4
minimize the number of free parameters, we set the threshold D∗ = 0, and therefore clusters
are recursively grown by merging all populated sites within a distance smaller than ℓ from
any site within the cluster.




     a                                        b

Figure 2: a, CCA applied to the USA (continuum CCA). The points in this figure denote
populated sites or FIPS. For our studies (and in this diagram) we use a density threshold
D∗ = 0. (i) We start a cluster selecting a populated site, red point, among all available
populated sites. We draw a circle of radius ℓ and add all populated sites, blue point, that
fall within the circle. (ii) We draw a circle from the new member of this cluster and add all
populated sites (denoted by the two blue points) within the circle. (iii) Recursively, we keep
drawing circles from all new cluster sites. The populated sites inside the circles (three blue
points in this case) are merged into the cluster. (iv) The red points are the members of the
cluster. Since no black point is at a distance smaller than ℓ from any red point, the cluster
does not grow anymore. We start the process again selecting another initial point that has
not been already assigned to any cluster. This process is repeated until all populated sites
are assigned to a cluster. Notice that the choice of the initial condition, the first selected
point, does not influence the outcome. b, CCA applied to GB (discrete CCA). (i) Cells are
colored in blue if they are populated, otherwise they are in white. (ii) We initialize the CCA
by selecting a random populated cell (red cell). Then, we merge all populated neighbors of
the red cell as shown in (iii). We keep growing the cluster by iteratively merging neighbors
of the red cells until all neighboring cells are unpopulated, as shown in (iv). Next, we
pick another unburned populated cell and repeat the algorithm until all populated cells are
assigned to a cluster.

   Once the clusters are built, we calculate the population of a cluster as the sum of the
populations of all sites within the cluster. Figure 3a shows a map of all identified clusters in
the continental USA where colors correspond to the cluster population, and Fig. 3b shows a
detail of the clusters in the northeastern USA for different ℓ.


                                               5
    Since the data of GB is already gridded, the CCA algorithm adopts a simpler form that in
the USA. To apply the CCA to the GB data we start from a populated cell and at each step
we grow the cluster by adding all populated cells neighboring the boundary of the cluster
(see Fig 2b). The cluster stops growing when all cells neighboring the cluster have a density
no greater than D∗ .
    As mentioned before, the data for GB differs from that of the USA, consisting of a grid
with cell size 200 m overlaid on the map of GB. For this reason, since the data is already
gridded at a very high resolution, we simply merge cells from the original data to obtain
larger levels of coarse-graining at different grid sizes ℓ. We call this version of the CCA, the
discrete CCA, while the version applied to the USA is the continuum CCA (see Fig. 2).


3     Population Distribution
3.1    Basic Results
We analyze the population data in the USA and GB to obtain the distribution, P (S),
measuring the probability density that a cluster has a population between S and S + dS.
Figure 4 shows the results of P (S) for the USA for ℓ = 2 km, ℓ = 3 km, and ℓ = 4 km
for which we obtain 30,201, 23,499, and 19,912 clusters, respectively. We find that the
population distribution follows a power-law of the form:

                                        P (S) ∼ S −ζ−1 ,                                    (1)

with an exponent of ζ ≈ 1, in approximate accordance with the value of Zipf’s law. For
example, when we estimate the exponent for ℓ = 3 km and for clusters with S > S∗ = 12, 000
inhabitants (comprising 63% of the country’s population) we find ζ = 0.97 ± 0.03 using an
OLS estimator (the notation ± means that the standard deviation is 0.03). Figure 5 shows
the Zipf exponent ζ for the USA for several value of ℓ. We observe that the exponent ζ
remains approximately within 5% of the Zipf value in the range ℓ ∈ [2.5, 3.5] km.
    Figure 6 displays the population distribution of the CCA clusters in GB for ℓ = 0.2 km,
ℓ = 0.6 km, ℓ = 1 km, ℓ = 1.8 km, ℓ = 2 km, and ℓ = 2.6 km. For clusters with a population
above a cutoff S∗ = 5, 000 inhabitants, the GB population follows a power-law to a good
degree of approximation. Using an OLS regression, we estimate for ℓ = 1 km (1,008 clusters
with 83% of the country’s population) a Zipf exponent ζ = 1.07 ± 0.03. As in the case of
the USA, the exponent is similar for different choices of grid size ℓ.
    To formally study the validity of our power-law fits, we employ the test proposed by Gabaix
and Ibragimov (2010) and Gabaix (2009), offering a simple quantification of possible devi-
ations from a pure power-law. The test for quadratic deviations is used to determine if a
power-law is adequate to describe the city size distribution. The method is as follows. Sort


                                               6
                a                                                            b




Figure 3: CCA clusters in the USA. a, CCA clusters applied to the entire USA. The map
shows the different clusters obtained by the algorithm. The color indicates the population of
each urban cluster (in logarithmic scale). b, Results of the CCA applied to the major clusters
of the northeastern USA at different length scales. The top left panel shows the CCA clusters
for ℓ = 1 km separating the cities of Washington D.C., Baltimore, Philadelphia, Newark,
Jersey City, New York, and Boston. The top right panel shows the results of the algorithm
when the data is coarse-grained to ℓ = 2 km. Here, for example, the cities of New York,
Newark and Jersey City become part of the same cluster. The lower left panel shows the
results for ℓ = 4 km, where the main clusters are Washington D.C.-Baltimore; Philadelphia;
New York-Newark-Jersey City-Long Island; and Boston-Cambridge. The lower right panel
for ℓ = 8 km shows a giant cluster comprising all major cities in the northeastern USA. The
gray points are also identified as part of other clusters but for clarity we do not specify them
with individual colors in this figure.




                                               7
Figure 4: Probability distribution of cluster populations P (S) for the USA at different coarse-
graining scales ℓ. The black solid line denotes a power-law function with exponent -2, i.e.
Zipf’s Law.




Figure 5: Zipf exponent ζ obtained for the USA clusters at different ℓ. The error bars
correspond to ±1 standard deviation.




                                               8
Figure 6: Probability distribution P (S) for GB clusters at different coarse-graining scales ℓ.

the cities according to their rank i (i = 1 being the largest city) and run the OLS regression

                       ln(i − 1/2) = constant − ζ lnSi + q (lnSi − γ)2                      (2)

where ζ (the power law exponent) and q (the quadratic deviation from a power law) are
the parameters to estimate and γ ≡ (cov((lnSj )2 , lnSj )) / (2var(lnSj )). The recentering term
γ ensures that the exponent ζ is the same whether the quadratic term is included or not,
and therefore ζ may be estimated beforehand using a simple linear OLS. The quadratic
test formalizes the intuition that a pure power law has q = 0 in the asymptotic limit, so a
high value of |q| indicates deviations from power-law behavior. Under the null of a power
                          √
law, for large samples 2NqN /ζ 2 converges to a standard normal distribution (where N is
the number of data-points). With probability 0.99, a standard normal is less than 2.57 in
                                           √
absolute value. Hence, let qc ≡ 2.57ζ 2/ 2N , be the critical value for the absolute value
of the quadratic term q at the 1% confidence level. If |q| > qc we reject the hypothesis
that the data is well described by a power-law since the quadratic term becomes significant.
Otherwise, if |q| < qc , the quadratic term is insignificant and we do not reject the power-law
hypothesis.
    For the USA, when we consider the distribution of city sizes for cities larger than S∗ =
12, 000 for ℓ = 3 km, we obtain |q| = 0.0291 and qc = 0.0413. Since |q| < qc , we conclude that
we can disregard the quadratic correction to the OLS fit and consider that the power-law
describes the empirical distribution of city sizes. In the case of GB, we consider S∗ = 5, 000
and ℓ = 1 km, for which |q| = 0.0521 and qc = 0.0522. Although |q| and qc are very close, the
fact that |q| < qc indicates that we cannot reject the hypothesis that the power-law describes
the city size distribution for GB. We conclude that Zipf’s law is a good description of city

                                               9
sizes with population above S∗ = 12, 000 inhabitants in the USA and S∗ = 5, 000 inhabitants
in GB. This comprises 1, 947 clusters (for ℓ = 3 km) and a population of 171.3 million out
of a total population of 271.1 million in the USA, and 1,007 clusters (for ℓ = 1 km) and a
population of 45.3 milllion out of a total population of 54.5 million in GB, in contrast to
previous samples (Soo 2005) typically having a few hundred cities.
    So far, we have only focused on the part of the distribution where a power law fit could
not be statistically rejected. Now, somewhat more loosely, we turn to a visual inspection of
Fig. 4 and Fig. 6. We see that the distribution is arguably well-approximated by a power
law, in a region covering cities above 3,000 inhabitants in the USA, and cities above 300
inhabitants in GB. The deviations from the power law, while statistically significant, are not
very large economically. Hence, we also submit that, for the modelling a cities, the domain
of an approximate power law is quite large. This domain comprises 17609 clusters and a
population of 259.3 million (96% of the total population) in the USA, and 9214 clusters and
a population of 53.1 million (96% of the total population) in GB.

3.2    Comparison between CCA clusters, MSAs, and Places
Although the CCA allows one to choose the observation level of population clusters, ℓ, it
may be desirable to have an objective way to choose ℓ. For this purpose, we perform a
comparison with the MSAs in the USA which may be considered a benchmark for plausibly
well-constructed cities. MSAs are defined starting from a highly populated central county
with population larger than 50,000 and adding its surrounding counties if they have social
or economic ties such as large commuting patterns between the regions. Figures 7a and 7b
show a comparison between the MSAs of the northeastern USA and the clusters obtained
using CCA.
    In order to find the value of ℓ that best matches the MSAs we match each MSA with the
most populated overlapping CCA cluster. For this purpose, from the US Census Bureau, we
obtain the counties (and corresponding FIPS) that belong to each MSA. An overlap between
an MSA and a CCA cluster exists if they share at least one FIPS code. This overlapping
procedure leads to several CCA clusters corresponding to one particular MSA. To obtain a
one-to-one correspondence, among all overlapping CCA clusters we select the one with the
largest population. We compare the size of the obtained CCA cluster with the corresponding
MSA by computing the correlation, ρ(ℓ), between the logarithm of the cluster population,
SiCCA (ℓ), and the logarithm of the population of the MSA, SiMSA . Figure 8a shows the cross-
plot of log SiMSA versus log SiCCA (ℓ) for ℓ = 3 km displaying an approximately linear behavior.
Figure 8b shows the correlation analysis between CCA clusters and MSAs by plotting ρ(ℓ)
for other values of ℓ. We quantify the regression, log SiCCA (ℓ) = a(ℓ) + b(ℓ) log SiMSA (ℓ),
by measuring the value of the linear regression slope b(ℓ) as a function of ℓ. We find that
b(ℓ) ≈ 1.2 for ℓ > 2 km. Correlation in log sizes is very good for values of ℓ between 2 km

                                              10
               MSA




a                                                  b

Figure 7: Comparison between the MSAs and the CCA clusters. a, MSAs for the
northeastern USA. For example, New York county (Manhattan) with a population larger
than 50,000 is a center of a MSA. Jersey City belongs to the same MSA since a large number
of its population commute to Manhattan, setting economic and social ties between the two
regions. b, CCA clusters for the northeastern USA for ℓ = 5 km. Each cluster or MSA is
plotted with a different color. For instance, the MSA centered in New York City (in green in
a) is composed of several clusters. The largest overlapping cluster found with the CCA is in
green in b. The white concentric circles correspond to the location of the state capitals in the
considered region. The star denotes Washington D.C. and the white full circle corresponds
to New York City.




                                              11
                                                                                 b( )
                                                                                 ρ( )




a                                             b




c

Figure 8: a, Population of the CCA cluster in the USA for ℓ = 3km vs its corresponding
MSAs, using the one-to-one correspondence explained in the text. b, Correlation analysis
between CCA clusters and MSAs by plotting ρ(ℓ) for different values of ℓ. We quantify
the regression, ln SiCCA (ℓ) = a(ℓ) + b(ℓ) ln SiMSA (ℓ), by measuring the value of the linear
regression slope b(ℓ) as a function of ℓ. c, Euclidean distance between MSAs and CCA
clusters.

and 6 km; the correlation, displayed in Fig. 8b, is very high for this range of ℓ. We find that
ρ(ℓ) exhibits a maximum value of ρ ≈ 0.91 for ℓ ∈ [2.5, 3.5] km, so that we consider ℓ = 3
km as the optimal value.
   We present another plausible measure of similarity between MSAs and CCA clusters,
based on the Euclidean distance. We define the distance, d(ℓ), between MSAs and CCA as
                                  s
                                    X
                          d(ℓ) ≡        [ln(SiMSA ) − ln(SiCCA (ℓ))]2 ,                     (3)
                                      i


where the sum is over all the MSAs and their corresponding CCA clusters. In Fig. 8c we
show the distance between overlapped MSAs and CCA clusters as a function of ℓ. We find
that when ℓ = 5 km the distance (in population) is minimized, and that it is very low
between 2.5 km ≤ ℓ ≤ 6 km in approximate agreement with the log correlation analysis of
Fig. 8a,b.


                                              12
    In addition to the MSAs, we compare the CCA clusters with US Census Bureau “places”
previously analyzed in Eeckhout (2004) where a log-normal distribution of city sizes was
found. We first find a one-to-one correspondence between CCA clusters and places, in
analogy to the previous match between MSAs and CCA clusters. In contrast to MSAs, US
Census places take into account all towns, villages, and cities and are based only on their
administrative or political boundaries (Eeckhout 2004; Holmes and Lee 2009). The smallest
and largest places are Lost Spring, Wyoming, with exactly one resident, and the political
entity of New York City (Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens, Bronx, and Staten Island) with
population 8.0 million.
    From the US Census Bureau we obtain the geographical location of each US Census
place. Then, we identify each place with a unique FIPS code. Accordingly, each place is
associated with a unique CCA cluster. This association leads to many places corresponding
to a single CCA. To obtain the one-to-one correspondence, among all overlapping places we
consider the one with the largest population.
    In Fig. 9a we show that, the smallest cities found with the CCA do not correspond well
to US Census places; however, for cities above population S = 10, 000 CCA and Census
places do exhibit a correlation coefficient of ρ = 0.79. A detailed comparison between CCA
clusters and places shows that the number of small CCA clusters is smaller than that for
places because the CCA tends to group small places that are geographically connected into a
larger cluster. Therefore, the construction based on places overestimates the number of small
cities and underestimates the number of large cities in comparison with CCA, resulting in
the size distribution of places to being less fat tailed than the distribution for CCA clusters.
This discrepancy, which may find its root in the fact that places are purely based on legal
boundaries of locations (Holmes and Lee 2009), may explain the finding of a log-normal
distribution of places (Eeckhout 2004), whose full elucidation is beyond the scope of this
paper. Here, we show results for ℓ = 3 km as representative, but other values of ℓ lead to
the same conclusions.
    We also perform a comparison between MSAs and places. In Fig. 9b we observe a
good congruence in the whole range for which MSAs are defined. Notice that MSAs by
definition have a minimum population of 50,000. Therefore, when looking for the one-to-one
correspondence, only large places are considered, leading to a good congruence, as found
between large CCA cluster and large places, with correlation ρ = 0.87.

3.3    Robustness Checks
In this section we test whether the results shown in Section 3.1 could be forced by the
CCA, or in other words, whether they could be an artifact of the CCA. Starting with the
actual location of the FIPS in the USA we randomize the data by placing all 61,224 FIPS
at random positions in a rectangle of the same area as the USA. Then we apply the CCA to

                                              13
                   8
                   7
                   6
    log(SPlaces)


                   5
                   4
                   3
                   2
                   1
                   0
                    1     2     3    4    5     6   7   8
a                                   log(SCCA)               b

Figure 9: a, Log of population of US Census places vs. the log of population of their
corresponding CCA clusters for ℓ = 3km. The straight line corresponds to a least square
fit with slope b = 0.90 ± 0.02 and y-intercept a = 0.25 ± 0.09, from where the correlation
coefficient ρ = 0.79 is obtained for cities with population larger than 10,000. b, Log of
population of US Census places vs. the log of population of their corresponding MSA. The
straight line corresponds to a least square fit with slope b = 0.84 ± 0.03 and y-intercept
a = 0.37 ± 0.14, from where the correlation coefficient ρ = 0.87 is obtained.

obtain the corresponding clusters. This randomization procedure preserves the population
of each FIPS. In Fig. 10 we show the population distribution for the shuffled data and for
the original data. These results show that the shuffled data does not exhibit Zipf’s law. The
largest cluster for the shuffled data contains 196,112 inhabitants: the reshuffling prevents
the emergence of very large clusters. This suggests that the CCA is not forcing the data to
present a power-law for the population distribution, and that Zipf’s law arises purely from
the data.


4                  Investigation of the Geography of Cities: Areas and
                   Densities
4.1                     Areas
The CCA presents a unique feature in that it allows the definition of the area of cities not
based on administrative boundaries. Such a feature in not present in agglomerations defined
by Places or MSAs. Thus, the spatial analysis of the CCA allows us to examine a possible
feature of the origin of the Zipf’s law: highly populated cities may have a large geographic
area. Therefore, it is of interest to study the distribution of areas (Makse, Havlin and Stanley
1995), P (A), defined by the CCA.
    As explained above, the data of GB consists of a high resolution grid with cell size 200m.
Therefore, after applying the CCA, we calculate the area of a cluster in GB as the number
of cells in the cluster multiplied by the area of a cell, ℓ2 .


                                                                14
Figure 10: Population distribution for shuffled data. The black lines correspond to the
real data studied in Section 3.1. The red lines correspond to the shuffled data, showing a
change in the population distribution and suggesting that the results of Section 3.1 are not
an artifact of the CCA.

    The case of the USA is more complicated. The data consists of 61,224 populated points
on the map. Each point corresponds to a different FIPS code, defined by the US Census
Bureau. USA FIPS are simply a partition of the map of the USA, so that any point in
the map belongs to one FIPS code, and each FIPS has an associated area which is given
by the US Census Bureau in the dataset. In the USA, FIPS codes are not homogeneously
distributed. In the New York City area, there is high resolution, which means that there
are many FIPS covering a small area, but in the state of Wyoming or Utah the resolution
is quite low, so that there are FIPS with a large area. For instance, FIPS in Manhattan
typically cover an area of about 0.20 km2 while in the state of Utah FIPS 49003960100 covers
a large area of 15,962 km2 . Therefore, when ℓ is of the order of a few kilometers, a FIPS in
the Wyoming area will remain isolated in its own cluster, but still its area will be extremely
large, typically a couple of orders of magnitude larger than ℓ2 . Therefore, since the area of
isolated points is very large, these points will appear at the tail and in the middle of the
distribution P (A), overestimating the outcome for middle and large areas. Accordingly, in
order to compute the P (A), we do not take into account clusters containing only 1 or 2
FIPS since they overestimate the amount of land they cover. Moreover, the population of
those isolated points is typically small and rarely exceeds S = 10, 000. In fact, we find that
removing all clusters with only 1 or 2 FIPS is practically the same as removing all clusters
with population smaller than 10,000: only 7% of clusters with 1 or 2 FIPS have a population
larger than 10,000.


                                             15
a                                            b

Figure 11: a, Probability distribution of the areas, P (A), for the USA for different ℓ. b,
Probability distribution P (A) of the areas of the clusters in GB at different coarse-graining
scales ℓ. The distribution of city areas for GB is also consistent with Zipf’s law. We find
ζA = 0.97 ± 0.04, for ℓ = 1 km. The black solid lines denote Zipf’s law, i.e. a power-law
function with exponent -2.

    In Fig. 11a we report the results of P (A) for the USA. We find a power-law distribution
of the form
                                       P (A) ∼ A−ζA −1 ,                                 (4)
with a Zipf exponent ζA = 1.07 ± 0.04, for ℓ = 3 km. In Fig. 11b we show the results of P (A)
for GB. As for the USA, we find that the area distribution for GB follows a power-law with
exponent ζA = 0.97 ± 0.04, for ℓ = 1 km. This extends the results obtained in (Makse et al.
1998) for areas distributions surrounding a city like London and Berlin (Makse, Havlin and
Stanley 1995) and in UK (Makse et al. 1998). The result of the Zipf’s law for areas in the
US appears to be new.
    This result may be an important update for calibrated models of cities where transport
costs of goods or people play an important role (Brakman, Garretsen and van Marrewijk
2009; Fujita, Krugman and Venables 2001). The Zipf’s law for areas implies that some cities
have very large areas, and those cities’ viability may mean that transport costs cannot be
too large, or are mitigated in economically interesting ways. We come back to this topic in
Section 5.
    In Fig. 12a we study the correlations between areas and populations for the USA and
GB. We find that the linear OLS regression lnA = a + b lnS leads to the results shown in
Table 1, indicating a strong correlation between areas and population in log sizes. Indeed,
the finding of b ≃ 1 indicates that population is, to a good degree of approximation, simply
proportional to area. This finding motivates us to study city density in more detail.




                                             16
            18                                                                  18
                   USA                                                          16    GB
            16                                                                  14
                                                                                12
            14
                                                                                                        Slope = 1.065




                                                                        ln(S)
                                                                                10
    ln(S)




            12                                  Slope = 0.958                    8
                                                                                6
            10
                                                                                4
             8                                                                  2
                                                                                0
             0     1   2   3   4    5      6    7   8     9   10                 -4    -2   0    2      4     6         8
a                                  ln(A)                           b                            ln(A)

Figure 12: Logarithm of the population, S versus the logarithm of the area, A, for a, the
USA with ℓ = 3 km and b, GB for ℓ = 1 km. The black lines denote the OLS regression
(see Table 1.)

Table 1: Results of the OLS regression analysis of lnS = a + b lnA, where A is the area
and S the population. We report results for S∗ = 12, 000 and ℓ = 3 km for the USA, and
S∗ = 5, 000 and ℓ = 1 km for GB. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.

                                                                    USA      GB
                                                    lnA             0.958   1.065
                                                                   (0.020) (0.007)
                                                Constant            6.567   8.166
                                                                   (0.085) (0.010)
                                               Observations         1064    1007
                                                   R2               0.686   0.921



4.2              Densities
In this section we study the population density, D = S/A. 1 We study the behavior of D
versus S and A by performing the linear regressions lnD = a + b lnA, and lnD = a + b lnS.
Table 2 shows the results of the OLS regression estimates with S∗ = 12, 000 and ℓ = 3
km for the USA, and S∗ = 5, 000 and ℓ = 1 km for GB (other choices of ℓ lead to the
same conclusions). We find that population density has very little relation to the area: the
coefficients are very close to 0. It has a slightly higher link with population. Of course,
measurement error in the variables may bias the measurement.
    Still, the link between density and area is perhaps surprisingly weak. Some urban systems,
like New York City, are quite dense, but even then, the effects are moderate: the density
of New York City is only 3.7 times the national median even though its population is 485
    1
     See Bryan, Minton and Sarte (2007) for an alternative analysis of density. They find that density has
fallen in the US over the past seven decades.


                                                                   17
Table 2: Results of the OLS regression analysis of lnD = a + b lnA and lnD = a + b lnS,
where D = S/A is the density, A the area, and S the population. We report results for
S∗ = 12, 000 and ℓ = 3 km for the USA, and S∗ = 5, 000 and ℓ = 1 km for GB. Standard
errors are reported in parentheses.

                          lnD = a + b lnA                      lnD = a + b lnS
                            USA     GB                          USA      GB
                 lnA       -0.042  0.065      lnS               0.284   0.099
                          (0.020) (0.007)                      (0.015) (0.006)
              Constant     6.567   8.166   Constant             3.357   7.299
                          (0.086) (0.010)                      (0.159) (0.057)
             Observations   1064   1007   Observations          1064    1007
                  R2       0.004   0.007       R2               0.256   0.050



times the national median. Of course, we obviate here a consideration of the interesting
heterogeneity within cities; but for the purposes of this paper such a study may be deferred
to later work. We find that density has a very small dispersion: the standard deviation of
its natural logarithm is 0.28 for the USA and 0.09 for GB. In contrast, the corresponding
quantity for areas and population is about 1. Hence, we conclude that city area covaries
greatly with population, and little with density. We next propose a model that is consistent
with this finding, as well as the power law scaling of city sizes.


5    Model
Recent economic theories that are compatible with Zipf’s law generally rely on the existence
of random growth (Champernowne 1953; Simon 1955; Krugman 1996; Levy and Solomon
1996; Gabaix 1999a; Dobkins and Ioannides 2001; Davis and Weinstein 2002; Gabaix and
Ioannides 2004; Eeckhout 2004; Duranton 2006, 2007; Rossi-Hansberg and Wright 2007;
Córdoba 2008): cities follow a proportional growth process where the distribution of the
percentage growth rate is the same for small and large cities. Small cities, however, grow
faster (Glaeser et al. 1992; Glaeser, Scheinkman and Shleifer 1995; Rozenfeld et al. 2008),
which prevents the distribution from becoming degenerate. Some theories obtain Zipf’s law
only approximately, and do not obtain it over the range that we find in the present work.
Accordingly, we present a parsimonious model that generates an approximate Zipf’s law for
population and area.
    We first describe the model at a given point in time. Cities are indexed by i ∈ [0, 1].
City i employs Si workers, and has a competitive sector producing good i, which it produces
in quantity yi = bi Si , where bi is the productivity. The aggregate good is a Dixit-Stiglitz


                                             18
aggregator with elasticity of substitution η > 1:
                                       Z              η/(η−1)
                                             (η−1)/η
                                 Y =       yi        di                                       (5)

    There is a potentially unbounded quantity of land, but making usable an area a of land
necessitates an investment pa, for some unit cost p. This reflects e.g. maintenance cost,
roads and other infrastructure to occupy a land area a (the cost is in the consumption good,
but it could equivalently be in units of labor). Hence, as in Rossi-Hansberg and Wright
(2007), land use is endogenous. As a result, if A is total land use, and C total consumption,
the resource constraint is C + pA ≤ Y .
    Consumers’ utility is u (c, a) = c1−β aβ with 0 < β < 1, where c is the consumption of
the good, and a the consumption of land. Workers are free to choose their cities, so that
utilities are the same across cities. Hence, the competitive equilibrium is also the solution
to the planner’s problem that equalizes utility across agents, and allocates population Si
                           R
in each city i (subject to Si di = S, the total population), and allocates their per capita
consumption of good ci and land area ai , to maximize total utility subject to the resource
constraint:                           Z
                                max     u (ci , ai ) Si di subject to
                                Si ,ci ,ai


                      Z                          Z                           η/(η−1)
                                                                  (η−1)/η
                          (ci + pai ) Si di ≤          (bi Si )             di

                          ∀i, j, u (ci , ai ) = u (cj , aj )
                                  Z
                                      Si di = S

   The solution method is standard. The labor allocated to producing good i, i.e., the
population living in city i is:
                                                  Bi
                                             Si =    S                                         (6)
                                                  B
                                                        1/(η−1)
where Bi ≡ bη−1
                              R
              i   and B ≡ Bi di. GDP is Y = B                   S. A fraction 1 − β of income is
devoted to consumption of the good, and a fraction β to land use. Each consumer purchases
                             1/(η−1)
a quantity of land ν ≡ βB            /p. So, the total quantity of land in city i, Ai , is ν times
the number of inhabitants of city i:
                                             Ai = νSi                                          (7)
Hence city area and city population are proportional.
    Next, we wish to see why Zipf’s law might arise. We consider a dynamic version of the
                                                       R               
above static description. Consumers have utility E e−δt u(ct , at )dt with some discount rate
δ, which is assumed to be sufficiently large for utility to be finite. As there are no adjustment
costs, for given productivities, the dynamic model yields the same allocation of workers and

                                                  19
land across cities as in the static model. We take a model that merges the random growth
models of cities and the model of random growth of firms developed by Luttmer (2007). We
postulate that (elasticity-adjusted) productivity Bi of city i evolves as a geometric Brownian
motion:
                                      dBit
                                           = gdt + σdzit                                   (8)
                                       Bit
where g is the mean of the growth rate of productivity of an existing city, σ the volatility
of that growth rate, and zit are independent Brownian motions. However, if a city is too
unproductive, it can “refresh” its productivity as a fraction of the average productivity:

                                            Bit ≥ πB t                                         (9)

where π ∈ (0, 1) is a constant. Here, we simply postulate that it can reset its productivity for
free, by simply imitating the average productivity, but only imperfectly: its reset productivity
is only a fraction π of the average productivity. Luttmer (2007) presents a much more
elaborate microfoundation for this idea, including the π, but the above model is useful for
its simplicity. All in all, Bit follows a geometric Brownian motion, reflected at πB t .
    The following Proposition characterizes the behavior of this economy.
Proposition (i) The steady state distribution of city population and city area is a power-law
with exponent ζ:
                                               1
                                        ζ=                                               (10)
                                             1−π
Indeed, Sit /S t , Ait /At and Bit /B t are all equal and follow the Pareto distribution P (X ≥ x) =
(x/π)−ζ for x ≥ π. The exponent ζ tends to 1 (the Zipf ’s law value) when the friction π
coming from the reflecting barrier tends to 0.
    (ii) City population S is proportional to city area A, and density D = S/A is independent
of city size.
    (iii) The fraction of income spent on housing is independent of city size.
Proof The proof method is as in Gabaix (1999a) (see also Gabaix (2009) and the references
therein). Denote by g the growth rate B t on the balanced growth path. The relative share
of city i, sit ≡ Bit /B t follows a geometric Brownian motion, with dsit /sit = (g − g)dt + σdzit ,
with a reflecting barrier, sit ≥ π. Calling µ = g − g, the steady state density p (s) follows
the Forward Kolmogorov equation:
                                                     1 2 2       ′′
                                0 = − (µsp (s))′ +     σ s p (s)
                                                     2
Integration of this equation yields p (s) = ks−ζ−1 for ζ = 1 − 2µ/σ 2 and some constant k.
                                   R∞
By construction E [s] = 1. Given π p (s) ds = 1, we have
                             R∞              R ∞ −ζ−1
                                 p (s) sds      ks     sds      ζ
                        1 = Rπ∞            = Rπ∞ −ζ−1      =π
                              π
                                 p (s) ds     π
                                                ks     sds    ζ −1

                                                20
which yields ζ = 1/ (1 − π). The steady state distribution can be written P (sit ≥ x) =
(x/π)−ζ . Finally, by (6) and (7), the distribution of populations and areas is a Pareto with
the same exponent ζ.
    We also note that ζ = 1 − 2(g − g)/σ 2 . This yields the value of the growth rate of
productivity: g = g + σ 2 (ζ − 1) /2. The (endogenous) growth rate of average productivity
is higher than the (exogenous) growth rate of a city above the reflecting barrier, because
this reflecting barrier makes small cities grow faster. In the Zipf limit where π → 0, hence
ζ → 1, the difference between the two growth rates, g − g, goes to 0. 
    This economy reflects our main empirical findings, (i) and (ii). Point (iii) reflects the
findings of Davis and Ortalo-Magné (2008), who find that the fraction of income spent on
housing is roughly constant over time and across city sizes.
    We note that here, following Rossi-Hansberg and Wright (2007) and Van Nieuwerburgh
and Weill (2009), land is not exogenous but instead it is acquired. This is a legitimate mod-
elling idealization in our view. Take a city such as Dallas, which starts with vast quantities
of unoccupied land around it. It can grow in a fairly unlimited way, but it needs to pay
for the land use, e.g. building infrastructure such as road, electricity and running water. It
makes sense to model this activity as a constant-return to scale activity, at least in the first
approximation. At the other end of the spectrum, we may have New York. But even it has
grown considerably by geographical expansion, which lends credence to our model. It would
be interesting, and surely desirable, to extend the model with some sort of increasing cost
of land use (given some limit). We conjecture that, if the random growth effects are large
enough, this will modify the power law distribution, but will not eliminate it. A calibration
of the deviation from the constant return to scale model, and the deviation of the power law,
would be useful, but we will not attempt it here.
    Here cities are basically constant-return-to-scales economies, except for one large Mar-
shallian force that makes a given good only producible in one city (as “secrets of the trade”
may be exclusive that city). Of course, this is a stark model, but it is parsimonious, and
is consistent with our scaling facts. In addition, external effects linked to cities may not
be huge. For instance, Glaeser (1998) reports quantitatively moderate deviations from the
hypothesis that cities are constant-return-to scale (see also Bettencourt et al. (2007)). For
instance, Glaeser (1998) reports that the average commute time in cities of less than 100,000
is 20.5 minutes each way, while in cities of more than 1,000,000 it is 31.9 minutes each way2 .
This difference may be small compared to the huge differences in size and area that our
model focuses on.
    Our model postulates that Gibrat’s law holds. However, deviations from Gibrat’s law
   2
    In a related vein, Ciccone and Hall (1996) estimate that a doubling of density increases productivity by
5.5%, while Davis, Fisher and Whited (2009) finds an increase of 2%. This is a arguably small deviation
from the constant-return to scale benchmark we use in our model.


                                                    21
have been found in the literature and for the CCA clusters (e.g. Glaeser, Scheinkman and
Shleifer (1995), and Rozenfeld et al. (2008)). A simple theoretical solution to this apparent
tension between the data and the idealization used in models based on Gibrat’s law is
discussed in Gabaix and Ioannides (2004), Section 3.2.2. Urban growth may accommodate
a wide range of growth processes exhibiting a Pareto distribution, but also deviations from
Gibrat’s law, as long as they contain a unit root (which satisfies Gibrat) with respect to
the logarithm of city size: in particular, growth processes can have some mean-reverting
component that violates Gibrat’s law. Under that hypothesis, the deviations from Gibrat’s
law would come from the mean-reverting component of the growth process, but Gibrat’s law
in the unit root part of the process would ensure the Pareto law. More research is needed
to empirically assess this possibility. It would likely require empirical studies of Gibrat’s law
over long time intervals.
    We think that the model could be extended to add positive and negative agglomera-
tion externalities, which also can generate random growth, as in Gabaix (1999b), Eeckhout
(2004), and Rossi-Hansberg and Wright (2007). We also eschew a detailed modelling of
the heterogeneity within a city, such as the one in Lucas and Rossi-Hansberg (2002). Such
developments would be very welcome, but we propose to defer them to future research.


6     Conclusion
We have used a “bottom-up” approach which allows us to construct cities independently of
their “legal” definition, instead using a more geographical and economic basis. The resulting
data extend the domain of validity of Zipf’s law to a considerable range: we show that when
cities are constructed independently of their administrative boundaries, Zipf’s law appears
to be a genuine regularity for the bulk of the city size distribution. Second, we are able to
analyze city areas, which allows for the estimation of a potentially very important quantity
in urban economics, and anchors the definition of cities much more in geography. We find
evidence for a power-law distribution of areas, with an exponent close to 1. Third, we
presented a model incorporating both population and area, that matches our “macro” facts.
Fourth, we provide a public good by putting on our web page the correspondence between
ZIP code and our Clusters, so that other researchers can use the agglomerations constructed
with the CCA, and study dimensions of local economics other than areas and populations.
    In the present work we have investigated only two countries. It is natural to extend this
study to more countries, an investigation that might offer confirmation of the scaling laws
for areas, population and density that we have found, and also perhaps find economically
interesting deviations from them. The minimalist model presented here could be extended to
incorporate richer specification of the internal structure of cities. We think that this “bottom-
up” approach could be useful for a host of urban questions. Combining our geographical


                                               22
approach with land price data could lead to a much more constrained and geography-based
theory of the macro and internal structure of cities.




                                          23
References
Batty, Michael. 2006. “Rank Clocks.” Nature, 444: 592–596.

Bettencourt, Lus M. A., José Lobo, Dirk Helbing, Christian Kühnert, and Ge-
 offrey B. West. 2007. “Growth, Innovation, Scaling, and the Pace of Life in Cities.”
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A., 104: 7301–7306.

Brakman, Steven, Harry Garretsen, and Charles van Marrewijk. 2009. A new
 Introduction to Economic Geography. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.

Bryan, Kevin A., Brian D. Minton, and Pierre-Daniel G. Sarte. 2007. “The Evolu-
 tion of City Population Density in the United States.” Economic Quarterly, 93(4): 341–360.

Champernowne, David G. 1953. “A Model of Income Distribution.” The Economic Jour-
 nal, 63(250): 318–351.

Ciccone, Antonio, and Robert E. Hall. 1996. “Productivity and the density of economic
  activity.” American Economic Review, 86(1): 54–70.

Córdoba, Juan-Carlos. 2008. “On the Distribution of City Sizes.” Journal of Urban Eco-
  nomics, 63: 177–197.

Davis, Donald R., and David E. Weinstein. 2002. “Bones, Bombs, and Break Points:
 The Geography of Economic Activity.” American Economic Review, 92(5): 1269–1289.

Davis, Morris A., and Francois Ortalo-Magné. 2008. “Household Expenditures, Wages,
 Rents.” Working Paper.

Davis, Morris A., Jonas D.M. Fisher, and Toni M. Whited. 2009. “Agglomeration
 and Productivity: New Estimates and Macroeconomic Implications.” Working Paper.

Dobkins, Linda Harris, and Yannis M. Ioannides. 2001. “Spatial Interactions among
 U.S. Cities: 1900-1990.” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 31: 701–731.

Duranton, Gilles. 2006. “Some Foundations for Zipf ’s Law: Product Proliferation and
 Local Spillovers.” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 36: 542–563.

Duranton, Gilles. 2007. “Urban Evolutions: the Fast, the Slow, and the Still.” American
 Economic Review, 97: 197–221.

Duranton, Gilles, and Henry G. Overman. 2005. “Testing for Localisation Using Micro-
 Geographic Data.” Review of Economic Studies, 72: 1077–1106.



                                            24
Eaton, Jonathan, and Zvi Eckstein. 1997. “City and Growth: Theory and Evidence
 from France and Japan.” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 27: 443–474.

Eeckhout, Jan. 2004. “Gibrat’s Law for (all) Cities.” American Economic Review, 94: 1429–
 1451.

Eeckhout, Jan. 2009. “Gibrat’s Law for (all) Cities: Reply.” American Economic Review.

Fujita, Masahisa, Paul Krugman, and Anthony J. Venables. 2001. The Spatial Econ-
  omy: Cities, Regions, and International Trade. Cambridge:MIT Press.

Gabaix, Xavier. 1999a. “Zipf’s Law for Cities: An Explanation.” Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 114: 739–767.

Gabaix, Xavier. 1999b. “Zipf’s Law and the Growth of Cities.” American Economic Review
 Papers and Proceedings, 89(2): 129–132.

Gabaix, Xavier. 2009. “Power Laws in Economics and Finance.” Annual Review of Eco-
 nomics, 1: 255–293.

Gabaix, Xavier, and Rustam Ibragimov. 2010. “Rank-1/2: A Simple Way to Improve
 the OLS Estimation of Tail Exponents.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics.

Gabaix, Xavier, and Yannis M. Ioannides. 2004. “The Evolution of the City Size
 Distributions.” In Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics. Vol. 4, , ed. V. Henderson
 and J. F. Thisse, 2341–2378. Oxford:Elsevier.

Glaeser, Edward L. 1998. “Are Cities Dying?” The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
 12(2): 139–160.

Glaeser, Edward L., Hedi D. Kallal, Jose A. Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer.
 1992. “Growth in Cities.” Journal of Political Economy, 100(6): 1126.

Glaeser, Edward L., Jose A. Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer. 1995. “Economic
 Growth in a Cross-Section of Cities.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 36: 117–143.

Holmes, Thomas J., and Sanghoon Lee. 2009. “Cities as Six-By-Six-Mile Squares:
 Zipf’s Law?” In The Economics of Agglomerations. , ed. E.L. Glaeser. Chicago:University
 of Chicago Press.

Krugman, Paul. 1996. The Self-Organizing Economy. Cambridge:Blackwell.

Levy, Moshe. 2009. “Gibrat’s Law for (all) Cities: Comment.” American Economic Review.



                                           25
Levy, Moshe, and Sorin Solomon. 1996. “Power Laws are Logarithmic Boltzmann Laws.”
  International Journal of Modern Physics C, 7(4): 595–601.

Lucas, Robert E., and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2002. “On the Internal Structure of
 Cities.” Econometrica, 70(4): 1445–1476.

Luttmer, Erzo G. J. 2007. “Selection, Growth, and the Size Distribution of Firms.”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122: 1103–1144.

Makse, Hernán A., José S. Andrade, Michael Batty, Shlomo Havlin, and H.
 Eugene Stanley. 1998. “Modeling urban growth patterns with correlated percolation.”
 Physical Review E, 58(6): 7054–7062.

Makse, Hernán A., Shlomo Havlin, and H. Eugene Stanley. 1995. “Modelling urban
 growth patterns.” Nature, 377: 608–612.

Michaels, Guy, Ferdinand Rauch, and Stephen J. Redding. 2008. “Urbanization and
 Structural Transformation.” CEPR Discussion Paper, DP7016.

Mori, Tomoya, Koji Nishikimi, and Tony E. Smith. 2008. “The Number-Average Size
 Rule: a New Empirical Relationship between Industrial Location and City Size.” Journal
 of Regional Science, 48: 165–211.

National Institute of Standards and Technology. 2008. “Federal Information Process-
 ing Standards Publications.”

Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban, and Mark L. J. Wright. 2007. “Urban Structure and
 Growth.” Review Economic Studies, 74: 597–624.

Rozenfeld, Hernán D., Diego Rybski, Jose S. Andrade Jr., Michael Batty, H.
 Eugene Stanley, and Hernán A. Makse. 2008. “Laws of Population Growth.” Pro-
 ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U.S.A., 105: 18702–18707.

Simon, Herbert. 1955. “On a Class of Skew Distribution Functions.” Biometrika, 42: 425–
  440.

Soo, Kwok Tong. 2005. “Zipf’s Law for Cities: a Cross Country Investigation.” Regional
  Science and Urban Economics, 35: 239–263.

The 1981 and 1991 population census, Crown Copyright, ESRC purchase. 2009.
 “ESRC Census Programme.”

U.S. Census Bureau. 2001. “FIPS Populations and FIPS Cartographic Boundaries Data.”


                                          26
U.S. Census Bureau. 2009. “Metropolitan and Micropolitan Statistical Areas.”

Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn, and Pierre-Olivier Weill. 2009. “Why Has House Price
 Dispersion Gone Up?” Working Paper, NYU and UCLA.

Zipf, George K. 1949. Human Behavior and the Principle of Least Effort.
  Cambridge:Addison-Wesley.




                                         27
