                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ARE BILATERAL REMITTANCES COUNTERCYCLICAL?

                                          Jeffrey A. Frankel

                                        Working Paper 15419
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15419


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2009




¸˛Presented at a panel on “Macroeconomic Impacts of Migration and Remittances,” May 26, 2009,
  at conference on Immigration and Global Development: Research Lessons on How Immigration and
  Remittances Affect Prosperity Around the World, co-hosted by the Center for Global Development
  in Washington DC and the Center for International Development at Harvard University. The author
  wishes to thank Olga Romero for dedicated research assistance; Erik Lueth and Marta Ruiz-Arranz
  for generously making data available; Maurice Kugler, Hillel Rapoport and conference participants
  for comments; and Robert Hildreth, Harvard’s Center for International Development, and the MacArthur
  Foundation for support.¸ The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
  reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Jeffrey A. Frankel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Are Bilateral Remittances Countercyclical?
Jeffrey A. Frankel
NBER Working Paper No. 15419
October 2009
JEL No. F24

                                                ABSTRACT

By putting together a relatively large data set on bilateral remittances of emigrants, this paper is able
to shed light on the important hypothesis of smoothing. The smoothing hypothesis is that remittances
are countercyclical with respect to income in the worker’s country of origin (the recipient of the remittance),
while procyclical with respect to income in the migrant’s host country (the sender of the remittance).
The econometric results confirm the hypothesis. This affirmation of smoothing is important for two
reasons. First, it suggests that remittances should be placed on the list of criteria for an optimum currency
area. Second, it sheds light on plans by governments in some developing countries to harness remittances
for their own use, in that government spending in these countries generally fails the test of countercyclicality
that remittances pass.


Jeffrey A. Frankel
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu
                  Are Bilateral Remittances Countercyclical?
        It has been remarked that the economic theory of migration tends to fall between
the two stools of labor economics1 and international trade.2 But the connection to a
third stool has in the past been especially under-studied: international finance and
macroeconomics. The research described here concerns macroeconomic aspects of
migrants’ remittances.

        Remittances are a large and growing source of foreign exchange in many
developing countries. Total recorded workers’ remittances received by developing
countries increased 73% between 2001 and 2005, reaching a total of $167 billion.3
Remittances received by countries in East Asia and the Pacific more than doubled during
this period ; transfers from Non Resident Indians to their country of origin are the
spectacular example.       Remittances have grown more rapidly than private capital flows,
or official development statistics. They constitute more than 15% of GDP in Tonga,
Moldova, Lesotho, Haiti, Bosnia, Jordan, Jamaica, Serbia, El Salvador and Honduras. In
places like the Philippines, El Salvador, the Caribbean, and North Africa, remittances can
be the most important single source of foreign exchange. Remittances constitute a
particularly valuable component of the balance of payments in downturns, when markets
in locally produced commodities are depressed or when international investors have lost
interest.

         1. The Hypothesis
        The hypothesis of this study is that remittances for some countries can play the
role that capital flows are in theory supposed to play. In theory, the increased integration
of developing countries into the world financial system should have carried a variety of
benefits: smoothing short-term income disturbances, diversification, helping to finance
high-return investment opportunities in low capital/labor ratio countries, and disciplining
policies and institutions in the recipient country. It is sometimes possible to observe
these theoretical benefits in operation. In practice, however, capital flows have -- as
often as not -- failed to deliver on this promise.4 Rather than smoothing short-term
disturbances such as fluctuations on world markets for a country’s export commodities,
private capital flows are often procyclical: pouring in during boom times and



1
 Rapoport and Docquier (2005) review the theory that has been developed as part of the New
Economics of Labor Migration. For a recent contribution, see Kugler and Rapoport (2007).
2
    Among trade economists, the subject goes back at least to Bhagwati and Hamada (1974).
3
 Statistics cited here come from “Economic Implications of Remittances and Migration” in
Global Economic Prospects 2006, World Bank, pp. 86-92.
4
  Prasad, Rogoff, Wei, and Kose (2003); Prasad, Rogoff, Wei and Kose (2004); Prasad and Rajan
(2008).


                                                                                             2
disappearing in recessions.5 Rather than flowing on average from high capital/labor
countries (e.g., the US) to low capital/labor countries, the tendency has been for capital
often to “flow uphill.”6 Rather than rewarding only countries that follow sound economic
policies and punishing only those that follow bad policies, capital sometimes aids and
abets irresponsible budget deficits, including among autocratic and kleptocratic rulers,
especially if they have control of a natural resource.7

        What reasons are there, a priori, for thinking that remittances might be better than
capital flows in delivering the benefits of smoothing, diversification, financing high-
return investment opportunities, and disciplining policies? The sending of remittances
is a decentralized decision made by individuals, based on a familiarity with and
appreciation for the needs, desires, constraints, and opportunities faced by themselves and
their families. These private individuals do not have the government’s problem of
needing to spend money in the short-term to win re-election or stave off coups. They are
more likely than a central government to know which family members are in truly
desperate circumstances through no fault of their own, or in which households the
husband will “drink away” the money, or to know whether it makes sense to save up to
buy a house or store or establish some other small business. Free-market theory says that
private agents do a good job of making these decisions. In the case of private capital
flows, historical and statistical evidence casts serious doubt on this claim. In the case of
emigrants’ remittances, it seems more likely to be true.

        The World Bank (2006; Box 4.5) argues “In contrast [to oil windfalls],
remittances are widely dispersed, the great bulk of them is allocated in small amounts,
and for the most part, remittances avoid the government ‘middleman.’ Hence the
expectation is that they can avoid the negative effects of natural resource windfalls on
poverty, growth, and institutional capacity.” But so far this proposition is more of an
assertion than a hypothesis that has been widely and successfully tested empirically.

        This hypothesis is especially important because many governments in remittance-
receiving countries reflexively treat remittances as a source of foreign exchange that
needs to be harnessed for national development,8 rather than letting the recipients spend it
on “unproductive” uses such as imports of consumer goods. This rhetoric is common
even among benevolent governments, let alone the kleptocracies. Some observers have
suggested that private citizens might do a good job determining and disposing of


5
 Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Vegh (2005); Reinhart and Reinhart (2009); Perry (2009); Gavin,
Hausmann, Perotti and Talvi (Year); Mendoza and Terrones(2008).
6
  Lucas (1990); Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan and Volosovych (2005); Gourinchas and Jeanne (2007);
Prasad, Rajan, and Subramanaian (2007); Kalemli-Ozcan, Reshef, Sorensen, and Yosha (2009).

7
    E.g., Lane and Tornell (1999).
8
    Chami, Fullenkamp and Jahjah (2005).



                                                                                           3
remittances.9 But the proposition remains a hope or assertion that has been expressed, as
much as a hypothesis that has been empirically demonstrated. It remains in need of
testing. If the hypothesis is true, then efforts by national governments to harness
remittances could be harmful, above and beyond the obvious point that taxing them could
“kill the goose” that is flying the golden eggs into the country. Government spending in
developing countries tends to be procyclical, not countercyclical.10

        The specific hypothesis to be tested in this paper is that emigrants’ remittances are
counter-cyclical: that they increase when the country of origin (the recipient of the
remittances) is in relative recession and decrease relatively when the origin country has
above-trend relative income. Under this hypothesis, remittances tend to smooth
consumption and investment intertemporily. As mentioned, this is a criterion that
private capital flows usually fail. For remittances, the countercyclicality hypothesis has
been tested by others, and has sometimes been found wanting. But some of these papers
are missing something. For one thing, many simply do not have enough data. To
specify an equation well-targeted to isolate the question of interest, it is best to use
bilateral remittance data. Yet such data are hard to come by; most countries don’t collect
or report them at all. 11 As a result, studies of bilateral remittances often have an
inadequate number of observations. The other item missing in some studies is the
cyclical position of the host country, which should matter just as much as the cyclical
position of the country of origin. If the recipient’s income is included without the
sender’s, one can estimate a coefficient of the wrong sign, when the recipient’s income is
highly correlated with the sender’s (for example due to dependence on exports or other
channels).

        Indeed the countercyclicality hypothesis is equally of interest with respect to
countries that are net hosts to immigrants (net senders of remittances) as for the
counterparty countries (the recipients of remittances). Not all of these hosts are
industrialized countries.12 If the inward flow of migrants and the outward payment of


9
 Chami, Barajas, Cosimano, Fullenkamp, Gapen and Montiel (2008) see macroeconomic
advantages of remittances of the sort considered here. Martin (1990), on the other hand, points
out that a steady flow of remittances can undermine the incentive for governments to create a
sound institutional framework – a sort of natural resource curse for remittances. See also the
quote below from the World Bank (2006).
10
     Talvi and Végh (2005); Gavin and Perotti (1997); Alesina, Campante and Tabellini (2008).
11
  Jiménez-Martin, Jorgensen, and Labeaga (2007) estimate bilateral workers’ remittance flows
from the 27 members of the EU, to all recipient countries. Ratha and Shaw (2005), in the absence
of hard data on bilateral flows, allocate the totals across partners.
12
  Roughly 10 per cent come from developing countries. South Africa, for example, receives
many immigrants from neighboring countries to work in its mines, farms, and factories, and sends
remittances back to the home countries.     In many Gulf countries, immigrants (called ex-patriate
workers) constitute more than half of the private-sector labor force, both skilled and unskilled.
For example, outward remittances from Saudi Arabia (not included in the developing country


                                                                                                  4
remittances is especially high in boom times and lower than average in bad times, this
can be an important macroeconomic stabilizer. In the boom times it means alleviation of
potential labor shortages and less danger of excessive monetary expansion, overheating,
and inflation. (There were serious problems in the Gulf countries and other mineral
exporters in 2006-2008, for example.) In the down times it means alleviation of
domestic unemployment and a needed improvement in the balance of payments.

        We have already mentioned one motivation for exploring the cyclical pattern of
remittances: it is an indication whether they play the role of improving intertemporal
welfare that capital flows are supposed to play in theory, but fail to provide in practice.
The procyclicality of capital flows is sometimes, for shorthand, associated with the Dutch
Disease (an analogy with the side-effect of inflows during commodity booms, which in
turn first got its name from the discovery of offshore natural gas by the Netherlands).
This paper also has a second motivation: to shed light on the decision of countries to
adopt a common currency.
        There are two possible relationships between the currency union decision and
remittances. On the one hand, a likely benefit of adopting the currency of an important
neighbor is to facilitate the payment of remittances. One would like to test that bilateral
currency links promote bilateral remittances, in the same way that Rose (2000) famously
discovered that they promote bilateral trade. On the other hand, if remittances are indeed
counter-cyclical, then they belong on the list of Optimum Currency Area criteria.13
Optimum Currency Area theory (OCA) says that the gains to a country of giving up its
currency (particularly the facilitation of trade and other international transactions)
outweigh the costs of losing monetary independence (which is losing the ability to
respond to shocks) only if its shocks are highly correlated with those of the relevant
neighbors or if it has alternative mechanisms to cushion itself against the effects of
asymmetric shocks. 14 The list of alternative cushioning mechanisms is headed by labor
mobility, followed by possible international transfers or other financial flows. If
remittances are countercyclical, then they belong on this list of OCA criteria, and for
some countries would be more important than the international transfers.

          2. Previous Studies
        Where earlier authors have findings, the results are interesting, but mixed. On the
one hand, Rajan and Subramanian (2005) find that although the Dutch Disease analogy
does extend to foreign aid (leading to real appreciation and slow growth), it does not
appear to extend to private remittances. On the other hand, Amuendo-Dorantes and Pozo
(2004) find that an increase in workers’ remittances to countries in Latin America and the


statistic) are about 7% of all remittances globally.
13
  Singer (2008) makes the argument that remittances should be and are a determinant of the
currency decision. His equation uses the level of remittances, but he cites earlier authors’
evidence of countercyclicality.
14
     Mundell (1961).



                                                                                               5
Caribbean leads to real appreciation of the currency, a major symptom of Dutch Disease.
Acosta, Lartey and Mandelman (2009), using data from El Salvador, also find that
remittances have the Dutch Disease effect of raising the relative price of nontraded
goods, but they also find welfare-improving smoothing behavior.15

        On the specific question of cyclicality, the World Bank has econometric evidence
that per capita remittances respond significantly to per capita income in the home
country.16 But the evidence is weaker regarding the host country. Remittances are a
more stable source of foreign exchange than capital flows, including even Foreign Direct
Investment. But are they actually countercyclical? An IMF study of 12 developing
countries finds “no.”17 Others find more supportive results.18 The area is wide open for
research.

       The recorded data on remittances in countries’ balance of payments are imperfect,
and certainly undercount the flows.19 There are also some conceptual questions where to
draw the line between remittances and, for example, investment or charitable
contributions.

        In the case of bilateral data on migration and remittances, availability of any sort
has been extremely limited until now. Thus most existing studies have either operated at
the level of a large cross-section of each country’s data on their aggregate remittances20
or have focused on bilateral flows as reported by a single country that is a center of
immigration (such as the United States) or emigration (such as Jamaica21). The latter
sort of data set – bilateral within a region – is needed to study questions such as those
15
  There are also examples inflows of remittances from emigrants apparently sustaining of violent
conflict -- Northern Ireland, Eritrea/Ethiopia, Israel/Palestine -- which again resemble effects of
mineral wealth.
16
     World Bank (2006, Tables 4A.2.1 and 4A.2.3
17
     Sayan (2006).
18
   Clarke and Wallstein (2004) and Yang (2007) find that remittance receipts go up in response to
a natural disaster. Kapur (2003) finds that they go up in response to an economic downturn.
Yang and Choi (2007) find that they respond to rainfall-induced economic fluctuations.
19
     Ghosh (2006) and Jiménez-Martin, Jorgensen, and Labeaga (2007, p. 8, 14).
20
   In the Appendix to this paper, I estimate regression equations for remittances that are received
by four of the smaller countries of southern Africa. In this case it is a safe bet that the majority of
emigrants reside in South Africa, and so we can use South African income as foreign income.
The results suggest countercyclicality for most of these countries, especially when the
coefficients on domestic and foreign (i.e., South African) income are constrained to be equal in
magnitude and of opposite signs.
21
  In a study of remittances into Jamaica, Lake (2006) finds that they do respond to the difference
between US and Jamaican income. She also argues against Jamaican government taxes or
regulation on remittances.


                                                                                                     6
relevant for the regional currency area decision. The former sort of global data set can
be used to study some questions along the lines of the Dutch Disease analogy. But a
more comprehensive bilateral data set would help tremendously to study both categories
of remittance issues. One could hope to attain far better estimates of the cyclicality of
remittances, and the effects of a common currency, if one had a relatively large bilateral
data set, rather than proceeding one country at a time or one region at a time as most
researchers have had to do in the past. 22

        The present study resembles Lueth and Ruiz-Arranz (2006, 2008), and indeed
uses the data set on bilateral remittances that they generously made available, among
other data sources. But Lueth and Ruiz-Arranz find that “remittances may not play a
major role in limiting vulnerability to shocks,” indeed that they are procyclical. Schiopu
and Siegfried (2006) also created a data set on bilateral remittances between a subset of
European Union countries and neighbors. The EU data set was expanded in Jiménez-
Martin, Jorgensen and Labeaga (2007).


        3. Results
         It is to be expected that the stock of immigrants is a major determinant of the
remittances. Indeed Freund and Spatafora (2005) find that it has a powerful effect.23
Figure 1 shows a plot of the relationship between the stock of immigrants and
remittances. The strong correlation is clear. To some extent this is simply a scale effect.
When we adjust for size of the country pair (via population in the source country and
GDP in the host country) in Figure 2, the correlation is naturally much weaker, but is still
there.24

        We begin oudr regression analysis with the data set collected by Lueth and Ruiz-
Arranz, which includes 64 pairs of countries. Most of the members of this eclectic set
are in Europe and Asia; but the Middle East and Australia are also included among the
sending countries, along with New Zealand, Liberia and Libya for one partner each. In


22
   For the question whether remittances have Dutch Disease type effects on the real exchange rate
or conflict, a bilateral data set would allow the construction of an instrumental variable for
remittances that otherwise in truth respond endogenously to factors like economic and political
stability. One possible instrumental variable is the stock of emigrants residing outside the
country of origin; but one could make the instrumental variable one step more exogenous by
looking at geographic determinants of bilateral emigration, including geographical proximity and
historical/linguistic links, and then aggregating up the bilateral migration flows, by analogy with
the Frankel-Romer (1997) instrument for openness with respect to trade.
23
   The other variables in their equation are per capita income in both countries, a measure of the
transaction cost, and the exchange rate spread, and a dummy variable for dual exchange rates.
Faini (2006) argues that the skill level of the migrant has a negative effect on remittances.
24
   The data point representing remittances from Portugal to Moldova looks like an outlier. But
investigation reveals that this is a real phenomenon, not a data error or artifact.


                                                                                                     7
Table 1 we control explicitly for the lagged stock of bilateral migrants. This variable is
only available for these countries in a few years. So we make a virtue out of necessity
by running a pure cross-section equation, thereby maximizing the number of countries for
which both variables are available, to explain remittances in 2005 as a function of the
stock of migrants in 2000. The cyclicality of remittances in 2005 is likely to be
determined not just by the behavior of remittances-per-2000-migrant, but also by the flow
of migration in 2001, 2002, 2003, and 2004 (and perhaps 2005), to the extent that the
cyclical position in those years is correlated with the cyclical position in 2005. In other
words we will capture not only the decision of migrants whether to send money home in
response to an international difference in the economic conjuncture, but also the decision
of workers whether to migrate in the first place. But this combined effect is just as
interesting as the pure remittance decision.25
         The lagged stock of emigrants is very highly significant statistically in Table 1, as
expected. In column (2) we also control for income per capita in the sender country; it
too is significant.
         The variable of interest is the difference in cyclical position between the sender
country and the recipient country. In this table, cyclical position is computed as the
(logarithmic) difference between GDP in 2005 and the long run trend value of GDP. The
estimated coefficient is positive and highly significant. (The t-statistic is almost 4.) This
is evidence in favor of the countercyclicality hypothesis: remittances sent back home
are high when income is above potential in the country to which the worker has migrated
or when income is below potential in the country of origin. The effect is evidently
enormous. Apparently every 1% rise in host-country income (or every 1% fall in origin-
country income) brings forth an increase in remittances of about 60%. If this is right, it
means that remittances are very much a “luxury good.” Perhaps remittances are
essentially zero until the income of the worker surpasses a threshold, so that a moderately
high marginal propensity to send remittances after that point shows up as an extremely
high elasticity of remittances with respect to income.

       Even when the stock of migrants is lagged five years, it may contain an element
of endogeneity. (Japan, for example, was essentially in recession throughout the 1990s;
ten years of stagnation continued to reduce the stock of immigrants.) Therefore we
apply Instrumental Variables, in column (3) of Table 1. There are many plausible
geographic, political and cultural determinants of migration. To keep it simple, we used
instrumental variables which showed up as significant (positive) determinants of
migration in “first stage” regressions, beginning with the border dummy and the island


25
   One might ask, if the cyclical behavior of migration flows is of equal interest to the cyclical
behavior of remittances per migrant, why not also the stock of migrants? Two answers. First, in
most cases the stock of migrants has been determined over a long history (by geographic,
political, cultural and other factors), during which cyclical considerations are not relevant; we
should get a better-specified equation and better estimates when controlling for it. It is only
over a horizon of a few years that the cyclical question arises. Second, it is important to control
for some sort of scale variable. It would not do to treat the absolute dollar level of US-Mexico
remittances on a par with the absolute dollar level of Luxembourg-Lesotho
remittances.


                                                                                                 8
variable. The change vis-à-vis the OLS equation is slight; while the overall significance
of the regression falls slightly, the procyclicality of remittances is still significant at the
1% level.

         Next, in Table 2, we expand our data set into a panel running from 1979 to 2005,
thereby allowing a big increase in the number of observations, to 1200 or more. To do
so, we have to drop the stock of migrants from the right-hand side of the equation. But
we can replace it with a list of gravity-style determinants of migration, including size,
bilateral distance, and other geographic and cultural variables. One advantage is that any
suspected endogeneity of the lagged stock of migrants is eliminated. The barebones
version includes only the size of the two countries, in this case represented by population,
which is essential as a scale variable. (We also retain income per capita in the sender
country, which is highly significant across all specifications.)
         In Table 2 the cyclical position of the two countries is represented by their
unemployment rates. It has the hypothesized negative sign, and the effect is even
stronger statistically than before: a t-statistic between 6 and 10. When we add the other
gravity determinants, in columns 1-3, most are of the hypothesized signs. Distance is the
most highly significant, which is not much of a surprise. The landlocked and island
variables are both statistically significant as well, with the hypothesized negative and
positive coefficients respectively. Surprisingly, the common border and common
language variable are not statistically significant. Perhaps migration and remittances
across a shared border are less likely to be captured by the official data. Regardless, the
important point is that the countercyclicality of remittances is still highly significant.
This is true even when allowing for time effects, country effects (whether they are fixed
effects or random effects), and even country-pair effects. This robustness apparently
testifies to a powerful empirical regularity.26

        Finally, we expand the set of countries by merging the Lueth and Ruiz-Arranz
data set with two others. One comes from the InterAmerican Development Bank, and
reports bilateral observations on remittances from the United States to eight small
countries in Central America (including Panama and the Dominican Republic). Because
Panama and El Salvador are in this data set, we are able to add a dummy variable for a
currency union. The third is the European Commission’s bilateral data set for the 27
members of the EU.27 We believe that this three-way merge produces the most
comprehensive data set on bilateral remittances to date. To maximize the number of


26
  The countercyclicality does not show well, however, if the income measure is used in the panel
data set or if the unemployment measure is used in the pure cross-section. I am indebted to
Maurice Kugler for suggesting one possible explanation of this puzzle: the relative variation of
detrended unemployment across countries may be limited, and the same with the variation over
time of detrended income.
27
   Jiménez-Martín, Jorgensen and Labeaga (2007). Inspection of country pairs that appear in
more than one data set show that the Lueth-Ruiz numbers are much higher, presumably because
of a more expansive definition of remittances. In this light, an important next step would be to
allow each remittance data set have its own intercept term (in logs).


                                                                                                   9
pairs of countries, we choose to conduct cross-sections in the years 2003 and 2004. We
use as the lagged stock of migrants the level in 2000. This produces about 330
observation pairs, which we believe is the largest that has been analyzed to date.
        Figure 3 plots bilateral remittances, expressed relative to the lagged stock of
migrants, against the relative cyclical position of the host and origin countries. The
regression estimations reported in Table 3 show a highly significant coefficient on the
cyclical position. This finding is not changed when we control for the income in the
sender country, though the latter is highly significant, as is the lagged stock of migrants.
The use of instrumental variables for the stock of migrants diminishes the
countercyclicality estimate slightly, but its t-statistic is still well above 3.

        4. The Effect of a Common Currency
        We added a dummy variable equal to 1 when the pair of countries in question
were both members of a currency union. It appears highly significant statistically at
first, which would suggest that the reduction of transactions cost and exchange risk from
a common currency promotes the sending of remittances (even controlling for the
enhanced ease of migration). However the currency union dummy loses all significance
under instrumental variables. This suggest the possibility that the apparent correlation
under the OLS estimates is not really attributable to the effect of currency unions on
remittances but rather to the reverse causation: Central American countries are more
likely to choose to adopt the dollar as their currency if they have a lot of emigration to the
United States.28
        Measuring remittances is always problematic. Even aside from transactions that
go entirely unreported, different statisticians may draw different lines regarding which
international financial transactions are classified as remittances and which are not. In
Table 4 we allow each of our three data sources to have its own constant term, to allow
for the likely possibility that some use a more expansive definition of remittances than
others. The result shows that the numbers on bilateral remittances for Central America
data are substantially higher, other things equal, than the other two data sets. This is
consistent with the possibility of more comprehensive reporting, but it is also consistent
with the possibility that the close links between Central America (defined here to include
Panama and the Dominican Republic) and the United States are not adequately captured
by the stock of emigrants. Perhaps we need to control for distance, or the cost of
transferring money.
        The effect of the currency union dummy loses its positive sign in Table 4, and
indeed turns inexplicably but significantly negative under instrumental variables.
Clearly the change in the currency union result, relative to Table 3, arises because the
high US share in the trade of El Salvador and Panama is no longer allocated to their
dollarization, but instead to the high constant term shown by the Central American
countries in general. One can only say that the number of currency union pairs in this
data set (two) is so small that no firm conclusions can yet be reached regardiing their
effect.

28
  Singer (2008) finds that remittances as a share of GDP are a statistically significant predictor of
the probability that a country will choose a fixed over a floating exchange rate.


                                                                                                  10
       5. Conclusions
        To summarize the findings, the creation of a larger bilateral data set by splicing
together three used by a few others, has allowed a moderately strong verdict on the
question of cyclicality, which runs contrary to the analogy with capital flows and the
Dutch Disease. Remittances do appear to respond positively to the cyclical position in
the sending country (the migrant’s host) and negatively to the cyclical position in the
receiving country (the migrant’s place of origin). This counter-cyclical pattern is
precisely what one wants. It suggests that emigrants’ remittances can play some of the
stabilizing role that capital flows often promise but seldom deliver. If this empirical
finding holds up under further investigation, it carries at least two specific policy
implications. First, it sheds light – though only indirectly, perhaps – on plans by some
governments to try to harness remittances in the name of national development, rather
than allowing private citizens to transact freely in this area . Remittance behavior is not
subject to the political economy forces that make government spending procyclical in so
many developing countries. Second, it suggests that remittances should join trade, labor
mobility, and transfers, on the list of Optimum Currency Area criteria.




                                                                                         11
                                             References


Alesina, Alberto, Filipe Campante and Guido Tabellini, 2008, “Why Is Fiscal Policy Often Procyclical?”
Journal of the European Economic Association, September 2008, Vol. 6, No. 5, Pages 1006-1036.

Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych, 2005. “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from
Rich to Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation,” NBER WP No. 11901, Dec.

Amuendo-Dorantes, Catalina, and Susan Pozo. 2004. “Workers Remittances and the Real Exchange Rate:
A Paradox of Gifts,” World Development 32, no. 8, 1407-17.

Bhagwati, Jagdish, and Koichi Hamada, “The Brain Drain, International Integration of Markets for
Professionals and Unemployment : A Theoretical Analysis,” Journal of Development Economics, April,
19-42.

Chami, Ralph, Adolfo Barajas, Thomas Cosimano, Connel Fullenkamp, Michael Gapen and Peter Montiel.
2008. Macroeconomic Consequences of Remittances, Occasional Paper No. 259 (International Monetary
Fund).

Chami, Ralph, Connel Fullenkamp, and Samir Jahjah, 2005. “Are Immigrant Remittance Flows a Source of
Capital for Development?” World Development 27, 1493-1502.

Clarke, George, and Scott Wallstein, 2004. “Do Remittances Protect Households in Developing Countries
against Shocks? Evidence from a Natural Disaster in Jamaica?” World Bank.

Faini, Riccardo, 2006. “Remittances and the Brain Drain,” CEPR discussion paper no. 5720, June.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and David Romer, 1999, "Does Trade Cause Growth?" American Economic Review 89,
no. 3, June, 379-399.

Freund, C. L. and N. Spatafora, 2005. “Remittances: Costs, Determinants, and Informality,“ World Bank
Policy Research Working Paper No. 3704, Washington, DC.

Gavin, Michael, Ricardo Hausmann, Roberto Perotti and Ernesto Talvi , “Managing Fiscal Policy in Latin
America and the Caribbean: Volatility, Procyclicality, and Limited Creditworthiness,” Inter-American
Development Bank, RES Working Papers 4032.

Gavin, Michael, and Roberto Perotti, 1997, “Fiscal Policy in Latin America” in NBER Macro Annual
1997, edited by Ben S. Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg (MIT Press) p. 11 – 72.

Ghosh, B. 2006. “Migrants’ Remittances and Development: Myths Rhetoric and Realities,” International
Organization for Migration.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne, 2007. "Capital Flows to Developing Countries: The
Allocation Puzzle," IMF Working Paper, forthcoming.

Jiménez-Martin, Sergi, Natalia Jorgensen, and José Maria Labeaga, 2007. The Volume and Geography of
Remittances from the EU, European Commission.

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Ariell Reshef, Bent Sorensen, and Oved Yosha, 2009. “Why Does Capital Flow
to Rich States?” NBER Working Paper No. 11301, May 2005, Revised February 2009.




                                                                                                        12
Kaminsky, Graciela, Carmen Reinhart and Carlos Vegh, 2005. "When It Rains, It Pours: Procyclical
Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Policies," NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2004, Volume 19, pages 11-
82.

Kapur, Devesh, 2003. “Remittances: The New Development Mantra?” Harvard University, August 25,
2003.

Kugler, Maurice, and Rapoport, Hillel, 2007 "International labor and capital flows: complements or
substitutes?" Economics Letters, 94 (2): 155-62.

Lake, Lisa, 2006. “Remittances and the Jamaican Economy: From Fundamentals to Effective Policy
Recommendations.” MPA/ID Second Year Policy Analysis, Harvard Kennedy School.

Philip Lane and Aaron Tornell, 1998. "Voracity and Growth in Discrete Time", Economic Letters 62(1):
139-145.

Lucas, Robert, 1990. "Why Doesn't Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?" American Economic
Review, Vol. 80 (May), pp. 92–96.

Lueth, Erik, and Marta Ruiz-Arranz, 2008, “Determinants of Bilateral Remittance Flows,” the B.E. Journal
of Macroeconomics, October.

Lueth, Erik, and Marta Ruiz-Arranz, 2006. “A Gravity Model of Workers’ Remittances,” International
Monetary Fund Working Paper.

Martin, P., 1990. “Labor Migration and Economic Development,” Report of the Commission for the Study
of International Migration and Cooperative Economic Development, Washington DC.

Mendoza, Enrique and Marco Terrones, 2008. “An Anatomy of Credit Booms: Evidence from Macro
Aggregates and Micro Data,” NBER Working Paper No. 14049, May 2008.

Mundell, Robert, 1961. “Optimum Currency Areas,” American Economic Review 51 (November): 509-
517.

Ozden, Caglar and Maurice Schiff, editors, 2006. International Migration, Remittances and the Brain
Drain. World Bank and Palgrave MacMillan.

Perry, Guillermo, 2009. Beyond Lending: How Multilateral Banks Can Help Developing Countries
Manage Volatility, Washington, DC: Center for Global Development.

Prasad, Eswar, Rogoff, Kenneth, Wei, Shang-Jin. and Kose, M. 2003. “Effects of Financial Globalization
on Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence”, Occasional Paper No. 220, Research Department,
International Monetary Fund. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 10942 (2004),
forthcoming in Ann Harrison (ed.) Globalization and Poverty, University of Chicago Press.

Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth S. Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose, 2004. "Financial Globalization,
Growth and Volatility in Developing Countries," NBER Working Papers 10942.

Prasad, Eswar, and Raghuram Rajan, 2008. “A Pragmatic Approach to Capital Account Liberalization,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2008 (NBER Working Paper No.14051).

Prasad, Eswar, Raghuram Rajan, and A.Subramanaian, “The Paradox of Capital,” Finance and
Development, IMF, March 2007, 44, no. 1.




                                                                                                       13
Rajan, Raghuram, and Arvind Subramanian, 2005, “What Undermines Aid’s Impact on Growth?” NBER
Working Paper No. 11657, September.

Rappoport, Hillel, and Frédéric Docquier, 2006. “The Economics of Migrants’ Remittances,” Chapter 17 in
Handbook on the Economics of Giving, Altruism and Reciprocity, edited by J. Mercier-Ytheier and S.C.
Kolm (Elsevier-North Holland).

Ratha, D. and J. Riedberg, 2005. “On Reducing Remittance Costs,” Development Research Group, World
Bank.

Ratha, D. and W. Shaw, 2005. “South-South Migration and Remittances,” World Bank.

Reinhart, Carmen and Vincent Reinhart, 2009. “Capital Flow Bonanzas: An Encompassing View of the
Past and Present,” in J.Frankel and C.Pissarides, eds., NBER International Seminar in Macroeconomics
2008, University of Chicago Press.

Rose, Andrew, 2000, “One Money, One Market: Estimating the Effect of Common Currencies on Trade,”
Economic Policy.

Sayan, Serdar, 2006. “Business Cycles and Workers’ Remittances: How Do Migrant Workers Respond to
Cyclical Movements of GDP at Home?” IMF WP/06/52, February.

Schiopu, I. and N. Siegfried, 2006. “Determinants of Workers’ Remittances: Evidence from the European
Neighboring Regions,” ECB Working Paper No. 688.

Singer, David, 2008, “Migrant Remittances and Exchange Rate Regimes in the Developing World,”
Political Science Department, MIT, July.

Talvi, Ernesto Talvi and Carlos A. Végh , 2005,“Tax base variability and procyclical fiscal policy in
developing countries,” Journal of Development Economics ,Volume 78, Issue 1, October 2005, Pages 156-
190.

World Bank, 2006. “Economic Implications of Remittances and Migration” in Global Economic Prospects
2006, World Bank, pp. 86-92.

Yang, Dean, 2006. “International Migration, Remittances, and Household Investment: Evidence from
Philippine Migrants’ Exchange Rate Shocks,” NBER Working Paper No. 12325, June, 2006.

Yang, Dean, 2007. “Coping with Disaster: The Impact of Hurricans on International Financial Flows,
1970-2002,” Ford School of Public Policy, University of Michigan.

Yang, Dean, and Hwajung Choi, 2007. “Are Remittances Insurance? Evidence from Ranifall Shocks in the
Phillippines,” World Bank Economic Review 21, 2, 219-248.




                                                                                                       14
         Figure 1: Country-pairs with high bilateral migration also,
         of course, tend to show high bilateral remittances.

                            Scatter Remittances Migration
      10
      5
Remittances
     0-5
      -10




              0                      5                      10                   15
                                            Migration

                              ln_remittances             Fitted values



         Remittances between included country pairs are around $113.6 billion.
         Total of 540 observations = 266 for 2003 plus 274 for 2004.
                                                 Figure 2a : Bilateral stock of migrants (normalized by populations)
                                                              versus remittances (normalized by GDPs)

                                                                Migrants 1990 and Remittances




2.00e-084.00e-086.00e-088.00e-081.00e-07
   Remittances/(GDPi*GDPj)
                      0




                                           0                                      .0005                                             .001
                                                                            Migration1990/(Popi*Popj)

                                                      Average Ratio Remittances/Income                                  Fitted values


                                                 Source: Central America data: FOMIN and the Central Banks. Data from 2000-2007
                                                 Jiménez-Martín, S., Jorgensen, N. and Labeaga, J. M. (2007). Data from 2000-2005
                                                          IMF. Lueth, E. and Ruiz-Arranz, M. (2006). Data from 1979-2005.


                                                  Figure 2b : Bilateral stock of migrants (normalized by populations)
                                               versus remittances (normalized by GDPs), with country identifiers




                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                Migrants 1990 and Remittances


   2.00e-084.00e-086.00e-088.00e-081.00e-07
                                                  PRTMDA

      Remittances/(GDPi*GDPj)
                                                  PRTMDA




                                                                 ESPECU
                                                   ITAMDA                  ITAALB
                                                  IRLMDA    GRCMDA FRAMAR
                                                  PRTUKRUSANIC
                                                      GBRGHA
                                                         USAHND      USASLV
                                                                BELMAR
                                                  IRLYUG     ESPMAR                                   AUTYUG
                                                    ESPBOL
                                                  IRLMDA
                                                  TURMDA USAGTM
                                                        ESPDOM
                                                       ESPCOL
                                                   ESPMDA      USADOM NLDMAR         USABLZ             CHEMKD
                                                                                                    CHEHRV
                                                                                                     CHEYUG
                                                     HUNYUG
                                                     LUXHRV
                                                        USAPHL
                                                     GBRPAK
                                                   GBRBGD                   FRADZAAUTHRV
                                                                                FRATUN
                                                                              AUTMKD                                     AUSMKD
                                                     ESPROM
                                                  PRTGEO
                                                  GBRMDA
                                                   BELMKD
                                                  AUTMDA
                                                   GRCPHL
                                                  DEUMDA
                                                  FRAMDA
                                                     ESPPER
                                                   GBRNGA
                                                   GRCJOR
                                                   PRTBRA
                                                       USACRI
                                                  IRLBLR
                                                      NORHRV
                                                   GBRPHL
                                                   GBRHRV
                                                     GRCYUG
                                                       DNKMKD
                                                  IRLUKR     DEUYUG
                                                           ITAMKD
                                                      GRCLBN
                                                          SWEMKD
                                                      ITAHRV
                                                  NZLTHA
                                                   NORPHL
                                                     DEUMAR
                                                        AUSPHL
                                                          SWEHRVUSAPAN HUNHRV
                                                                    CANHRV   DEUMKD
                                                                               SWEYUG
                                                                                 NLDHRV      DEUHRV
                                                                                            AUSHRV
                                                  IRLHRV
                                                  GBRYUG
                                                  PRK/KORTHA
                                                  FRAYUG
                                                   NLDPHL
                                                   ITAPHL
                                                   CHEPHL
                                                   BELHRV
                                                  AUTSVN
                                                  JPNPHL
                                                   USAMDA
                                                     GRCMKD
                                                      FRAHRV
                                                  DEUUKRITAMAR
                                                  PRK/KORIDN
                                                  DEUPHL
                                                   GBRMKD
                                                   AUSTHA
                                                   GBRBGD
                                                     DEUTUN
                                                     ESPBGR
                                                      USAHRV
                                                   PRTVEN
                                                    GRCEGY
                                                    LUXSVN
                                                     GRCUKR
                                                  IRLBRA
                                                  HUNUKR
                                                  HUNISR
                                                  ESPUSA
                                                  FRAKAZ
                                                  FRAPHL
                                                  JPNKAZ
                                                  JPNIDN
                                                  PRK/KORKAZ
                                                  ESPMKD
                                                  TURKAZ
                                                  GBRKAZ
                                                  BELCOL
                                                  BELPER
                                                  ITABRA
                                                  ITAUKR
                                                  POLSYR
                                                  BELPHL
                                                  DEUKAZ
                                                  USAKAZ
                                                  ITACOL
                                                  DEUTHA
                                                  ITAVEN
                                                  ESPHRV
                                                  ESPPHL
                                                  SWEPHL
                                                  GRCISR
                                                  ITAARG
                                                  ITAEGY
                                                  NLDTHA
                                                  NORTHA
                                                  GBRSVN
                                                   DNKPHL
                                                   USATHA
                                                   ITAPER
                                                   BELSVN
                                                    USASVN
                                                    BELISR
                                                    ITASVN
                                                     FRAMKD
                                                     FRASVN
                                                     BELTUN DEULBN
                                                       NORMKD
                                                  PRTMAR
                                                  IRLPHL
                                                  BELECU
                                                  GBRTHA
                                                  DNKTHA
                                                  PRK/KORPHL
                                                   ITAECU
                                                   DNKHRV
                                                   CHETHA
                                                     ITAYUG
                                                      ESPARG
                                                      USAMKD
                                                  GBRCHN
                                                  JPNTHA
                                                  USABGD
                                                  ESPBRA
                                                  GRCBLR
                                                   AUTPHL
                                                   SWETHA
                                                   USAYUGCANPHL
                                                            CANMKD
                                                       SWESVN CANYUG
                                                              DEUSVN
                                                         NLDSVN
                                                           HUNSVN
                                                               CANSVN  AUSYUG
                                                                        TURMKD
                                                                   AUSSVN       NLDMKD
                                                                               POLBLR                  CHESVN
                       0




                                              0                                .0005                             .001
                                                                         Migration1990/(Popi*Popj)

                                                        Average Ratio Remittances/Income                 Fitted values


Figure 3: Remittances per migrant (lagged stock) are positively correlated
with relative cyclical position. Data for 2003-2004




                                                                                                                                  17
                      Remittances per Migrants and Difference in cyclical position

            .08
  Remittances/Migrants 2000
    .02     0.04       .06




                              -.15   -.1               -.05                  0      .05
                                           Difference in cyclical position

                                     remitt_migrants                Fitted values

Sources of data: Western Hemisphere data: FOMIN & the Central Banks;
Jiménez-Martín, Jorgensen & Labeaga (2007); Lueth & Ruiz-Arranz, IMF(2006).




                                                                                          18
Table 1: Pure Cross-Section Data, 2005 (Lueth & Ruiz-Arranz data set)
                                          Dependent Variable:
                                Ln Remittances 2005 between Countries
                                    (1)          (2)              (3)
Ln (Stock migrants 2000 )        0.459***     0.449***         0.327**
                                  (0.085)     (0.0818)         (0.126)
Difference in cyclical position
(Ln (Real GDP/ Trend GDP))      57.585***    67.909***        65.300***
host relative to origin country  (15.875)     (16.998)        (17.335)
GDP per capita Sender                         0.061***         0.062**
                                               (0.023)         (0.024)
Estimated Method                   OLS          OLS             2SLS
Instrumental variables                                     Border/Islands
F test                             22.63        19.27            9.35
Probability > F                   (0.000)      (0.000)         (0.000)
Observations                        64           64               64
R2                                 0.373        0.448          0.4259
Root MSE                           1.304        1.234          1.2577
First stage F-statistic                                          0.07
P-value                                                        (0.933)
J-test of overidentifying
restrictions                                                    0.138
P-value                                                        (0.620)
Standard errors in parenthesis
Constants not reported
Statistical signficance: * 10%
level, ** 5% level and *** 1%
level




                                                                            19
Table 2: Panel Data, 1979-2005 (Lueth&Ruiz-Arranz data set)


                                                           Dependent Variable: Ln Remittances between Countries
                                                      (1)           (2)        (3)       (4)               (5)
Difference in cyclical position                                                 -          -
     (unemployment rate)                         -10.507***     -8.981***  11.607*** 11.483***         -12.918***
      host relative to origin country              (0.995)       (0.976)    (1.125)    (1.947)          ( 1.976)
Host country’s GDP per capita                      0.076***      0.026***   0.049***  0.049***            0.023
                                                   (0.005)       (0.007)    (0.006)    (0.009)           (0.017)
Colonial relationship?                              2.444**       0.076
   (0 = never, 0.5 = post-1945, 1 = always)        (1.082)       (1.007)
Islands ?                                          0.644**       0.570**
  (0 = neither, 1 = one of the pair, 2 = both)     (0.317)       (0.284)
Landlocked                                         -1.260*      -1.431***
  (0 = neither, 1 = one of the pair, 2 = both)     (0.288)       (0.259)
Language                                             0.572         0.575
 (Dummy for common language)                       (0.492)       (0.440)
Border (Dummy for land border)                      -0.409        -0.547
                                                   (0.582)       (0.523)
Ln (Distance between i and j)                     -0.909***     -0.561***
                                                   (0.191)       (0.174)
Ln (Product Population i and j)                    0.941***      0.609***   2.963***  3.017***            1.209
                                                   (0.080)       (0.078)    (0.243)    (0.400)           (0.974)
Time Effects                                          no            yes        no         no               yes
Random Effects                                        yes           yes        no        no                 no
Fixed Effects for Countries                            no            no        yes        no                no
Fixed Effects for Country Pair                        no            no         no        yes               yes
Wald test                                           731.55       1184.69    1306.28     71.76             44.69
Prob > χ2                                          (0.000)       (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)           (0.000)
Observations                                         1200          1200       1228      1228              1228
R2                                                  0.389         0.414      0.696      0.304             0.331

Constants not reported
       (Standard errors in parenthesis.)                       Significance * 10% level, ** 5% level, and *** 1% level




                                                                                                                         20
Table 3: Cross-Section 2003-04 -- Composite data set (merging three sources)
                                                        Dependent Variable:
                                        Ln Remittances 2003-04 between Countries
                                          (1)             (2)                (3)               (4)
Ln (Stock migrants 2000 )              0.761***        0.739***          1.053***           1.224***
                                       (0.040)         (0.041)           (0.087)            (0.151)
Difference in cyclical position
(Ln (Real GDP/ Trend GDP))            16.574***       16.316***         14.988***          14.266***
  Sender relative to recipient         (2.894)         (2.766)           (3.390)            (3.894)
GDP per capita Sender                                  0.037**            0.026               0.020
                                                       (0.015)           (0.016)            (0.019)
Currency Union                                        0.873***            -0.053             -0.556
                                                       (0.322)           (0.333)            (0.493)
Estimation Method                        OLS            OLS                2SLS               2SLS
                                                                      border/language/     border/lang
                                                                       islands/colonial       uage
Instrumental variables
F test                                 189.17          146.94             195.83            244.72
Prob > F                               (0.000)         (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)
Observations                             333             330                330               330
R2                                      0.528           0.547              0.468             0.359
Root MSE                                1.540           1.516              1.642             1.803
First stage F-statistic                                                     3.04              4.06
P-value                                                                   (0.018)           (0.018)
J-test of overidentifying
restrictions                                                              12.157              8.123
P-value                                                                   (0.007)            (0.004)

Constant not reported
(Standard errors in parentheses.)   Statistical significance: * 10% level, ** 5% level, *** 1% level




                                                                                                         21
 Three sources of remittance data for 2003-04: Central America data, FOMIN and the
 Central Banks, via Interamerican Development Bank; EU data: Jiménez-Martín,
 Jorgensen and Labeaga (2007); IMF data: Lueth and Ruiz-Arranz (2006, 2008).




Table 4: Cross-Section 2003-04 -- Composite data set (merging three data sets and controlling for each one)

                                                                                                   Dependent Variable:
                                                                                        Ln Remittances 2003-04 between Countries
                                                                               (1)             (2)               (3)                  (4)
Ln (Stock migrants 2000)                                                    0.713***        0.708***          1.087***             1.253***
                                                                            (0.042)         (0.042)           (0.090)              (0.154)
Difference in cyclical position
(Ln (Real GDP/ Trend GDP))                                                  16.477***       15.736***         16.004***            16.121***
  Sender relative to recipient                                               (2.889)         (2.837)           (3.582)              (4.073)
GDP per capita Sender                                                                         0.026*            0.017                0.012
                                                                                             (0.016)           (0.019)              (0.022)
Currency Union                                                                                -0.376          -0.437***            -0.464***
                                                                                             (0.309)           (0.150)              (0.134)
IMF data                                                                    -3.605***       -4.289***         -7.338***            -8.670***
                                                                             (0.394)         (0.537)           (0.900)              (1.358)
EU data                                                                     -3.771***        -4.308***        -7.621***            -9.069***
                                                                             (0.404)         (0.515)           (0.938)              (1.463)
Central America data                                                        -2.014***       -2.778***         -7.062***            -8.935***
                                                                             (0.537)         (0.709)           (1.218)              (1.882)
Estimated Method                                                              OLS              OLS              2SLS                 2SLS



                                                                                                                                      22
                                                                                                                     border/language/
                                                                                                                                         border/language
Instrumental variables                                                                                                islands/colonial
F test                                                                                           733.58    603.79       1427.11            1611.49
Prob > F                                                                                         (0.000)   (0.000)      (0.000)            (0.000)
Observations                                                                                       333       330          330                330
R2                                                                                                0.817     0.819
Root MSE                                                                                          1.510     1.501          1.67              1.832
First stage F-statistic                                                                                                    3.34               4.61
P-value                                                                                                                  (0.011)            (0.011)
J-test of overidentifying
restrictions                                                                                                             13.365              9.214
P-value                                                                                                                  (0.004)            (0.002)

 Constant not reported
 (Standard errors in parentheses.)   Statistical significance: * 10% level, ** 5% level, *** 1% level


 Three sources of remittance data for 2003-04: Central America data, FOMIN and the
 Central Banks, via Interamerican Development Bank; EU data: Jiménez-Martín,
 Jorgensen and Labeaga (2007); IMF data: Lueth and Ruiz-Arranz (2006, 2008).




                                                                                                                                               23
Appendix: Determinants of overall remittances among some southern Africa countries
Acknowledgements: Thanks to Melesse Tashu for R.A. help with these results.

Regression Results of Remittances per capita for Selected Southern African Countries:
  - Dependent variable in all cases is log of per capita remittance
  - Income refers to per capita GDP in 2000 $US constant prices
  - Numbers in parentheses are t-values
  - Sample size: 1975-2004 for all countries except for Mozambique, which is 1980-2004
  - All variables are in logs except trends
  - Detrended 1: refers incomes detrended by cubic polynomial trend functions
  - Detrended 2: refers incomes detrended by Hodrick-Prescott filter
  - Data Source: World Development Indicators, Online Database
Lesotho
                  Regression with separate incomes                          Regression with restriction of equal and opposite
                                                                            sign on incomes
               Constant       Domestic     SA         Trend      Adj-R2     Constant    Ratio of SA to        Trend Adj-R2
                              income       income                                       Domestic income
Level          3.44           0.67         -0.24      -0.02      -0.08      8.04        -0.97                 -0.004 0.98
               (0.28)         (0.84)       (-0.18)    (-0.81)               (100.66)    (-36.08               (-4.26

Detrended 1    5.22           0.67         2.42       0.001      -0.06      5.22         -0.36              0.001     -0.06
               (46.06)        (0.84)       (0.89)     (0.14)                (45.94)      (-0.49)            (0.14)

Detrended 2    5.23           -1.15        4.02       0.0003     -0.05      5.24         1.61               0.00      -0.03
               (45.79)        (1.71)       (1.12)     (0.05)                (46.27)      (1.02)




                                                                                                                                24
Botswana
              Regression with separate incomes           Regression with restriction of
                                                         equal and opposite sign on
                                                         incomes
           Constant Domestic SA         Trend     Adj-   Constant  Ratio of Trend Adj-
                    income   income               R2               SA to                R2
                                                                   Domestic
                                                                   income
Level      5.91      1.36       -1.32   -0.12     0.67   7.94      -0.95        -0.006 0.99
                                        (-3.92)
           (0.53)    (2.36)     (-                       (84.58) (-39.16) (-4.66)
                                1.07)
Detrended 4.31       2.49       -0.89   -0.04     0.64   4.31      -2.26      -0.04     0.65
                                        (-7.05)                               (-7.14)
1         (38.86)    (2.05)     (-                       (39.35)   (-1.99)
                                0.33)
Detrended 4.31       3.00       1.04    -0.04     0.60   4.31      -1.49      -0.04     0.60
                                        (-6.69)                               (-6.70)
2         (36.88)    (0.91)     (0.27                    (36.92)   (-0.51)




                                                                                               25
Mozambique
               Regression with separate incomes                         Regression with restriction of equal and opposite sign on
                                                                        incomes
            Constant Domestic            SA          Trend Adj-         Constant Ratio of SA to Domestic              Trend Adj-R2
                     income              income            R2                      income
Level       -2.63       -0.13            0.63        -0.02      0.47    7.91       -0.96                           -0.006    0.97
            (-0.26)     (-0.29)          (0.44)      (-1.31)            (25.96)    (-19.97)                        (-3.29)

Detrended   1.85        1.14             -0.16       -0.03      0.56    1.86       -1.20                           -0.03     0.58
1           (17.37)     (1.98)           (-0.07)     (-5.29)            (18.39)    (-2.18)                         (-5.63)

Detrended   1.83        1.02             1.84        -0.03      0.52    1.86       -1.26                           -0.03     0.52
2           (16.59)     (0.93)           (0.60)      (-4.95)            (17.12)    (-1.17)                         (-5.22)



Swaziland
                  Regression with separate incomes                       Regression with restriction of equal and opposite sign on
                                                                         incomes
              Constant Domestic           SA          Trend Adj-         Constant Ratio of SA to Domestic             Trend Adj-R2
                       income             income             R2                     income
Level         -33.86   3.01               2.10        -0.007 0.32        8.07       -0.99                             -0.004   0.99
              (-1.24)  (2.00)             (0.85)      (-0.29)            (106.72) (-59.17)                            (-3.16)


Detrended     3.70        2.59            2.05        0.035      0.28    3.70       -2.16                          0.03      0.27
1             (20.25)     (1.37)          (0.46)      (3.43)             (20.22)    (-1.17)                        (3.42)


Detrended     3.70        4.03            2.15        0.03       0.23    3.70       -2.79                          0.03      0.25
2             (19.85)     (0.75)          (0.30)      (3.36)             (19.83)    (-0.53)                        (3.36)




                                                                                                                                    26
