                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      ONE TV, ONE PRICE?

                                            Jean Imbs
                                          Haroon Mumtaz
                                          Morten O. Ravn
                                            Hélène Rey

                                        Working Paper 15418
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15418


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2009




¸˛This paper could not have been written without the most competent help of the team of GfK France,
  who provided the data and technical assistance. We are very grateful in particular to Jerome Habauzit
  and Matthias Carpentier of GfK. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
  necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Jean Imbs, Haroon Mumtaz, Morten O. Ravn, and Hélène Rey. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
One TV, One Price?
Jean Imbs, Haroon Mumtaz, Morten O. Ravn, and Hélène Rey
NBER Working Paper No. 15418
October 2009
JEL No. F0,F1,F15,F23,F41

                                              ABSTRACT

We use a unique dataset on television prices across European countries and regions to investigate the
sources of differences in price levels. Our findings are as follows: (i) Quality is a crucial determinant
of price differences. Even in an integrated economic zone as Europe, rich economies tend to consume
higher quality goods. This effect accounts for the lion’s share of international price dispersion. (ii)
Sizable international price differentials subsist even for the same television sets. The average bilateral
price difference is as high as 80 euros, or 8% of the average TV price in our sample. (iii) EMU countries
display lower price dispersion than non-EMU countries. (iv) absolute price differentials and relative
price volatility are positively correlated with exchange rate volatility, but not with conventional measures
of transport costs. (v) Importantly we show brand premia are sizable. They differ markedly across
borders, in a way that does not correlate with transport costs, nor exchange rate movements. Taken
together, the evidence is consistent firms exploiting market power through brand values to price discriminate
across borders.


Jean Imbs                                             Morten O. Ravn
HEC Lausanne                                          Department of Economics
Lausanne, Switzerland                                 University College London
jimbs@unil.ch                                         London UK
                                                      morten.ravn@eui.eu
Haroon Mumtaz
Bank of England                                       Hélène Rey
London UK                                             London Business School
hmumtaz@london.edu                                    Regents Park
                                                      London NW1 4SA
                                                      UK
                                                      and NBER
                                                      hrey@london.edu
1 INTRODUCTION                                                                                    1


1       Introduction

A large literature on Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) has documented that price levels
expressed in common currency diﬀer persistently across national borders 1 . The sources
and extent of good price diﬀerences across markets is a topic of great importance. Signifi-
cant price diﬀerentials across countries may entail large social costs due to the distortions
introduced by price discriminating producers or retailers and may be of concern to regu-
lators and policy makers alike. Understanding the determinants of deviations form PPP
is also important for the modelling of the open economy as the international transmission
of shocks and welfare results hinge crucially on the extent of exchange rate pass-through2 .
The standard explanations put forward to explain price diﬀerentials across markets are
nominal rigidities that prevent instantaneous adjustment of prices to changes in marginal
costs, market segmentation and diﬀerences in baskets of goods across countries. A number
of recent studies have used datasets on disaggregated prices featuring (close) to identical
products in an attempt to correct for diﬀerences in the composition of the basket of goods
across locations. Haskel and Wolf (2001), Goldberg and Verboven (2001, 2005), Crucini,
Telmer and Zachariadis (2005), Crucini and Shintani (2008), Broda and Weinstein (2007),
Burstein and Jaimovich (2008) and Gopinath et al (2009) document that prices of goods
that are similar - or identical - diﬀer substantially across borders3 . A number of these
papers also conclude that diﬀerences in retail prices derive from diﬀerences in wholesale
costs such as distribution (see e.g. Goldberg and Verboven (2001), or Gopinath et al.
2009). Much less attention, however, has been paid to the extent to which firms are able
to price discriminate across borders due to branding. The present paper contributes to
the burgeoning literature on the law of one price that use high quality micro data on price
levels and puts a special emphasis on the role of branding in explaining international price
diﬀerences.

    We study an exceptional panel database on the prices of television sets across Europe.
We examine the characteristics and evolution of price diﬀerentials for one of the most
widespread consumer durable goods, in a panel consisting of both European countries and
regions. The evolution of price diﬀerentials over time is of particular interest in European
countries, which provide a natural laboratory to study the eﬀect on price convergence
of a monetary union, where international relative prices can no longer adjust through
the nominal exchange rate. It is therefore potentially informative to track the trend in
price diﬀerentials throughout the EMU period. Our sample contains members of the euro
    1
     Surveys can be found in Rogoﬀ (1996) and Taylor and Taylor (2004).
    2
     See Carvahlo and Nechio (2009) for a recent model of the open economy with heterogeneous price
adjustments.
   3
     Other contributions include Asplund and Friberg (2001), Ghosh and Wolf (1994), Parsley and Wei
(2004), Imbs et al (2005). Other studies such as Engel and Rogers (1996) and Gorodnichenko and Tesar
(2009) have used volatility of relative price indices across locations to identify a border eﬀect.
1 INTRODUCTION                                                                                           2


area as well as non euro area countries; it has three large new EU members (the Czech
Republic, Hungary and Poland). The television market is of particular interest since TVs
have been present in the shopping basket of European consumers for many years, and
almost every household in Europe owns at least one TV set. Furthermore, the good’s
price is substantial enough to warrant some reflection (and, possibly, some international
comparisons) before the actual purchase decision. Finally, the production and distribution
of TV sets across European countries are actually the object of very little regulation. This
stands in stark contrast with existing work, which either focused on low unit costs goods,
or on expensive yet heavily regulated durable goods.4 Thus, our data single out a good
where large price diﬀerences would be particularly intriguing as arbitrage is likely both
intense and relatively unfettered.

     Our data are remarkable in that they supplement actual sale price data with detailed
information on the characteristics of the TV sets sold and on brands. Those characteris-
tics are refined enough to allow us to actually control for variations in quality both across
regions and over time.5 Thus, we bring the focus on any residual explanations for diﬀer-
ences in prices, over and beyond the usual argument that standard data unduly compare
apples with oranges. In particular, we consider market power, diﬀerences in production
costs, or heterogeneous preferences and especially diﬀerences in the national perception
of a given brand. The richness of our data enables us to compare the prices of the exact
same TV set across countries and regions. We can ask all these questions both within
and without EMU, and thus we can investigate the extent to which price diﬀerentials
respond to changes in the monetary standard. The corollary question of whether price
diﬀerences are larger within or between countries can be addressed as well, thanks to a
regional dimension in (some of) our data. Finally, the availability of actual prices makes
it possible to investigate whether price diﬀerentials are related in any systematic manner
with goods’ unit prices, as would be the case if arbitragers needed to pay a setup cost to
take advantage of price diﬀerences. These costs could help explain some of the remaining
cross-sectional variation in prices, once diﬀerences in quality and in costs are controlled
for.

     Our results are as follows. (i) A large part of international price diﬀerences can be
explained by diﬀerences in the quality of the goods purchased. (ii) EMU countries display
considerably smaller price dispersion than countries external to the monetary union. In
fact, EMU price diﬀerences are comparable to within country regional price dispersion.
(iii) Price diﬀerences for the same set of televisions are sizeable, but rank diﬀerently
across countries. (iv) Absolute price diﬀerentials and relative price volatility are positively
   4
     See Haskel and Wolf (2001) or Goldberg and Verboven (2001), respectively, for studies on Ikea mirrors
and automobile sales. Nevo (2001) focuses on ready-to-eat cereals.
   5
     This corresponds to another desirable feature of the good we are investigating. Most of the production
costs of TV sets appear to depend on the tube used in the device, whose type is included in our dataset
and whose production location can be traced.
2 DATA                                                                                    3


correlated with exchange rate volatility. This suggests the “border eﬀects” documented
first by Engel and Rogers (1996) may be a reflection of level diﬀerences. (v) Diﬀerences
in brand valuations across countries are an important source of price variation. But they
do not correlate with any conventional measures of cultural proximity, nor with exchange
rate volatility.

    The results regarding brands are important. At face value, the data suggest that
TV prices are diﬀerent across countries because of heterogeneous preferences, rather than
limits to arbitrage. Brand perceptions vary across countries, which may be a reflection of
unobserved marketing activity, after-sales services, or of country-specific habit formation.
While structural studies have paid attention to the fact that prices seem to be relatively
stable over time and aﬀected little by changes in marginal costs (such as exchange rates
for imported goods), see Goldberg and Hellerstein (2008) for example, much less eﬀort
has gone into examining how firms can build up brand premia that allows them to charge
a premium for their goods. We believe that the size of the brand premia that we find for
TVs, if comparable for other goods, may be suﬃciently large that their welfare implica-
tions dominate those that derive from sluggish adjustment of prices.

    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. We next describe our dataset in more
details. In Section 3, we investigate the impact of quality adjustment on international
price diﬀerentials. We document dramatic reversals in countries expensiveness rankings.
Section 4 compares intranational to international price diﬀerentials and assess whether
EMU countries can be considered as integrated as regions within the same country. Section
5 uses hedonic regressions to investigate the role of exchange rates in explaining price
diﬀerentials and estimate the extent of pass-through. Section 6 studies the dispersion
of the prices of the same television sets across countries. We find sizable diﬀerences as
well as diﬀerent relative rankings across countries. The average bilateral price diﬀerence
between two countries is as high as 80 euros (8% of the average price), when the same
set of televisions is compared. These absolute price diﬀerences are positively correlated
with exchange rate volatility. In section 7, we propose that heterogeneous brand eﬀects
are one of the main sources of these big price diﬀerentials. Section 8 concludes.



2    Data

Our data were obtained from GfK France. GfK is a private company selling market
surveys based on high quality and very disaggregated data. The traditional focus of GfK
has been on consumer electronics and especially the TV market. Their data cover no less
than 80 percent of all TV sales in the countries considered, and up to 95 percent for some
markets. Duty free shops as well as small outlets are excluded. We have data on countries
3 INTERNATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN TV PRICES                                                         4


which belong to the EU and the euro area (Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Greece,
Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain); on countries belonging to the EU but that have
not adopted the euro (Sweden, the United Kingdom and the accession countries, Hungary,
the Czech Republic and Poland); and finally on Switzerland. For the majority of these
countries, the data are national averages (weighted by sale volumes), collected bimonthly
(6 observations per year).6 The period considered is 1999 till end of 2002. We also have
regional information for Germany (4 regions), Italy (4 regions), Spain (4 regions) and
Switzerland (2 regions).

    The data are reported in national currency and we use market exchange rates to con-
vert price levels into a common currency, which we choose to be the Euro. For each market
we have information on the prices of TV sets, and on a variety of their characteristics.
These include the TV screen size (28 inches, 29 inches, or more than 29 inches), the tube
dimension (4:3 or 16:9), the type of the tube (50 or 100 Hertz), and the brand, which
is separated into 24 individual brands and an aggregate of all others. To maximize the
number of characteristics available for each TV set, we restrict our sample to televisions
whose screen size is above 28 inches. Combining the country and good dimensions, our
international cross-sectional dimension is as large as 4,500 goods. The coverage of these
data is summarized in Table 1. In Table 2, we show the list of brands and their country
of origin. The regional data do not have all the characteristics we study in the country
sample. But they still allow us to perform some hedonic regressions and to gain some
insights in the degree of regional price convergence and the magnitude of national border
eﬀects.



3         International Diﬀerences in TV Prices

In this section, we focus on cross-country price diﬀerences. Our data have 27,760 observa-
tions, the average TV price is 992 euros, the minimum price is 69 euros and the maximum
8205 euros. We first focus on raw, uncorrected prices. We then perform hedonic regressions
to investigate the importance of quality and other observed characteristics.


3.1         Uncorrected Prices 1999-2002

In Figure 1 we plot the average raw TV price in each of the 15 countries for the period 1999-
2002.7 According to these measures, the three most expensive countries in the sample are
    6
        For Switzerland, the data are four-monthly, i.e. three observations per year.
    7
        The average prices are computed by weighting the prices of TVs by the volume of sales.
3 INTERNATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN TV PRICES                                                                  5


Switzerland, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, while Poland, Hungary and the
Czech Republic, three accession countries, are the cheapest. Average price diﬀerentials
are substantial even among the richest European countries. For example, in the early
part of 2002, the average TV set in Switzerland was almost twice as expensive as in
Italy (approximately 1,100 vs. 580 Euros). Furthermore, the pictures do not reveal any
significant evidence of convergence of TV prices even though the country rankings of
average TV prices change over time.
    We investigate the evidence on price convergence in raw prices more rigorously by
estimating
                                pit = αi0 + α1 pit−1 + εit                        (1)
where pit is the (logarithm) average TV price (expressed in Euro) in country i at date t
and αi denotes a country specific fixed eﬀect. We estimate equation (1) using the level
of uncorrected prices, since Figure 1 suggests non-stationarity does not appear to be a
major concern.8
   The major diﬀerence between our approach and most of the literature is that we
have information on price levels. This makes is possible
                                                  µ      to directly assess the permanent
                                                         ¶
                                                                α̂0i
diﬀerences in international TV prices, given by exp            1−α̂1
                                                                       .9 Table 3 reports our estimates
per country. The first and foremost result in Table 3 pertains to large persistent diﬀerences
in TV prices across countries. TV sets in Switzerland, the most expensive country in our
sample, are persistently almost twice as expensive as in the Czech Republic, Hungary
or Poland. Switzerland is also substantially ahead of the rest of Western Europe, 20
percent more expensive than the Netherlands or the United Kingdom, and a good 40
percent above the European average. These are persistent diﬀerences, and thus they point
to little convergence in prices across European countries. Of course, these discrepancies
could simply reflect diﬀerences in the characteristics and quality of TV sets across Europe.
For instance, it is entirely possible that the typical TV set sold in Switzerland is simply
not available (or has a very thin market) in Poland or Hungary. Price diﬀerences could
simply reflect diﬀerences in quality. We next investigate this possibility.


3.2     Hedonic Regressions: Corrected Prices 1999-2002

In this section we explore the extent to which quality-adjusted prices diﬀer across markets.
We adopt an hedonic price adjustment approach expressing the prices of the products as
                              peuro
                               imt = ωimt γ + θst + θmf + θmt + εimt                                    (1)
   8
     We implemented all standard stationarity tests, and rejected in all cases the hypothesis of non-
stationarity in raw prices.
   9
     We also tested whether αi = α for all countries in the sample, and were unable to reject the hypothesis
of permanent country specific diﬀerences in almost all cases.
3 INTERNATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN TV PRICES                                                               6


where peuro
        imt is the logarithm of the euro price of product i in market m at date t, ωimt is
a vector of product characteristics that may be diﬀerent across markets, θst is a source
country-time dummy, θmf a market/firm supplier dummy (i.e. brand dummy), and θmt
is a market-country time dummy10 . A similar formulation was implemented by Goldberg
and Verboven (2002), among others, in their study of the European car market. Hedonic
regressions model prices as a function of observable product characteristics that might
aﬀect the costs of supplying the good, and consumers’ evaluation of the product. The
market-country time dummies θmt capture the residual cross-country price diﬀerences that
are unrelated to the observed variables meant to explain diﬀerences in good’s quality.

     Product characteristics are included in order to control for observable diﬀerences which
may aﬀect the consumer’s evaluation of the TV set. But they may also reflect the re-
tailer’s choice of prices, over and above the direct eﬀect of quality diﬀerences themselves.
For example, small screens may not be a simple substitute for large screens. Observable
product characteristics include the size of the screen, the tube dimension, and the picture
renewal rate. It seems reasonable to assume that, all other things equal, larger or more
sophisticated TV sets are more expensive. The screen sizes are divided into three cate-
gories, 28”, 29” and larger than 29”.11 Tube dimension is defined as either the traditional
4:3 ratio, or the wide screen format, 16:9. Given the versatility of wide screen formats, we
would expect TV sets equipped with 16:9 tubes to be more expensive than those with 4:3
tubes. We also include information on picture quality, distinguishing between traditional
50 hz and more 100 hz TV sets. The higher renewal rate frequency is supposed to reduce
flicker normally observed on 50 hz TV sets. Unfortunately, the data does not include other
relevant variables such as the quality of the audio or the number of tuners. However, the
variables that we include are those that the industry believes to be the most important
observable product characteristics.

    Television production is a highly globalized activity. Television sets are often produced
by multinationals whose headquarters are usually located in their country of origin (source
country), while key TV components, i.e. tubes, are purchased in another country and the
final assemblage of the TV sets is performed in yet another one. The identification of the
production country is therefore not straightforward. We scanned thoroughly the annual
reports for each TV producer we have data on, as well as outsourcing announcements in
the financial press. We choose as the source country the country of origin of the firm since
a non negligible part of the activity of the company, such as marketing and advertising
decisions and some stages of production most frequently take place in the firm’s country
of origin (see Table 2).
  10
     There is very little variation in the TV tax rates in our sample. We therefore did not include a tax
variable.
  11
     We also have data on smaller TV sets but for these products information is missing on other key
variables.
3 INTERNATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN TV PRICES                                                      7


    The inclusion of brand dummies is traditionally meant to reflect unobserved quality
diﬀerentials. In particular, if certain producers are renowned for high (or low) quality
TV sets, their reputation can be expected to aﬀect consumers’ perception of the product.
Furthermore, TV sets diﬀer not only in the quality of their components but also in their
design. For example, producers such as Bang and Olufsen (B&O) or Loewe are well-known
for exquisite design which increases consumers’ willingness to pay. Other aspects such as
the degree to which TV sets may be integrated with other audio-visual products may
have similar consequences. Brands may also be related to after-sales service, reliability
and durability of the product. Many of these aspects are hard to measure directly, but
will be captured through the inclusion of market specific brand dummies.

    Finally, the country-time eﬀect θmt picks up residual cross-country price diﬀerentials.
It can reflect either local costs at the retail level, or price diﬀerentials due to general
diﬀerences in the willingness to pay for TV sets across markets. In particular, diﬀerences
in the costs of distribution at the retail level are likely to aﬀect the choice of retail prices
through their eﬀect on retailer margins. Similarly, countries with higher income may
also be countries in which consumers have a higher demand for durable goods. That is,
markets where producers may be able to set higher prices, holding quality constant.

    Table 4 reports the results of our hedonic price regression. The validity of an hedo-
nic regression is commensurate to its goodness-of-fit. In the present case, we obtain R2
around 80 percent, a rather good fit given the somewhat limited set of observable product
characteristics included. Observable product characteristics all enter the hedonic prices
with significant coeﬃcients and with signs consistent with our priors. The results imply
that TV sets with larger than 29 inch screen command a premium of around 32 percent
relative to 29 inch television sets and a premium of 53 percent relative to 28 inch tele-
vision sets. Similarly, we find that TV sets with 16:9 tubes are sold with a premium of
approximately 26 percent relative to TV sets with 4:3 tubes. The higher price for wide
screen TV sets are in line with standard industry wisdom. Finally, TV sets with 100 hz
picture renewal rate carry a premium of approximately 38 percent relative to traditional
50 hz TV sets.

    We also find highly significant source country-time eﬀects indicating that our modeling
of the source country appears to have an eﬀect on the prices of the TV sets. Likewise,
the country-time dummies are highly significant indicating that there are important dif-
ferences in the general level of prices across markets that are not explained by diﬀerences
in the product and/or production characteristics.

    Finally, the hedonic regressions include a measure of brands in order to control for
unobserved product characteristics. The brand dummies are in fact highly significant and
the hypothesis that brands do not aﬀect prices is resoundingly rejected. In Figure 2 we
illustrate the size of the estimated brand eﬀects. The largest eﬀect is estimated for Bang
3 INTERNATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN TV PRICES                                                       8


& Olufsen (B&O) TV sets, a brand that is known for high quality and attractive design.
Once observable product characteristics are accounted for, the premium on B&O remains
very large, with prices around 150 percent higher than comparable products. Loewe, Sony
and Panasonic are also highly priced, but their brand premia are considerably lower than
those of B&O. At the other extreme, Mivar, Orion and Daewoo do not appear to possess
much brand value. Thus, product and market characteristics are important components
of the prices of the TVs, but brand eﬀects seem to be pertinent as well. Evidently, either
brands control for unobserved product characteristics (such as the quality of the design,
the sound system etc.) and/or firms are able to brand their goods in such a way that
they can charge relatively large premia for their goods. Either way, brands seem to be an
important dimension of prices.


3.3    Rankings and Dispersion

We now use our corrected prices to investigate the ranking and dispersion of prices across
European countries, once diﬀerences in the TV sets’ main characteristics are accounted
for. In particular, we estimate again the following fixed eﬀects regression

                                   pi,t = βi0 + β 1 pi,t−1 + vi,t

where p = ln( θθuki ) denotes country i’s hedonic price relative to the UK. The estimation is
now performed in relative terms, for non-stationarity in hedonic prices cannot be rejected.
Figure 3 illustrates graphically our estimates for quality adjusted prices, which display a
clear downward trend, in contrast with raw prices which were overall stationary. A variety
of (unreported) tests confirm that the hypothesis of non-stationarity is significantly harder
to reject for quality adjusted prices than for their raw counterpart. This suggests that
the bulk of the time-variation in TV prices comes from quality improvements, a finding
that in itself appears important. Thus, we investigate the dynamic properties of quality
adjusted relative prices, and we choose the United Kingdom as the numeraire.µ As before,
                                                                                       ¶
                                                                                    β̂i0
a measure of persistent deviation in corrected (relative) prices is given by exp   1−β̂ 1
                                                                                            . We
report our estimates in Table 5.

    The ranking of TV prices changes dramatically. The UK, true to its reputation, is still
found to be above the European mean, with only two countries scoring more highly on the
expensiveness scale. Those are surprisingly the Czech Republic and Greece. Controlling
for quality, TV sets in the Czech Republic and Greece are found to actually be more
expensive than in the UK, by 2 percent and 0.7 percent, respectively. Both countries
were at the bottom of the ranking of uncorrected prices. This suggests that TV sets sold
in the Czech Republic and Greece score low on most of the product characteristics we
observe, to such an extent that they are actually overpriced relative to other countries.
3 INTERNATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN TV PRICES                                                   9


Switzerland on the other hand remains an expensive country, just behind the UK. This
implies that the high uncorrected prices we observe there are - partly, but not completely
- due to high quality TV sets. Quite strikingly, the countries with cheapest TV sets
in our sample are now Germany, Austria and the Netherlands. Raw Dutch prices were
amongst the highest in our sample: Table 5 means therefore that the TV sets sold in the
Netherlands are of such good quality as to be actually cheap relative to an European
average, 15 percent below a similar TV set sold in the UK, for instance. It is also striking
that the three newcomers in the EU (the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland), which
were the three cheapest countries when our ranking was conducted using raw prices are
now among the most expensive ones once quality of the TV sets is accounted for.

    The fact that the ranking of quality adjusted TV prices is rather diﬀerent from the
ranking of the average raw TV prices of course reflects that there are large diﬀerences
across countries in the quality of the typical TV set purchased. This finding underlines
the usefulness of studying prices of individual goods rather than price indices when inves-
tigating cross-market price diﬀerences.

   Finally, the cross-sectional dispersion in prices seems substantially lower once quality
diﬀerences are accounted for. On average, TV sets are 8.5 percent cheaper than in the
UK, and the maximal discrepancy occurs between Germany and the Czech Republic, with
(quality adjusted) price diﬀerences equal to 22 percent. In contrast, Table 3 pointed to
diﬀerences close to a ratio of one to two, between Switzerland and the Czech Republic.
We now know part of this huge discrepancy stems from particularly low quality TVs in
the Czech Republic. Nevertheless, price diﬀerences are still sizeable having accounted for
product characteristics.

    In Figure 3, we plot hedonic prices for all countries in our sample. A one-time fall in
prices can be observed in all countries around July 2000, and, to a lesser extent, toward the
end of 1999. Our conversations with TV manufacturers unanimously suggest the former
was largely due to massive discounts across Europe following immediately the European
football Championship, and disappointing TV sales. The fall in November-December 1999
is ascribed to a re-positioning of the main European manufacturers (Thompson, Sony and
Phillips) into the high-end TV market - indeed a price war.

    σ-convergence is apparent on Figure 3, with some price convergence towards a low
common level. We investigate the possibility in more details on Figure 4, borrowing
from the literature on economic growth, and computing a time-varying measures of σ-
convergence.12 We compute the cross-sectional variance of the measure of quality-adjusted
prices θeit ,                           ³        ³ ´´2
                                σt2 = Et θeit − μ θeit
 12
      See Sala-i-Martin (1996) for a discussion.
4 REGIONAL PRICE DIFFERENCES VS. CROSS-COUNTRY PRICE DIFFERENCES10

                           ³   ´
at each time t, where μ θeit denotes the cross-country average of quality adjusted prices.
We plot the corresponding series in Figure 4, both for EMU and non-EMU countries.
The results are surprising. First, there are no apparent trends in either of the two series.
This suggests the cross-sectional dispersion in quality adjusted prices did not experience
any marked change in our sample. Second, however, dispersion is systematically lower
within the European Monetary Union, with the short-lived exception of February 2000.
This does suggest economic integration is more prevalent between EMU economies, but
not necessarily because of the Monetary Union.

    In fact the absence of downward trend in dispersion since 1999 suggests that most
of the price convergence between EMU countries was a reality before the introduction
of the Euro13 . EMU countries may be better integrated with each other to start with.14
Deep integration on the goods market could actually explain why these countries chose
to have a common currency in the first place. Or alternatively, preferences in EMU
countries may be more similar than the preferences among non-EMU countries, a group
that includes economies as diﬀerent as Switzerland, the UK and poorer countries like
Poland and Hungary. Given our finding that intra EMU price dispersion is smaller than
average price dispersion in our sample, it is now worth investigating whether intra-EMU
price dispersion is of the same order of magnitude as regional price dispersion, i.e. whether
EMU countries can be considered as integrated as regions within the same country.



4      Regional Price Diﬀerences vs. Cross-Country Price
       Diﬀerences

For four of the countries in our sample we have information on regional prices for the post
1999 period. This dimension is available for Germany, Spain, Italy and Switzerland.15
The regional dimension makes it possible to investigate whether absolute price diﬀerences
are smaller within regions of countries than across national borders. We stress again that
this hypothesis can only be investigated because our data is denominated in absolute
prices rather than indexed.

   Engel and Rogers (1996) examine price diﬀerences across city pairs located in Canada
and in the United States using CPIs for 14 categories of consumer goods. They find that
  13
     In that sense our results are consistent with Engel and Rogers (2004).
  14
     Switzerland, the UK and Sweden are part of a free trade zone with EMU countries but the Czech
Republic, Poland and Hungary had to comply to the restriction of the “rule of origin” during the period
considered.
  15
     The regions in these countries are: Germany: North - NorthWest - Middle - South; Spain: North
- NorthEast - Middle - South; Italy: North - NorthWest - Middle - South and Switzerland: French -
German parts.
4 REGIONAL PRICE DIFFERENCES VS. CROSS-COUNTRY PRICE DIFFERENCES11


distance between markets matters for cross-market price variation, but most importantly
that the price variation between cities located in two diﬀerent countries is much higher
than the price variation between equidistant cities located in the same country. Since
Engel and Rogers examine CPIs their data do not allow them directly to investigate the
extent to which absolute price diﬀer across markets. Our data allow us to shed some new
light on these issues and in particular whether absolute price diﬀerences can be linked to
exchange rate volatility and distance.16

    In Figure 5, we plot both intra-regional and international³
                                                                  price³dispersion.
                                                                           ´´2
                                                                                     Interna-
tional price dispersion is, as before, measured as σt2 = Et θeit − μ θeit . To compute
regional price dispersion, we calculate the cross-sectional variance of prices of the regions
in each country and then average this variance across the four countries with regional
data. Figure 5 corroborates the view that regions within a country are more integrated
than countries within Europe. This suggests that at the national level, strong forces of
integration are at work, whether they be common currency, common preferences, ease of
trade, integrated labour markets or common distribution networks. Such forces do not
seem to exist or to be as strong at the international level, except perhaps among EMU
countries.

    In Figure 6, we plot the evolution of price dispersion for the three countries of our sam-
ple belonging to EMU and for which we have regional data (Italy, Spain and Germany).
We compare price dispersion within these three countries and between those same coun-
tries. Figure 6 shows quite clearly that there is a tendency for regional price diﬀerentials
to be smaller than cross-country price diﬀerentials even if the diﬀerences are much smaller
than those shown in Figure 5 for all countries in the sample. A formal test for equality
of the cross-sectional variances shows that regional price dispersion and intra-EMU price
dispersion are not significantly diﬀerent. This suggests that the historic process of conver-
gence among EMU countries, which has culminated in the Common Market initiative of
1992 and the introduction of the Euro in 1999 has borne fruit, at least for the TV market.
The absolute deviations of quality-adjusted prices are no bigger across EMU-nations than
among Spanish regions say. This is a remarkable result that can only be established on
the basis of highly disaggregated price level data, both for regions and nations.

   Whether the explanation for this fact should rest on arbitrage arguments, greater
similitude in distribution and pricing strategies, or more homogeneous preferences within
  16
    Furthermore, as we have discussed above, the goods characteristics matter very significantly for the
evidence on the LOP. Engel and Rogers (1996) use CPI data from the BLS and Statistics Canada.
While they attempt to control for diﬀerences in the goods definitions as rigorously as possible, their
data -and most alternatives in this literature- just do not lend themselves to this type of thorough and
accurate correction. See Gorodnichenko and Tesar (2009) and Gopinath et al (2009) for a discussion of
the identification of the border eﬀect .
5 PASS-THROUGH                                                                                        12


EMU countries remains to be determined. In the next section we seek to shed some light
on the eﬀect of EMU by studying in more details the role of the exchange rate.



5      Pass-through

We next ask to what extent observed price diﬀerences may be due to pricing to market
and incomplete exchange rate pass-through. To investigate this issue we run the following
regression, similar to Goldberg and Verboven (2001)

                           psource
                            imt    = ωimt γ + θst + θf m + αSsmt + εimt                              (3)
where, unlike equation (1), the left-hand side is expressed in the currency of the source
country17 . On the right hand side, the destination market time eﬀects are dropped.
Instead, we include the log of the exchange rate of each source country vis-a-vis the
destination market, Ssmt . This regression allows us to investigate how much of the time
variation in TV prices can be attributed to changes in the exchange rate, once we control
for observable characteristics, source market eﬀects and brands. If there is pricing to
market (or local currency pricing) then changes in the exchange rate should be reflected
one for one in the TV price, expressed in the exporter’s (source) currency. In this case,
there is zero pass-through and α = 1. All the currency risk is borne by the exporter. At
the other extreme, if there is complete pass-through and prices are fixed in the currency
of the exporter (producer currency pricing), α = 0 and prices in the export market fully
respond to exchange rate changes.

   In Table 6, we impose α to be the same across all bilateral exchange rates and estimate
an average pricing to market coeﬃcient of 0.174 (with a standard deviation of 0.003). On
average, there is a relatively high degree of pass-through for television sets. In our sample,
many observations concern fixed exchange rates, for instance when both the source and
destination countries are within the euro area. The main time varying exchange rates are
yen/euro, sterling/euro or won/euro. One caveat is that it is of course entirely possible
that for Japanese firms for instance, the relevant exchange rate for pricing decisions is
not merely the yen euro/exchange rate but it includes third currencies, because of the
geographical dispersion of production. Such would be the case if some sizable portion of
marginal costs were incurred in third currencies.

   There is reason to expect however that the extent of pass-through varies across mar-
kets and source countries. Indeed it is well-known that larger markets (or markets whose
  17
    For recent important contributions to the literature on passthrough with empirical applications based
on US import price data see Gopinath and Rigobon (2008), Gopinath and Itshoki (2009) and Gopinath
et al (2009). For OECD data see Campa and Goldberg (2006).
6 ONE TV, ONE PRICE?                                                                     13


currency is more internationalized) tend to benefit from a higher degree of pricing to
market. In turn, the source country can matter since diﬀerent brands do not internation-
alize production to the same extent when they serve the European market, depending
for example on their geographical location. Furthermore, firms having a larger market
share in a given country may be able to adjust their prices when exchange rate fluctuates
without losing their customers. Less established firms may have to absorb exchange rate
movements to a larger extent in order to stabilize their market share.
   Therefore, we also allowed pass-through coeﬃcient to vary across source countries.
But the two source countries commanding the highest market shares (41 percent in Japan
and 21 percent in South Korea) did not yield dissimilar pass-through estimates.
    This section provided some preliminary evidence that part of the “EMU eﬀect” on
price dispersion may be due to incomplete pass through. In the next sections we focus
more on explanation based on heterogeneous preferences. We also investigate in more
detail the actual sources of price diﬀerentials in our sample.



6    One TV, One Price?

Given our detailed data on TV sets, an alternative to hedonic regressions is to actually
track price diﬀerences of the exact same TV over time and across locations. We follow
that route in this section, and construct a sample formed by the prices of TV sets with
identical characteristics, among those we observe. In other words, remaining diﬀerences
have to originate in unobserved features, such as brand perception, habit persistence or
distribution and after-sale services. We use this sample to answer two questions, that
correspond to the dimensions of our data. First, we investigate whether price diﬀerences
across countries can be linked to standard economic variable such as proximity in trade or
exchange rate volatility. This should allow an assessment of the importance of arbitrage
as a price equalizing force across borders. Sizable price diﬀerentials would hint at the
existence of sizable non-traded local costs such as retailing, distribution or at country
specific unobserved diﬀerences in preferences or brand awareness.[]
    Second, we ask whether the dispersion in international prices relates with the actual
average TV price. On the one hand, if setting up an arbitrage business entails a fixed
cost, one would expect that TV prices are more homogeneous across countries at the high
end of the market. But on the other hand, the prices of high-end TV sets could be more
dispersed if diﬀerences in after-sales services were most prevalent in high-end products,
or if diﬀerences in brand perception were more important for expensive TV sets.
   We first construct a measure of bilateral price dispersion by computing the variance of
the relative prices for the same television set across country pairs. More precisely, we use
6 ONE TV, ONE PRICE?                                                                        14


the time average of pik (resp. pjk ), price of television k in country i (resp. j) to calculate
the ij specific volatility of relative television prices
                                                     Ã           !2
                                      1    X      pik
                           varij =            s̄k     − mij
                                   K(K − 1) k     pjk

where mij is the mean of the relative prices for country i and j, and s̄k denotes the average
share of the TV set of type k in sales in countries i and j. Since our measure of dispersion
could be biased by diﬀerences in the number of common television sets across country
pairs, we truncate our sample to ensure that K is the same across pairs. We are left with
around 90 diﬀerent television sets for each country pair.

   Our results are reported in Table 7. We confirm the well-known result in Engel and
Rogers (1996). Relative price volatility mirrors to some extent the movements in the
nominal exchange rate. In particular, we find high volatilities between pairs of countries
where the exchange rate fluctuates, involving for instance Switzerland or the UK. The
highest average volatility of relative prices can be found for the UK-France country pair,
while in contrast the Austrian-German couple or the trio Spain, Portugal, France who all
share the euro, seem much more in phase.

   Since one of the major advantage of our data is to include the actual price of each
TV sets, we can also compare average television price diﬀerences in levels across country
pairs. We construct a simple bilateral price diﬀerential measure as
                                         1 X
                                 ∆ij =       s̄k (pik − pjk )
                                         K k

where the set of televisions is also restricted to include solely the ones common across all
country pairs.

   The results presented in Table 8 are striking. They confirm the existence of important
average price diﬀerences between European countries, even between TV sets that are as
similar as an econometrician can know. On average the absolute price diﬀerence between
the average price of the same televisions across pair of countries is as high as 80 euros,
or a bit less than 8 percent of the average price. The highest diﬀerentials can be found
between the UK and the Netherlands, the UK and France, the UK and Germany, or
Switzerland and Germany. British customers pay an amount in excess of 257.9 euros on
average when they purchase a television set compared to Dutch customers; they also put
on the table 224.2 euros more on average than their friends from across the Channel. This
amount is comparable to the 225.4 euro the Swiss customers disburse in excess of their
German neighbors. The correlation between the absolute values of the price diﬀerences
and the bilateral volatility measure is high, approximately 0.74. In particular, the highest
average price diﬀerentials can be found across the same markets for which the variance
6 ONE TV, ONE PRICE?                                                                        15


of relative prices is the highest. This suggests the border eﬀect, based on the observed
volatility of relative prices, may in fact be a reflection of diﬀerences in price levels.

    We next attempt to relate our measures of relative prices variances and mean diﬀeren-
tials to traditional measures of economic and/or cultural integration. We simply regress
Xij = varij or |∆ij | on variables traditionally used as indicators of cultural or economic
aﬃnities such as distance dij , a common language dummy Li and exchange rate volatility
voleij (or, alternatively, an EMU dummy). We include country fixed eﬀects to account
for the possibility prices be systematically higher, for instance in rich economies. We
estimate
                            Xij = αi + αj + dij + Li + voleij + εij
The results, presented in Table 9 (first four columns) suggest very little geographical pat-
tern of relative price volatility and of average price diﬀerences, with significant coeﬃcients
on the exchange rate volatility, or an EMU dummy variable, but no significant eﬀect of
geographic proximity variables. Both the first and second moments of price diﬀerentials
are increasing in absolute value with exchange rate volatility, or, alternatively, a variable
capturing membership to EMU.

    Figure 7 plots the average price of one among 300 TV sets, as against its coeﬃcient
of variation measured across countries. There are clear outliers, but the relation is sig-
nificantly positive. TVs that are expensive on average also tend to have more widely
dispersed prices across countries. This is a puzzling result for the arbitrage based expla-
nation of price diﬀerences. If there is a fixed cost to set up an arbitrage business, arbitrage
forces should presumably be stronger for high-end goods, which command a higher price.
But, as our previous findings make clear, arbitrage forces seem weak to start with (10
percent average diﬀerence in price across markets is a large number) and are therefore
unlikely to shape the pattern of price dispersion. The positive correlation between the
price level and the coeﬃcient of variation could occur because manufacturers in the high-
end market have the option of seconding their sales with services, such as on call repairs
or servicing at home, and do so diﬀerentially across countries. But this fact is of course
also compatible with heterogeneous preferences across countries. We have every reason
to believe for example that there are important national diﬀerences in brand perceptions
(see the next section). These diﬀerences in brand valuations may be more pervasive for
expensive television sets, which is the segment of the market in which TV producers strive
to build their image.

    Altogether these results constitute strong evidence in favor of market segmentation
(lack of arbitrage, diﬀerent local costs) and/or diﬀerences in consumer valuation across
countries. These in turn could be due either to unobserved diﬀerences in product quality
(diﬀerential customer service, advertising across countries) or to preference heterogeneity
(including diﬀerent brand perception or habit formation). In what follows we investigate
the important role that brands play in product valuation.
7 BRANDS 1999-2002                                                                          16


7       Brands 1999-2002

Our hedonic equation

                            peuro
                             imt = ωimt γ + θst + θpt + θmf + θmt + εikt

allows for market specific brand dummies. In Table 4, we report the outcome of an F-test
on the null hypothesis that θmf = θf for all m, f . The hypothesis is strongly rejected.
While brands may reflect unobserved quality diﬀerences, which are good-specific, the
variable appears to aﬀect prices in a manner that varies across markets, and therefore
cannot be explained just by unobserved goods characteristics. They may also reflect
international diﬀerences in brand perception. By contrast, the regression coeﬃcients on
physical characteristics are not significantly diﬀerent across countries.

   Figure 8 illustrates the dispersion of the brand eﬀects across the 15 markets in our
sample18 . The figure shows the range (from minimum to maximum) of brand eﬀects across
markets. Contrary to what one would expect if brands reflected only unobserved quality,
the dispersion of the brand eﬀects is large. In particular, some brands carry a positive
premium in some markets but negative premia in others and the range of values are in
some cases quite wide.

    Of course, prices diﬀer across markets, but these diﬀerences, captured by our country-
time fixed eﬀects (i.e. local costs like rents, or retail margins) should not aﬀect the ranking
of prices of individual TV sets. A more precise insight on the extent to which there are
cross-market price diﬀerentials can therefore be gained by checking rank correlations of
individual TV sets. Figure 9 plots the distribution of Spearman rank correlations of
prices for identical products in each of the fifteen markets. We ranked the TV sets from
cheapest to most expensive in each of the fifteen markets in our sample. We then computed
Spearman rank correlations between the rank of product i in market m and its rank in
the other markets.

    If TV sets were priced similarly across markets we would expect the rank correlation
distributions to be narrow and with a high positive mean. Instead we find that the distri-
butions of the rank correlations are very wide, include positive as well as negative values,
and with modes that often are close to zero. In other words, even when comparing iden-
tical products, we observe a large amount of dispersion across markets. Since we cannot
reject commonality in the valuation of tube size, frequency, and screen size across coun-
tries, these international diﬀerences in valuations have to be related to more subjective
 18
      We excluded all the brands which were not present in all markets.
7 BRANDS 1999-2002                                                                                      17


characteristics of the television set, most prominently its brand.19

    Brands are perceived diﬀerently across countries and this diﬀerence in valuation does
influence both the premium that a brand carries in diﬀerent countries and the relative
ranking of TV sets across countries. This is an important finding since it indicates that the
brand premium cannot simply be controlling for unobserved brand characteristics that we
erroneously have left out of the hedonic price regressions. If it were the case, then brand
premia should not vary so much across borders. Instead, the results appear to indicate
that firms invest in brand values and that these investments (or their eﬀectiveness) vary
across borders. Evidently, firms use such brand values in order to charge higher prices of
their goods in markets where their goods are perceived as superior.

    The eventual welfare eﬀects of the ensuing price level diﬀerences may be important
and this topic warrant further future investigation. A full answer to this would require a
structural model which goes beyond our aim with this paper. However, we do wish to shed
some further light on this topic. We aim here at oﬀering a more precise description of the
particular ways in which brand valuations diﬀer across countries. Of potential interest is
the existence of a geographical pattern in brand valuations across Europe. We construct
a brand aﬃnity measure Bij across pair of countries. Let bkj denote the value of brand
k in country j. We define the brand aﬃnity between country i and j as the Euclidian
distance in the space of brand values (weighted by sales)
                                                  v
                                                  u
                                                  uXKij
                                             1    u
                                    Bij =         t     s̄k (bkj   − bki )2
                                            Kij     k=1


where Kij is the total number of brands present both in countries i and j, and we weight
bilateral discrepancies by average market shares.

   We then simply regress Bij on variables traditionally used as indicators of cultural or
economic aﬃnities such as distance dij and exchange rate volatility voleij . We also include
country fixed eﬀects, and estimate

                              Bij = αi + αj + dij + Li + voleij + εij

The results, presented in Table 9 are surprising. The cross-section of brand perception
appears to be largely unrelated with any obvious economic variables, who enter with the
expected sign but are insignificant. Remarkably given the previous evidence on average
  19
    A caveat is in order. Our result could be explained by an omitted variable bias in the hedonic
equation. If the unobserved physical characteristic is diﬀerently distributed across countries, it could
account for part of the residual variation in the brand eﬀect. There is little we can do against this here,
given the data limitations. Our conversations with GfK do however strongly suggest the characteristics
we observe are the key determinants of TV prices.
8 CONCLUSION                                                                            18


price diﬀerentials, the behavior of the nominal exchange rate seems irrelevant to how
brands are perceived. More generally, EMU is insignificant as well, and so are standard
gravity variables. This is surprising, for it suggests that even though price diﬀerentials
present a systematic pattern where market segmentation plays a role through exchange
rate volatility, the perception of brands does not. The perception of brands across coun-
tries seems heterogeneous, but the sources of that heterogeneity seem independent from
those aﬀecting price diﬀerences. The finding that there is dispersion in the brand eﬀects
render our results consistent with those of Crucini, Telmer and Zachariadis (2005) who
study a panel of goods prices for European cities. These authors show that there is lit-
tle tendency for individual cities being systematically more expensive in the sense that
there are roughly as many overpriced and underpriced goods when comparing any two
EU countries.

    Therefore, in case tastes are country specific, heterogeneity in preferences seems to
be randomly distributed internationally (at least in a geographic sense). The pattern
we uncovered is consistent with an explanation of diﬀerential brand valuations based on
random taste heterogeneity. But these findings are certainly not suﬃcient to fully dismiss
alternative hypotheses. We could also make the argument that distribution networks,
customer service or advertising are diﬀerent across countries in a way also uncorrelated
with distance. Similarly it is also possible that TV sets are “experience goods” so that
people are hooked on a specific brand. More generally, our findings indicate that branding
is an extremely important aspect when understanding why prices of goods diﬀer across
markets. This aspect, while well recognized in the IO literature, has received very little
attention in international macroeconomics but definitely deserves more attention


8    Conclusion

We use a unique dataset on the raw prices and characteristics of TV sets across European
countries and regions to inform a broad range of empirical questions. We show a large
fraction of international price gaps corresponds to quality diﬀerences. Adjusting for qual-
ity, expensive countries are not the conventional ones: while Switzerland and the UK sell
expensive TV sets for their quality, so do the Czech Republic, Poland and Hungary. We
find absolute price diﬀerences within EMU and between regions are comparable in magni-
tude, but significantly smaller than diﬀerences outside of the Monetary Union. Exchange
rate pass-through is relatively homogeneous across countries, and close to 80 percent.
We show absolute price diﬀerences is positively linked to exchange rate volatility. Inter-
estingly, international price diﬀerences cannot be explained by conventional geographic
measures of transport costs, nor are they smaller for expensive TV sets. Both facts cast
doubt on an explanation of price diﬀerences based on costly arbitrage. In contrast, we
find brand eﬀects play a sizeable role in explaining price diﬀerences. But we are unable to
8 CONCLUSION                                                                          19


explain the cross-country pattern of brand perception using conventional measures of cul-
tural proximity. We therefore conclude brand perception is country-specific, but largely
random. We conjecture this can reflect heterogeneous preferences, unobserved after-sales
quality diﬀerences, or perhaps habit formation.
REFERENCES                                                                            20


References
 [1] Asplund, Marcus and Richard Friberg, 2001, “The Law of One Price in Scandinavian
     Duty-Free Stores”, American Economic Review 91(4), 1072-83.
 [2] Broda, Christian and David Weinstein, 2007, “Understanding International Price
     Diﬀerences Using Barcode Data”, Technical Report, Booth School of Business, Uni-
     versity of Chicago.
 [3] Burstein, Ariel and Nir Jaimovich, 2008, “Understanding Movements in Aggregate
     and Product-Level Real Exchange Rates”, Working paper, UCLA.
 [4] Campa, Jose and Linda Goldberg, 2006. ”Distribution Margins, Imported Inputs, and
     the Sensitivity of the CPI to Exchange Rates,” NBER Working Paper No. 12121.
 [5] Carvalho Carlos and Fernanda Nechio, 2008, Aggregation and the PPP Puzzle in a
     Sticky Price Model, Working Paper Princeton.
 [6] Crucini, Mario J., Chris Telmer and Marios Zachariadis, 2005, “Understanding Eu-
     ropean Real Exchange Rates”, American Economic Review 95(3), 724-38.
 [7] Crucini, Mario J. and Moto Shintani, 2008, ”Persistence in Law-of-One-Price Devi-
     ations: Evidence from Micro-data”, Journal of Monetary Economics 55(3), 629-44.
 [8] Engel, Charles, and John H. Rogers, 1996, “How Wide is the Border?”, American
     Economic Review 86(5), 1112-25.
 [9] Engel, Charles, and John H. Rogers, 2004, “European Market Integration After the
     Euro,” Economic Policy 19, 347-84.
[10] Ghosh, Atish R. and Holger C. Wolf, 1994, “Pricing in International Markets: Lessons
     from the Economist”, NBER working paper no. 4806 J
[11] Goldberg, Pinelopi K. and Rebecca Hellerstein, 2008, “A Structural Approach to
     Explaining Incomplete Pass-Through and Pricing-to-Markets”, American Economic
     Review 98(2), 423-29.
[12] Goldberg, Pinelopi K. and Frank Verboven, 2001, “The Evolution of Price Dispersion
     in European Car Markets”. Review of Economic Studies, pp. 811-848.
[13] Goldberg Pinelopi and Frank Verboven, 2004, ” Cross-Country Price Dispersion and
     the Euro”, Economic Policy 19, 347-384.
[14] Goldberg, Pinelopi K. and Frank Verboven, 2005, “Market Integration and Conver-
     gence to the Law of One Price: Evidence from the European Car Market”, Journal
     of International Economics, 49-73.
REFERENCES                                                                           21


[15] Gopinath, Gita, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Chang-Kai Hsieh, and Nicholas Li, 2009,
     “Estimating the Border Eﬀect: Some New Evidence”, Working paper, Harvard Uni-
     versity.

[16] Gopinath, Gita and Oleg Itskhoki, 2009, ”Frequency of Price Adjustment and Pass-
     through”, Working paper, Harvard University.

[17] Gopinath, Gita, Oleg Itskhoki and Roberto Rigobon, 2009 “Currency Choice and
     Exchange Rate Pass-through”, American Economic Review, forthcoming.

[18] Gopinath, Gita and Roberto Rigobon, 2008, ”Sticky Borders”, Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, May 2008, Volume 123(2).

[19] Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Linda Tesar, “Border Eﬀect or Country Eﬀect? Seat-
     tle May Not Be So Far from Vancouver After All.,” American Economic Journal:
     Macroeconomics,January 2009, 1 (1), 21941.

[20] Ghosh, Atish R. and Holger C. Wolf, “Pricing in International Markets: Lessons From
     The Economist,” Working Paper 4806, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc
     July 1994.

[21] Haskel, Jonathan and Wolf, Holger, 2001, “Why Does the Law of One Price Fail? A
     Case Study.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 103, pp. 545-558.

[22] Imbs, Jean M., Haroon Mumtaz, Morten O. Ravn, and Hélène Rey, 2005, “PPP
     Strikes Back: Aggregation and the Real Exchange Rate”, Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics 120(1), 1-43.

[23] Nakamura, Emi, 2008, “Pass-Through in Retail and Wholesale”, American Economic
     Review 98(2), 430-37.

[24] Nevo, Aviv, 2001, “Measuring Market Power in the Ready-to-Eat Cereal Industry,”
     Econometrica 69(2), 307-42.

[25] Parsley, David and Wei, Shang-Jin, 1996, “Convergence to the Law of One Price
     without Trade Barriers or Currency Fluctuations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     1211-36.

[26] Parsley, David and Wei, Shang-Jin, 2002, “Explaining the Border Eﬀect: The Role of
     Exchange Rate Variability, Shipping Costs and Geography.” Journal of International
     Economics,

[27] Rogers, John H. and Michael Jenkins, 1995, “Haircuts or Hysteresis? Sources of
     Movements in Real Exchange Rates”, Journal of International Economics 38(3/4),
     339-60.
REFERENCES                                                                            22


[28] Rogers John, 2002, “Monetary Union, Price Level Convergence, and Inflation: How
     Close is Europe to the United States?”, International Finance Discussion Papers 740.
     Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

[29] Sala-i-Martin, Xavier, 1996, “The Classical Approach to Convergence Analysis”, Eco-
     nomic Journal 106(437), 1019-36.

[30] Taylor, Alan and Mark Taylor, 2004, ”The Purchasing Power Parity Debate”, Journal
     of Economic Perspectives, Volume 18, Number 4, 135—158

[31] Rogoﬀ Kenneth, 1996, ”The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle”, Journal of Economic
     Literature, 34:2, pp. 647—68.
REFERENCES                                                                             23


   Table 1: Data Coverage
      Country     Time Series Regional Data       N̂T [NT ]
      Germany      1993-2002   N,NW,M,S           310 [399]
       France      1999-2002                      124 [147]
       Spain       1995-2002    S,N,NE,M          151 [315]
        Italy      1999-2002   NW,NE,M,S          146 [147]
    Switzerland∗ 1993-2002         F,G            211 [399]
      Austria      1999-2002                      125 [147]
      Belgium      1999-2002                      119 [147]
         UK        1999-2002                      128 [147]
    Netherlands 1999-2002                         128 [147]
      Portugal     1999-2002                      121 [147]
       Greece      1999-2002                       83 [147]
      Sweden       1999-2002                      122 [147]
      Hungary      1999-2002                      108 [147]
     Czech Rep.    1999-2002                      109 [147]
       Poland      1999-2002                      118 [147]
Notes: * implies data is available every 4 months. N=north, NW=North West, M=Middle/Center,
S=South, F=French Part, G=German Part. N̂T are total available observations, while the
numbers in parenthesis report potential maximum observations.
REFERENCES                                                                              24


   Table 2: Brands and their Origin

    Brand      Country of origin      Purchased by
               (source country)
    Aristona   Netherlands
    Brandt     Germany                Thomson (France)
    B&O        Denmark
    Ferguson   UK
    Grundig    Germany
    Loewe      Germany
    Mivar      Italy
    Philips    Netherlands
    Radiola    France                 Philips (Netherl.)
    Saba       Germany                Thomson (France)
    Schneider  France                 Philips (Netherl.)
    Telefunken Germany                Thomson (France)
    Thomson    France
    Hitachi    Japan
    JVC        Japan
    Orion      Japan
    Panasonic US
    Sanyo      Japan
    Sharp      Japan
    Sony       Japan
    Toshiba    Japan
    Daewoo     South Korea
    LG         South Korea
    Samsung    South Korea
Notes: The information on country of origin and ownership have been obtained from various
issues of the business newspaper ”Les Echos” between 1993 and 2003 and from websites of the
TV manufacturers.
REFERENCES                                                                         25

    Table 3: Long Run Coeﬃcients (Average Prices)
             Country                Long Run Eﬀect
         Switzerland                        1156.222
         Netherlands                        986.6138
    United Kingdom                          944.2861
               Greece                       863.2629
             Belgium                        855.8381
             Portugal                        829.775
              Sweden                        776.5889
              Austria                       769.3651
            Germany                          762.993
                Spain                       753.3398
                 Italy                      722.7224
               France                       712.5274
              Poland                        686.5289
             Hungary                        635.7281
         Czech. Rep.                         625.613
             Average                         805.427
Notes: The long run coeﬃcients are obtained from an AR1 fixed eﬀects model using
average uncorrected prices for each country. The average TV price is constructed using
weights derived from sales.
REFERENCES                                                             26

    Table 4: Hedonic Regression
    Variable                        Coeﬃcient
                                      7.480
    Constant
                                     (0.009)
                                     −0.528
    28 inches
                                     (0.003)
                                     −0.315
    29 inches
                                     (0.005)
                                     −0.257
    Tube
                                     (0.003)
                                     −0.384
    Hertz
                                     (0.003)
                                      41.279
    Source(time) Dummiesa
                                     (0.000)
                                      21.820
    Brand (Country) Dummiesa
                                     (0.000)
                                      6.386
    Country (time) Dummiesa
                                     (0.000)
                                      4.224
    F-test∗
                                     (0.000)
      2
    R                               0.784
    NT                              27760
  ∗
    The F-test is for the equality of brand dummies across countries
  a
     F-Tests
REFERENCES                                                                                  27

    Table 5: Corrected Long Run Coeﬃcients
                                   µ    ¶
                                            β̂i0
         Country                     exp   1−β̂ 1
     Czech. Rep.                           0.020
           Greece                          0.007
      Switzerland                         -0.012
         Hungary                          -0.016
           Poland                         -0.022
         Belgium                          -0.086
           France                         -0.097
         Portugal                         -0.100
            Spain                         -0.115
          Sweden                          -0.125
             Italy                        -0.129
     Netherlands                          -0.151
          Austria                         -0.162
        Germany                           -0.198
          Average                         -0.085
Notes:Ranking using hedonic prices. The table lists the LR Coeﬃcients from the following
                                                                    ∗
fixed eﬀects regression pi,t = λpi,t−1 + αi + vi,t where p = ln( ppuk ) i.e. the hedonic prices
relative to the UK.
REFERENCES                                    28

  Table 6: Hedonic Regression. Pass-through
  Variable                     Coeﬃcient
                                 8.767
  Constant
                                (0.019)
                                 0.174
  Exchange rate
                                (0.003)
                                −0.530
  28 inches
                                (0.007)
                                −0.300
  29 inches
                                (0.009)
                                −0.248
  Tube
                                (0.007)
                                −0.370
  Hertz
                                (0.006)
                                309.41
  Source(time) Dummiesa
                                (0.000)
                                127.95
  Brand (Country) Dummiesa
                                (0.000)
    2
  R̄                           0.97
  NT                           25576
REFERENCES                                                                                                              29


  Table 7: Bilateral Price Dispersion as Measured by Relative Price Variance
       DE       FR        IT       CH         PL        CZ       HU         SE         GR        PT        NL    UK          BE          AT
DE
FR    0.038
 IT   0.033    0.051
CH    0.072    0.089    0.076
PL    0.062    0.043    0.051     0.032
CZ    0.054    0.066    0.031     0.042     0.009
HU    0.039    0.053    0.032     0.019     0.012     0.011
SE    0.044    0.062    0.031     0.049     0.030     0.027     0.021
GR    0.024    0.057    0.028     0.051     0.061     0.032     0.026     0.040
PT    0.035    0.015    0.031     0.045     0.038     0.030     0.025     0.029    0.050
NL    0.026    0.033    0.027     0.090     0.055     0.042     0.037     0.037    0.036     0.025
UK    0.097    0.100    0.087     0.039     0.030     0.028     0.024     0.053    0.079     0.059    0.098
BE    0.036    0.039    0.034     0.044     0.031     0.014     0.028     0.022    0.032     0.022    0.024     0.063
AT    0.010    0.022    0.027     0.057     0.040     0.034     0.026     0.032    0.017     0.031    0.014     0.060     0.020
ES    0.039    0.019    0.042     0.064     0.037     0.062     0.038     0.054    0.035     0.016    0.032     0.080     0.039     0.024


  Table 8: Price Dispersion as Measured by Price Level Diﬀerences
        DE        FR        IT       CH         PL        CZ       HU             SE        GR        PT        NL       UK       BE          AT
DE
FR     -50.3
 IT    -29.6      0.9
CH    -225.4   -132.1    -161.4
PL    -163.6    -98.7    -138.4     -16.0
CZ    -102.4    -69.4     -79.5      1.77       2.7
HU    -113.1    -59.7     -77.0     -15.4      47.4      21.4
SE     -92.3    -54.8     -52.9      68.8      80.5      44.8      46.9
GR     -64.7     -5.0     -22.4     173.8     167.5     116.3     119.6       -3.6
PT     -84.4    -32.8     -22.7     138.4     118.3      55.9      72.7       23.5       -2.5
NL     -16.5     18.3      30.1     258.5     151.4      97.3      95.5       81.3       96.5       83.1
UK    -205.2   -224.2    -178.7     -54.6     -10.2     -41.8     -29.9     -122.2     -156.7     -201.3    -257.9
BE    -103.9     -2.1     -46.6     140.0      88.0      29.3      54.7       12.4       -4.5       -8.2     -78.8      153.8
AT     -35.2      8.5      -5.5     204.3     137.3      85.8      94.6       51.3       20.2       31.0     -36.4      173.4     64.9
ES     -76.2    -32.9     -39.9     124.3     104.9      89.9      65.3       21.9      -28.5      -25.9     -90.8      152.7     -0.3    -34.8
REFERENCES                                                                                         30


   Table 9: Brand Value Regressions

                   volij    volij      |∆ij |   |∆ij |    Bij     Bij
                     (1)      (2)        (1)      (2)     (1)     (2)
      Distance -0.004      -0.003     -0.32     -0.25   -0.14 -0.014
                 (0.004) (0.003)     (0.21) (0.17) (0.08) (0.08)
      Volatility 6.235∗∗           334.43∗∗              1.34
                  (1.60)            (63.43)            (1.75)
                                ∗∗                 ∗∗
          EMU            -0.055               -3.44            -0.001
                          (0.009)              (0.52)         (0.016)
      language -0.006      -0.009     0.398      0.24 -0.026 -0.027
                 (0.008) (0.006)     (0.58) (0.43) (0.017) (0.17)

     R-squared         0.83       0.86        0.62      0.74       0.67       0.66
             N           55         55          55        55         55         55

    Notes: The table below gives the results of regressions of bilateral volatility of relative prices
and of the log of absolute average price diﬀerences on log(distance), exchange rate volatility
(standard deviation of the first diﬀerence of bilateral exchange rates), language and EMU dum-
mies. ∗ and ∗∗ denote significance at the 5%, and 1% levels respectively. Robust standard errors
are shown within brackets. Fixed eﬀects are not reported.
     AR
       IS




                           -0.2
                                  0
                                      0.2
                                            0.4
                                                  0.6
                                                        0.8
                                                              1
                                                                  1.2
                                                                        1.4
                                                                              1.6
              TO
                N
                 A
       BR




                                                                                                    Figure 1
              AN
                D
                       T

                  B&
 FE                    O
    R
          G
              U
                  SO
     G                 N
      R
           U
               ND
                      IG
          LO
            EW
               E
         M
          IV
              AR
                                                                                                               Figure 1: Average Raw Prices




       PH
          IL
             IP
                S
      R
        AD
           IO
              LA

SC            SA
     HN               BA
          EI
            D
TE              ER
     LE               /F
       FU
              NK
                EN
     TH
       O
        M
                  SO
                    N
       H
        IT
               AC




                                                                                    Brand Dummies
                      H
                       I
                  JV
                       C
           O
            R
 PA               IO
   N                N
          AS
               O
                N
                      IC
          SA
                  N
                      YO
          SH
                  AR
                       P
              SO
                N
      TO       Y
         SH
            IB
      D        A
        AE
           W
            O
              O

                      LG
     SA
       M
              SU
                   N
                    G
                                                    AP
                                                       R
                                                         99
                                                             -M




                                                                         0.7
                                                                                 0.8
                                                                                                    0.9
                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                              1.1
                                                                                                                                                                  1.2
                                                                                                                                                                        1.3

                                                     JU         AY
                                                        N
                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 3




                                                          99        99
                                                    AU -JU
                                                        G         L9
                                                          99         9
                                                    O        -S
                                                      C         EP
                                                       T9           99
                                                           9-
                                                    D         N
                                                      EC OV
                                                          99       99
                                                    FE        -JA
                                                       B0        N
                                                           0       00
                                                    AP -MA
                                                       R          R
                                                         00         00
                                                             -M
                                                     JU         AY
                                                        N           00
                                                          00
                                                    AU -JU
                                                        G         L0
                                                          00         0
                                                    O        -S
                                                      C         EP
                                                       T0           00
                                                           0-
                                                    D         N
                                                      EC OV
                                                          00       00
                                                    FE -JA
                                                       B0        N
                                                           1-      01
                                                    AP MA
                                                       R          R
                                                         01         01
                                                             -M
                                                     JU         AY
                                                        N           01
                                                          01




Figure 4: σ-Convergence Inside and Outside of EMU
                                                    AU -JU
                                                        G
                                                                                                                                                                              Hedonic Prices




                                                                  L0
                                                          01         1
                                                    O        -S
                                                      C         EP
                                                       T0
                                                           1-       01
                                                    D         N
                                                      EC OV
                                                          01       01
                                                    FE -JA
                                                       B0        N
                                                           2-      02
                                                    AP MA
                                                       R          R
                                                         02         02
                                                             -M
                                                     JU         AY
                                                        N           02
                                                          02
                                                    AU -JU
                                                        G         L0
                                                          02         2
                                                             -S
                                                                EP
                                                                    02
                                                                                                                                      Italy




                                                                               United
                                                                                                                                               France




                                                                                                      Greece
                                                                                                               Sweden




                                                                               Belgium
                                                                                         Portugal


                                                                               Kingdom
                                                                                                                                                        Germany




                                                                                                                        Switzerland
Figure 5: International and Inter-Regional σ-Convergence




Figure 6 (Italy, Spain, Germany)
Figure 7

                                                Level and Dispersion of TV Prices

                  5000


                  4500


                  4000


                  3500


                  3000
  Average Price




                  2500


                  2000


                  1500


                  1000


                  500


                    0
                         0   0.2                0.4                  0.6               0.8                 1                  1.2
                                                           Coefficient Of Variation




Notes: The figure is constructed in the following way. There are 300 types of TV’s in each country. For each type i the price is
averaged over time. Then, for each average price, the dispersion (coefficient of variation) and the mean is calculated across
countries. The figure plots the relationship between these two for all available [i].
Figure 8


                                       Dispersion of Brand Effects across Countries

   1


  0.8


  0.6


  0.4


  0.2


   0


 -0.2


 -0.4


 -0.6


 -0.8
                                                  IC




                                                            YO




                                                                    P




                                                                           Y




                                                                                                   LG
                         C




                                                                                     A




                                                                                                             G
                   I




                                   N
          E




                                                                                               O
                  H




                                                                  AR




                                                                          N




                                                                                   IB
                       JV
        EW




                                 IO




                                                                                                            N
                                                                                            O
                                              N
                 AC




                                                                        SO
                                                        N




                                                                                                          SU
                                                                                 SH




                                                                                           W
                                              O
                             R




                                                                 SH
                                                       SA
    LO




              IT




                                            AS
                             O




                                                                                          AE




                                                                                                         M
                                                                                TO
              H




                                                                                                        SA
                                           N




                                                                                         D
                                        PA




Notes: Sample restricted to the brands present in all our 15 countries.
Figure 9
