NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENDOWMENTS, FISCAL FEDERALISM, AND THE COST OF CAPITAL FOR STATES:
EVIDENCE FROM BRAZIL, 1891-1930
André C. Martínez Fritscher
Aldo Musacchio
Working Paper 15411
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15411

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2009

Martínez is an economist at the Banco de México. Musacchio is an associate professor and Marvin
Bower fellow at Harvard Business School (corresponding author, amusacchio@hbs.edu). We would
like to acknowledge the helpful comments of Lee Alston, Gaelle Brachet, Alan Dye, Zephyr Frank,
Andrés Gallo, Aurora Gomez-Galvarriato, Stephen Haber, Lakshmi Iyer, Robert Margo, Noel Maurer,
Kris Mitchener, David Moss, Steve Nafziger, Alberto Ortiz, Daniele Paserman, Sergio Silva, William
Summerhill III, Matt Weinzierl, Eric Werker, and participants of the Harvard Economic History Tea
Seminar, the Economics Department Seminar at Williams College, the Empirical Microeconomics
Lunch Seminar, the Microeconomics Workshop at Boston University, and of the Conference “New
Frontiers of Latin American Economic History” at Harvard University. Special thanks to Rodrigo
Soares and Leonardo Monastério, who kindly shared their databases with us. Funding from this paper
came from the Research and Faculty Development Fund, Harvard Business School. All errors are
responsibility of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by André C. Martínez Fritscher and Aldo Musacchio. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Endowments, Fiscal Federalism, and the Cost of Capital for States: Evidence from Brazil,
1891-1930
André C. Martínez Fritscher and Aldo Musacchio
NBER Working Paper No. 15411
October 2009
JEL No. H4,H74,N0,N16,N96
ABSTRACT
In the last few years there has been an explosion in the number of papers that aim to explain what
determines country risk (defined as the difference between the yield of a sovereign’s bonds and the
risk free rate). In this paper, we contribute to the discussion using by showing that Brazilian states
with natural endowments that allowed them to export commodities that were in high demand (e.g.,
rubber and coffee) between 1891 and 1930 ended up having higher revenues per capita and, thus, lower
cost of capital. The link between exports and state government revenues works in the Brazilian case
because of the extreme form of fiscal federalism that the Brazilian government adopted in the Constitution
of 1891, giving state governments the sole right to tax exports. We create a panel of state debt risk
premia and a series of state level fiscal variables and we show, using OLS, that having specific commodities
gave states access capital in better terms (i.e., lower risk premium) in international markets. We also
confirm our results that states with better commodities had lower risk premia when we use export
price indices for each of the states as instruments for state revenue per capita. ¸

André C. Martínez Fritscher
Banco de Mexico
Av. 5 de Mayo No. 18
Col. Centro
C.P.06059
México
and Boston University
amartinez@banxico.org.mx
Aldo Musacchio
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 279
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
amusacchio@hbs.edu

Introduction
In the last few years there has been an explosion in the number of papers that aim to explain
what determines country risk. Using the difference between the yield of a sovereign’s bonds
and the risk free rate (usually defined as the yield of British bonds), these papers have tried to
explain what macroeconomic or political variables explain more of the variation in country risk
or “risk premium” across emerging markets. In this paper, we contribute to the discussion
exploring the following question: do endowments matter to determine the cost of capital for a
country or state? We study the determinants of the risk premium of the bonds issued by
Brazilian states between 1891 and 1930, a period of extreme decentralization of fiscal revenues
and expenditures in Brazil. We find that risk premia are highly correlated with state public
revenue per capita. Because these revenues came, to a large extent, from the taxes states levied
on commodity exports, we argue that endowments mattered to determine the cost of capital for
states. We define endowments as the set of natural resources (such as soil types), climatic
conditions, and geographic variables (e.g., altitude) that constrain the kind of crops a farmer
within a given state can produce. In fact, the relationship between state public revenue per
capita and risk premiums is also strong when we instrument for state public revenue per capita
using a series of price indices of commodity exports by state.
In the literature of sovereign risk there is no consensus as to what matters to determine
the cost of capital for governments.

For instance, according to North and Weingast,

constitutional changes that limit the power of the ruler (e.g., by establishing clear checks and
balances) should induce bondholders to reduce their perception of sovereign risk given that
with more veto players, there is less probability of default or expropriation of debtholders.1
Bordo and Rockoff show that adherence to the gold standard worked as a “good housekeeping
seal of approval,” reducing the cost of capital for sovereigns because it induced governments to
follow prudent fiscal and monetary policy.2 Ferguson and Shularick find that beyond fiscal

D.C. North and B.R. Weingast, `Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution of Institutions
Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England´, Journal of Economic History, 49 (1989), pp.
803-832.
2 M. Bordo H. Rockoff, `The Gold Standard as a 'Good Housekeeping seal of Approval'´ Journal of
Economic History, 56 (1996), pp. 389-428.
1

2

variables what mattered to reduce yields was whether the borrowing country was part of the
British Empire.3 Sussman and Yafeh and Mauro, Sussman, and Yafeh find that the perception
of country risk of foreign investors in the emerging markets of the late nineteenth century
changed significantly mostly when countries adopted the gold standard or when they were
victorious in a major war.4 Also, Landon-Lane and Oosterlinck find that investors of Russian
bonds adjusted their perception of risk significantly when news about World War I changed
their expectations of repayment.5
Flandreau and Zumer give more importance to fiscal factors than to political institutions
or the adoption of the gold standard. For them, the main factor determining the cost of capital
for sovereigns between 1880 and 1913 was their fiscal capacity to pay (e.g., interest or debt
service over government revenues).6
For the case of Brazil, Abreu and Summerhill have paid close attention to the issue of
capacity to pay and the spread of Brazilian sovereign bonds relative to UK bonds. Summerhill
examines the capacity to pay of the central government between 1822 and 1889. He argues that
during this period the central government of Brazil was able to generate a credible commitment
to repay its debts because the political system (a constitutional monarchy) had many veto
players preventing any attempt of default.7 Abreu suggests that the central government of
Brazil was not that great of a debtor after 1898 and estimates the actual rates of return for
holders of Brazilian debt in foreign currency. He suggests that, in fact, some states had lower
spreads (lower default risk) than the central government because they exported precious

3 Ferguson,

Niall and Moritz Schularick, `The Empire Effect: The Determinants of Country Risk in the
First Age of Globalization, 1880–1913´, Journal of Economic History, 66 (2006), pp. 283–312.
4 N. Sussman and Y. Yafeh, `Institutions, Reforms, and Country Risk: Lessons from Japanese Government
Debt in the Meiji Era´, Journal of Economic History, 60 (2000), pp. 442–467; and P. Mauro, N. Sussman and
Y. Yafeh. Emerging Markets and Financial Globalization: Sovereign Bond Spreads in 1870–1913 and Today
(Oxford and New York, 2006).
5 J. Landon-Lane and K. Oosterlinck, `Hope springs eternal: French bondholders and the Soviet
Repudiation (1915-1919)´, Review of Finance, 10 (2006), pp. 507-535
6 M.

7

Flandreau and F. Zumer, The Making of Global Finance: 1880-1913 (Paris, 2004).

W. Summerhill III. ‘Credible Commitment in the Tropics: Sovereign Borrowing in Imperial Brazil, 1822–

1889´, presented at the conference New Frontiers in Latin American Economic History, Harvard
University, May 16-17, 2008.

3

commodities like coffee. Moreover, he highlights the fact that rubber-exporting states like Pará
defaulted in the 1920s after the price of rubber plummeted.8
We extend those studies by looking at the debt that Brazilian states issued in
international markets in more detail. We use fiscal capacity to pay as the main explanatory
variable of the default risk or the risk premium of the bonds issued by states (we define fiscal
capacity to pay as state revenue per capita). We show that thanks to the Constitution of 1891
states were able to tax the export of commodities and increased their ability to service their
debts. Since some states had commodities that had higher prices than others, we explain the
variation in the cost of capital, among other things, using the variation in the individual states’
capacity to collect export tax revenues. We do not assign too much weight to the states’
willingness to pay because domestic elites did not have to face the burden of heavy tax
collection. In general, most states obtained the majority of their funding from export taxes and
the incidence of those taxes fell on consumers (e.g., taxes on coffee and rubber exports).
Our explanation of how endowments matter is pretty straightforward. Given our
definition of endowments as the conditions that determine what kind of commodities can be
produced and exported in a determined geographical region, we divide our argument into two
parts. The first part is about how endowments constrained and partly determined the kind of
commodities Brazilian states produced and the amounts of those commodities states exported.
The second part of the argument is about how the differences in commodity exports at the state
level generated marked differences in the cost of capital for state governments.
First, farmers in Brazilian states tried to maximize their income through a mix of crops
according to two constraints: the prices of commodities in international markets and the
limitations to choose their “portfolio” of commodities according to the natural endowments of
the state. That is, even if coffee was the most valuable commodity a Brazilian farmer could
produce and export, only farmers in high hills with temperate weather and specific soil types
could actually produce coffee. Thus, rather than taking endowments as given and as having
effects only after the interaction with colonial institutions, as has been the case in the literature

8

M. Abreu, `Brazil as a debtor, 1824-1931´, Economic History Review, 59 (2006), pp. 765-787

4

on endowments and institutions (e.g., as in Engerman and Sokoloff; Bruhn and Gallego;
Naritomi, Soares, and Assunção),

9

we view the importance of endowments as changing over

time according to the demand for international commodities (mostly determined in
international markets). For instance, Brazilian states with the capacity to produce sugar may
have had valuable endowments in the 17th and 18th centuries, but by the nineteenth century new
sugar producers abroad drove the price down and created a long decline in the economic
supremacy of sugar states in Brazil. In the second half of the nineteenth century commodities
such as coffee, rubber, mate, and cotton had unexpected booms that provided advantages for
rapid growth to some states over others.
The second part of our argument is that states did not take advantage of the boom in
commodity exports until after the Constitution of 1891 gave states the autonomy to pursue their
own policies and tax their own exports. In fact, this constitution established a federalist system
with extreme fiscal decentralization.10 Between 1891 and 1930, states were in charge of collecting
most taxes, including taxes on exports, while the federal government taxed imports and paid
for national public goods like defense. Since there was very limited redistribution among states
or from the central government to other states, the capacity of states to issues debt and to pay
for it depended heavily on export taxes each state collected.
Therefore, our objective is to show that revenues per capita determined to a large extent
the perceptions that investors had of the default risk implicit in the bonds that states sold in
international markets and that these revenues were determined by the kind of commodity states
could export. We construct a panel of state level data with annual observations of commodity
exports, population, debt per capita, and fiscal revenues per capita, as well as estimates of the
risk premium (difference in the yield of each state’s bonds relative to the yield of British

S. Engerman and K. Sokoloff , ‘Factor Endowments, Institutions, and Differential Paths of Growth´ in S.
Haber (ed.), Why Latin America Fell Behind (Stanford, 1997); M. Bruhn and F. Gallego, ‘Good, Bad, and
Ugly Colonial Activities: Studying Development Across the Americas´, MIT mimeo (2007); and J.
Naritomi, R.R. Soares and J.J. Assunção, ‘Rent Seeking and the Unveiling Of 'De Facto' Institutions:
Development and Colonial Heritage Within Brazil´, NBER Working paper no. 13545 (2007).
10 See André C. Martinez Fritscher. ‘Bargaining for Fiscal Control: Tax Federalism in Brazil and Mexico,
1870-1940,´ Boston University, Ph. D. dissertation (2009)
9

5

consols). We estimate the determinants of risk premium (a proxy for “country risk”) using
different panel estimation approaches, including a set of instrumental variables estimates.
Finally, our paper contributes to the literature in another way. We think there could be
both serial correlation and a potential endogeneity problem in our ordinary least squares (OLS)
estimates. The potential endogeneity problem could come because before 1930, and in particular
before 1914, the capacity to collect revenues depended to a large extent on the capacity that
countries had to export and that capacity was, in turn, dependent on the infrastructure of each
nation. Since most of the infrastructure was financed through debt issues, we think the cost of
capital in a way determined the level of revenues per capita. This problem is obviously hard to
solve, but by considering the fact that fiscal capacity was to a large extent determined by the
kind of commodities states could export, we device an instrumental variables approach that
treats the export mix of states as exogenous and uses the changes in prices as a way to explain
fiscal revenues per capita at the state level. The instrumental variables approach reinforces our
findings that commodity exports determined capacity to pay and investor’s perceptions of
country risk, and support our general conclusion that endowments mattered to determine the
risk premium of the states’ debt before 1930. Furthermore, the regressions with instrumental
variables help us control for possible serial correlation.
The paper is divided into four additional sections. Section II provides a brief explanation
of the Constitution of 1891 and the configuration of the fiscal system in Brazil. Section III,
presents the methodology. Section IV presents the findings and Section V concludes.

Fiscal Federalism in Brazil, 1821–1930
In this section we explain why we look at the period 1891-1930 and explain why the yields
of Brazilian state bonds during this period can be treated as independent observations. We
highlight two major factors. First, that Brazil did not have a decentralized fiscal system until
after 1889, and more formally after the Constitution of 1891. Second, we show that between 1891
and 1930 there were marked differences in the level of revenues per capita, debt per capita, and
the cost of capital among Brazilian states. In the next section we explain how we will exploit
those differences to run our estimates of the determinants of the cost of capital for states in
Brazil.
6

The fiscal system of Brazil before 1889 was very centralized and depended heavily on trade
taxes. After independence in 1821 Brazil had a constitutional monarchy, with a two-tiered
parliament, and a council of ministers running the central government. The constitution of 1824
gave the central government the right to tax imports and exports. As a consequence, the
imperial government collected around 80-85% of the total public revenue in Brazil, with 50% of
the total revenue coming from tariffs on imports.11 For instance, the Ministry of Agriculture and
Public Works (in charge of around one quarter of the federal budget in 1888), responsible for
“improvements” such as railroads, ports, colonization, and so forth,12 in 1888 spent 66% of its
total budget in the Rio de Janeiro area and only 3.14% in the state of Sao Paulo.13 The northeast
and northern regions also contributed more than they received. The south was a net beneficiary,
receiving large amounts of money to finance military bases on the borders with Argentina and
Uruguay.
The power of provincial governments was weak until 1889 as these governments had little
control over fiscal revenues. The provinces were not allowed to collect import taxes or interprovincial trade taxes, but implicitly they had the right to collect export taxes and in practice
they also collected interstate taxes.
In 1889, a republican movement overthrew the emperor in a peaceful revolution and
established a provisional government in charge of drafting a new constitution. The provisional
government created a commission of legal specialists to write the first draft of a new
constitution. This first draft was then sent to the Constitutional Congress for a final revision and
approval.14 One of the most important issues discussed at all levels was the distribution of tax
revenues among the federation and the states. The debate did not revolve around the issue of
whether Brazil should be a federalist republic, but how decentralized the federalist system was
going to be.

Brazil, Ministerio da Agricultura, Finanças da União e dos Estados 1822-1913 (Rio de Janeiro, 1917).
A. Villela.’ Distribuição Regional das Receitas e Despesas do Governo Central no II Reinado, 18441889´, Instituto de Pesquisas Econômicas, 37 (2007), p. 247-274.
13 Martinez Fritscher. ‘Bargaining for Fiscal Control: Tax Federalism in Brazil and Mexico, 1870-1940´.
14 W. P. Costa, ‘A Questão Fiscal na Transformação Republicana: Continuidades e Descontinuidades´,
Economia e Sociedade, 10 (1998), pp. 141-174.
11
12

7

After intense negotiations the Constitutional Assembly passed a new Constitution on
February 24, 1891, which gave states the right to tax exports, to have their own armed forces,
and to organize gubernatorial elections.15 By not including any limitations to the amount of debt
states could issue, the Constitution implicitly gave states the right to issue debt domestically
and abroad.16 Below we explain the implications that these legal changes had for the capacity
that different states had to collect taxes and issue debt.
The Decentralization of State Tax Revenues
After the 1891 Constitution, states relied on export taxes as an important source of revenue.
State public revenues from export taxes represented on average around 60% of total revenue
between 1914 and 1916. States such as Espírito Santo and Rio Grande do Norte collected more
than 85% of their revenues from export taxes. São Paulo increased its collection capacity per
capita three times after 1891, collecting almost 40% of what all the states collected with only half
of the total exports and less than one fifth of the population. In contrast, Góias and Rio Grande
do Sul collected only 24% and 29% of their revenues from export taxes.
The decentralization of trade taxes generated a marked inequality in the capacity that states
had to collect taxes. In Table 1 we can see the significant variation in state revenue per capita
among the different Brazilian states. The average revenue per capita was 9.5 mil reis (about $3
dollars), but some states collected over 20 mil reis per capita and a large number of states
collected less than 4.5 mil reis per capital. We can also see that the states that benefited the most
from decentralization were those states with the largest exports per capita. These are states

Costa, ‘A Questão Fiscal na Transformação Republicana: Continuidades e Descontinuidades´.
Love points out that even some of the states that wanted more fiscal autonomy supported a relatively
strong central government (with the right to collect all import duties) because they understood the
benefits of having a national authority in charge of monetary policy, negotiating trade treaties with other
countries, and backing states on certain programs with positive spillovers across states (e.g., the coffee
valorization program). See J.L. Love, ‘Federalismo y Regionalismo en Brasil, 1889-1937´, in M.
Carmagnani, (coord.), Federalismos Latinoamericanos: Mexico/Brasil/Argentina (México, 1993).

15
16

8

such as São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro state, Paraná, Espírito Santo, which exported coffee, and
Amazonas and Pará, which exported rubber.17
Once the state governments got the right to tax exports they did not raise the level of export
duties, they left them unchanged and instead focused on reshuffling the revenue sharing
schemes they had with the central government. For instance, in São Paulo and Minas Gerais the
state governments charged a tax rate for coffee exports of 11%. Before the Constitution of 1891
the central government collected 7% out of the 11% and left 4% for state governments. After the
Constitution the entire 11% was kept at the state level. 18
Most of the export taxes were ad valorem (see Table 2). Therefore, what really mattered for
the capacity to pay of state governments was that the total value of exports would go up. Table
2 shows the significant variation in tax rates for commodity exports (by type of commodity),
which most likely reflect the differences in the elasticity of demand for each of the commodities.
Rubber, with a highly inelastic demand, had the highest export tax level. Fernandes estimates,
in a static exercise, that rubber states charged taxes that were below the optimal to maximize
welfare at the state level (assuming rubber-exporting states could have behaved like a
monopoly).19

20

Yet the variation in tax rates for the same commodity among different states is

not that large and mostly seems to compensate for the differences in the cost of transportation.
In states in which it has more expensive to export rubber, because of transportation costs or
relative scarcity of rubber trees, taxes were relatively lower than in the states with abundant
resources and closer to the ocean. Amazonas (AM) or Pará (PA), where the tax rates on rubber

17 Paraná had coffee as its main export in the 1920s, it was mainly a mate tea exporter in the first two
decades of our study.
18 See J.L. Love, São Paulo in the Brazilian Federation, 1889-1937 (Stanford, 1980); and S. Topik, The Political
Economy of the Brazilian State, 1889-1930 (Austin, 1987).
19 It is not clear that in a dynamic game states would have wanted to charge higher taxes. Brazil was
losing its comparative advantage to new producers in Southeast Asia and higher tax rates could have
sped up the process. In fact, one could speculate whether Brazil would have lost its competitive edge in
natural rubber so fast (around 1910).
20 F.T. Fernandes, ‘Taxation and Welfare: The Case of Rubber in the Brazilian Amazon (1870-1910)´
mimeo presented at the 69th meeting of the Economic History Association Meeting(2009).

9

exports were 20% and 22%,21 there was a slight difference in taxes to compensate for distance to
the ocean.
There is also some evidence of variation in tax rates over time. For instance, some states
moved tax rates in a countercyclical way. The governments of Minas Gerais and São Paulo
lowered the tax rates on coffee exports from 11% to 9% to increase the volume of sales when
international coffee prices declined.
In sum, the fiscal system of Brazil was decentralized after the Constitution of 1891
provided states with the capacity to tax exports and we will show that those differences in tax
revenues were translated in differences in the cost of capital for state governments.
Yet, the state’s capacity to pay was to a large extent determined by the state’s
commodity exports. In turn, the capacity to export specific commodities was constrained by the
natural resources of each of the states. We argue that planters, farmers, and cattle ranchers in
each state could choose what to produce and export, but were constrained by the natural
endowments of the places where they produced commodities. For instance, coffee could only be
produced in places with high altitude, temperate weather, and with specific types of yellow soil
(latossolos amarelos). Therefore, natural endowments determined what could be produced and
economic agents maximized their income according to their limitations of land, weather, and
altitude.
In Table 3 we show that crop specialization (using the share of each commodity to total
exports) was highly correlated with soil types and geographic and climatic variables (Panel A).
For instance, states that had rubber as a large share of their exports also had high rainfall, high
temperatures, low altitude, and were close to the equator. In fact, natural rubber could not be
grown in plantations, so the constraints were even stricter, i.e., rubber exporters could tap
rubber only in the places where it grew naturally. For coffee the most important factor was high
altitude, low sun light, and lower temperatures (see Panel B of Table 3). That is, there were
many of these geographic, exogenous variables determining how much a state could export

21 J.

Lyra, Economia e Finanças dos Estados do Brasil, 1913 (Parahyba 1914).
10

and, in fact, the geographic variables are significantly correlated with public revenue per capita
at the state level (see Panel C of Table 3).
The Variation in the Cost of Capital for Brazilian States
The variation across states in terms of the cost of capital and the amounts of debt issued
followed a clear pattern: states with larger exports per capita were able to sell more debt in
international markets and paid lower interest rates for those loans. Table 1 shows data on the
distribution of debt (or bond issues) by state. The table depicts clearly the concentration of debt
issues in four states: São Paulo, Minas Gerais, the Federal District (in Rio de Janeiro), and Bahia.
All of these states, except Bahia, had coffee as their largest export. In fact, these were the states
with the largest populations in the Brazilian federation, so we would expect them to have a
higher demand for external financing to pay for infrastructure and other improvements. In fact,
in our multivariate analysis we control for population and also scale state revenues by
population. The second thing to note in Table 1 is that the column with data for the average
year of bond issues per state shows that most debt issues happened between 1909 and 1917,
perhaps because this was the peak period for international capital flows to Latin America.22
Figure 2 shows that Brazilian states managed to place bonds in at least four of the largest
financial markets of the time. Almost half of the bond issues were denominated in pounds
sterling and traded in the London Stock Exchange. States issued another 24% of the total debt in
French francs and traded the bonds in Paris and Brussels. Finally, in the 1920s, many of the new
state bond issues were denominated in US dollars and were traded in the New York Stock
Exchange.
As a product of the international supply of funds and the conditions that allowed
Brazilian states to borrow we find significant variation in the cost of capital for states. Table 4
shows the variation in the cost of capital for states between 1890 and 1931 (the cost of capital is
estimated as the bond’s coupon rate over the average price of the bond minus the yield of

See I. Stone. The Global Export of Capital From Great Britain, 1865-1914: A Statistical Survey (New York,
1999); and M. Obstfeld and A. Taylor. Global Capital Markets. Integration, Crisis, and Growth (Cambridge,
2004).

22

11

British bonds). It is important to note that there is significant variation over time and across
states. Much of the variation in cost of capital across states, we argue, can be captured by the
variation in the crop specialization (see Panel C of Table 3). The variation over time, which is
high, is a product of the variation in the price of the main commodities exported by each of the
states. Thus, the logic is that states specialized in certain commodities, the prices of those
commodities fluctuated over time and the combination of both determined the capacity to pay
of the states. The willingness to pay of states, that is the ad valorem tax levels, increased when
prices were higher (in commodities like rubber or coffee that high relatively inelastic demands)
and decreased during bad times. For other commodities we do not have much evidence of
change over time.
We study the cost of capital for state debt issued abroad for two reasons. First investor
perceptions of capacity to pay were based on their informed estimates of the fiscal capacity of
states, the information they had about states’ exports, and, indirectly, on the kinds of natural
endowments the states had. The prospectuses of state bonds contained information on what the
funds were going to be used for and explained what sources of revenues backed each of the
issues. Second, states issued the bulk of their debt abroad, about 66% of their total debt (see
Table 5). Third, the cost of capital (the spread over the risk-free rate, i.e., the UK consols rate)
abroad reflected the cost of capital that state governments in Brazil faced to pay for large public
infrastructure projects. This is because the largest share of the capital obtained through foreign
bond issues was used to pay for infrastructure (18%) and other urban improvements, such as
waterworks, sewage, and other projects (39%). Also, a large part of all bond issues abroad were
used to roll over past debts (39%) (see Figure 1).
Now, one may think that because we are excluding domestic bond issues we are not
taking into account the bond issues of all the states or we are biasing our estimates to look only
at the bonds issues by states that had significant exports of commodities. Table 5 shows that the
domestic bond market was also dominated by the same states that issued most of the bonds in
international markets. Therefore, the data for domestic issues and our database of foreign bond
issues have similar biases. Moreover, we collected all of the state bond quotations available in
the Rio de Janeiro Stock Exchange and tried adding them to the database. The problem that we
get is that most of the data of bond quotations that was regular was for bonds that were also
12

traded abroad, so adding the quotations from the domestic stock market to our database yields
a net addition of only 20 observations. This is because there are states like Sergipe and Góias
that issued bonds that were only traded for one year. In the same way, Paraíba, Rio Grande do
Norte, and Santa Catarina had regular trading of their bonds only during 10 years, in the 1920s,
when there was more volatility in the market.
We also have data for municipal bonds traded in Rio de Janeiro and London. Yet we
believe this should not be included in the present analysis because investors estimated the price
of these bonds in a completely different way. The main sources of revenue for municipalities
were taxes on property or property transfers and a variety of stamp taxes. Moreover, it is not
clear what relationship we should expect to find between state and municipal bonds. That is,
they may not be comparable at all. In fact, in some cases municipal bond prices were more
volatile than the state bond prices (e.g., in Belém vs. Pará and Manaus vs. Amazonas), but in
others municipal bonds were more stable and apparently perceived as less risky than their state
counterparts (e.g., Porto Alegre vs. Rio Grande do Sul).
We believe that the investors who were trading Brazilian state bonds separated the risk
implicit in each state from the risk implicit in the debt of other states, much like they separated
the yields of different countries. We have found that in specialized publications, such as
L’Êconomiste Europeen, there were sections detailing the state of public finances and the level of
exports by state in Brazil, even disaggregated by product. In fact, yields for different states are
relatively independent from one another (see Table 4). There does not seem to be any contagion
effect after one of the state defaults. For instance, Espirito Santo (ES) defaulted in 1900 and in
that same year (and the following) the yield of bonds issued by the Federal District and São
Paulo actually go down. In the 1920s many states in the north of Brazil defaulted on their debts
and the yields implicit in their bonds skyrocketed without generating any negative effects on
the yields of bonds of other states in the south of Brazil. The yields of states like Rio de Janeiro
(RJ), São Paulo (SP), the Federal District (DF) or Minas Gerais (MG) do not seem to react to
those events.
In our view, investors were willing to lend at a lower cost when states had higher tax
revenues per capita because they had a lower probability of default. Higher tax revenues per
capita were usually a consequence of higher exports per capita at the state level. Table 6 shows
13

that states that had higher revenue per capita also had lower spreads. This table shows the
summary statistics of our complete dataset, separating the data into two categories, rich states
(with revenues per capita above the median) and poor states (those below the median).
According to the last columns there are significant differences in cost of capital and state
revenues per capita among rich and poor states, especially in the size of the variation around
the mean of the former. Richer states had a very tight distribution of spreads (cost of capital),
with a mean of 0.04 (400 basis points) and a standard deviation of 0.04 (also 400 basis points),
while poor states had a mean of 0.06 (600 basis points) and a standard deviation of 0.13 (1300
basis points). In order to test if the relationship between revenues and cost of capital holds in
the next section we explain the methodology we use to conduct multivariate analysis using
panel data.

Data and Methodology
Our objective is to study the determinants of the cost of capital of Brazilian states
between 1891 and 1930. In particular, we are interested in looking at the effects of state public
revenues per capita on the cost of capital both over time and at the cross-section level. Thus we
use panel data techniques controlling for a series of state characteristics, fixed effects, and time
dummies.
Compiling fiscal and debt data for the different states of the Brazilian federation
between 1890 and 1930 required us to get statistics from a variety of archival sources and
published materials. The Methodological Appendix describes in detail the sources used to
estimate the key variables for the present analysis. Below is an explanation of how we construct
our main dependent variables and how we design the empirical approach we use to examine
the determinants of cost of capital for Brazilian states.
Main Dependent Variable: Cost of Capital or Spreads (Yields)
Since the yield of the bonds issued by Brazilian states is our main dependent variable it
is worth explaining clearly how we estimate it. So far, we have constructed two measures for
yields, one is the coupon yield, or the yield implicit in bond quotations according to the coupon
payments of that bond. That is, the yield is just the coupon payment of a bond over the average
14

price of that bond in a given year. For example, a 4% bond with face value of £100 quoted at £80
would have a yield of 5% (because 4/80= 0.05). Since part of the return is to compensate for the
opportunity cost of investors if they had invested in a risk-free asset, the yields we report
subtract the average annual yield for UK consols. In that way the yields we study reflect the risk
premium investors demanded to buy debt issued by Brazilian states.
This method of estimating the yields or spreads, however, assumes that bonds are
perpetuities. According to Mauro, Sussman, and Yafeh, “this approximation was reasonable,
given that the bonds were usually of very long maturity [in our state bonds sample the average
maturity is 33 years] , and probably seemed natural to the large proportion of investors who
were rentiers living off the fixed income provided by the bonds” (p.41).23 Moreover, these
authors point out that the most sophisticated methods for calculating exact yield were
developed until the second half of the twentieth century and that investors usually estimated
their yields using prices and coupon rates. In fact, for Brazilian bonds it is hard to think that
investors cared about yield to maturity since the federal government postponed repayments in
1898 and 1914.24 That is, we believe investors had a short investment horizon.
Our second measure of yield is an approximation of the yield to maturity of the debt
issued by Brazilian states. Yield to maturity is a rate which reflects the flow of all the revenue
(the gains—or losses—from bond appreciation—or depreciation—plus interests) derived from a
given bond, relative to the price that investors pay for the bond today. To estimate it we first
subtract the current bond value (i.e., its current price) from its par value in order to obtain the
discount that investors get when they buy the bond. Then, we assume that the profit (loss) from
purchasing a bond today is only realized at maturity, when the bond is redeemed. We also
assume that the profit (loss) of purchasing a bond today and having it redeemed at face value
tomorrow is realized evenly over time. So if an investor buys a $100 bond at $80 today and the
bond matures in 20 years, we assume the investor makes $20 of profit over 20 years and for
simplicity we just assume the return from capital gains is $1 per year. We then add to this gain
the profit an investor would make from the actual annual coupon payment of the bond, which

Mauro, Sussman and Yafeh, Emerging Markets and Financial Globalization: Sovereign Bond Spreads in
1870–1913 and Today.
24Abreu, `Brazil as a debtor, 1824-1931.´
23

15

is simply the coupon rate multiplied by the par value of the bond. This gives us the annual
return for the investor, which we then divide by the current bond price to obtain the yield to
maturity.
Given that we need the maturity to be able to estimate yield to maturity and we do not
have this information for all the bonds, our sample of yields of state bonds using this approach
is smaller than that for the yield calculated by using coupon rates only. Moreover using the
sample of bond yields estimated using yield to maturity introduces another bias. Since many of
the poorest states in Brazil could not issue bonds with long maturities (or at least we do not
observe those), we end up estimating really high yield to maturity rates for those states when
they were sold at a discount from par value. Therefore, our estimates with yield to maturity are
biased in favor of our hypothesis that richer states faced lower cost of capital. Since the first set
of estimates using coupon yields do not bias the data in favor of our hypothesis, we make most
of our inferences using those estimates and present some estimates using yield to maturity as a
robustness check.
Empirical Strategy
The first step in our empirical approach is to address one of the biases in our data. In
Table 1 we show that only 15 out of 20 Brazilian states issued foreign debt. More importantly,
around half of the bonds issued in foreign markets, representing more than 70 % of the capital
raised by states, were issued by 4 states. Thus, one may argue that there is a bias in the data
because a few states issued most of the debt and some states did not even issue foreign debt. In
Appendix A (Tables A1 and A2 we address this bias by running simple specifications of Cox
Hazard or Probit models for which we create a dummy variable that is equal to one on the year
when a state government issued a bond in international markets). That is, any state-year
observation will take the value of 1 if the state issued a new foreign bond on that year and zero
for all the other years. We find that, both in the Cox Hazard (Table A1) and the Probit (Table
A2) estimates, having higher tax revenue per capita made states more likely to issue more debt
in any given year. That is, the bias in our data goes in the same direction of our hypothesis. The
states that did not issue bonds had low revenues per capita.

16

Now, our main objective is to estimate the determinants of the spread or cost of capital
for Brazilian states. Our hypothesis is that richer states were able to issue debt at a lower cost
and in larger amounts in international capital markets. We measure the states’ capacity to pay
using state public revenue per capita. This is a good indicator of the economic characteristics of
each state since it is correlated with total exports per capita by state and with a variety of
geographical and geological variables at the state level. Moreover, most of the bonds issued
during the period had diverse sources of state public revenue as guarantee, such as service fees
(lighting, sewage, water, etc) and taxes (export taxes, professional, industry, etc). Therefore,
state revenues per capita are a good measure of state capacity to pay international debts.
Our basic specification to examine the determinants of the cost of capital by state is of
the following form:
rit= β sit-1 + δXit + ζi+φt +εit,
where rit is the logarithm of the risk premium of state i at time t, measured as the difference
between the state’s bond yield and the yield of British Consols. sit-1 is the logarithm of state
public revenue for each state i lagged one period. X is a vector of control variables that includes
the logarithms of imports, population, and debt per state. We also use fixed effects for states (ζi)
to control for state unobservable characteristics and time dummy variables (φt), accounting for
time varying trends common for all states. When a state had more than one bond being traded
in the secondary market we use the average of all the yields. We repeat this exercise with our
estimates of yield to maturity as well.
States as independent units of analysis
We are confident that we can treat states as independent observations for this analysis
for two reasons. First, state bonds had no explicit or implicit bail out clauses. For instance, a few
Brazilian states suspended payments (defaulted) on their debt over the period we study and
those defaults were not followed by a bailout from other states or from the federal government.
This was the case of Espírito Santo in 1900, Alagoas in 1921, Pará in 1922, Bahia in 1923, and
Amazonas in 1924. In Table 4 we can see the spread of those bonds (over the UK bonds) going
up when the state governments default. Yet default in one state did not have negative effects on
the spreads of other bonds, i.e., there was no contagion unless the default was the consequence
17

of a trade shock that affected many states, as was the case with the low price of rubber in the
early 1920s (affecting Pará and Amazonas). More importantly, there is no sovereign ceiling
effect. Some of the states’ bonds were sometimes perceived as less risky than those of the federal
government and in some years, such as 1914, the sovereign risk goes up faster than the risk for
other bonds. Take for instance the risk premium of the debt of Sao Paulo, which remains under
the sovereign risk for a few years after every sovereign gets restructuring (e.g., 1898 and 1914).
In fact, between 1918 and 1927 a large number of state bonds in Table 4 had risk premia lower
than sovereign risk.
Second, the redistribution of resources among states or by the central government was
minimal. For example, in 1914 the central government divided total expenditures among its
seven ministries as follows: Justice (7%), Foreign Relations (1%), Navy (8%), War (11%), the
Treasury (38%), Transportation and Public Works (32%), and Agriculture, Industry and
Commerce (3%).25 We can infer that most of the ministries, except the latter two, spend most of
their funds in Rio de Janeiro or in providing national public goods that benefited all the states
(e.g., security). If we assume that all the budget of the last two ministries went to the states, then
about 65% of the central government’s budget was spent mostly in Rio de Janeiro. Now, a
significant amount of the budget of these two last ministries (that supposedly provide
improvements for the beneficiary states) was also spent in the City of Rio de Janeiro.26
Moreover, there were no rules to distribute fiscal resources to the states, no programs to
redistribute from one state to another, and no fiscal transfers to the states from the center. What
states collected, they kept for their own expenditures. In the same way, the Constitution of 1891
gave states the mandate to spend on education, public health, and other public goods that in
many countries are a responsibility of the central government.
States Excluded from the Analysis
The capital of Brazil, the Distrito Federal (DF), was located in what is now the city of Rio
de Janeiro during the period we study. For the purposes of this paper we excluded the DF from
our estimates because it is not properly a state like the rest of our units of analysis. It should be

25
26

Brazil, Balancos da Receita e Despeza da Republica (Rio de Janeiro 1914).
Brazil, Balancos da Receita e Despeza da Republica (Rio de Janeiro 1914).

18

treated like a municipality, a rich municipality with significant federal expenditure devoted to
improving infrastructure in the place. The DF also differs from the rest of the states in that its
local production of commodities was minimal, its export tax revenue was only 1.8% of the total
revenues, and its main source of revenue was property taxes (Brazil, 1926).27
We also excluded from all of our regressions the data for Góias and Acre. We excluded
Góias because it was a landlocked state and there was no data on exports. This is because all of
the exports from Góias had to go through other states and were not reported separately as was
the case for Minas Gerais, another landlocked state (see the methodological appendix). Acre
was part of Bolivia until the end of the nineteenth century and was officially declared part of
Brazil in 1903. As a territory it did not have as much autonomy as the states of the Brazilian
federation and the statistics for Acre are not comparable in quality and detail to those we have
for Brazilian states. Thus, we could not include Acre in our estimates.

Findings
The results of our OLS estimates confirm our hypotheses and are presented in Table 7.
States with higher state public revenues per capita tended to have lower cost of capital (i.e., the
coefficient is negative). The interpretation of the coefficients is as follows. Specifications 2 to 7,
in which the elasticity of state public revenues per capita to the cost of capital is between -0.19
and -0.27 we would say that if, for instance, a state went from being in the group of poor states,
with an average state public revenue per capita of 6.4 mil reis, to having the average state public
revenues per capita of 9.5 mil reis, we would observe a sizable decrease in the cost of capital.
According to the coefficient of specification 4 this jump would be associated with moving from
having a state government issuing debt that pays 624 bps over the risk-free rate to debt that
pays only 555 bps. Yet going from being a relatively poor state to being one of the richest is
associated with a reduction in the cost of capital from 624 bps to around 391 bps. In order to
understand the intuition behind this last counterfactual one has to think that if a state like
Pernambuco, a predominantly sugar exporter, could suddenly grow coffee and be as rich as the
Brazil, Diretoria Geral de Estatística/ Ministerio da Agricultura, Industria e Commercio, Estatistica das
Financas do Brasil, (Rio de Janeiro, 1926).

27

19

state of Rio de Janeiro, a coffee exporting state, it would get higher revenues per capita and
could issue debt almost 0.6% (60 bps) lower for its debt issues. These results hold even after
controlling for whether the state has defaulted in the past, for the level of imports per capita,
debt per capita, and population in the state. Most of the regressions, from specifications from 1
to 9, control for year and state dummies and have clustered robust standard errors to account
for heteroskedasticity and serial correlation. In specifications 2, 5 and 6 we do not have
clustered standard errors, but we still get coefficients with similar significance
One may say that Brazil had market power in coffee and, perhaps, in rubber (even if it
was not able to exercise it). That is why in specification 5 of Table 7 we included dummies for
coffee- and rubber-exporting states. We can see that only the dummy for rubber is significant
and implies that having rubber as one of the most important commodities reduced the risk
implicit in the bonds by 0.67%.
In Table 7 we also perform other robustness checks. First, in specification 6 and 7 we run
the regressions without outliers, i.e., states that had spreads over 1500 bps. These were usually
states that defaulted on their debts. Interestingly we still get similar magnitudes in the
coefficients and negative signs (as expected). In specification 8 we run the same regression
using yield to maturity as dependent variable. The coefficient is larger and the yields or spreads
seem to be more sensitive to whether a state government defaults on its debt payments. In
specification 9 we run the same regression, but including all the state bonds traded in the Rio de
Janeiro Stock Exchange as well as those bonds traded in foreign stock markets. The coefficient is
not significant in this case, but the magnitude seems to be within the range of our previous
estimates. We believe that some of the domestic bond issues may be less sensitive to revenues
per capita at the state level because of the lower liquidity in the Rio de Janeiro stock market or
due to the fact that state governments could push some of the local debt to domestic elites in
exchange for political favors. In those cases the indicators of capacity to pay may be less
relevant to determine the yield. What is more interesting is why some states were able to issue
bonds abroad and others did not even pass the minimum threshold to do it. Finally in
specifications 10 and 11 we run similar specifications but using Panel-Corrected Standard Errors
(PCSE) and Feasible Generalized Least Squares (FGLS). Both methods help us to account for
heteroskedasticity, while PCSE also corrects for contemporaneous correlation (e.g., contagion
20

among states). In both cases we find a coefficient close to 0.3 that is fairly close to our regular
OLS coefficient (0.21-0.26).
Simulated Instruments Approach
Since using OLS may have potential endogeneity problems and serial correlation, in this
section we also run an instrumental variable (IV) estimation using the variation in international
commodity prices as the main source of exogenous variation. We believe that there is potential
endogeneity in the OLS estimates because the yield that investors assigned to each bond issue
was based on the expectations they had about that country’s capacity to either export or to
obtain revenues in gold or silver (when silver was valuable). The problem is that the capacity
that countries had to export and/or collect revenue depended to a large extent on the
infrastructure that was put in place to integrate markets or facilitate trade. Thus, a lower cost of
capital could lead to a larger debt burden to finance infrastructure. More infrastructure
expenditures could lead to higher revenues as economic activity increases. Higher revenues or
exports would make investors more confident of the repayment prospects of the debt, which in
turn would lower yields (the cost of capital) even further. It is for this reason that we believe
perhaps and instrumental variable approach is in order to reduce the potential endogeneity
problem, not to mention the problems we may have with serial correlation.
In order to address this potential endogeneity problem in the case of Brazil we would
want to find a variable that affected the cost of capital but through revenues per capita alone.
Since a lot of the revenue came from the taxes on commodity exports, we would want to find an
exogenous factor that determined the export capacity of every state (without affecting bond
yields directly). Ideally we would want to explain the variation in state revenues per capita
across states by using factors that exogenously determine the states capacity to export
commodities, such as geographical or climate-related variables, as well as some variables that
could account for the variation over time in the demand for state commodities. This is quite a
daunting task since taking fixed factors that explain what commodities were produced (e.g., soil
types or altitudes) is not going to help us explain the variation over time. Moreover, since
exports followed cycles determined either by international demand or by internal changes in
weather conditions we need to find a variable that summarizes both the conditions that
21

determined the crop or commodity mix by state and the variation in the volume and mix over
time. Therefore, we look for an alternative way to create an instrument.
Panel A of Table 3 shows the correlations between our geographical and climatic
variables with the export share of each commodity (to total exports). We can see that there are
some high correlations between some of these geographical (exogenous) variables and the kind
of commodities states specialized in. We then assume that the export shares or commodity mix
reflect this heterogeneity across states.
In order to capture the variation over time in the volume of exports and possible
variations in the commodity mix we use the export shares by states at the beginning of our
period as weights for a series of simulated export price indices by state. We want to take the
commodity mix by state at the beginning of our period because it could be indirectly driven by
the cost of capital (e.g., through the infrastructure investments that states with low cost of
capital made). We are confident that the shares of exports that we use as the initial point are
exogenous to the cost of capital faced by states in international markets after 1901. This is
because the first year with available data for commodity exports at state level is 1901. Most of
the state foreign bonds were issued after 1901. Moreover, there is no evidence of compositional
changes in the state exports during the 1890s, so 1901 should be representative of the state of
commodity exports in 1890.
Once we have the commodity mix we use the growth in international commodity prices
to simulate the price received by the exporters at state level. We use the international price for
the main commodities produced by Brazilian states as reported in Global Financial Data. We
lose accuracy by taking generic or average prices for some commodities that had different
varieties. Yet the prices of, for instance, the different varieties of coffee and rubber move in
tandem. That is why we feel our simulated price indices reflect variation over time in export
prices for Brazil accurately.
The strategy to simulate a price index of commodity exports for each of the states is as
follows. Brazil has I commodities, i=1,…,8, there are J states, j=1,…., 18, and we have T periods
t=0,…., 1; where t=0 represents 1901. SHij0 is the export share of commodity i at the beginning of
the period (t=0) for state i. We have the international prices for each commodity pit at dollars.
22

We transform it, using the exchange rate mil reis/dollar, into mil reis28. Then we calculate the
growth rate (g) of international prices for each commodity, which is defined as git= [(pit -pit-1)/ (pit1)-

1], where i and t are defined as usual. Then we use giNt to predict prices at state level using

SHij0 as weights for a weighted price index per state, following the following formula
∧

⎡ I
⎤
P jt = 100 ⎢∑ SH ijo * g it + 1⎥ ,
⎦
⎣ i =1
∧

where Pjt is the index price for state j at period t. For each of the indices, 1901 is the base year
∧

(1901= 100). Once we have a price index Pjt for each state, we use it as a simulated instrument
for state public revenue per capita in the first stage. The idea is that our price indices per state
will reflect how much states can extract in ad valorem taxes on exports. In the second stage, we
use our estimated state public revenues per capita as independent variable to estimate the cost
of capital or spread of the states that traded bonds in international markets.
Our simulated export price indices assume that states did not influence the growth rate
of prices in international markets. This was not necessarily the case since São Paulo, Minas
Gerais, and Rio de Janeiro were price setters in the international coffee market for a few years
(especially 1906 to 1914 and the late 1920s). The same may be argued for Amazonas and Pará
which enjoyed a monopoly position in the international rubber market until the surge of
competition from Asian countries before the First World War.

In order to deal with this

potential endogeneity in prices, we construct alternative price indexes ignoring the price
fluctuations for coffee and rubber. Alternatively, in some specifications we added a dummy to
control for rubber and coffee states (in separate specifications). This is to control for the fact that
Brazil had market power in these two commodities, even if it coffee producers were the only
ones to exercise it actively.
Findings Using the Simulated Export Price Indices as Instruments

Taken from A.Musacchio,‘Data Appendix for Experiments in Financial Democracy: Corporate
Governance and Financial Development in Brazil, 1882-1950´ (Cambridge and New York, 2008)
28

23

The results of the simulated instruments estimation are presented in Table 8. While
panel A of this table shows the second stage of the regression, panel B shows the first stage. The
results confirm our hypotheses because state public revenue responds consistently to changes in
the international prices. The intuition of Panel B, the first stage, is that higher prices in the
commodities exported by state implied higher total exports and higher state revenues.29
Because the estimations take the logarithm of the variables, the coefficients should be
interpreted as elasticities. For instance, specification 2 shows that a 100% increase in the state
price index would imply that states would get 65% more in public revenues (per capita). This is
not a farfetched counterfactual since, on average, commodity prices increased almost 130% from
1890 to 1899 and about 43% from 1890 to 1909 (in mil reis). The sign and significance of the
coefficients in Panel B is consistent with our specification (positive and significant) and fluctuate
between 0.40 and 0.85.
Panel A of Table 8 shows the effects of the instrumented state public revenue per capita
on the cost of capital that Brazilian states faced between 1900 and 1928 in the second stage
regression. The results confirm our OLS estimations as the coefficient for state public revenue
per capita is significant and negative in all the specifications. Specifications 1 to 5 show the
results for the whole sample with different controls. The elasticity varies from -0.60 and -0.95,
indicating that a 10% change in state public revenue per capita could reduce the cost of capital
by between 25 and 50 basis points, on average (i.e., because of the multiplication of the
coefficients 0.5 and 0.95 times 10, times the average cost of capital which is 510 bps). Our results,
however, have one important difference with the OLS estimates. We find larger coefficients in
the IV regression than in the OLS estimate. This could be confusing if we think that the bias we
are trying to correct for is endogeneity (i.e., endogeneity in the OLS estimates would imply a
bias upwards for our coefficient of interest). In that case we would expect to find lower
coefficients in the IV regression than in the OLS estimates.

Therefore, we think our IV

regressions uncover an important finding. More than looking at revenues per se, it seems like
investors cared more about how movements in commodity prices would affect capacity to pay

Note that in this setup increases in exports increase capacity to pay not only through higher export tax
revenues, but also because higher exports could make the private sector expand other activities that also
yielded tax revenues for state coffers.

29

24

and, thus, calculated their default risk of state bonds (the yield minus the yield of British
consols) accordingly.
Moreover, investors seem to have been more worried about commodity prices in states
other than coffee and rubber states. Specifications 8 and 9 of Panel A (Table 8) shows how we
get larger elesticities when we run the same regressions excluding the fluctuations in the price
of coffee and rubber, products in which São Paulo, Amazonas and Pará arguably had significant
market power. That is, we assume that rubber and coffee were not exported at all and we
reweight the price indices using the other commodities states exported (for lack of data the state
of Minas Gerais gets dropped from that specification). We find coefficients of -0.97 when we
exclude coffee and -0.95 when we exclude rubber. This implies that investors cared more about
commodity price fluctuations for states that were less developed and less diversified than São
Paulo and Amazonas. The former was the most diversified and industrialized state in Brazil,
thus it makes sense to think that investors cared less about coffee prices when they made their
estimates of the yields. In the case of Amazonas the logic is harder to explain, but it probably
has to do with the fact that Amazonas was the state that spent more on public goods per capita,
e.g., education, during the period we study. That is, it was probably perceived as too rich to be
affected by year-on-year price fluctuations. Even if this last explanation is not the right one, the
econometric results show that investors were less influenced by price movements when valuing
the bonds of those states.
In Specifications 6 through 7 of the same table we run further robustness checks. First
we use yield to maturity as the dependent variable and the coefficient is -0.71, very close to our
estimates with the coupon yields. We also include the sample of yields that are lower than 1500
bps, to eliminate states that defaulted, we get similar results (the coefficient is -0.65, but only
significant at 10%). This last result may be explained because since in most specifications we
control for whether the state has defaulted in the past, we have weeded out the variation that
comes from a bad reputation as a debtor.

Conclusions
The results of our study show that the cost of capital for Brazilian states and the
probability of issuing state debt in international capital markets were highly correlated with
25

state revenues per capita. Our argument is that revenues per capita are highly correlated with
exports per capita by state and that the level of exports per capita actually depended on the
kind of commodities each state was able to export between 1890 and 1930. We argue that the
relationship among endowments and the cost of capital for states or the capacity to issue debt
may have led to marked differences in access to capital and in the capacity that states had to
spend on public goods. Since differences in expenditures on public goods can lead to market
differences in economic development among states we believe that the setup of the 1891
Constitution promoted some of the regional inequality that we still observe today in Brazil. That
is, the commodity lottery mattered in Brazil because the trade boom allowed state governments
to increase current expenditures in large projects by issuing debt.
In our view, then, this paper shows that endowments matter beyond just colonial
institutions, because trade shocks that took place centuries later facilitated the job of state
governments to spend on public goods. Most of the debt was actually used to pay for
infrastructure projects, so we believe the trade shock had a positive long-lasting effect on
productivity for the Brazilian states that reaped the benefits of the commodity boom. Yet, more
research is needed to prove the actual effects of the trade shock over productivity and income
per capita in the long run.
The episode we study matters for Brazilian history because after 1930 the government of
Getulio Vargas changed the federalist pact, named some of his allies as supervisors of the
actions of state governments. Moreover, after 1928 Brazilian states defaulted en masse and the
federal government had to assume all state debts. That was the end of state debt issues in
international markets. By 1934 a new constitution was drafted and in 1937 Vargas himself
rewrote the constitution to give the central government more powers, including a new fiscal
setup that destroyed the federalist pact of 1891-1930.
Finally, if we extrapolate some of the implications of our findings to the literature that
studies the cost of capital for countries, our paper suggests that we should look at why some
countries had more capacity to pay than others and that, at least for the nineteenth century, the
answer may lay the capacity that some countries had to export commodities that were in high
demand and that had significant price increases during the commodity boom of the late
nineteenth century.
26

27

Appendix A. Cox Hazard and Probit Estimates to Deal With Biases in Our Data
In this appendix we present two approaches to examine the propensity or probability of
Brazilian states to issue bonds in any given year between 1890 and 1930. Since the sample used
for the paper contains only the states that actually issued bonds abroad we want to check if the
bias in the sample selection poses problems for the relationship we are trying to draw between
state revenue per capita and the cost of capital. Below we develop two estimates to examine the
relationship between capacity to pay, using state revenue per capita, and the probability of
issuing debt in foreign markets including data for all of the states in the Brazilian federation.

Methodology
Our first approach to study how much state public revenue per capita affects the
probability of issuing debt is very simple. We run a Probit estimate to examine whether richer
states had higher probability to be actively engaged in the international bond market. The basic
specification for this estimation is:
Pr(yit=1)= βsit + δXit + φt;
where yit is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if the state i issues a bond in period t
and zero otherwise. The independent variable is state public revenue per capita (sit) lagged one
period. We use the one period lag of the state public revenue because the expectations of the
value of the bond and its yield are formed with the information available at the time of buying
the debt instrument in the secondary market. The vector of control variables X includes imports
(also lagged one period), population, and debt burden. In some specifications we control for the
years in which Brazil was on the gold standard. Imports and population are used to control as a
proxy for the demand of public goods, which is supposed to be the final use of the capital
derived from the bond issues. On the other hand, the state budget deficit is measured as the
percentage of the difference between the state public expenditure and state public revenue
divided by the state public revenue. This ratio could be interpreted as a proxy of risk as it may
be interpreted as how responsible is each state in the administration of their finances, but at the
same time it could just reflect the fact that some states were able to sustain deficits precisely
because they issued debt. Thus we do not make too much out of the interpretation of this

28

coefficient. Finally we add time dummy variables (φt) to control for time fixed effects common
for all the states.
Now, since the states that issued debt may be biasing the results of the probit (given
how skewed is the data with some states issuing debt many times and some issuing nothing),
we also run a Cox proportional hazard model to look at whether the relationship between state
revenue per capita and the probability of issuing debt is still intact once the sample is less
biased in favor of debt issuing states. The Cox hazard model has the advantage of only taking
into account the effect of issuing states up until the point where they issue debt for the first
time, leaving them out of the estimation afterwards. We define the dependent variable as the
time in years until the state issues a bond in international markets and examine the change in
relative risk of issuing the first bond by state i, in any given year t, if the state had an additional
unit of state public revenue per capita. The estimated model is as follows:

⎛ h (t ) ⎞
log⎜⎜ i ⎟⎟ = β 1lag ( spri1 ) + β X ,
⎝ h0 (t ) ⎠
where ho(t) is the baseline hazard function, which is common for all states, it has no particular
specification, and provides the shape of the hazard function. hi(t) is the hazard function specific
to the state i. We are interested in the relative risk of state i issuing a foreign bond in any year
relative to the baseline risk (common to all the states) of issuing a bond in foreign markets in
any given year. Since the Cox model is exponential, we take the log of all of our variables to
avoid negative probabilities.

In our case, we are interested in the value and sign of the

parameter β1, which indicates the effect of an additional unit of state public revenue, lagged one
period, on the relative risk of issuing for first time a bond relative to the baseline risk of any
state issuing foreign bonds in any given year.
In sum, the reason why we first run these two estimations, one with a Cox hazard model
and another one with a Probit, is that they allow us to include all the states of Brazil in the
sample (those which issued debt and those that did not). Also, because of the way we design
the Cox hazard model test, we give more weight to the states that never issued debt, thus giving
us a less biased view of the importance of state revenues per capita on the capacity to issue
bonds in foreign markets.
29

Findings
Table A.1 shows the result for the Cox hazard model estimations. We can see that state
public revenue per capita has a consistent, positive and significant effect over the hazard rate of
issuing a new bond. In the last regression we control for the size of the debt burden using the
debt/exports ratio, which reduced considerably our sample and the coefficient still has the
expected sign and it is significant at 10%. The coefficient in the lag of the state public revenue
indicates that those states collecting an additional unit of revenue increases their relative risk of
issuing their first international bond in any year by a range between 0.036 and 0.089 (3% and
8%, respectively).
We find similar conclusions in the Probit estimations (Table A.2). The marginal effect of
increasing the public revenue per capita infinitesimally increases the probability of issuing an
international bond by a range between 0.023% and 0.035%. The significance of this coefficient is
consistent at 5% significant level and the size does not change after we include a variety of
controls. Unlike the Cox estimations, we find that the size of the population also increases the
probability of issuing a bond. It also seems that having a high cost of capital in the past or a
history of default is taken into account by investors and made it more difficult for defaulting
states to issue new bonds. In sum, our findings show that effectively those states with higher
capacity to collect tax revenue increased considerably the likelihood of issuing bonds in
international markets.

30

Methodological Appendix. Sources and methodology to construct the dataset
Variable
Bond characteristics

Source:
Year of issue, state, currency, nominal value, type, coupon interest rate and liquid
entry of capital for each state and municipal bonds comes from M. Abreu, ‘A Divida
Publica Externa do Brasil´, Department of Economics of the Pontíficia Universidade
Católica(PUC), Rio de Janeiro, Working paper No. 83 (1985). For bonds issued before
1912, information on maturity, date and place of issue, underwriter, use of the debt
and guarantees from bonds issued before 1910 came from Brazil/Ministerio da
Agricultura, Industria e Commercio, Anuario Estatistico do Brazil I (Rio de Janeiro,
1917). For bonds issued after 1912, the same data comes from V. Bouças, Financas do
Brasil. Historia da Divida Externa Estadual e Municipal. Volume X (Rio de Janeiro, 1942),
except for the maturity of bonds between 1919 and 1924, which comes from F. Conty,
Le Independence Financiere des Etats federes du Brasil (Paris, 1926) (for bonds traded in
Europe) and from R. A. Young, Handbook on American underwriting of foreign securities
(Washington, 1930) (for securities traded in the United States).

Bond prices

For securities quoted in London we used the last price of the year or the average
between the highest and lowest prices in December from the Investor’s Monthly
Manual, electronic version, Yale University. London Stock Exchange Project, 1888–
1930, complemented with Stock Exchanges, London and provincial, ten-year record of
prices and dividends (London, 1910, 1917, 1924, 1932). (There are no prices for December
of 1914, so we used the closest quotation available). For the securities quoted in New
York we use The Commercial and financial chronicle, Bank and quotation section (New
York, 1921–1927) and W.B. Dana Co., Bank and quotation record (New York, 1928- 1931).
Most of the quotations are as of December 31. In case of some missing quotations, we
took prices from the Section General Quotations of Bonds and Stocks, which also
includes unlisted securities. Initial prices for these bonds used to calculate yield to
maturity were taken from R.. Young, Handbook on American underwriting of foreign
securities … Initial prices and annual prices for bonds quoted in Paris and Brussels
come from the Moniteur de les interest materiels, (Brussels, 1890–1920) (from “Titres a
Revenu Fixe. Fonds Publics, Emprunts et Obligations” and “Ours General des Fonds
Publics, Obligations et Actions”). The data reported is, in general, as of the last day of
the year (December 31st). However, for the data extracted from “Ours…” there are
slight variations in the dates along the first days of January (not later than the first
week though). We also use the Compagne Des Agents de Change Pres la Bourse de
Paris/ Chambre Syndicale, Annuaire Des Valeurs Admises a la Cote Officiell, (Paris, 192223) (for this publication we use the average of the lowest and highest price). We take
the prices of the bonds quoted in Rio de Janeiro from Câmara Sindical de Corretores
de Fundos Públicos da Bolsa de Valores do Rio de Janeiro. Relatorio da Câmara Sindical
de Corretores de Fundos Públicos da Bolsa de Valores do Rio de Janeiro (Rio de Janeiro,
1890–1947).
For data before 1897, we use Brazil, Ministerio da Agricultura, Finanças da União e dos
Estados 1822-1913 (Rio de Janeiro, 1917).For data from 1897 to 1939, see Brazil/
Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatistica. Anuario Estatistico do Brazil V (Rio de
Janeiro, 1940).
Brazilian Population Census 1890, 1900 and Anuario Estatístico do Brasil V, which
contains data from 1900 to 1939. Data from 1873 to 1899 were estimated through
interpolation: We assumed a linear trend between censuses points for each state.

State Public Revenue

Population

Deflators

Commodity prices

Price indices are from L. A. Catão, ‘A new wholesale price index for Brazil during the
period 1870-1913´, Revista Brasileira de Economia 46 (1992) and after 1913we use the
GDP deflator from C. Contador and C. Haddad, ‘Produto real, moeda e preços: A
experiência brasileira no período 19861-1970´, Revista Brasileira de Estatística, 36(1975):
pp. 407-440
Global Financial Data

31

Exports and Imports

Stock of debt by state

World GDP per capita

Data from 1902 (imports) and 1901 and 1902 (exports) from Brazil/Ministério da
Fazenda. Importacão e Exportacão da Republica dos Estados Unidos do Brasil Rio de Janeiro
(1904); 1908-1912 comes from Anuario Estatistico do Brazil I; Data from 1913-1927 and
1935-40 comes from Brazil/Ministério da Fazenda, Commercio Exterior do Brasil (Rio de
Janeiro, 1901-1930). Information from 1928-1934 is from Brazil/ Directoria de
Estatistica Economica e Financeira, Quadros Estatísticos Rio de Janeiro (1935-1938);
General trade data for 1887, 1892 to 1897 and 1903-1907 is from Brazil/ Diretoria Geral
de Estadística, Boletin commemorativo da Exposição nacional de 1908 (Rio de Janeiro,
1908). Except for Minas Gerais1 for which we had to built our own estimates and the
Federal District (Distrito Federal).2 Data for exports from Minas Gerais comes from
Minas Gerais/ Servico de Estatistica Geral, Carteira Estatistica de Minas Gerais, Belo
Horizonte (1927).
J. P. Wileman, The Brazilian Year Book (Rio de Janeiro and London, 1909) has
unbalanced data until 1908. For 1912 we take the information from Anuario Estatistico
do Brazil I . For 1922, we take the information from Brazil, Diretoria Geral de
Estatística/ Ministerio da Agricultura, Industria e Commercio, Estatistica das Financas
do Brasil, (Rio de Janeiro, 1926) and finally for 1930 the source is V. Bouças, Financas
dos estados do Brasil. Volume I (Rio de Janeiro, 1932). We also have also added data
compilated for São Paulo (Love, São Paulo in the Brazilian Federation, 1889-1937 ); Minas
Gerais (Minas Gerais, Carteira Estatistica de Minas Gerais) and Pernambuco (R. Levine,
Pernambuco in the Brazilian federation, 1889-1937 (Stanford, 1978)), who constructed a
data series for period under study. We interporlated between these data points in a
way that allowed us to run a panel.
We create a weighted average of the GDP per capita of the countries in which
Brazilian states floated debt. The weights are simply reflecting the size of each
country’s economy. The information for the GDP per capita for France, the United
States and the United Kingdom comes from A. Maddison and Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Development, The World Economy: Historical Statistics,
Development Centre Studies (Paris, 2003). Thus, GDP is measured in 1990 international
Geary-Khamis dollars.

Notes:.
1) We have information only for states that had customs offices and a port (or a navigable river that connected it to the ocean). For
this reason, we originally had no data for Góias (GO) and Minas Gerais (MG). Yet for Minas Gerais we have some reports of total
exports, but not from which port they were shipped. Since we know that most of the exports were shipped from Rio de Janeiro (RJ),
Santos (in São Paulo, SP), and in the 1920s through Espírito Santo (ES). For simplicity we assume that the exports of MG were
exported through RJ and SP in equal proportions. Thus we subtract the exports from MG from those two other states. For the MG
export data for 1927-1931, we assume that the MG average export share between 1923 and 1927 will prevail for the rest of the
studied period and we proceed with the same methodology as explained above. In order to show that results of the estimations do
not change, we also use the exports as reported by the federal publications (excluding MG). Unfortunately, data for imports for MG
are not available. Therefore, all the estimations that include imports as a control exclude the observations from MG.
2) The city of Rio de Janeiro was the capital of Brazil, known as Federal District (Distrito Federal or DF). Rio de Janeiro City is in the
middle of what was Rio de Janeiro State, now Guanabara. Both the city and the state collected their own tax revenue, yet export
taxes collected in the port of Rio de Janeiro accrued mostly to the State of Rio, while import taxes accrued to the Federal
Government, as in other parts of the country. Moreover, the port of Rio de Janeiro, in the Federal District, served the states of Rio de
Janeiro and Minas Gerais. Rio de Janeiro state had no other port until the 1920s (i.e. Angra dos Reis). Therefore, we cannot
distinguish the exports made from the capital itself and Rio de Janeiro State (or Minas Gerais, see note above). We are confident,
however, that most of the exports shipped from the Rio de Janeiro port were commodities produced in the state of Rio de Janeiro
and not in the Federal District. Furthermore, we consider that the state of Rio de Janeiro benefited from the exports and economic
activity of the port of the city of Rio de Janeiro and vice versa and for this reason we use the same level of international trade
activity for both state and city.

32

TABLES AND FIGURES

Figure 1. Uses of Foreign Debt by Brazilian
States (1889‐1931)
Debt
Public work
Roads, brid
Other

Other
5%

Roads, bridges, &
40%
37% railways
18%
18%

Debt
40%

5%

Public works
(sewage and
water works)
37%

Source: Constructed with data from Paiva (1985), AEB 1, vol.II and Boucas (1942)

Figure 2. Currency in which State Bonds were
denominated (1889‐1931)
Francs
24%

Guilders
1%
Dollars
28%

Pounds sterling
47%
Source: Constructed with data from Paiva (1985) and Bouças (1942).

33

Table 1. State Distribution of Bonds Issued in Brazil. 1889-1930
Main
Number of
commodity
debt Issues
exported

State revenue
per capita per
year

São Paulo

SP

Coffee

22

21.5

Federal District

DF

Coffee

10

37.9

Minas Gerais

MG

Coffee

10

6.2

Rio Grande do Sul

RS

Cattle

4

Rio de Janeiro

RJ

Coffee

Bahia

BA

Amazonas

Exports per capita

Total debt in

per year

pounds sterling

pounds
sterling (debt
minus fees)

Amount
received %

Amount
received per
capita by 1913
reis
(cumulative)

Date of
first state
bond issue

65,241,076

58,694,000

41.5%

163.1

1888

24,205,082

21,828,000

15.4%

248.1

1889

47.3

16,284,143

13,880,000

9.8%

35.5

1896

12.1

24.9

11,532,235

10,491,000

7.4%

61.0

1919

4

9.7

89.4

8,052,371

7,515,000

5.3%

64.8

1912

Tobacco

7

5.4

26.6

6,076,129

5,258,000

3.7%

23.4

1888

AM

Rubber

4

36.3

237.5

5,742,976

4,772,000

3.4%

210.5

1902

Paraná

PR

Mate

5

11.1

43.7

5,210,477

4,744,000

3.4%

84.5

1905

Pernambuco

PE

Sugar

4

6.8

18.1

3,832,178

3,289,000

2.3%

21.5

1905

Espírito Santo

ES

Coffee

6

15.5

85.1

3,337,825

2,879,000

2.0%

80.9

1894

Pará

PA

Rubber

4

18.1

109.8

3,292,453

2,720,000

1.9%

39.4

1901

Santa Catarina

SC

Mate

3

5.7

11.9

2,405,556

2,157,000

1.5%

36.5

1909

Maranhão

MA

Cotton

4

4.1

14.1

1,579,254

1,326,000

0.9%

23.1

1910

Ceará

CE

Cattle

2

3.4

11.0

1,040,881

882,000

0.6%

10.5

1910

Alagoas

AL

Sugar

2

3.4

7.8

871,250

697,000

0.5%

10.6

1906

Rio Grande do Norte

RN

Cotton

1

4.7

5.7

343,373

285,000

0.2%

7.0

1910

92

9.5

159,047,256

141,417,000

Total

80.9

Amount
received in

45.9

Source: Own elaboration with information from Paiva (1985), AEB 1, vol.II and Boucas (1942)
Amounts received per capita represent the ratio of the total amount actually received to state population in 1931.

100.0%

67.0

Table 2. Ad Valorem Tax Rates on Commodity Exports by State (percentage points), circa 1912
BA
Sand

SE

AL

PE

Paraiba

RN

CE

PI

MA

PA

AM

RJ

SP

MG

PRc

SC

Rs e

MG

MT

GO

35

Wood

20

Hides

14

12

15

Skins

14

12

10

Cocoa

12

Rubber

9

Tobacco

8

Coffee

7

Coconuts

5

Gold

2

Sugar

1

25

10
15

10

10

8

6

8

8
8

3
12

7
12

3

12

10

6

5

22

20 a

12
20 d

6

8
8.5

8

9b

8

4

8

8

6

20
6

2

5

8

4

12

8

9

10

8

8

6

12

Wine and liquor

10

9

6

8

Salt

10

Fruits

10

Wax

6

2.5
8

7

5

6

0

6

7

12

8

0

Mate
Meat
Other/non specified

10
10

10

7

Cotton

4

17

0
6

10

4

6

7

12

10

0.5

5

Soruce: Lyra (1914).
Note: This table shows only ad valorem taxes and not lump some taxes that were charged on some products.
The main commodities exported by each state appear in bold.
a. Rubber from the remote Javary River basin paid only 10%
b. Love (1980)
c. There is also an additional tax of 10% on all products except mate.
d. Rubber from Mato Grosso (MT) exported through Pará and Amazonas paid only 12%.
e. Tax rates not reported

35

Table 3. Correlation between Crop Specialization, Geography, Weather, Soil Types, and Revenues in
Brazilian States (averages 1890--1930)
Panel A: Correlations Between Soil Type and Crop Specialization (i.e., Export Shares)
Mate Tobacco Cacao Rubber Cotton Sugar
Coffee Mineral
Argissolos
-0.10*
-0.03
0.06
0.89*
-0.28*
-0.22*
-0.16*
-0.12*
Cambissolos
0.70*
0.48*
0.43*
-0.27*
-0.37*
-0.27*
0.17*
-0.01
Chernossolos
-0.12*
0.79*
0.75*
-0.13*
-0.20*
-0.14*
-0.14*
0.10*
Latossolos
0.68*
-0.01
0.16*
0.22*
-0.33*
-0.27*
-0.12*
-0.10*
Luvissolos
-0.23*
-0.03
-0.02
-0.10*
0.51*
0.07
-0.27*
-0.13*
0.09*
0.22*
0.24*
0.20*
-0.17*
-0.23*
-0.34*
-0.13*
Neossolos
Nitossolos
0.74*
-0.08
-0.09
0.02
-0.26*
-0.20*
-0.21*
-0.13*
Vertissolos
-0.06
0.04
-0.07
-0.12*
-0.15*
-0.10*
-0.13*
-0.04
Plintossolos
-0.02
-0.14*
-0.11*
0.52*
-0.19*
-0.21*
-0.24*
-0.11*
Planossolos
-0.11*
0.78*
0.75*
-0.15*
-0.16*
-0.07
-0.19*
0.07

Cattle
-0.20*
-0.12*
0.31*
-0.12*
0.16*
0.30*
-0.11*
0.60*
-0.06
0.29*

Panel B: Correlations Between Geographical and Weather Variables and the Share of Exports of Each
Commodity, by State
Mate Tobacco Cacao Rubber Cotton Sugar
Coffee Mineral
Cattle
Altitude
0.65*
0.22*
0.16*
-0.43*
-0.13*
-0.16*
0.21*
-0.07
-0.13*
Rain
0.26*
-0.15*
-0.12*
0.68*
-0.50*
-0.29*
-0.02
-0.07
-0.21*
Sun
Temperature
Distance to equator

-0.43*
-0.53*
0.52*

0.21*
0.08
0.06

0.20*
0.18*
-0.04

-0.35*
0.43*
-0.44*

0.43*
0.18*
-0.42*

0.50*
0.31*
-0.20*

-0.24*
-0.22*
0.47*

-0.10*
-0.12*
0.22*

0.30*
-0.07*
0.06

Panel C: Correlations Between Geography, Weather, and State Public Revenue Per Capita
Altitude Rain
Sun
Temperature
Distance to Equator
Public rev. pc
-0.18*
0.60*
-0.40*
0.14*
0.03
Public rev. pc (w/o rubber states)
0.28*
0.42*
-0.31*
-0.22*
0.54*
Note: Soil type represent the percentage of the state area that corresponds to each type of soil. Sun is the days
of sunlight in a year. Rain is the average precipitation in a year and temperature is the average temperature in
the state. All of these variables come from measures made from 1950 to 2000. Correlations marked with *
indicates significant at 1%
Source: Most variables kindly shared by Rodrigo Soares and Leonardo Monastério. See Naritomi, Soares, and
Assunção (2007).

Table 4. Spreads of State Bonds over the UK Consold Yield, 1890-1931
AL
year
1890
1891
1892
1893
1894
1895
1896
1897
1898
1899
1900
1901
1902
1903
1904
1905
1906
1907
1908
1909
1910
1911
1912
1913
1914
1915
1916
1917
1918
1919
1920
1921
1922
1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
1928
1929
1930
1931

AM

BA

CE

DF

ES

MA

MG

PR

PARA

PE

RJ

RS

SP

RN

SC

PB

yield to coupon/ yield to coupon/ yield to coupon/ yield to coupon/ yield to coupon/ yield to coupon/ yield to coupon/ yield to coupon/ yield to coupon/ yield to coupon/ yield to coupon/ yield to coupon/ yield to coupon/ yield to coupon/ yield to coupon/ yield to coupon/ coupon/
maturity price
maturity price
maturity price
maturity price
maturity price
maturity price
maturity price
maturity price
maturity price
maturity price
maturity price
maturity price
maturity price
maturity price
maturity price
maturity price
price
2.72%
2.66%
4.49%
3.76%
4.11%
3.52%
5.35%
4.16%
3.29%
2.95%
3.47%
3.02%
4.44%
3.61%
2.73%
2.57%
2.4%
5.9%
3.11%
2.73%
3.9%
3.8%
5.4%
4.1%
3.81%
3.14%
6.36%
4.66%
6.45%
4.72%
3.00%
2.66%
3.7%
6.0%
4.11%
3.29%
4.21%
3.35%
6.61%
4.77%
4.0%
6.3%
4.0%
6.4%
4.03%
3.10%
5.45%
4.03%
5.40%
4.03%
4.9%
4.4%
6.2%
3.03%
3.19%
2.63%
7.2%
5.1%
3.72%
3.01%
2.40%
8.16%
5.49%
5.10%
3.79%
2.96%
2.54%
6.9%
2.77%
2.50%
2.08%
4.91%
3.67%
3.64%
2.98%
4.05%
3.51%
2.41%
2.28%
7.2%
2.26%
2.19%
1.96%
3.77%
3.01%
2.84%
2.51%
3.68%
3.22%
2.37%
2.26%
5.8%
2.15%
2.13%
1.96%
2.85%
2.50%
2.31%
2.21%
2.90%
2.67%
2.29%
2.19%
5.2%
4.8%
2.13%
2.07%
2.13%
2.69%
2.36%
2.15%
2.08%
2.47%
2.33%
2.74%
2.48%
2.02%
2.04%
3.7%
6.4%
3.05%
2.76%
2.99%
2.72%
2.49%
2.35%
2.06%
2.40%
2.22%
2.01%
2.02%
2.59%
2.42%
3.12%
2.73%
2.39%
2.23%
3.9%
4.56%
3.82%
4.08%
3.48%
2.43%
2.31%
2.23%
2.22%
2.12%
1.66%
1.85%
3.23%
2.83%
3.97%
3.27%
2.84%
2.43%
3.8%
4.01%
3.41%
4.85%
4.01%
2.13%
2.10%
2.12%
2.20%
2.09%
2.02%
2.02%
3.23%
2.81%
3.50%
2.94%
2.78%
2.54%
3.5%
2.89%
2.61%
3.19%
2.83%
2.07%
2.05%
1.97%
1.70%
1.85%
1.78%
1.88%
3.22%
2.81%
2.45%
2.28%
2.27%
2.22%
3.0%
2.57%
2.34%
2.85%
2.55%
1.79%
1.82%
1.67%
1.79%
1.82%
1.63%
1.67%
2.28%
2.14%
2.22%
2.08%
2.10%
2.07%
2.4%
3.0%
2.58%
2.31%
2.69%
2.40%
1.73%
1.74%
2.30%
2.10%
1.52%
1.60%
1.69%
1.74%
1.66%
2.26%
2.11%
2.23%
2.05%
2.21%
2.12%
2.3%
3.7%
2.75%
2.40%
3.02%
2.59%
1.67%
1.67%
2.58%
2.25%
1.51%
1.61%
1.64%
1.77%
1.65%
2.40%
2.18%
2.21%
2.00%
2.12%
1.99%
1.91%
1.89%
3.6%
2.62%
2.25%
5.89%
4.50%
1.75%
1.69%
2.59%
2.20%
1.54%
1.91%
1.67%
2.19%
1.89%
2.13%
1.92%
2.88%
2.35%
2.35%
2.11%
1.89%
1.80%
3.4%
4.34%
3.42%
7.28%
5.47%
4.53%
3.65%
3.51%
2.81%
1.78%
3.31%
2.28%
3.30%
2.70%
4.13%
3.22%
2.91%
2.43%
5.11%
4.09%
3.15%
2.15%
4.21%
3.30%
6.88%
4.95%
2.17%
4.99%
3.84%
6.80%
4.95%
6.36%
4.95%
3.34%
2.49%
5.0%
2.8%
3.77%
2.68%
7.44%
4.52%
6.17%
4.03%
1.84%
6.08%
4.13%
9.65%
6.08%
4.08%
3.06%
2.40%
1.53%
4.2%
2.9%
4.22%
2.84%
6.41%
3.34%
6.98%
4.36%
1.51%
6.36%
4.16%
5.08%
3.28%
2.84%
2.10%
1.89%
1.08%
3.9%
3.49%
2.40%
6.48%
3.46%
7.27%
4.53%
1.45%
4.36%
2.88%
5.62%
3.62%
2.72%
2.04%
1.13%
0.93%
2.9%
2.90%
2.05%
6.60%
3.64%
6.10%
3.83%
1.19%
3.03%
2.09%
5.83%
3.78%
0.95%
0.82%
3.58%
2.66%
1.62%
1.09%
1.5%
4.74%
3.03% 17.77% 11.53% 10.58%
5.94%
4.28%
2.58%
1.61%
3.32%
2.09%
14.57%
8.82%
0.59%
0.45%
5.32%
3.70%
1.31%
0.53%
1.6%
1.8%
8.49%
5.48% 36.60% 23.58% 10.63%
6.44%
6.70%
4.14%
2.64%
2.16%
9.82%
7.31%
9.25%
5.03%
5.08%
3.39% 10.91%
7.94% 33.73% 20.27%
3.00%
2.04%
4.81%
3.49%
2.02%
1.66%
5.52%
3.47% -0.01%
0.47%
2.3%
22.50% 13.71% 33.31% 21.17% 19.01%
9.98%
3.31%
2.08%
3.94%
2.07%
5.41%
4.69%
2.96% 11.85%
8.48% 53.89% 31.64%
4.28%
0.77%
4.48%
3.16%
0.66%
1.41%
4.96%
2.99%
3.44%
1.68%
3.3% 10.55%
2.8%
2.2%
19.26% 11.59% 21.11% 13.32% 18.48%
9.15%
8.27%
4.72%
5.37%
2.49%
7.46%
5.46%
6.66%
3.40%
2.94%
1.86%
2.33%
1.73% 68.60% 39.62%
0.66%
1.40%
4.62%
3.21%
4.53%
4.16%
1.55%
1.52%
3.65%
2.20%
3.25%
1.51%
2.0%
7.66%
4.69% 46.22% 28.65% 17.22%
6.63%
1.47%
1.03%
4.20%
2.29%
9.59%
6.97%
4.94%
2.56%
1.77%
1.14%
6.63%
4.75% 82.78% 46.95%
0.25%
0.62%
3.97%
2.79%
4.27%
4.01%
1.49%
1.53%
5.25%
3.06%
1.51%
0.88%
2.1%
5.78%
3.60% 18.22% 11.34% 12.56%
7.39%
2.04%
1.39%
3.89%
1.87%
8.20%
5.99%
3.58%
1.96%
2.87%
1.88%
4.82%
3.50% 32.74% 18.22%
5.32%
1.22%
3.37%
2.42%
3.83%
3.77%
2.30%
2.35%
3.98%
2.40%
2.10%
1.14%
2.6%
4.50%
2.70% 24.21% 14.68% 10.47%
5.86%
2.11%
1.26%
3.16%
1.41%
24.17% 13.12%
3.77%
7.49%
2.50%
1.74%
2.91%
3.09%
2.22%
2.33%
1.91%
0.85%
3.8%
2.7%
2.4%
6.87%
4.00% 10.54%
6.41%
4.47%
2.67%
2.41%
1.42%
2.73%
1.28%
7.59%
5.42%
4.28%
2.01%
3.24%
1.92%
1.99%
1.44% 48.42% 25.35%
5.67%
3.47%
1.64%
1.49%
2.59%
2.67%
1.79%
1.99%
1.66%
1.04%
2.43%
1.00%
2.1%
7.71%
4.40%
6.68%
3.78%
2.95%
1.33%
9.29%
6.56%
5.61%
3.16%
2.98%
2.06%
3.31%
2.80% 38.92% 20.04%
7.01%
3.79%
1.67%
1.51%
2.69%
2.64%
1.88%
1.70%
3.00%
1.68%
2.46%
2.46%
1.7%
12.68%
6.90%
17.64% 10.21%
9.80%
3.01%
6.73%
5.25%
6.49%
4.87%
5.89%
4.69% 68.78% 34.31%
5.89%
3.86%
2.46%
2.09%
5.33%
4.41%
3.57%
3.06%
5.1%
25.87% 13.58%
21.44% 11.86%
19.35%
4.37%
8.03%
9.18%
6.51%
9.26%
6.83% 136.19% 66.55%
8.78%
4.49%
4.43%
3.21%
8.49%
6.47%
5.63%
4.24%
5.3% 11.07%
49.63% 25.42%
33.36% 15.65%
6.33%
11.30%
7.75% 15.49% 10.82% 272.17% 126.49%
13.52%
8.60%
10.67%
6.78%

Source: See methodological appendix for an explanation of how we calculate the yields. Sovereign risk from Global Financial Data (using the 4.5% Gold Bonds from 1889 to 1914, the 5s bonds of 1912 for 1915, and the 5s funded debt of 1914 for the rest of the period). All yields in this table are
Note: The figures represent the implicit risk premium of the average yield for bonds of each state relative to the UK Consols. Figures in bold are spread of state bonds quoted in the Rio de Janeiro Stock Exchange relative to the UK Conols.
Coupon spread for Goias in 1917 is 3.4% and for Sergipe 3.7% in 1918 for apolices quoted in Rio de Janeiro are not reported in the table

Table 5. Foreign and Domestic State Debt by
Brazilian States in 1922 (mil reis)
% issued % issued in
Total debt abroad
Brazil
90%
9,776
62%
102,210
75%
186,883
85%
28,607
54%
575,091
80%
34,573
13,921
82%
0%
1,137
58%
141,923
89%
109,887
85,908
80%
76%
82,454
0%
157
82%
118,640
79%
6,079
56%
137,892
89%
48,243
57%
675,128
0%
4,708
2,363,217
63.6%
Source: Brazil. Diretoria Geral de Estatística. 1926.
Alagoas
Amazonas
Bahia
Ceará
Distrito Federal
Espírito Santo
Góias
Maranhão
Mato Grosso
Minas Gerais
Pará
Paraíba
Paraná
Pernambuco
Piaui
Rio de Janeiro
Rio Grande do Norte
Rio Grande do Sul
Santa Catarina
São Paulo
SE
Total state debt

10%
38%
25%
15%
46%
20%
18%
100%
42%
11%
20%
24%
100%
18%
21%
44%
11%
43%
100%
36.4%

38

Table 6. Summary Statistics
All
Variable

Obs

Mean

Std. Dev.

Rich
Min

Max

Obs

Mean

Poor
Std. Dev.

Obs

Mean

Std. Dev.

Dummy issue bond

880

0.078

0.269

0

1.000

264

0.15

0.36

616

0.05

0.22

Coupon spread

305

0.051

0.096

0.001

1.265

142

0.04

0.04

163

0.06

0.13

Yield to maturity spread

305

0.082

0.197

0

2.722

142

0.05

0.06

163

0.11

0.26

State public revenue per capita (1000's of reis)

880

9.5

10.5

1.3

76.7

264

16.9

14.6

616

6.4

5.8

Exports per capita (1000's of reis)

787

45.9

68.6

0.0

711.0

262

90.6

93.0

525

23.6

35.5

Imports per capita (1000's of reis)

791

31.7

58.8

0.5

418.2

220

77.5

93.9

571

14.0

16.8

Population (millions)

880

1.2

1.3

0.1

7.1

264

2.0

1.8

616

0.8

0.7

Deficit ratio

880

0.06

0.24

-0.62

2.07

264

0.10

0.3

616

0.05

0.21
21.5

Debt per capita lineal interpolation (1000's reis)

a

662

32.21

43.99

0

284.68

215

62.5

60.4

447

17.7

Debt1/state public revenue

661

2.99

3.17

0

25.99

215

4.3

3.8

447

2.3

2.6

Debt1/exports

585

1.82

10.47

0

206.76

215

0.8

0.6

457

17.2

20.6

Note: Rich States are those with revenue per capita are above the median for almost all years. Among the rich states are Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo, Minas Gerais, Espitio Santo, Rio Grande do Sul and
Amazonas. Poor states are Alagoas, Bahia, Ceara, Goias, Maranhão, Mato Grosso, Pará, Paraiba, Parana, Pernambuco, Piaui, Rio Grande do Norte, Santa Catarina and Sergipe
a) We estimate these figures by simple linear interpolation between the data points available.

39

Table 7. Log Spreads (Brazil states 1891-1928). Dependent variable is the logarithm of the spread of states' yield over the yield of of UK consols in basis points. The first 9 specifications are OLS panel
data. Specification 11 is a linear regression with panel-corrected standard errors and 12 is Feasible Generalized Least Squares in order to model the autocorrelation of errors within panels. All the
regressions are the spreads of state bonds in foreign markets but 10, which include quotations from the Rio de Janeiro Stock Exchange (this increases the number of states by including Paraíba, Sergipe,
and Góias). The hypothesis tested is that those states with higher capacity to collect revenue are perceived by international markets as safer and thus have lower spreads or lower default risk. A negative
sign in lag state public revenue per capita would confirm our hypothesis. Clustered robust standard errors unless otherwise indicated. Coefficients marked with: *** indicates significant at 1%, ** at 5%,
and * at 10%, respectively.
(1)
VARIABLES

Log State Public Revenue pc (t-1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Log (Coupon Log (Coupon Log (Coupon Log (Coupon Log (Coupon Log (Coupon
Spread)
Spread)
Spread)
Spread)
Spread)
Spread
<1500)
-0.586**
(0.21)

Log Population (t-1)
Log Debt pc capita (t-1)

-0.217**

-0.266*

-0.227**

-0.190*

-0.269***

(7)
Log (Coupon
Spread<1500)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

Log (Yield to Including RJ Log (Coupon Log (Coupon
Maturity
Spread)
Spread) (FGLS)
Spread)
(PCSE)

-0.269

-0.178

-0.222

-0.313***

-0.301***

(0.10)

(0.13)

(0.09)

(0.10)

(0.09)

(0.19)

(0.18)

(0.27)

(0.09)

(0.10)

0.968*

0.968

1.322***

0.539

-0.591

-0.591

0.532

-1.252

1.327**

1.630**

(0.54)

(1.44)

(0.69)

(0.44)

(0.61)

(0.59)

(1.67)

(1.68)

(1.69)

(0.56)

-0.05

-0.098

-0.061

-0.062

-0.062

-0.059

0.139

0.118

0.098

(0.09)

(0.09)

(0.09)

(0.10)

(0.17)

(0.18)

(0.18)

(0.12)

(0.12)

Debt/State Public Revenue

-0.05
(0.16)

Default History

1.065***

1.065***

1.093***

0.919***

1.329***

0.777***

0.782***

(0.20)

(0.35)

(0.19)

(0.21)

(0.37)

(0.18)

(0.18)

Log GDP international

-0.68
(0.43)

Gold Standard

-0.304***
(0.09)

Coffee

0.004
(0.13)

Rubber

-0.670**
(0.29)

Constant

7.105***

8.056***

8.056***

16.829***

7.500***

6.265***

6.265**

6.432***

4.454**

7.284***

(0.49)

(0.71)

(1.60)

(3.61)

(0.79)

(0.84)

(2.17)

(2.01)

(2.03)

(1.58)

Controlling for commodity prices

N

N

N

Y

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

State Dummies

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Year Dummies

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Observations

Y
278

N
268

Y
268

Y
257

N
268

N
258

Y
258

Y
267

Y
282

Y
268

Y
268

R-squared

0.63

0.68

0.68

0.67

0.69

0.50

0.50

0.69

0.62

0.96

Clustered Standard Errors

40

Table 8. Log Coupon Spreads (Brazil states 1891-1928) Two Stage Least Squares Estimates. Panel A shows the first stage
where the dependent variable is the logarithm of the lag (t-1) of state public revenue per capita, using the logarithm of the our simulated
commodity price index as instrument (lagged one year). The dependent variable in the second stage is the logarithm of the yield of state debt bonds
relative to the UK consol yield in basis points. The hypothesis tested is that those states with higher revenue collection haver lower cost of capital. A
negative sign in the logarithm of the lagged state public revenue per capita confirms our hypothesis and it is interpreted as an elasticity. Clustered
Robust Standard errors are reported in parenthesis. Coefficients marked with: *** indicates significant at 1%, ** at 5% and * at 10%
Panel A. Second stage regression: dependent variable is the spread of state bonds relative to the UK consols
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Log State Public Revenue pc
(t-1)

(8)

(9)

Log
(Coupon
Spread)
(Prices
without
coffee)

Log (Coupon
Spread) (Prices
without
rubber)

-0.71**

-0.97***

-0.95**

(0.38)

(0.31)

(0.29)

(0.43)

0.14

0.72

0.35

0.24

(1.93)

(1.70)

(1.93)

(1.94)

Log
(Coupon
Spread)

Log
(Coupon
Spread)

Log
(Coupon
Spread)

Log
(Coupon
Spread)

-0.88***

-0.60*

-0.95*

-0.80***

-0.80*

-0.65*

(0.23)

(0.33)

(0.55)

(0.23)

(0.47)

0.75

0.73

1.56

-0.42

(1.57)

(1.33)

(1.50)

(2.65)

Log Population (t-1)
Log Debt pc capita (t-1)
Default Dummy

(7)

Log (Yield to
Log
(Coupon
Maturity
Spread<150
Spread)
0)

Log
(Coupon
Spread)

0.00

0.31*

-0.01

0.00

-0.02

0.01

0.03

(0.16)

(0.18)

(0.16)

(0.20)

(0.20)

(0.22)

(0.18)

0.63

0.71**

0.79*

0.50

(0.40)

(0.36)

(0.42)

(0.35)

Coffee

-0.16
(0.13)

Rubber

-0.71**
(0.36)
7.50***

7.85***

9.16***

7.41***

7.12***

7.45***

8.06***

8.07***

7.88***

(0.66)

(1.48)

(1.77)

(1.63)

(2.13)

(1.72)

(1.64)

(1.95)

(1.69)

Time dummies

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

State fixed effects

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Constant

Commodity prices
Observations
R-squared

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

258

258

256

256

239

246

256

229

229

0.614

0.663

0.648

0.656

0.569

0.672

0.653

0.605

0.604

Panel B. First stage regression using (simulated) state price indices as instruments. Dep.variable is state public revenue per capita (t-1)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Log State
Log State
Log State
Log State Log State Log State Log State Log State Log State
Public
Public
Public
Public
Public
Public
Public
Public
Public
Revenue pc Revenue pc Revenue pc Revenue pc Revenue pc Revenue pc Revenue pc Revenue pc Revenue pc (t(t-1)
1)
(t-1)
(t-1)
(t-1)
(t-1)
(t-1)
(t-1)
(t-1)
Log State Public Revenue pc
(t-1)

0.85***

0.65***

0.40***

0.85***

0.58***

0.65***

0.55***

0.87***

0.68**

(0.14)

(0.14)

(0.09)

(0.16)

(0.19)

(0.14)

(0.14)

(0.14)

(0.24)

-1.13

-0.72

-1.17

-1.9

-1.13

-0.5

-0.5

-1.27

(1.12)

(0.65)

(1.59)

(1.38)

(1.12)

(1.26)

(1.76)

(2.48)

-0.08
(0.22)

-0.07
(0.13)

0
(0.08)

0.09
(0.09)

0.14
(0.13)

-0.06
(0.16)

Log Population (t-1)
Log Debt pc capita (t-1)

0
(0.08)

Default Dummy

-0.5

-0.23

-0.5

-0.39

(0.29)

(0.24)

(0.29)

(0.27)

Coffee

-0.17
(0.10)

Rubber

0.37
(0.34)

Constant

-1.24**

-1.24**

-2.19

-3.50**

-2.2

-1.94

-2.19

-1.08

-3.07*

(0.54)

(0.54)

(1.30)

(1.53)

(1.77)

(1.47)

(1.30)

(1.63)

(1.69)

Observations

258

258

256

256

239

246

256

229

229

R-squared

0.89

0.89

0.90

0.90

0.90

0.90

0.90

0.92

0.88

42

Table A1. Cox Hazard Model Estimates. Dependent variable is the relative hazard ratio of issuing a
state bond for the first time in the international capital markets between 1890 and 1931. The hypothesis
is that high capacity to collect revenue increases the likelihood that a state will issue its firts bond
earlier. A positive sign in the coefficient for the logarithm of lag state public revenue per capita would
confirm our hypothesis. Clustered robust standard errors in parentheses. Coefficients marked with: ***
indicates significant at 1%, ** at 5% and * at 10%
Hazard Ratio Hazard Ratio Hazard Ratio Hazard Ratio Hazard Ratio
of Issuing
of Issuing
of Issuing
of Issuing
of Issuing
First Bond
First Bond
First Bond
First Bond
First Bond

Log State Public Revenue pc (t-1)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.731***

0.882**

0.979**

1.180**

1.591***

(0.23)

(0.44)
0.6
(0.49)
0.072
(0.31)

(0.44)
0.62
(0.51)
0.09
(0.32)
1.173
0.00
4.535***
(0.94)
6.063
0.00

(0.55)

(0.43)
0.878
(0.54)
0.036
(0.35)
-1.004
0.00
7.510**
(2.98)
-17.692
0.00

Log Population (millions)
Log Imports per capita (t-1)
Gold Standard Dummy
Log World GDP
World War I Dummy
Coffee as a % of total exports
Sugar as a % of total exports
Cotton as a % of total exports
Rubber as a % of total exports
Tobacco as a % of total exports
Cacao as a % of total exports

-0.249
(0.42)
0
0.00
9.679**
(3.88)
-0.997
0.00
1.734
(1.08)
-3.33
(2.54)
0.799
(1.69)
-0.634
(1.43)
-19.038
(12.92)
34.726**
(15.37)

Altitude

1.077
(0.80)
-1.06
(2.92)
-1.13
(0.84)

Temperature
Distance to equator
Observations

478

426

426

425

425

43

Table A2. Probit Estimates of the Probability of Issuing a Bond in a Given Year for any Given
State. Dependent variable is a dummy indicating 1 if a state issues a bond in year t , or zero
otherwise. The hypothesis is that states with high capacity to collect revenue have higher probability
of issuing a bond in any point of time. A positive sign in the coefficient for the lag of state public
revenue per capita would confirm our hypothesis.Regressions 2 to 5 include year dummies. Robust
standard errors clustered at state level appear in parentheses. This table reports marginal effects
only. For a definition of the controls see the Methodological Appendix. Coefficients marked with:
*** indicates significant at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%, respectively.
Bond
Dummy
Log State Public Revenue pc (t-1)

Bond
Dummy

Bond
Dummy

Bond
Dummy

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.0510***

0.0791***

0.0492***

0.0613***

0.0593***

(0.01)

(0.02)
0.0734***

(0.01)
0.0480***

(0.02)
0.0674***

(0.01)
0.0520***

(0.01)
-0.0089

(0.01)
-0.0069

(0.02)
-0.0152

(0.01)
-0.0094

(0.01)

(0.01)
0.0922***
(0.02)
0.0079
(0.03)
0
0.00

(0.01)

(0.01)

Log Population (millions)
Log Lag Imports per capita
Gold Standard Dummy
Log World GDP
World War I Dummy
Coffee as a % of total exports

0.0731***
(0.02)
-0.0771

Sugar as a % of total exports

(0.05)
-0.0119
(0.08)
0.0447
(0.04)
0.1204

Cotton as a % of total exports
Rubber as a % of total exports
Tobacco as a % of total exports

(0.11)
-0.0492
(0.10)

Cacao as a % of total exports
Altitude

0.0003
(0.01)
-0.0048
(0.01)
-0.0014
(0.00)

Temperature
Distance to equator
Observations

Bond
Dummy

923

550

550

492

492

44

