                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       TRAFFIC CONGESTION AND INFANT HEALTH:
                               EVIDENCE FROM E-ZPASS

                                             Janet Currie
                                             Reed Walker

                                        Working Paper 15413
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15413


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2009




We are grateful to the MacArthur foundation for financial support. We thank Katherine Hempstead
and Matthew Weinberg of the New Jersey Department of Health, and Craig Edelman of the Pennsylvania
Department of Health for facilitating our access to the data. We are grateful to James MacKinnon and
seminar participants at Harvard University, Princeton University, Queens University, Tulane University,
the University of Maryland, the University of Massachusetts- Amherst, the University of Rome, Uppsala
University, the NBER Summer Institute, and the SOLE/EALE 2010 meetings for helpful comments.
All opinions and any errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Janet Currie and Reed Walker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from E-ZPass
Janet Currie and Reed Walker
NBER Working Paper No. 15413
October 2009, Revised April 2012
JEL No. I12,Q51,Q53

                                             ABSTRACT

We exploit the introduction of electronic toll collection, (E-ZPass), which greatly reduced both traffic
congestion and vehicle emissions near highway toll plazas. We show that the introduction of E-ZPass
reduced prematurity and low birth weight among mothers within 2km of a toll plaza by 10.8% and
11.8% respectively relative to mothers 2-10km from a toll plaza. There were no immediate changes
in the characteristics of mothers or in housing prices near toll plazas that could explain these changes.
The results are robust to many changes in specification and suggest that traffic congestion contributes
significantly to poor health among infants.


Janet Currie
Princeton University
316 Wallace Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
jcurrie@princeton.edu

Reed Walker
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1022 International Affairs Building
New York, NY 10027
rw2157@columbia.edu
1     Introduction
Motor vehicles are a major source of air pollution. Nationally they are responsible for over 50 percent

of carbon monoxide (CO), 34 percent of nitrogen dioxide (NO2 ) and over 29 percent of hydrocarbon

emissions in addition to as much as 10 percent of fine particulate matter emissions (Michelle Ernst

and Greene-Roesel 2003). In urban areas, vehicles are the dominant source of these emissions. Fur-

thermore, between 1980 and 2003 total vehicle miles traveled (VMT) in urban areas in the United

States increased by 111 percent against an increase in urban lane-miles of only 51 percent (Bureau

of Transportation Statistics 2004). As a result, traffic congestion has steadily increased across the

United States, causing 3.7 billion hours of delay by 2003 and wasting 2.3 billion gallons of motor fuel

(Lomax and Schrank 2005). Traditional estimates of the cost of congestion typically include delay

costs (Vickrey 1969), but they rarely address other congestion externalities such as the health effects

of congestion.

    This paper seeks to provide estimates of the health effects of traffic congestion by examining the

effect of a policy change that caused a sharp drop in congestion (and therefore in the level of local

motor vehicle emissions) within a relatively short time frame at different sites across the northeastern

United States. Engineering studies suggest that the introduction of electronic toll collection (ETC)

technology, called E-ZPass in the Northeast, sharply reduced delays at toll plazas and pollution caused

by idling, decelerating, and accelerating. We study the effect of E-ZPass, and thus the sharp reductions

in local traffic congestion, on the health of infants born to mothers living near toll plazas.

    This question is of interest for three reasons. First, there is increasing evidence of the long-term

effects of poor health at birth on future outcomes. For example, low birth weight has been linked

to future health problems and lower educational attainment (see Currie (2009) for a summary of

this research). The debate over the costs and benefits of emission controls and traffic congestion

policies could be significantly impacted by evidence that traffic congestion has a deleterious effect on

fetal health. Second, the study of newborns overcomes several difficulties in making the connection

between pollution and health because, unlike adult diseases that may reflect pollution exposure that

occurred many years ago, the link between cause and effect is immediate. Third, E-ZPass is an

interesting policy experiment because, while pollution control was an important consideration for



                                                    2
policy makers, the main motive for consumers to sign up for E-ZPass is to reduce travel time. Hence,

E-ZPass offers an example of achieving reductions in pollution by bundling emissions reductions with

something consumers perhaps value more highly such as reduced travel time.

   Our analysis improves upon much of the previous research linking air pollution to fetal health as

well as on the somewhat smaller literature focusing specifically on the relationship between residential

proximity to busy roadways and poor pregnancy outcomes. Since air pollution is not randomly as-

signed, studies that attempt to compare health outcomes for populations exposed to differing pollution

levels may not be adequately controlling for confounding determinants of health. Since air quality

is capitalized into housing prices (see Chay and Greenstone (2005)) families with higher incomes or

preferences for cleaner air are likely to sort into locations with better air quality, and failure to account

for this sorting will lead to overestimates of the effects of pollution. Alternatively, pollution levels are

higher in urban areas where there are often more educated individuals with better access to health

care, which can cause underestimates of the true effects of pollution on health.

   In the absence of a randomized trial, we exploit a policy change that created large local and

persistent reductions in traffic congestion and traffic related air emissions for certain segments along

a highway. We compare the infant health outcomes of those living near an electronic toll plaza before

and after implementation of E-ZPass to those living near a major highway but further away from a

toll plaza. Specifically, we compare mothers within 2 kilometers of a toll plaza to mothers who are

between 2 and 10 km from a toll plaza but still within 3 kilometers of a major highway before and

after the adoption of E-ZPass in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.

   New Jersey and Pennsylvania provide a compelling setting for our particular research design.

First, both New Jersey and Pennsylvania are heavily populated, with New Jersey being the most

densely populated state in the United States and Pennsylvania being the sixth most populous state

in the country. As a result, these two states have some of the busiest interstate systems in the

country, systems that also happen to be densely surrounded by residential housing. Furthermore, we

know the exact addresses of mothers, in contrast to many observational studies which approximate the

individuals location as the centroid of a geographic area or by computing average pollution levels within

the geographic area. This information enables us to improve on the assignment of pollution exposure.

Lastly, E-ZPass adoption and take up was extremely quick, and the reductions in congestion spillover


                                                     3
to all automobiles, not just those registered with E-ZPass (New Jersey Turnpike Authority 2001).

    Our difference-in-differences research design relies on the assumption that the characteristics of

mothers near a toll plaza change over time in a way that is comparable to those of other mothers

who live further away from a plaza but still close to a major highway. We test this assumption by

examining the way that observable characteristics of the two groups of mothers and housing prices

change before and after E-ZPass adoption. We also estimate a range of alternative specifications in

an effort to control for unobserved characteristics of mothers and neighborhoods that could confound

our estimates.

    We find significant effects on infant health. The difference-in-difference models suggest that pre-

maturity fell by 6.7-9.16 percent among mothers within 2km of a toll plaza, while the incidence of low

birth weight fell by 8.5-11.3 percent. We argue that these are large but not implausible effects given

previous studies. In contrast, we find that there are no significant effects of E-ZPass adoption on the

demographic characteristics of mothers in the vicinity of a toll plaza. We also find no immediate effect

on housing prices, suggesting that the composition of women giving birth near toll plazas shows little

change in the immediate aftermath of E-ZPass adoption (though of course it might change more over

time).

    The rest of the paper is laid out as follows: Section I provides necessary background. Section II

describes our methods, while data are described in Section III. Section IV presents our results. Section

VI discusses the magnitude of the effects we find, and Section V details our conclusions.



2        Background
Many studies suggest an association between air pollution and fetal health. Glinianaia, Rankin,

Bell, Pless-Mulloli, and Howel (2004) and Mattison (2003) summarize much of the literature. For

more recent papers see for example Currie, Neidell, and Schmieder (2009); Rose, Linda, David, and

Marc (2006); Huynh, Woodruff, Parker, and Schoendorf (2006); Karr, Rudra, Miller, Gould, Larson,

Sathyanarayana, and Koenig (2009); Lee, Hajat, Steer, and Filippi (2008); Leem, Kaplan, Shim,

Pohl, Gotway, Bullard, Rogers, Smith, and Tylenda (2006); Liu, Krewski, Shi, Chen, and Burnett

(2006); Parker, Woodruff, Basu, and Schoendorf (2005); Salam, Millstein, Li, Lurmann, Margolis,


                                                   4
and Gilliland (2005); Ritz, Wilhelm, and Zhao (2006); Wilhelm and Ritz (2005); Woodruff, Darrow,

and Parker (2008). Since traffic is a major contributor to air pollution, several studies have focused

specifically on the effects of exposure to motor vehicle exhaust (see Wilhelm and Ritz (2003); Ponce,

Hoggatt, Wilhelm, and Ritz (2005); Brauer, Hoek, Van Vliet, Meliefste, Fischer, Gehring, Heinrich,

Cyrys, Bellander, Lewne, et al. (2003); Slama, Morgenstern, Cyrys, Zutavern, Herbarth, Wichmann,

Heinrich, et al. (2007); Beatty and Shimshack (2011); Knittel, Miller, and Sanders (2011)).

   At the same time, researchers have documented many differences between people who are exposed

to high volumes of traffic and others (Gunier, Hertz, Von Behren, and Reynolds 2003). A correlational

study cannot demonstrate that the effect of pollution is causal. Women living close to busy roadways

are more likely to have other characteristics that are linked to poor pregnancy outcomes such as

lower income, education, and probabilities of being married, and a higher probability of being a teen

mother. This is partly because wealthier people are more likely to move away from pollution. Depro

and Timmins (2008) show that gains in wealth from appreciating housing values during the 1990s

allowed households in San Francisco to move to cleaner areas. Banzhaf and Walsh (2008) show that

neighborhoods experiencing improvements in environmental quality tend to gain population while the

converse is also true.

   Most previous studies include a minimal set of controls for potential confounders. Families with

higher incomes or greater preferences for cleaner air may be more likely to sort into neighborhoods

with better air quality. These families are also likely to provide other investments in their children, so

that fetuses exposed to lower levels of pollution also receive more family inputs, such as better quality

prenatal care or less maternal stress. If these factors are unaccounted for, then the estimated effects

of pollution may be biased upwards. Alternatively, emission sources tend to be located in urban areas,

and individuals in urban areas may be more educated and have better access to health care, factors

that may improve health. Omitting these factors would lead to a downward bias in the estimated

effects of pollution, suggesting that the overall direction of bias from confounding is unclear.

   Several previous studies are especially relevant to our work because they address the problem of

omitted confounders by focusing on “natural experiments.” Chay and Greenstone (2003a) and Chay

and Greenstone (2003b) examine the implementation of the Clean Air Act of 1970 and the recession

of the early 1980s. Both events induced sharper reductions in particulates in some counties than in


                                                    5
others, and they use this exogenous variation in pollution at the county-year level to identify its effects.

They estimate that a one unit decline in particulates caused by the implementation of the Clean Air

Act (or by recession) led to between five and eight (four and seven) fewer infant deaths per 100,000

live births. They also find some evidence that declines in Total Suspended Particles (TSPs) led to

reductions in the incidence of low birth weight. However, the levels of particulates studied by Chay

and Greenstone are much higher than those prevalent today; for example, PM10 levels have fallen by

nearly 50 percent from 1980 to 2000. Furthermore, only TSPs were measured during the time period

they examine, which precludes the examination of other pollutants that are found in motor vehicle

exhaust.

   Other studies that are similar in spirit include a sequence of papers by Arden Pope and his

collaborators, who investigated the health effects of the temporary closing of a Utah steel mill (Pope 3rd

(1989); Ransom and Pope III (1992); Pope III, Schwartz, and Ransom (1992)) and Friedman, Powell,

Hutwagner, Graham, and Teague (2001) who examine the effect of changes in traffic patterns in

Atlanta due to the 1996 Olympic games. However, these studies did not look at fetal health. Parker,

Mendola, and Woodruff (2008) examine the effect of the Utah steel mill closure on preterm births and

find that exposure to pollution from the mill increased the probability of preterm birth. This study

however does not speak to the issue of effects of traffic congestion on infant health.

   Currie, Neidell, and Schmieder (2009) examine the effects of several pollutants on fetal health in

New Jersey using models that include maternal fixed effects to control for potential confounders. They

find that CO is particularly implicated in negative birth outcomes. In pregnant women, exposure to

CO reduces the availability of oxygen to be transported to the fetus. Carbon monoxide readily crosses

the placenta and binds to fetal haemoglobin more readily than to maternal haemoglobin. It is cleared

from fetal blood more slowly than from maternal blood, leading to concentrations that may be 10

to 15 percent higher in the fetuss blood than in the mothers. Indeed, much of the negative effect of

smoking on infant health is believed to be due to the CO contained in cigarette smoke (World Health

Organization 2000). Hence, a significant effect of E-ZPass on CO alone would be expected to have a

significant positive effect on fetal health.

   E-ZPass is an electronic toll collection system that allows vehicles equipped with a special windshield-

mounted tag to drive through designated toll lanes without stopping to manually pay a toll. The


                                                     6
benefits include time saved, reduced fuel consumption, and reductions in harmful emissions caused

by idling and acceleration at toll plazas. In addition, the air quality benefits are thought to be large

enough that some counties have introduced ETC explicitly in order to meet pollution migitation

requirements under the Clean Air Act (Saka, United States. Dept. of Transportation. Office of

Innovation, Education, for Transportation Studies, and (US) 2000).

   Engineering estimates of the reduction in pollution with E-ZPass adoption vary. They are typically

based on a combination of traffic count data, and measures of the extent to which reducing the

idling, deceleration and acceleration around toll plazas would reduce emissions for a given vehicle

mix. For example, Saka, United States. Dept. of Transportation. Office of Innovation, Education, for

Transportation Studies, and (US) (2000) compared data on traffic flows through manned toll lanes and

electronic toll collection lanes at one toll plaza at a single point in time and estimated that reductions

in queuing, decelerations and accelerations in the ETC lanes resulted in reductions of 11 percent for

NO2 and a decrease of more than 40 percent for hydrocarbons and CO relative to emissions in the

manned lanes. A similar study of the George Washington Bridge toll plaza, one of those included

in this study, by Venigalla and Krimmer (2006), estimated that VOC, CO, and NO2 emissions from

trucks were reduced in the E-ZPass lanes by 30.8 percent, 23.5 percent, and 5.8 percent.

   Although these studies suggest that E-ZPass could lead to substantial reductions in ambient pol-

lution, these studies may over-estimate or under-estimate the extent of that reduction. For example,

if reducing toll plaza delays encourages more people to drive rather than take public transit, then

this may offset the reduction in pollution per-vehicle to some extent. Conversely, to the extent that

drivers in non E-ZPass lanes also benefit from reduced congestion, comparing delays at E-ZPass and

manual lanes will understate the benefits of E-ZPass. We were unable to find a study that measured

pollution in the radius of a toll plaza before and after the introduction of ETC.

   However, the New Jersey Turnpike Authority commissioned a study of the extent to which E-

ZPass reduced total delays at toll plazas (New Jersey Turnpike Authority 2001). This study used

before and after data on traffic counts at each toll plaza, and measured the delays at toll plazas

using video cameras. Evidently, the total delay is given by (number of vehicles)*(delay per vehicle).

This study concluded that total delay at toll plazas dropped by 85 percent after the implementation

of E-ZPass, saving 1.8 million hours of delay for cars, and 231,000 hours of delay for trucks in the


                                                    7
year after adoption. If pollution around the toll plaza is proportional to these delays, then it is

reasonable to conclude that it was also reduced considerably. The report estimated that E-ZPass

reduced emissions of NO2 by .056 tons per day, or 20.4 tons per year. In 2002, mobile on-road

sources emitted approximately 300 tons of NO2 per year (New Jersey Department of Environmental

Protection 2005). Hence, a crude estimate is that E-ZPass reduced NO2 emissions from traffic by

about 6.8 percent. Unfortunately, the EPAs air quality monitors are placed throughout the state such

that there is only one monitor located near a toll plaza in our study area. Furthermore, this particular

monitor only measures NO2 and SO2 . Nevertheless we show evidence that suggests a sharp decline in

NO2 levels following E-ZPass adoption. This is in contrast to SO2 levels at the same monitor, for which

we see no noticeable decline. This is consistent with the fact that cars produce a large percentage of

local NO2 emissions, while they are responsible for a very small fraction of SO2 emissions.

   An important unresolved question is how far elevated pollution levels extend from highways or toll

plazas? Most studies have focused on areas 100 to 500 meters from a roadway. However, Hu, Fruin,

Kozawa, Mara, Paulson, and Winer (2009) find evidence that pollution from the 405 Freeway in Los

Angeles is found up to 2,600 meters from the roadway. Moreover, their study was conducted in the

hours before sunrise, when traffic volumes are relatively light, but most people are in their homes. We

investigate this issue below.

   We focus on the implementation of E-ZPass on three major state tollways in New Jersey and

Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Turnpike, the New Jersey Turnpike, and the Garden State Parkway.

Portions of all three of these state highways rank nationally as some of the busiest in the country. In

addition to these state tollways, we also use the major bridge and tunnel tolls connecting New Jersey

to New York (George Washington Bridge, Lincoln Tunnel, and the Holland Tunnel). Each of these

bridges and tunnels are extremely well traveled, transporting around 105 million, 42 million, and 35

million vehicles respectively. New Jersey has 38 toll plazas, 3 at bridge/tunnel entrances to New York

City, 11 along the Garden State Parkway, 22 along the New Jersey Turnpike, and 2 along the Atlantic

City Expressway. There are 60 toll plazas in Pennsylvania. Figure 1 shows the toll plazas and major

highways that we use.

   Our research design exploits the fact that E-ZPass was installed at different times and in different

locations across the two states. The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey implemented E-


                                                   8
ZPass at the bridge and tunnels entering New York City in 1997. Soon after, New Jersey installed

its first E-ZPass toll plazas on the Atlantic City Expressway. Starting in December 1999, New Jersey

began installing E-ZPass on the Garden State Parkway. Throughout the course of the following year,

toll plazas were added at the rate of 1 per month (working from North to South on the GSP), with

the final plaza installed in August of 2000. In September 2000, the NJ Turnpike installed E-ZPass at

all their toll collection terminals throughout the system. Similarly, the PA Turnpike installed most

of their toll-plazas with E-ZPass in December 2000, with a major addition occurring in December of

2001. E-ZPass adoption and take up was extremely rapid. By early 2001 (1 year after implementation

of the Garden State Parkway and NJ Turnpike), 1.3 million cars had been registered with E-ZPass in

New Jersey.



3     Data
Our main source of data for this study are Vital Statistics Natality records from Pennsylvania for 1997

to 2002 and for New Jersey for the years 1994 to 2003. Vital Statistics records are a very rich source

of data that cover all births in the two states. They have both detailed information about health at

birth and background information about the mother, including race, education, and marital status.

We were able to make use of a confidential version of the data with the mothers address, and we were

also able to match births to the same mother over time using information about the mothers name,

race, and birth date. Like most previous studies of infant health, we focus on two birth outcomes,

prematurity (defined as gestation less than 38 weeks) and low birth weight (defined as birth weight

less than 2500 grams).

    Using this information, we first divided mothers into three groups: Those living within 2km of a

toll plaza; those living within 3km of a major highway, but between 2km and 10km from a toll plaza;

and those who lived 10km or more away from a toll plaza. Our treatment group in the difference-in-

difference design is the mothers living within 2km of a toll plaza, while the control group is those who

live close to a highway, but between 2km and 10km from a toll plaza. We drop mothers who live more

than 10km away from a toll plaza. In total, we have 98 toll plazas that adopted electronic tolling in

our sample, and thus we have 98 separate sample regions. We also drop births that occurred more


                                                   9
than 3 years before or after the E-ZPass conversion of the nearest plaza, in an effort to focus on births

that occurred around the changes. All of the mothers in the sample are assigned to their nearest toll

plaza.

   Figure 2 illustrates the way that we created the treatment and control groups for each of our toll

plaza sample regions. As one can see from the figure, there are many homes within the relevant radius

of the toll plaza. Moreover, housing tends to follow the highway. The areas more than 2km away

from either a toll plaza or the highway are somewhat less dense. We also repeat this procedure using

mothers less than 1.5km from a toll plaza as the treatment group, comparing them to mothers who

live within 3km of a highway but between 1.5 and 10km from a toll plaza.

   In the analysis including mother fixed effects, we select the sample differently. Specifically, we

keep only mothers with more than one birth in our data. We then restrict the sample to only mothers

who have had at least one child born within 2km of a toll plaza, since only these mothers can help

to identify the effects of E-ZPass. (The other mothers could in principal identify some of the other

coefficients in the model, but as we show below, they have quite different average characteristics so we

prefer to exclude them). We use all available years of sample data, in order to maximize the number

of women we observe with two or more children.

   We obtained data on housing prices in New Jersey from 1989 to 2009 by submitting an open access

records request. In addition to the sales date and price, these data include information about address,

square footage, age of structures, whether the unit is a condominium, assessed value of the land,

and assessed value of the structures. We will use these data to see if housing prices changed in the

neighborhood of toll plazas in response to amenity benefits generated from reduced traffic congestion

and increased air quality surrounding E-ZPass implementation.

   Means of the outcomes we examine (prematurity and low birth weight) and of the independent

variables are shown in Table 1 for all of these groups. Panel A shows means for the treatment and

control group used in the difference-in-differences analysis. For the control group, “before” and “after”

are assigned on the basis of when the closest toll plaza converted to E-ZPass. The last column of Panel

A shows means for mothers who live more than 10km from a toll plaza. They are less likely to have

a premature birth, and their babies are less likely to be low birth weight. They are also less likely to

be black or Hispanic. These mothers are omitted from our difference-in-difference analysis.


                                                   10
   The treatment and control groups are similar to each other before the adoption of E-ZPass except

in terms of racial composition: Mothers close to toll plazas are much more likely to be Hispanic and

somewhat less likely to be African-American than other mothers. Mothers close to toll plazas are

also less likely to have smoked during the pregnancy. These differences have potentially important

implications for our analysis, since other things being equal, African Americans and smokers tend to

have worse birth outcomes than others. Hence, it is important to control for these differences, and we

will also examine these subgroups separately.

   In terms of before and after trends, both areas show increases in the fraction of births to Hispanic

and African-American mothers, and decreases in the fraction of births to smokers and teen mothers

over time. The fraction of births that were premature rose over time, especially in the control areas.

The fraction of births that were low birth weight showed a slight decrease in the treatment area near

toll plazas, but an increase in the control areas. These patterns reflect national time trends in the

demographic characteristics of new mothers and in birth outcomes. We can use these means tables to

do a crude difference in difference comparison. Such a comparison suggests that prematurity and low

birth weight fell by about 7 percent in areas less than 2km from a toll plaza after E-ZPass. Appendix

Table 8 shows changes in mean outcomes when the treatment group is restricted to those who were

within 1.5km of a toll plaza.

   Panel B of Table 1 shows means for the sample that we use in the mother fixed effects analysis.

Panel B shows that in general, the mothers with more than one birth in the sample have somewhat

better birth outcomestheir children are less likely to be premature or low birth weight than in the full

sample of children (Panel A). The sample of women who have more than one birth and who ever had a

child within 2 km of a toll plaza changes over time. Comparing columns 1 and 2 shows that over time

this population has become more Hispanic, less educated, and somewhat more likely to be having a

higher order birth. Columns 3 and 4 of Panel B show that the population of women who never had

a birth within 2 km of a plaza are quite differentthey are less likely to be Hispanic, the sample tends

to gain education over time, and (not surprisingly) lives further from a highway.

   Panel C shows means from the housing sales data. All prices were deflated by the CPI into 1993

dollars. Comparing columns 1 and 3 suggests that sales prices were similar in areas close to toll plazas

and a little further away from toll plazas before E-ZPass, but that prices increased faster near toll


                                                  11
plazas after adoption. The same comparison is shown for the area within 1.5km of a toll plaza and

areas 1.5-10km away from toll plazas in Appendix Table 8. We show below that controlling for a fairly

minimal set of covariates (month and year of sale, square footage, age of structure, municipality and

whether it is a condominium) reduces this estimate to statistical insignificance. Still, the idea that

prices may have increased, thereby changing the composition of mothers in the neighborhood provides

a motivation for the models we estimate below including mother fixed effects.

   Figures 3 to 6 provide more nuanced pictures of the relationship between E-ZPass adoption, birth

weight, and prematurity. Figures 3 and 4 focus on mothers within 2km of a toll plaza and take the

average values over .1km bins before and after E-ZPass. Figure 3 shows that there is a dramatic

reduction in low birth weight after E-ZPass in the area closest to the toll plaza. The reduction tapers

off and the lines cross at a little after 1km. Figure 4 shows a similar pattern for prematurity, although

here the lines cross at about 1.5 km from the toll plaza.

   Figures 5 and 6 compare low birth weight and prematurity in households more than 1.5km from

a toll plaza and households less than 1.5km from a toll plaza in the days before and after E-ZPass.

These figures indicate a higher incidence of low birth weight in the 500 days prior to E-ZPass adoption

in the area near the toll plaza. Around the time of E-ZPass adoption, the incidence of low birth weight

near toll plazas begins to decline dramatically, and falls below the control rate soon after adoption.

Figure 6 shows increasing rates of prematurity in both mothers near toll plazas and mothers further

away. Around the time of E-ZPass adoption, the rate of prematurity begins to fall for the near toll

plaza group.

   It is noticeable that in both figures, the incidence of poor outcomes begins to decline slightly before

the official date of E-ZPass adoption. We believe that this slight discrepancy in the timing may be

explained by E-ZPass construction. Prior to the official opening date, each plaza had to be adapted

for E-ZPass. The New Jersey E-ZPass contract included the installation of fiber optic communications

networks, patron fare displays, E-ZPass toll plaza signs and road stripping at a cost of $500 million

(New Jersey Department of Transportation ????). In one recent example, the toll plaza for the I-78

Toll Bridge is being upgraded to E-ZPass. Construction is scheduled to take place between early

January 2010 and Memorial Day, approximately 5 months. In the meantime, commuters are being

advised to use an alternative route so that traffic may be lighter than usual near this plaza (The


                                                   12
Warren Reporter 2010).



4     Methods
To implement our difference-in-difference estimator, we begin by testing the assumptions for the

estimator to be valid, namely that any trends in the observable characteristics of mothers are the

same across both treatment and control groups. The models for these specification checks take the

following form:


           M omCharit =a + β1 EZP assit + β2 Closeit + β3 P lazait + β4 EZP ass ∗ Closeit                (1)

                            + β5 Y ear + β6 M onth + β7 Distanceit + eit ,


where M omCharit are indicators for mother is race or ethnicity, her education, teen motherhood,

and whether she smoked during pregnancy t. EZP ass is an indicator equal to one if the closest toll

plaza has implemented E-ZPass, Closeit is an indicator equal to one if the mother lived within 2km

(or 1.5km) of a toll plaza, and P lazait is a series of indicators for the closest toll plaza. This indicator

is designed to capture any unobserved, time-invariant characteristics of each toll plaza sample region.

The coefficient of interest is that on the interaction between EZP assit and Closeit . We also include

indicators for the year and month to allow for systematic trends, such as the increase in minority

mothers. Finally, we control for linear distance from a busy roadway. Standard errors are clustered

at the level of the toll plaza, to allow for correlations in the errors of mothers around each plaza. If

we saw that maternal characteristics changed in some systematic way following the introduction of

E-ZPass, then we would need to take account of this selection when assessing the effects of E-ZPass

on health outcomes.

    We also estimate models of the effects of EZPass on housing prices. These models are similar

to (1) above except that they control for whether it is a condominium, age (in categories, including

missing), square footage (in categories, including missing), fixed effects for the municipality, and year

and month of sale. We have also estimated models that control for the ratio of assessed structure to

land values, with similar results.



                                                     13
   Our baseline models examining the effects of E-ZPass on the probabilities of low birth weight and

prematurity are similar to the models from equation (1). The estimated equation takes the following

form:


           Outcomeit = a + β1 EZP assit + β2 Closeit + β3 P lazait + β4 EZP assit ∗ Closeit            (2)

                         + β5 Y ear + β6 M onth + β7 Xit + β8 Distanceit + eit ,


where Outcome is either prematurity or low birth weight, and the vector Xit of mother and child

characteristics includes indicators for whether the mother is black or Hispanic; 4 mother education

categories (¡12, high school, some college, and college or more; missing is the left out category); mother

age categories (19-24, 25-24, 35+); an indicator for smoking during pregnancy; indicators for birth

order (2nd, 3rd, or 4th or higher order); an indicator for multiple birth; and an indicator for male child.

Indicators for missing data on each of these variables were also included. Again, the main coefficient

of interest is β4 which can be interpreted as the difference-in-differences coefficient comparing births

that are closer or further from a toll plaza, before and after adoption of E-ZPass.

   We perform a series of robustness checks. First, we estimate models that restrict the sample to

mothers within 5km of a toll plaza. Second, we include interactions of Closeit and a linear time trend.

It is possible that areas close to toll plazas are generally evolving in some way that is different from

other areas (e.g. racial composition), but as we shall see, this does not seem to affect our estimates.

Third, we estimated models of the propensity to live close to a toll plaza to see whether mothers

were more or less likely to live near a toll plaza before or after E-ZPass adoption. The propensity

models are estimated using all of the maternal and child characteristics listed above, the interactions

of these variables, as well as zip code fixed effects. We then excluded all observations with a propensity

less than .1 or greater than .9 as suggested by Crump et al. (2009). We estimated separate models

for African Americans and non-African Americans since these groups tend to have very different

average birth outcomes. We also looked separately at estimates for non-smokers. As we show below,

our difference in difference results are robust to these changes, though we do find larger effects for

African-Americans and for smokers.

   The estimates from (2) reflect an average effect of E-ZPass on people anywhere within the 2km



                                                    14
(or 1.5km) window. We have also experimented with allowing the effect to vary with distance from

the toll plaza. To do this requires that some assumption be made about the rate at which the effects

decay with distance from the toll plaza. The engineering literature is not particularly helpful in this

respect, since most studies focus on areas very close to roadways. As we show below, the estimates

are somewhat sensitive to these assumptions, but are qualitatively consistent with the results from

the simple difference-in-difference models.

    One possible threat to identification is that new mothers with better predicted birth outcomes

could select into areas around toll plazas after E-ZPass is adopted. Although we do not find evidence

of changes in the average demographic characteristics of those living near toll plazas after E-ZPass,

an arguably better way to control for possible changes in the composition of mothers is to estimate

models with mother fixed effects. These models take the following form:


           Outcomeit =ai + β1 EZP assit + β2 Closeit + β3 P lazait + β4 EZP assit ∗ Closeit           (3)

                         + β5 Y ear + β7 M onth + β8 Zit + β9 Distanceit + eit ,


where ai is a fixed effect for each mother i, and Z is a vector including child gender and birth order and

potentially time varying maternal characteristics including mothers age, education, and an indicator

for smoking. Although all the mothers are selected to have had at least one child while residing within

2km of a toll plaza, we alternatively define the indicator for Close either as less than 2km from a toll

plaza, or as less than 1.5km from a toll plaza.



5     Results
Table 2 shows the results of estimating equation (1), the effects of E-ZPass on the characteristics of

mothers who live near toll plazas and on housing prices. Each coefficient represents an estimate of

b4 from a separate regression. The only maternal characteristic to show any significant changes with

E-ZPass adoption is smoking, where it is estimated that E-ZPass has a positive effect. Note that if

more smokers move to areas after E-ZPass adoption (or if mothers smoke more) this will tend to work

against finding any net benefit of E-ZPass on birth outcomes. The last column shows that there is



                                                   15
no immediate significant effect on housing prices (although the coefficient is positive), suggesting that

it takes time for any effects through the housing market to be felt. These results suggest that the

estimated health effects of E-ZPass are not due to changes in the composition of mothers who live

close to toll plazas.

   Table 3 shows our estimates of (2). Again, each coefficient is an estimate of β4 from a separate

regression. The first and third columns show a model that controls only for month and year of birth,

toll plaza fixed effects, and distance to highway. These estimates are somewhat higher than the raw

difference-in-difference estimates implied by Table 1, suggesting that it is important to control for

time trends and regional differences. The second and fourth columns add maternal characteristics as

in equation (2). Assuming our research design is valid, adding controls for mothers characteristics

should only reduce the sampling variance while leaving the coefficient estimates unchanged. The

results in columns (2) and (4), are consistent with the validity of the research design, since adding

maternal characteristics has little impact on the estimated coefficients. These estimates suggest that

E-ZPass adoption reduced prematurity by 0.86 percentage points. This suggests that in the 29,677

births that we observe within 2km of a toll plaza after E-ZPass, 255 preterm births were averted. A

similar calculation indicates that E-ZPass reduced the incidence of low birth weight by 0.93 percentage

points, which means that in our sample 275 low birth weight births were averted (of course many of

these births overlap since most preterm infants are low birth weight).

   Panel 2 of Table 3 shows that the estimates are not generally significantly different when we define

“close” as 1.5km from a toll plaza. The point estimates are somewhat higher for prematurity, and

somewhat lower for low birth weight. In what follows we focus on models using the 2km cutoff and

explore the robustness of our results.

   The first panel of Table 4 shows the effect of restricting the sample to mothers within 5km of a toll

plaza only. This cuts our sample size by about 40 percent. Still, the standard errors are quite similar

to those shown in the comparable columns of Table 3 although the point estimates are somewhat

reduced. In this specification, there is a 6.7 percent reduction in prematurity and an 8.5 percent

reduction in low birth weight. Panel 2 shows the results of adding interactions between Closeit and

a linear time trend to the model. These interactions capture any differences in the evolution of areas

near toll plazas and other areas (such as, perhaps, different trends in demographic characteristics or


                                                   16
in housing markets). Adding these time trends again lowers the estimates somewhat from those in

Table 3, to 0.74 percentage points for prematurity and 0.84 percentage points for low birth weight.

Similarly, the propensity-score trimmed estimates shown in Panel 3 of Table 4, are a little smaller than

those in Table 3 (0.79 and 0.86 percentage points for prematurity and low birth weight respectively).

   The remaining panels of Table 4 focus on some important subgroups. Panels 4 and 5 estimate

separate models for African-Americans and all others. These estimates suggest that effects are much

larger for African-Americans. Since these mothers are twice as likely to have small and/or premature

babies, it is possible that similar reductions in gestation and birth weight are more likely to push

African-American babies below the thresholds for concern. Alternatively, it is possible that African-

American mothers are at a different point on the production possibility frontier, so that a similar

exposure to pollution has a larger effect. In results not reported in the table, we compared the

estimated effects on a continuous measure of birth weight for African-Americans and others and again

found much larger effects for the former.

   Panel 6 examines the effects for non-smokers. These are slightly smaller than the effects estimated

in Table 3 (7.5 compared to 8.6 percentage point reduction in prematurity 7.9 compared to 9.3 per-

centage point reduction in low birth weight) suggesting that pollution from motor vehicles is more

damaging for children of smokers. This result is consistent with (Currie, Neidell, and Schmieder 2009).

   Table 5 shows estimates in which we allow the effect of distance to vary within a 2km radius of

the toll plaza. As discussed above, these specifications require assumptions about the form of the

decay in the effects of E-ZPass. Table 5 compares two models. The first, shown in columns one and

three, assumes that the decay in effects is linear and dies out completely after 2km. When we use

this specification, the estimated effects of E-ZPass are negative, but relatively small and not precisely

estimated. However, if the form of the decay is not in fact linear, then we can expect the imposition

of linearity to bias the estimated coefficient towards zero. An alternative specification that conforms

more closely to the pattern shown in Figures 3 and 4 assumes that the effects decay exponentially

with distance from the toll plaza. Columns 3 and 4 show that imposing this assumption (specifically,

interacting “after E-ZPass” with 1/(edistance )) results in much larger point coefficients, although the

coefficient on prematurity is significant only at the 90 percent level of confidence. This coefficient (of

-.0153) implies, for example, that prematurity falls by 1.53 percentage points at 0km, 0.93 at .5km ,


                                                   17
0.56 at 1km and 0.34 at 1.5km.

    Table 6 shows estimates of (3) that include mother fixed effects. Panel A defines Close as less

than 2km from a toll plaza while Panel B defines Close as less than 1.5km from a toll plaza. These

estimates are significantly negative, suggesting that the effects we find in the difference-in-difference

specification are not driven primarily by changes in unobservable fixed characteristics of mothers in

the neighborhood of toll plazas after E-ZPass.



6      Discussion
Our results suggest that the adoption of E-ZPass was associated with significant improvements of

infant health. While these results are robust to a number of different specifications, in the absence of

a “first stage” it is difficult to interpret the magnitude of these effects. Unfortunately, there is only

one air quality monitor located within 2km of a toll plaza, but it happens to be located just .15km

from a toll plaza in our study. In this section we use data from this monitor as well as other air

quality monitors maintained by the EPA as various control groups, allowing us to estimate the effect

of E-ZPass. We combine our results with information from the engineering studies discussed above to

try to interpret our reduced form coefficients.

    Columns 1 and 2 of Table 7 shows difference in difference estimates of the effects of E-ZPass on

daily mean NO2 and SO2 levels at the one monitor that we observe within 2km of a toll plaza. These

models compare pollution at this “close” monitor to pollution at all monitors further than 2km from

a toll plaza, before and after E-ZPass. The model includes year, month, and day of week effects,

as well as monitor specific time trends. Furthermore, since pollution is correlated with weather, we

control for daily weather variation using quadratic polynomials in minimum temperature, maximum

temperature, and precipitation at the site of the air quality monitor. It is interesting to compare

the effects on NO2 and SO2 , because cars are a major source of the former but not of the later.

The estimates indicate that NO2 fell by 10.8 percent, post E-ZPass, while SO2 , showed no change.

The remaining columns of Table 7 show five similar models each estimated using a randomly selected

monitor from the sample of all NO2 monitors over 2km from a toll plaza as a control. Four of the five

show a significant decline in NO2 at the toll plaza monitor relative to the others, and these declines


                                                   18
range from 6.5 to 20.8 percent.

    It is unfortunate that this monitor does not also measure CO, since CO has been specifically

linked to poorer infant health outcomes in these data. However, the Saka, United States. Dept. of

Transportation. Office of Innovation, Education, for Transportation Studies, and (US) (2000) and

Venigalla and Krimmer (2006) studies discussed above suggest that a 10 percent reduction in NO2

due to E-ZPass would likely be accompanied by at least a 40 percent reduction in CO. Currie, Neidell,

and Schmieder (2009)estimate that a one part per million (ppm) change in ambient CO levels among

women within 10km of an air monitor in New Jersey reduced the incidence of low birth weight by

10.6 percent. While the mean levels of CO among all mothers within 10km of an air monitor was

1.64ppm, the standard deviation was .8, suggesting that more highly polluted areas of the state had

ambient levels over 3 ppm. Hence, the finding that E-Zpass led to reductions in the incidence of low

birth weight of 8.5-11.3 percent within 2km of a toll plaza seems reasonable.



7     Conclusions
We provide the first estimates of the effect of improvements in traffic congestion on infant health. We

show that E-ZPass reduced the incidence of prematurity and low birth weight in the vicinity of toll

plazas by 6.7-9.1 percent and 8.5-11.3 percent respectively. These are large but not implausible effects

given the correlations between proximity to traffic and birth outcomes found in previous studies. For

example, Slama, Morgenstern, Cyrys, Zutavern, Herbarth, Wichmann, Heinrich, et al. (2007) measure

levels of PM2.5 (particulates less than 2.5 microns in diameter) associated with traffic and find that

mothers in the highest quartile of exposure had a risk of birth weight less than 3000 grams that was 1.7

times higher than mothers in the lowest quartile of exposure. Wilhelm and Ritz (2003) find that the

risk of preterm birth was 8 percent higher in mothers in the highest quartile of a distance weighted

traffic exposure measure, an estimate that is remarkably similar to our own. The strength of our

approach is that our estimates are based on a credible natural experiment rather than correlations

between proximity and outcomes. Our results are robust across a variety of specifications, providing

reassuring evidence on the credibility of the research design.

    Our results suggest that policies intended to curb traffic congestion can have significant health


                                                  19
benefits for local populations in addition to the more often cited benefits in terms of reducing travel

costs. Traffic congestion is an increasingly salient issue, with annual congestion delays experienced

by the average peak-period driver increasing 250 percent over the last 25 years. In 2007, a study of

439 U.S. urban areas found that congestion cost about $87.2 billion in terms of wasted time and fuel

(Schrank and Lomax 2010). Our results suggest that these numbers are lower bounds on the true

costs, since the health externalities of traffic congestion contribute significantly to social costs.

   The recent Institute of Medicine report on the costs of prematurity estimated that the societal

cost was $51,600 per infant (in 2005 dollars, Behrman and Butler (2007)). Hence, the 6.7-9.1 percent

reduction in the risk of prematurity (from a baseline of around 10 percent) in the 29,677 infants

born within 2km of a toll plaza in the 3 years after the implementation of E-ZPass can be valued at

approximately $9.8-$13.2 million. While it is difficult to know precisely how many of the roughly 4

million infants born each year in the U.S. are affected by traffic congestion, estimates from the United

States Census Bureau: American Housing Survey (2003) suggest that 26 percent of occupied units

suffer from street noise or other disamenities due to traffic; hence, nationwide roughly 1 million infants

per year are potentially affected. This figure suggests that nationwide reductions in prenatal exposure

to traffic congestion could reduce preterm births by as many as 8,600 annually, a reduction that can

be valued at $444 million per year. Since we have focused on only one of the possible health effects

of traffic congestion, albeit an important one, the total health benefits of reducing pollution due to

traffic congestion are likely to be much greater.




                                                    20
References
Banzhaf, S., and R. Walsh (2008): “Do people vote with their feet? An empirical test of Tiebout’s
  mechanism,” The American Economic Review, 98(3), 843–863.
Beatty, T., and J. Shimshack (2011): “School Buses, Diesel Emissions, and Respiratory Health,”
  Journal of Health Economics.
Behrman, R., and A. Butler (2007): “Preterm Birth: Causes, Consequences, and Prevention,”
  Washington, D.C. Institute of Medicine of the National Academies, National Academies Press.
Brauer, M., G. Hoek, P. Van Vliet, K. Meliefste, P. Fischer, U. Gehring, J. Heinrich,
  J. Cyrys, T. Bellander, M. Lewne, et al. (2003): “Estimating long-term average particulate
  air pollution concentrations: application of traffic indicators and geographic information systems,”
  Epidemiology, 14(2), 228.
Bureau of Transportation Statistics (2004): “National Transportation Statistics 2004,” De-
  partment of Transportation.
Chay, K., and M. Greenstone (2003a): “Air quality, infant mortality, and the Clean Air Act of
 1970,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
         (2003b): “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality: Evidence from Geographic
  Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession*,” The Quarterly journal of economics, 118(3),
  1121–1167.
       (2005): “Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from the Housing Market,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 113(2).
Currie, J. (2009): “Healthy, wealthy, and wise: Socioeconomic status, poor health in childhood, and
 human capital development,” Journal of Economic Literature, 47(1), 87–122.
Currie, J., M. Neidell, and J. Schmieder (2009): “Air pollution and infant health: Lessons
 from New Jersey,” Journal of health economics, 28(3), 688–703.
Depro, B., and C. Timmins (2008): “Mobility and Environmental Equity: Do Housing Choices
 Determine Exposure to Air Pollution?,” Discussion paper, Duke University Working Paper, August
 2008. and Risk of Hospitalization for RSV Bronchiolitis in a Region with Lower Ambient Air
 Pollution, Environmental Research, 2009, 109# 3, 321-327.
Friedman, M., K. Powell, L. Hutwagner, L. Graham, and W. Teague (2001): “Impact
  of changes in transportation and commuting behaviors during the 1996 Summer Olympic Games
  in Atlanta on air quality and childhood asthma,” JAMA: the journal of the American Medical
  Association, 285(7), 897.
Glinianaia, S., J. Rankin, R. Bell, T. Pless-Mulloli, and D. Howel (2004): “Particulate
 air pollution and fetal health: a systematic review of the epidemiologic evidence,” Epidemiology,
 15(1), 36.
Gunier, R., A. Hertz, J. Von Behren, and P. Reynolds (2003): “Traffic density in California:
 socioeconomic and ethnic differences among potentially exposed children,” Journal of Exposure
 Science and Environmental Epidemiology, 13(3), 240–246.
Hu, S., S. Fruin, K. Kozawa, S. Mara, S. Paulson, and A. Winer (2009): “A wide area of
 air pollutant impact downwind of a freeway during pre-sunrise hours,” Atmospheric Environment,
 43(16), 2541–2549.


                                                 21
Huynh, M., T. Woodruff, J. Parker, and K. Schoendorf (2006): “Relationships between air
 pollution and preterm birth in California,” Paediatric and perinatal epidemiology, 20(6), 454–461.
Karr, C., C. Rudra, K. Miller, T. Gould, T. Larson, S. Sathyanarayana, and J. Koenig
 (2009): “Infant exposure to fine particulate matter and traffic and risk of hospitalization for RSV
 bronchiolitis in a region with lower ambient air pollution,” Environmental research, 109(3), 321.
Knittel, C., D. Miller, and N. Sanders (2011): “Caution, Drivers! Children Present: Traffic,
 Pollution, and Infant Health,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lee, S., S. Hajat, P. Steer, and V. Filippi (2008): “A time-series analysis of any short-term
  effects of meteorological and air pollution factors on preterm births in London, UK,” Environmental
  research, 106(2), 185–194.
Leem, J., B. Kaplan, Y. Shim, H. Pohl, C. Gotway, S. Bullard, J. Rogers, M. Smith,
  and C. Tylenda (2006): “Exposures to air pollutants during pregnancy and preterm delivery,”
  Environmental health perspectives, 114(6), 905.
Liu, S., D. Krewski, Y. Shi, Y. Chen, and R. Burnett (2006): “Association between maternal
  exposure to ambient air pollutants during pregnancy and fetal growth restriction,” Journal of
  Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology, 17(5), 426–432.
Lomax, T., and D. Schrank (2005): “The 2005 urban mobility report,” .
Mattison, D. (2003): The role of environmental hazards in premature birth: workshop summary.
 Natl Academy Pr.
Michelle Ernst, J. C., and R. Greene-Roesel (2003): “Clearing the Air. A Report of the
 Surface Transportation Policy Project,” Surface Transportation Policy Partnership.
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (2005): “NO2 and VOCs,” Discussion
 paper, New Jersey’s Environmental Trends.
New Jersey Department of Transportation (????):                  “Agreement on E-ZPass Contract
 Reached,” .
New Jersey Turnpike Authority (2001): “Operational and traffic benefits of E-ZPass deployment
 to the New Jersey Turnpike,” Discussion paper, Prepared by Wilbur Smith Associates.
Parker, J., P. Mendola, and T. Woodruff (2008): “Preterm birth after the Utah Valley Steel
  Mill closure: a natural experiment,” Epidemiology, 19(6), 820.
Parker, J., T. Woodruff, R. Basu, and K. Schoendorf (2005): “Air pollution and birth
  weight among term infants in California,” Pediatrics, 115(1), 121.
Ponce, N., K. Hoggatt, M. Wilhelm, and B. Ritz (2005): “Preterm birth: the interaction
  of traffic-related air pollution with economic hardship in Los Angeles neighborhoods,” American
  journal of epidemiology, 162(2), 140–148.
Pope 3rd, C. (1989): “Respiratory disease associated with community air pollution and a steel mill,
  Utah Valley.,” American Journal of Public Health, 79(5), 623.
Pope III, D., J. Schwartz, and M. Ransom (1992): “Daily mortality and PM10 pollution in
  Utah Valley,” Archives of Environmental Health: An International Journal, 47(3), 211–217.
Ransom, M., and C. Pope III (1992): “Elementary school absences and PM10 pollution in Utah
 Valley1,” Environmental research, 58(1-2), 204–219.
Ritz, B., M. Wilhelm, and Y. Zhao (2006): “Air pollution and infant death in southern California,
  1989–2000,” Pediatrics, 118(2), 493.

                                                 22
Rose, D., D. Linda, S. David, and S. Marc (2006): “The association between low level exposures
  to ambient air pollution and term low birth weight: a retrospective cohort study,” Environ Health,
  5(3).
Saka, A., R. United States. Dept. of Transportation. Office of Innovation, Education,
  M. S. U. C. for Transportation Studies, and U. T. C. P. (US) (2000): An estimation of
  mobile emissions reduction from using electronic toll collection in the Baltimore metropolitan area: a
  case study of the Fort McHenry tunnel toll plaza. Morgan State University, National Transportation
  Center.
Salam, M., J. Millstein, Y. Li, F. Lurmann, H. Margolis, and F. Gilliland (2005): “Birth
  outcomes and prenatal exposure to ozone, carbon monoxide, and particulate matter: results from
  the Children’s Health Study,” Environmental health perspectives, 113(11), 1638.
Schrank, D., and T. Lomax (2010): “The 2009 urban mobility report. Texas Transportation
  Institute, 2009,” .
Slama, R., V. Morgenstern, J. Cyrys, A. Zutavern, O. Herbarth, H. Wichmann, J. Hein-
  rich, et al. (2007): “Traffic-related atmospheric pollutants levels during pregnancy and offspring’s
  term birth weight: a study relying on a land-use regression exposure model,” Environmental Health
  Perspectives, 115(9), 1283.
The Warren Reporter (2010): “Motorists Could Encounter Delays During I-78 Toll Plaza Con-
 struction,” .
United States Census Bureau: American Housing Survey (2003):.
Venigalla, M., and M. Krimmer (2006): “Impact of electronic toll collection and electronic screen-
 ing on heavy-duty vehicle emissions,” Transportation research record: Journal of the Transportation
 research Board, 1987(-1), 11–20.
Vickrey, W. (1969): “Congestion theory and transport investment,” The American Economic Re-
  view, 59(2), 251–260.
Wilhelm, M., and B. Ritz (2003): “Residential proximity to traffic and adverse birth outcomes in
 Los Angeles county, California, 1994-1996.,” Environmental Health Perspectives, 111(2), 207.
        (2005): “Local variations in CO and particulate air pollution and adverse birth outcomes in
  Los Angeles County, California, USA,” Environmental health perspectives, 113(9), 1212.
Woodruff, T., L. Darrow, and J. Parker (2008): “Air pollution and postneonatal infant mor-
 tality in the United States, 1999–2002,” Environmental Health Perspectives, 116(1), 110.
World Health Organization (2000): “Carbon monoxide,” Discussion paper, WHO Air quality
 guidelines 2nd edition.




                                                  23
8      Figures

    Figure 1: Locations of Toll Plazas and Major Roadways in New Jersey and Pennsylvania




                                            24
Figure 2: Research Design Showing 1.5km and 2km Treatment Radii and Control Group




                                       25
                                         Figure 3: Low Birthweight by Distance: Before and After



                                                      Low Birthweight by Distance
                                                       Before and After E−ZPass
                           .08
                   Low Birthweight
                       .06 .04




                                     0                .5                 1             1.5            2
                                                                   Distance Toll

                                                           Before E−ZPass          After E−ZPass



Note: Smoothed plots of treatment and control groups using locally weighted regression. To facilitate computation, obser-
vations are first grouped into 0.1-mile bins by treatment and control and averaged. The weights are applied using a tricube
weighting function (Cleveland 1979) with a bandwidth of 1.




                                                                     26
                                         Figure 4: Prematurity by Distance: Before and After



                                                    Premature Birth by Distance
                                                     Before and After E−ZPass
                           .15
                   Premature Birth
                          .1
                           .05




                                     0              .5                 1             1.5              2
                                                                 Distance Toll

                                                         Before E−ZPass          After E−ZPass



Note: Smoothed plots of treatment and control groups using locally weighted regression. To facilitate computation, obser-
vations are first grouped into 0.1-mile bins by treatment and control and averaged. The weights are applied using a tricube
weighting function (Cleveland 1979) with a bandwidth of 1.




                                                                   27
                                           Figure 5: Low Birthweight by Day: Before and After



                                                         Low Birthweight by day
                                                        Before and After EZPass
                          .088
                  Low Birthweight
                       .086
                          .084




                                    −500                              0                          500
                                                           Days Before/After EZPass

                                                            More than 1.5km from Toll Plaza
                                                            Less than 1.5km from Toll Plaza



Note: Smoothed plots of treatment and control groups using locally weighted regression. The weights are applied using a
tricube weighting function (Cleveland 1979) with a bandwidth of 1.




                                                                  28
                                           Figure 6: Prematurity by Day: Before and After



                                                       Premature Birth by day
                                                      Before and After EZPass
                          .11
                  Premature Birth
                         .105
                          .1




                                    −500                            0                            500
                                                         Days Before/After EZPass

                                                          More than 1.5km from Toll Plaza
                                                          Less than 1.5km from Toll Plaza



Note: Smoothed plots of treatment and control groups using locally weighted regression. The weights are applied using a
tricube weighting function (Cleveland 1979) with a bandwidth of 1.




                                                                29
9   Tables




             30
                                                 Table 1: Summary Statistics


        Panel A: Difference-in-Difference Sample
                                  <2km E-Zpass     <2km E-Zpass      >2km & <10km     >2km & <10km          >10km
        Outcomes                     Before           After          E-Zpass Before    E-Zpass After       Toll Plaza
        Premature                    0.095             0.095             0.102             0.109             0.085
        Low Birth Weight             0.082             0.078             0.089             0.092             0.078
        Controls
        Mother Hispanic              0.291             0.332             0.165             0.229             0.054
        Mother Black                  0.16             0.173              0.233            0.264             0.047
        Mother Education             13.12              13.2             13.276            13.24             12.92
        Mother HS Dropout            0.169             0.164             0.154             0.163             0.173
        Mother Smoked                0.089             0.075              0.109            0.086             0.152
        Teen Mother                  0.073             0.061             0.082             0.069             0.079
        Birth Order                   1.3               1.37              1.39              1.46              1.68
        Multiple Birth               0.028             0.033             0.032             0.037             0.033
        Child Male                    0.51             0.512             0.514             0.512             0.512
        Distance to Roadway          1.099             1.074              1.507            1.482               21
        Number of Obs.               33,758            29,677           190,904           161,145           185,795
        New Jersey Obs.              26,415            26,563           128,547           133,560            70,484
        Penn. Obs                     7,343             3,114           62,357            27,585            115,311

        Panel B: Mothers with More than One Birth in Sample
                                                   Ever Birth<2km    Ever Birth<2km   Never Birth<2km   Never Birth<2km
                                                    E-Zpass Plaza     E-Zpass Plaza    E-Zpass Plaza     E-Zpass Plaza
        Outcomes                                        Before            After            Before             After
        Premature                                      0.088             0.099             0.092             0.103
        Low Birth Weight                               0.081             0.077             0.086             0.086
        Controls
        Mother Hispanic                                0.167              0.29             0.088             0.161
        Mother Black                                   0.145             0.157             0.169             0.171
        Mother Education                               12.78              12.6             12.75             13.13
        Mother HS Dropout                              0.168             0.201             0.178             0.162
        Mother Smoked                                  0.113             0.076             0.135             0.095
        Teen Mother                                    0.041             0.044             0.072             0.047
        Birth Order                                    1.575             1.708             1.598             1.735
        Multiple Birth                                  0.03             0.037             0.033             0.046
        Child Male                                     0.513             0.512             0.512             0.512
        Distance to Highway                            3.702             2.561             5.598              5.3
        Total # Obs.                                  179,537            58,180          1,640,118          485,351
        NJ Obs.                                        85,565            47,012           678,025           352,751
        PA Obs.                                        93,972            11,168           962,093           132,600

        Panel C: Summary Statistics for Housing Sales Data (New Jersey Only)
                                                   <2km E-Zpass      <2km E-Zpass     >2km & <10km      >2km & <10km
                                                      Before            After         E-Zpass Before     E-Zpass After
        Sales Price                                    94,883           126,006            95,518           116,691
        Assessed Land Value                            42,146            43,219            46,551            46,126
        Assessed Building Value                        78,234            81,437            70,093            69,752
        Total Assessed Value                          119,166           123,640           115,129           114,403
        Year Built                                      1952              1954              1951              1950
        Square Footage                                 1,573             1,569             1,646             1,675
        # Obs.                                         22,350            22,604           105,341           102,048


Note: Notes: All observations in Panels A and C are selected to be within 3km of a busy roadway. Housing price data is
only for New Jersey and pertains to housing units, not mothers, as described in the text. The housing price data has been
deflated by the CPI (base year=1993).
                                                                31
                     Table 2: Regressions of Maternal Characteristics on E-Zpass Adoption


                                         (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)
                                                               Mother                   Teen       Mother      Housing
       Panel 1                          Black     Hispanic     Yrs. Ed    Dropout      Mother      Smoked     Sale Price
       <2km toll*after EZpass           -0.011      -0.01       0.037       -0.007      -0.001      .005*       0.149
                                       (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.040)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.003)     (0.103)
       # observations                  397,201     406,641     406,198     397,201     412,884     402,590     252,343
       Panel 2
       <1.5km toll*after EZpass         -0.014      -0.01       0.013       -0.003      0.001      .007**       0.031
                                       (0.055)     (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.006)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.106)
       # observations                  397,201     406,641     406,198     397,201     412,884     402,590     252,343

Note: Notes: Each coefficient is from a separate regression. Each coefficient in columns 1-6 is from a regression that also
included controls for being within 2km (or 1.5km) of a toll plaza, year of birth, month of birth, indicators for each toll plaza,
an indicator for post EZpass at nearest toll plaza, and distance to highway. Housing sale price regressions in column 7 include
year and month of sale, indicators for nearest toll plaza, an indicator for condo units, distance to highway, municipality fixed
effects, square footage (in categories including dummies for missing), and age (in categories, including dummies for missing).
Standard errors in brackets. A ** indicates that the estimate is statistically significant at the 95 percent level of confidence.
A * indicates significance at the 90 percent level of confidence.

                          Table 3: Regressions of Birth Outcomes on E-Zpass Adoption


                                                      [1]               [2]               [3]            [4]
               Panel 1                            Prematurity       Prematurity          LBW            LBW
               <2km toll*after E-Zpass                -0.0085          -0.0086          -0.0094        -0.0093
                                                    [0.0039]**       [0.0034]**       [0.0032]**     [0.0028]**
               R-squared                               0.0044           0.1051           0.0032         0.1220
               Panel 2
               <1.5km toll*after E-Zpass             -0.0088           -0.0098          -0.0077        -0.0084
                                                    [0.0051]*        [0.0048]**       [0.0035]**     [0.0032]**
               R-squared                              0.0042           0.1051            0.0035         0.1221
               Maternal Characteristics                no                yes             no             yes
               # Obs.                                405,802           405,802         409,673        409,673

Note: Each coefficient is from a different regression. All regressions also included controls for being within 2km (or 1.5km)
of a toll plaza, year of birth, month of birth, toll plaza indicators, an indicator for post E-Zpass, and distance to highway.
Maternal characteristics include: mother black, mother hispanic, mother education (<hs, hs, some college, college +), mother
age (19-24, 25-34, 35+), smoking, multiple birth, gender, and birth order, and indicators for missing values. Standard errors
in brackets. A ** indicates that the estimate is statistically significant at the 95 percent level of confidence. A * indicates
significance at the 90 percent level of confidence.


                                                               32
                    Table 4: Robustness Checks, Birth Outcomes on E-Zpass Adoption


                                                         [1]         [2]
                        Panel 1: All obs. within 5km toll plaza
                                                  Prematurity        LBW
                        <2km toll*after E-Zpass     -0.0064         -0.007
                                                   [0.0035]*      [0.0028]**
                        R-squared                    0.104          0.1224
                        # Obs.                      255,711        258,226

                        Panel 2: Add time trend for areas near toll plazas
                        <2km toll*after E-Zpass      -0.0074        -0.0084
                                                   [0.0035]**     [0.0029]**
                        R-squared                     0.1053        0.1222
                        # Obs.                       405,802       409,673

                        Panel 3: Propensity Trimmed, .1<=P(near toll)<=.9
                        <2km toll*after E-Zpass      -0.0079        -0.0086
                                                   [0.0037]**     [0.0036]**
                        R-squared                     0.1011        0.1222
                        # Obs.                       123,467       124,672

                        Panel 4: Non-African Americans Only
                        <2km toll*after E-Zpass     -0.0052         -0.0059
                                                    [0.0035]      [0.0029]**
                        R-squared                    0.1078         0.1267
                        # Obs.                      311,038        314,269

                        Panel 5: African-Americans Only
                        <2km toll*after E-Zpass      -0.0213        -0.0242
                                                   [0.0067]**     [0.0064]**
                        R-squared                     0.0882        0.0989
                        # Obs.                        94,764        95,404

                        Panel 6: Non-Smokers Only
                        <2km toll*after E-Zpass      -0.0075        -0.0079
                                                   [0.0032]**     [0.0028]**
                        R-squared                     0.1074        0.1232
                        # Obs.                       367,465       371,089

Note: See Table 3




                                                    33
                 Table 5: Using Linear and Exponential Functions of Distance from Toll Plaza


                                                               [1]               [2]            [3]          [4]
                                                           Prematurity       Prematurity       LBW          LBW

             Argmax(2-Distance,0)×after E-Zpass               -0.0019                        -0.0043
                                                              [0.0035]                       [0.0027]
             1/(edistance )×after E-Zpass                                       -0.0153                    -0.0225
                                                                               [0.0093]*                 [0.0080]**
             R-squared                                        0.1051              0.1051       0.122        0.122
             # observations                                   405,802             405,802     409,673      409,673

Note: All regressions control for after E-Zpass, a dummy for being less than 2km from a toll plaza, distance to highway,
and fixed effects for toll plaza, year, and month of birth, as well as the full set of maternal characteristics listed for Table 3.
Standard errors in brackets. A ** indicates that the estimate is statistically significant at the 95 percent level of confidence.
A * indicates significance at the 90 percent level of confidence.




                        Table 6: Mother Fixed Effects Estimates of the Effects of E-Zpass


                                                                                         Low
                                Panel A                           Prematurity        Birth Weight

                                <2km toll×after E-Zpass                -0.0131          -0.0107
                                                                     [0.0042]**       [0.0025]**
                                R-squared                               0.195            0.192

                                Panel B

                                <1.5km toll×after E-Zpass              -0.0135          -0.0112
                                                                     [0.0036]***      [0.0023]***
                                R-squared                               0.195            0.193
                                #Obs                                   232,399          237,717

Note: The sample includes all mothers with more than 1 birth who ever gave birth within 2km of a toll plaza. Each
coefficient is from a different regression. All regressions also included controls for being within 2km (or 1.5km) of a toll plaza,
year of birth, month of birth, an indicator for post E-Zpass at nearest plaza, toll plaza indicators, and distance to highway.
Maternal characteristics include: mother’s age (19-24, 25-34, 35+), smoking, and mother’s education (<12, 12, 13-15, 16+).
Child gender and birth order are also controlled. Standard errors in brackets. A ** indicates that the estimate is statistically
significant at the 95 percent level of confidence. A * indicates that the estimate is statistically significant at the 90 percent
level of confidence.




                                                                34
                Table 7: Difference-in-Differences Estimates of Effects of E-Zpass on Pollution


                              [1]             [2]          [3]           [4]          [5]           [6]          [7]
                             NO2             SO2          NO2           NO2          NO2           NO2          NO2
                         All Control     All Control    Random        Random       Random        Random       Random
     Panel 1              Monitors        Monitors      Control 1     Control 2    Control 3     Control 4    Control 5

     <2km toll               -0.108         0.053          -0.208       -0.090       -0.065        -0.181        0.018
     ×after E-Zpass        [0.019]**       [0.034]       [0.028]**    [0.024]**    [0.017]**     [0.023]**      [0.038]
     # observations          84,159        128,513          6,361       6,449        6,453         6,448         6,421

Note: Each coefficient is from a separate regression. Columns 1 and 2 use all monitors over 2km from a toll plaza as controls.
Columns 3-7 each use a randomly selected control monitor. Regressions also included controls for being within 2km of a toll
plaza, year of birth, month of birth, indicators for each toll plaza, an indicator for post E-Zpass at nearest toll plaza, and
distance to highway. Dependent variable is the log daily mean pollution level for the indicated pollutant. Standard errors
in brackets. A ** indicates that the estimate is statistically significant at the 95 percent level of confidence. A * indicates
significance at the 90 percent level of confidence.




                                                              35
                      Table 8: Appendix Table: Means for 1.5km Sample


Panel A: Difference-in-Difference Sample
                          <1.5km E-Zpass     <1.5km E-Zpass     >1.5km & <10km      >1.5km & <10km
Outcomes                      Before              After          E-Zpass Before      E-Zpass After
Premature                      0.096              0.096               0.102               0.108
Low Birth Weight               0.082               0.08               0.089               0.091
Controls
Mother Hispanic                0.272              0.309               0.176               0.239
Mother Black                   0.159              0.174               0.227               0.256
Mother Education               13.25              13.31               13.25               13.23
Mother HS Dropout              0.152              0.152               0.156               0.164
Mother Smoked                  0.088              0.078               0.107               0.085
Teen Mother                    0.067              0.058               0.082               0.069
Birth Order                     1.3                1.37                1.38                1.45
Multiple Birth                 0.029              0.034               0.031               0.036
Child Male                     0.511              0.518               0.513               0.512
Distance to Roadway            0.976              0.939               1.484               1.459
Number of Obs.                 16,934             14,856             207,728             175,966
New Jersey Obs.                12,980             13,175             141,982             146,948
Penn. Obs                       3,954              1,681             65,746              29,018
Panel B: Mothers with More than One Birth in Sample
                          Ever Birth<1.5km   Ever Birth<1.5km   Never Birth<1.5km   Never Birth<1.5km
                            E-Zpass Plaza      E-Zpass Plaza      E-Zpass Plaza       E-Zpass Plaza
Outcomes                       Before              After             Before               After
Premature                      0.0883             0.0988             0.0914              0.103
Low Birth Weight               0.0803             0.0755             0.0862              0.0857
Controls
Mother Hispanic                 0.164              0.286             0.0916              0.168
Mother Black                    0.144              0.156              0.168               0.17
Mother Education                12.81             12.54               12.75              13.11
Mother HS Dropout               0.163             0.202              0.178               0.164
Mother Smoked                   0.113             0.0756              0.134              0.0939
Teen Mother                    0.0414             0.0417               0.07              0.0464
Birth Order                     1.581             1.723              1.596               1.733
Multiple Birth                 0.0306             0.0382             0.0331              0.0451
Child Male                      0.512             0.512              0.512               0.512
Distance to Highway             3.612              2.502              5.509              5.159
Total # Obs.                   94,473             31,188            1,725,182            512,343
NJ Obs.                        45,215             25,376             718,375             374,387
PA Obs.                        49,258              5,812            1,006,807            137,956
Panel C: Summary Statistics for Housing Sales Data (New Jersey Only)
                          <1.5km E-Zpass     <1.5km E-Zpass     >1.5km & <10km      >1.5km & <10km
                              Before              After          E-Zpass Before      E-Zpass After
Sales Price                   95,033             125,567              95,444             117,600
Assessed Land Value            45,270             45,462              45,825              45,608
Assessed Building Value       84,445              87,394              70,219              70,186
Total Assessed Value          128,899            131,867             114,531             114,363
Year Built                      1953               1955                1951                1950
Square Footage                 1,593              1,551               1,639               1,670
# Obs.                         11,586             12,214             116,105             112,438




                                                  36
