                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     TOBACCO REGULATION THROUGH LITIGATION:
                        THE MASTER SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT

                                           W. Kip Viscusi
                                            Joni Hersch

                                        Working Paper 15422
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15422


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2009




This paper was presented at the NBER Regulation Versus Litigation Conference, Sept. 11-12, 2009.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by W. Kip Viscusi and Joni Hersch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Tobacco Regulation through Litigation: The Master Settlement Agreement
W. Kip Viscusi and Joni Hersch
NBER Working Paper No. 15422
October 2009
JEL No. H2,I18,K0,K13

                                             ABSTRACT

The 1998 Master Settlement Agreement resolved the unprecedented litigation in which the states sought
to recoup the cigarette-related Medicaid costs. The litigation was settled through a combination of
negotiated regulatory requirements and financial payments of about $250 billion over 25 years. Settlement
payments received by states are strongly related to smoking-related medical costs but are also related
to political factors. The payments largely took the form of an excise tax equivalent, raising potential
antitrust concerns. The regulatory restrictions imposed by the agreement also raised antitrust concerns.
However, there has been no evident shift in industry concentration. The increase in advertising and
marketing expenses has largely taken the form of price discounts. The settlement sidestepped the
usual procedures pertaining to the imposition of taxes and the promulgation of new regulations.


W. Kip Viscusi
Vanderbilt Law School
131 21st Avenue South
Nashville, TN 37203-1181
and NBER
kip.viscusi@vanderbilt.edu

Joni Hersch
Vanderbilt Law School
131 21st Avenue South
Nashville, TN 37203-1181
joni.hersch@vanderbilt.edu
1. Introduction

         For decades individual lawsuits by smokers against the cigarette industry were

unsuccessful. In 1995 state attorneys general launched a series of lawsuits seeking to recoup the

Medicaid-related costs associated with cigarettes. The prospects for such lawsuits were not great

because the same demonstration of wrongful conduct required in individual tort cases would also

be required for the states’ claims. In addition, the states were seeking to recoup the value of a

financial externality, which involves a more novel legal theory than does a standard torts claim.1

This litigation was undertaken during a period of increased anti-tobacco sentiment as well as new

legislation, particularly by states imposing restrictions on locations in which smoking is

permitted, such as restaurants and hospitals.2 This changing sentiment in turn would affect juror

attitudes and the companies’ prospects in court.

         The 1998 Master Settlement Agreement (MSA) that resolved this cigarette litigation was

innovative in several respects. First, this settlement marked the end of an unprecedented line of

litigation in which the state attorneys general sued the tobacco industry for the state Medicaid-

related costs generated by cigarettes. Second, the nature of the financial settlement also was

pathbreaking in that it did not involve a damages payment that took a conventional form, but

instead imposed the equivalent of a per pack cigarette tax that was called a “settlement”

payment. Third, the settlement was not restricted to financial compensation as it also imposed

numerous sweeping regulatory restrictions. Thus, a tax was imposed without legislative

approval, and national regulations were enacted without the usual rulemaking process. The



1
  The existence of a financial externality from cigarettes is not a sufficient basis for a valid legal claim as there also
must be wrongful conduct by the cigarette industry that led to the smoking behavior and the subsequent costs.
Otherwise, automobile manufacturers and producers of all other risky products would be liable for accident costs
irrespective of producer negligence or the presence of product defects.
2
  See Hersch, Del Rossi, and Viscusi (2004) and the State Tobacco Activities Tracking and Evaluation (STATE)
System, which can be found online at www2.cdc.gov/nccdphp/osh/state/.

                                                             1
absence of such standard political processes has raised a series of questions about the effects of

the settlement on new entrants, the introduction of new products, and market competition

generally. Finally, after decades of successfully defending lawsuits against the tobacco industry,

this agreement marked the first major litigation-related payoff by the cigarette industry.

       In this paper we analyze the terms of the settlement and its implications. The stakes

involved in the settlement were substantial—about $250 billion over the first 25 years. How this

money was spent is of policy interest as well in that the stated rationale for the payments was to

defer the health-related costs of cigarettes and to decrease youth smoking. The regulatory

restrictions likewise were targeted at decreasing smoking but may have had anti-competitive

effects as well. Thus, the appropriate reference point for judging the settlement is how it

performed as an unconventional public policy initiative with both regulatory and tax

components.

       The MSA may have had broader ramifications both for the cigarette industry and tort

liability. By imposing a de facto tax and a series of regulatory constraints, the MSA greatly

expanded the degree of regulation of the cigarette industry. The 2009 law giving the Food and

Drug Administration (FDA) authority to regulate cigarettes can be traced to the attempt by the

U.S. Congress to legislate a settlement of the state tobacco litigation. The MSA also influenced

tort liability generally, both through providing billions of dollars in contingency fees to plaintiff

attorneys and through an anchoring effect that set litigation damages award targets in the billions

of dollars rather than millions.




                                                  2
2. The Master Settlement Agreement3

         The Master Settlement Agreement of Nov. 23, 1998 marked the end of the tobacco

litigation launched by the state attorneys general against the cigarette industry.4 Whether the

lawsuits would have succeeded was never resolved as no trials were completed in any of the

cases. The MSA settled possible claims for 46 states. Previously, four states—Mississippi,

Minnesota, Florida, and Texas—reached separate settlements with the tobacco industry.

Because of the national scope of many of the requirements imposed by the MSA, our main focus

is on the MSA itself rather than presenting parallel discussions of each feature of the individual

state settlements.

2.1 Financial Externalities and the Litigation Focus

         The cases on behalf of the states involved claims for the Medicaid-related costs incurred

by the states. Thus, the damages did not pertain to the harms that cigarettes caused to smokers’

health but rather focused on the Medicaid costs generated by smoking behavior. The states’

claims consequently focused on the gross cigarette costs to the states from one program,

Medicaid, rather than on the net costs across all programs. Estimates in Viscusi (1995, 2002a)

found that on balance cigarettes did not impose net financial costs, but rather yielded net cost

savings.5

         The first state to file a financial claim against the cigarette companies for smoking-related

Medicaid costs was Mississippi in 1995. Even though the cigarette industry had never advocated

the net financial cost approach, nevertheless, Mississippi’s opening salvo in the cigarette

3
  For previous treatments of the MSA and regulation through litigation generally, see Bulow and Klemperer (1998),
Wagner (1999), Viscusi (2002a, b), and Cutler et al. (2002).
4
  Because of the political sensitivity of the settlement, some states did not sign on to the agreement until after the
November 1998 elections. One such example is Massachusetts, where anti-tobacco groups lobbied for more
punitive settlement terms.
5
  The national net financial costs per pack in 1995 dollars at a 3% interest rate were $0.58 total medical care, $0.01
sick leave, $0.14 life insurance, -$0.24 nursing home care, -$1.26 retirement and pension, $0.02 fires, and $0.43
taxes on earnings, for a net cost of -$0.32.

                                                          3
litigation was its Memorandum that explicitly targeted the net financial cost reasoning in the

NBER working paper version of Viscusi (1995):

         A credit to the cigarette industry for any monetary savings in elderly health care, as well
         as other savings resulting in the premature deaths of smokers, is utterly repugnant to a
         civilized society and must be rejected on grounds of public policy….The contention of
         entitlement to an ‘elderly death’ credit is, on its face, void as against public policy. That
         policy and basic human decency preclude the defendants from putting forth the perverse
         and depraved argument that by killing Mississippians prematurely, they provide an
         economic benefit to the State. No court of equity should countenance, condone, or
         sanction such base, evil, and corrupt arguments….The defendants’ argument is indeed
         ghoulish. They are merchants of death. Seeking a credit for a purported economic
         benefit for early death is akin to robbing the graves of Mississippi smokers who died
         from tobacco-related illnesses. No court of law or equity should entertain such a defense
         or counterclaim. It is offensive to human decency, an affront to justice, uncharacteristic
         of civilized society, and unquestionably contrary to public policy.6

         What is particularly noteworthy is that Mississippi’s Memorandum was the opening salvo

in the tobacco litigation before the defendants had put forth any arguments.7 But it was clear to

the states that by framing the litigation in terms of the gross financial costs associated with

Medicaid, the states could enhance their prospective payoff.8 All states adopted a similar

approach although there were some differences in the calculations of the damages payments

owed to the states.

         The MSA settled this litigation, putting an end to the claims on behalf of the states. Not

all states had filed claims. For example, the state of Alabama opposed the litigation and never




6
  See Viscusi (2002a) p. 87. Memorandum in Support of the State’s Motion for Ruling in Limine, or Alternatively,
for Partial Summary Judgment, in re Moore, Attorney General ex Rel., State of Mississippi Tobacco Litigation,
Cause No. 94-1429, (August 11, 1995), pp. 3, 21, and 23. The Viscusi (1995) NBER study received no financial
support from the tobacco industry, which was not aware of the study. To the best of Viscusi’s knowledge, the study
has never been presented in testimony on behalf of the tobacco industry.
7
  For the state of Mississippi, which was the state that launched the litigation, the financial externalities from
cigarettes were $0.02 medical care, -$0.03 nursing homes, -$0.05 pensions, $0.02 taxes on earnings, for a net
financial externality of -$0.04. In addition, the Mississippi state cigarette excise tax was $0.18. See Viscusi (1999,
2002a).
8
  The states also included the Federal share of Medicaid costs in the claim as well as other costs that the states did
not actually incur. See Viscusi (2002a).

                                                          4
filed a claim against the tobacco industry, but nevertheless participated in the MSA.9 The MSA

had no direct effect on individual lawsuits, class action lawsuits, and punitive damages. These

efforts were not restricted by the MSA despite attempts by the cigarette industry to obtain

protections in these areas. In 1997 and 1998 there were legislative attempts by the U.S.

Congress to settle the litigation at the national level through the imposition of cigarette tax

payments and regulatory reforms. In this proposed legislation, which was referred to as the

Proposed Resolution, the cigarette industry had sought protections against punitive damages and

class actions. No legislation was enacted because Congress’s late drafts of the Proposed

Resolution omitted such protections and escalated the tax payments. The tobacco industry

withdrew its participation, decreasing support for the legislation in Congress. The benefits

reaped by the states from the MSA included a variety of regulatory restrictions and financial

payments.

2.2 Financial Characteristics of the Settlement

        The first distinctive aspect of the MSA is that this settlement of the litigation did not

involve settlement payments of the usual type. Financial settlements typically involve either

lump sum payments or structured payments to the claimant, where in each instance the payments

are being made by the defendant. For the MSA some of the minor costs, such as the costs of the

MSA executive committee and enforcement costs, were borne directly by the companies, but the

primary thrust of the settlement terms was to impose the equivalent of an additional excise tax on

9
  The reasoning for the state of Alabama was articulated by then Deputy Attorney General and now Federal Judge
William Pryor: “We recommend to the Governor and the Attorney General that the State of Alabama not file a
Medicaid reimbursement suit. We do not believe that filing such a suit would serve the interests of the citizens of
Alabama. First, such a suit would advance weak legal or equitable theories which, even if the State won the suit,
would threaten to undermine Alabama law generally. Second, the State’s burden of proving net harm is
problematic, because widely respected economic studies conclude that there is no net harm to the State’s treasury as
a result of cigarette consumption. Third, this litigation would effectively raise taxes on tobacco companies without
going through the ordinary legislative process. As a matter of judicial and political economy, if the State of
Alabama wants to raise taxes on tobacco, the Legislature, not the judiciary, should do so.” See Viscusi (2002a) p.
48.

                                                         5
cigarettes for which payments would go to the states. In effect, the states used the MSA to

impose additional cigarette taxes rather than obtaining the authorization of state legislatures.

Specifically, the MSA imposed fees in perpetuity based on cigarette sales so that the fees are

tantamount to an excise tax. The preferences of the citizenry in the affected states were not

reflected in the same manner as they might have been if legislation were required. The decision

to participate in the MSA and the terms of the participation were the result of a series of bargains

involving representatives of the affected companies and the states, with a small group of

attorneys general playing a pivotal role.10 The imposition of a tax equivalent through litigation

rather than legislation involved efficiency costs as well as the possible issue of appropriateness

of bypassing the usual legislative processes. Moreover, this type of intervention is asymmetric

as such deals can boost tax rates but not decrease them.

         The settlement did not emerge in the abstract but took shape only after the efforts in 1997

and 1998 to pass the Proposed Resolution were unsuccessful. At the time of that legislation’s

demise, the cigarette industry favored greater protections against other forms of litigation than

would be provided by the subsequent MSA, while anti-tobacco advocates favored higher tax

rates and more regulation than the MSA would ultimately impose.

         One lesson from the Proposed Resolution experience was that indications that there

would be a settled resolution of the state cases led to favorable stock price effects for the

cigarette companies. The market expectations, and presumably the expectations of the

companies as well, was that settling the state cases would eliminate the litigation threat as the

companies had an unblemished record of success in individual smoker cases. While this may

have been a reasonable expectation at that time, after the fact it proved to be quite wrong. If


10
 None of the state legislatures were involved in ratifying the agreements, and at least in some instances, notably
Massachusetts, the actions of the state attorney general conflicted with the views of the governor.

                                                          6
company executives were in fact cognizant of the adverse longer term implications of the MSA

but nevertheless favored the MSA to reap short term benefits, that would reflect a possible

agency problem.

        Settlement in the form of a tax equivalent rather than a lump sum payment has two

principal economic ramifications. First, taxes raise the price of the product, discouraging

smoking behavior through the incentive effect. Second, because of the finite financial resources

of the affected firms, the total present value of the payments to the states could be larger if the

damages were paid in the form of a unit tax rather than a lump sum penalty. Some anti-smoking

advocates had favored a lump sum damages payment to maximize the immediate harm to the

industry, while others placed greater weight on the objectives of discouraging smoking behavior

and maximizing the state’s financial gain. The choice of the form of the payment influences the

extent to which each of these objectives can be fostered as there is an inevitable tradeoff

involved in the choice of the payment structure.

        In a standard tort claim, the damages bear a direct relation to the harm. Because the basis

of the suits was recovery of Medicaid costs, a natural question to ask is what relationship does a

cigarette tax have to the state’s financial costs attributable to the wrongful conduct of the

companies? The trigger for the payment of any damages is the alleged wrongful conduct by the

companies, such as that relating to claims of deceptive advertising and concealment of the

product risks.11 However, if this behavior was in the past and will not continue into the

indefinite future, as will the per unit tax equivalent feature of the MSA, then the penalty being

levied is not directly related to the alleged wrongful conduct or even the time period in which the

wrongful conduct is alleged to have occurred. Similarly, if all major manufacturers are not

11
  The states’ damages claims assumed that all Medicaid-related costs of cigarettes were attributable to the
industry’s wrongful conduct. However, it is unreasonable to assume that smoking rates would be zero in the
absence of possible wrong conduct.

                                                        7
guilty of the same wrongful conduct, then the imposition of penalties on all firms may not be

warranted from the standpoint of setting prices at an efficient level. For prices to be efficient,

they should reflect the marginal costs associated with the product. Penalties related to past

harmful conduct that is no longer occurring are not well suited to establishing efficient prices for

currently produced products. In a competitive market situation, such costs linked to past

behavior are fixed costs and cannot be embedded successfully in the product price.

         The pivotal economic actors consist of parties that are not subject to these damages

payments. The extreme case is that of potential new entrants that did not exist during the period

of wrongful conduct. Nevertheless, the MSA is structured so that new entrants will share in a

variant of the penalty structure to be discussed below. The MSA did not provide for a damages

payment in any real sense but rather imposed a disguised form of cigarette tax. Likewise, the

total amounts of the tax were not driven solely by the damages in the cases, but emerged from

the bargaining power of the respective parties, which included the major cigarette producers but

not potential new entrants. Even if a new entrant were to market a completely safe cigarette, it

would still have to pay the MSA fee. The same types of political factors also influenced the

relative payment shares for each of the states, as will be discussed below.

         The financial stakes in the tobacco litigation settlements were quite substantial. In 1997

and earlier in 1998 before the MSA was finalized, four states reached separate agreements with

the cigarette industry: $3.6 billion for Mississippi, $11.3 billion for Florida, $15.3 billion for

Texas, and $6.6 billion for Minnesota, for a total of $36.8 billion. These four states had made

the most progress in developing their cases.12 In addition to the $36.8 billion in settlements for



12
  The first state to file a lawsuit was Mississippi. The trial was about to begin in Mississippi at the time of the
settlement. The amount of the settlement exceeded the damages sought in the case, much to the surprise of the
defense attorneys litigating the case. The first of the state tobacco trials took place in Minnesota, but the settlement

                                                            8
these four states, there was the MSA settlement in the remaining states for $206 billion. The

combined undiscounted total of payments to all 50 states over the first 25 years is $243 million.

There were also about $7 billion in additional payments, including payments for a foundation

and anti-smoking education as well as enforcement, making the total of all settlements about

$250 billion.

        While some of the payments were initial payments made in the first five years of the

agreement, the bulk of the payments consisted of annual payments. The annual payment levels

were set so that for the $8 billion payment amount from 2004 to 2007, the MSA agreement

would impose a tax-equivalent charge of $0.33 per pack. Combined with the four separate state

settlements, the total tax equivalent is $0.40 per pack.

        Payments will decline if cigarette sales decline, so the agreement does function

effectively as a tax. New entrants were required to pay these amounts into a fund even if they

had never sold any cigarettes before 1998 and thus could not even be affected by the type of

litigation that the MSA was settling. To participate in the settlement revenues, states were

required to adopt “Qualifying Statutes.” These statutes required new entrants to pay a pro rate

damages amount based on their cigarette sales, where these per pack levies are the same as for

cigarettes sold by the defendants in the state litigation. For these companies, there was no

previous wrongful conduct or previous cigarette market conduct of any sort. In this way the

MSA provided a competitive shield so that firms that were not parties to the litigation could not

have a cost advantage.13




occurred before the trial was concluded. Texas and Florida had completed most of the depositions of experts before
the settlement.
13
   Potentially these new entrants could obtain reimbursement for these payments 25 years later if they could
demonstrate that there was no wrongful conduct throughout the period. At least one new entrant, the South African
firm Carolina Tobacco Company, claimed that the payments to the states threatened the firm’s profitability.

                                                        9
2.3 The Political Economy of the Settlement Amounts

         How the settlement funds would be divided among the 46 MSA participants was

determined by a political bargain, the results of which are summarized in Table 1.14 The first

column of statistics is a calculation of the percentage share of the state’s medical costs calculated

by Viscusi (1999, 2002a). These costs are calculated using state-specific information on

smoking rates and medical cost structures including the state’s Medicaid expenses, state

expenditures on community hospitals, and other state medical costs. The sum of all states’

expenses comprise the national medical costs that are being addressed by the MSA, where these

calculations follow the states’ procedures of assuming that the defense is liable for all such

smoking-related costs.15 Thus, the denominator in the calculation is the total U.S. smoking-

attributable state health costs, while the numerator is the state-specific value. These estimates

are the actual economic costs calculated using the same procedure for each state and are not

identical to the diverse approaches used by the handful of states that undertook such calculations

at the time of the settlement.16 With the exception of the states’ calculation of the medical costs

for Massachusetts, the states’ calculations of the medical costs generally included the federal

costs share as well as the state share, and also did not account for the net incremental costs of

smoking behavior.17 All economic estimates reported here follow the practice in the economics

literature of isolating the net incremental costs incurred by the states where the reference point is

the nonsmoking smoker. While the financial externalities of smoking are not great and on


14
   The procedures used for calculating the state-specific costs reported in Table 1 are calculated by Viscusi (1999)
using his economic cost calculation procedure, not that of the states.
15
   If states had differed in whether the alleged wrongful conduct contributed to the costs, then the percentage of
recoverable medical costs would need to be adjusted.
16
   A critique of the state cost calculations appears in Viscusi (2002a), which shows that the states’ calculations
greatly overstated their smoking-related medical costs. The states’ calculations also did not isolate the share of the
costs attributable to wrongful conduct but rather included all costs.
17
   Cutler et al. (2000) present the estimates for the state of Massachusetts, where these calculations are consistent
with sound economic principles.

                                                          10
balance are favorable, the health cost internalities are more substantial (Viscusi and Hersch

2008), but these were not the subject of the litigation.

       The second column of statistics in Table 1 presents the percentage share of the settlement

received by the different states. Interestingly, New York received a 12.995 percent share that is

almost identical to that of California’s 12.997 percent share, even though New York accounted

for 15.17 percent of the national smoking-related Medicaid costs as compared to 8.551 percent

for California. This disparity highlights the political influences on the MSA.

       The best measure of how the states fared is represented by the statistics in the final

column of Table 1, which divides the payment share by the medical cost share. States with a

value above 1 reaped a disproportionate share of the settlement. The state of Washington, which

was represented by the lead MSA broker Christine Gregoire, then attorney general and

subsequently governor, received a relatively high ratio of 1.396. The most prominent tobacco

states fared particularly poorly, as North Carolina, Virginia, and Kentucky all had ratios in the

0.6 to 0.8 range. The state of Iowa, where the state’s tobacco case had been dismissed,

nevertheless had a ratio of 0.901, and the state of Alabama, where the state attorney general

refused to file a case because he did not believe such cases had validity, had a ratio of 1.08.

Factors other than the state’s expected damages amounts in the litigation clearly influenced the

distribution of the payments.

       Using this sample of 46 states, we estimate the determinants of the percentage share of

the settlement. The key variable included in the regression is the state share of the medical costs,

which should fully account for the division of the payments if the payments are distributed based

on the rationale for the claims. As a proxy for anti-tobacco political sentiments and political

pressures to secure revenues from cigarettes, we include the per pack cigarette excise tax that



                                                 11
prevailed in the state in 1998.18 One would expect that states with a stronger anti-smoking

sentiment would be more aggressive in waging the litigation with respect to the Medicaid claims

and in obtaining a larger share of the MSA. We also include a dummy variable for whether the

state had a Republican governor in 1998. The regression results reported in the first column of

Table 2 indicate that the settlement share is strongly related to the medical cost share, but on less

than a one-to-one basis. States with a higher cigarette excise tax fared better in terms of the

settlement share, but the political party of the governor did not have a statistically significant

effect.19

         The regression in the second column of Table 2 reframes the issue in terms of the state’s

relative gain from the settlement, or the settlement share minus the share of medical costs

divided by the medical cost share.20 As expected based on the previous results, states with

higher cigarette tax rates reaped a greater relative gain from the settlement based on what they

should have received given their state-specific smoking-related medical costs.

         Because the details of the MSA negotiations were not made public, one can only

speculate as to the source of the positive influence of the state excise tax variable. One

prominent possibility is that the strong anti-tobacco states required more compensation to sign

onto the agreement. A second possibility is that the negotiations were not based on actual

medical expenditures reflecting state-specific differences in smoking rates. Smoking rates are

lower in states with higher excise taxes so that population-based compensation levels will

overcompensate the high excise tax states.



18
   These data are from Orzechowski and Walker (2008).
19
   In exploratory regressions we examined other possible determinants of the state settlement share, such as whether
the state is a major tobacco producer. However, most of these tobacco-related political factors are already reflected
in the state’s cigarette excise tax rate. For example, the major tobacco producing states of North Carolina, Virginia,
and Kentucky have very low cigarette excise taxes.
20
   Thus, the dependent variable is the data in the third column on Table 1 minus 1.

                                                         12
2.4 Regulatory Components of the MSA

        In addition to the financial structure that generates payments to the states, the MSA

included additional regulatory provisions as well. As with taxes, the MSA could only increase

regulatory restrictions and not decrease them. The MSA banned the targeting of youths in

advertising and cigarette marketing, which led to subsequent debate over which publications

were youth oriented and which were not.21 Youths were no longer permitted to have access to

free samples of cigarettes. In that same spirit, the MSA also banned the use of cartoons in

advertising, such as the penguin that appeared in the Kool ads and Joe Camel in the Camel ads.

A year before the MSA, R.J. Reynolds had voluntarily retired Joe Camel, who was the most

prominent cigarette cartoon character.22 The MSA also banned outdoor advertising and cigarette

advertisements, tobacco name brand merchandise, and payments for product placements in

movies and television shows. The MSA imposed limits but not a ban on corporate sponsorship

of events. The agreement also disbanded the two main trade associations, the Tobacco Institute

and the Council for Tobacco Research, and prohibited the companies from lobbying against

policies attempting to reduce youth smoking.

        The various restrictions on advertising and marketing raise two classes of possible

concerns: the effect on market concentration, and the effect on the introduction of new types of

cigarettes, such as those that are less hazardous to health.

        A final noteworthy component of the settlements with the states involved the release of

tobacco industry documents. As part of the settlement with the state of Minnesota, the tobacco

industry documents obtained during the course of the litigation were posted online and made


21
   R.J. Reynolds in particular became embroiled in a controversy over the target age group for Rolling Stone
magazine.
22
   The role of Joe Camel with respect to youth smoking had been the subject of an FTC case that the agency
dropped. Joe Camel retired just before his tenth birthday.

                                                        13
available for future private suits and class actions against the industry (see

www.tobaccodocuments.org). This measure consequently reduced the litigation costs that

plaintiffs in future cases would have to bear by making the results of the discovery process in

this case a public good.



3. The Levels and Allocation of the State Payments

3.1 Payments and Their Role in State Budgets

           The MSA provided for a series of upfront payments ranging from $2.4 billion to $2.7

billion per year from 1998–2003. The annual payments continuing into perpetuity were $4.5

billion in 2000, $5 billion in 2001, and $6.5 billion in 2002 and 2003.23 Including the four states

that settled separately, the states received $8.0 billion in payments in 2003 and a total of $37.5

billion from 2000 to 2003 (McKinley et al. 2003, 3).

           While the proceeds from the MSA are substantial, they do not constitute a major part of

states’ budgets. Table 3 provides a breakdown by state of the MSA payments and the share these

payments have of the total tax revenues for each state in 2003. For comparison, Table 3 also

presents comparable statistics for cigarette taxes. With the exception of Mississippi, the MSA

payments, while substantial, constitute under 1% of the states’ total revenues. Because the MSA

payments are comparable to a $0.40 per pack tax, the MSA revenues are sometimes less than the

revenues from cigarette taxes.

           Although the MSA provides for payments to the states that will continue indefinitely,

some states obtained much of the future value of the funds by securitizing part of their share of

the MSA payments. The principal impetus for these efforts is that many states faced budget

deficits so that cashing in on future payments might shortchange future residents but had the
23
     These payments would continue to increase over time until reaching $9.0 billion annually in 2018.

                                                          14
advantage of providing immediate political benefits. From fiscal year 2000–2005, total MSA-

related payments to the 46 states were $52.6 billion, of which $36.5 billion were annual MSA

payments and $16.0 billion were securitized proceeds (U.S. Government Accountability Office

2007).

         Table 4 lists the securitized proceeds received by the states in fiscal years 2000–2005.

The states with the largest securitized proceeds for fiscal years 2000–2005 are New York with

$4.2 billion, New Jersey with $2.8 billion, California with $2.5 billion, and Louisiana with $1.1

billion. Some states have had multiple bond issues as they have securitized greater portions of

their payments over time. Regression estimates show that the amounts securitized by the states

are positively related to the state’s share of the MSA payments.24 State fiscal crises also have

affected whether the state securitized (Sloan et al. 2005).

         The value of the bond issues hinged on the ability of the cigarette companies to continue

to make their MSA payments. Litigation that led to court awards that threatened the viability of

the industry consequently reduced the value of the bonds so that the MSA led to an alignment of

the interests of the cigarette industry and the states. After the $10.2 billion verdict in the Illinois

class action cigarette case, Price v. Philip Morris Inc., Philip Morris was required to post a $12

billion bond if it wished to appeal the case. Because this amount threatened the company’s

ability to pay its April 2003 MSA payments to the states, the value of the MSA tobacco bonds

dropped by 20% (McKinley et al. 2003, 26). Because of this threat to the solvency of Philip

Morris, the prospects for securitization dimmed. California cancelled the sale of its bonds, and

New York proceeded with its $4.2 billion sale only after pledging to make up any shortfall in the

tobacco companies’ payments with the state’s general revenue funds (McKinley et al. 2003, 18).

24
  Specifically, a Tobit regression yields the following coefficient estimates, with standard errors reported in
parentheses: Amount securitized (in $ millions) = -1584 (500) + 268 (73) Share of settlement + 1236 (814) Cigarette
excise tax in 1999.

                                                        15
Although the Illinois Supreme Court subsequently overturned the verdict in the Price case in

2006, this incident highlights the continued financial stake that the states have in the financial

well-being of the cigarette industry.

3.2 How the Payments Were Spent

         The allocation of the payments by the states bore little relation to the avowed objective of

decreasing tobacco smoking, particularly among underage smokers. Table 5 summarizes the

spending distribution of both the payments and the securitized proceeds. Note that these

allocations are gross allocations, not net, so they may not necessarily indicate an increase in state

spending in particular areas. Almost one-third of the funds were designated for health programs.

While Medicaid is included among the targeted efforts, other funded programs included cancer

prevention programs generally, drug addiction programs, the provision of adult health insurance,

medical assistance for the disabled, and pharmaceutical assistance for the elderly (U.S.

Government Accountability Office 2007, pp. 8-9). As Table 5 indicates, most of the funds were

for deficit reduction, unallocated general revenues, general purposes, and other categories

unrelated to smoking and health. Many states had quite targeted allocations, as Tennessee

allocated all the funds to general revenues to balance the budget, and Kentucky allocated 50% of

the funds for economic assistance to tobacco farmers (McKinley et al. 2003, pp. 37, 59).

Tobacco control efforts received only 3.5% of the funds, and this categorization is sufficiently

broad that it overstates the amount actually targeted at anti-smoking efforts.25 Gross et al. (2002)

found that in 2001, the per capita level of spending targeted at tobacco control efforts was

negatively related to the percentage of smokers in the state and to whether the state was a


25
  The relatively ambitious efforts by the state of Illinois in FY 2004 included “$1 million for the American Lung
Association, $2.3 million for school-based health clinics, $5 million for grants to local health departments, $1.2
million to the Liquor Control commission for age enforcement, $0.5 million for MSA enforcement, $1 million for
tobacco control research, and $5 million for tobacco-use prevention” (McKinley et al. 2003, 34).

                                                         16
tobacco-producing state.26 Similarly, Sloan et al. (2005) found that the per capita settlement

funds allocated to tobacco control followed expected patterns with tobacco control expenditures

negatively related to tobacco production and positively related to medical lobbies. With rare

exceptions, the funds obtained from securitization were targeted to deficit reduction, economic

development, education, capital projects, and other matters unrelated to smoking or health.

Louisiana and South Carolina included health care among the purposes of the securitized funds

(Johnson 2004).

        As a result, anti-smoking groups have expressed dissatisfaction with how the funds have

been allocated. Irrespective of state differences, the levels of expenditure for tobacco control are

low. The Centers for Disease Control established funding guidelines for tobacco-use prevention

that few states have been able to meet. In 2000 the only state that met the guidelines was

Mississippi, which was not part of the MSA. The three states that met the guidelines in

subsequent years were Hawaii, Indiana, and Maine in 2001; Maine, Massachusetts, and

Mississippi in 2002; and Arkansas, Maine, and Mississippi in 2003. With the exception of

Maine and Mississippi, there are no repeat players in meeting the minimum guidelines

established by the CDC. The MSA funds have proven to be quite fungible, bearing little relation

to the intended purpose of the funds.



4. The Effects of Advertising Restrictions

        A particularly visible consequence of the MSA is that it bolstered the already stringent

restrictions on the advertising and marketing of cigarettes. Table 6 reports the different


26
  Over the 1981–2000 time period that includes many years before the MSA, expenditures on tobacco control
efforts have been found to reduce per capita cigarette sales. See Farrelly, Pechacek, and Chaloupka (2003). Marlow
(2007) found that California’s tobacco control expenditures accounted for much of the decline in that state’s per
capita cigarette sales since 1988.

                                                       17
expenditure categories from MSA year of 1998 and the most recent year for which data are

available, 2005, based on data compiled by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (2007). All data

have been converted to $2005. The “Total” figures at the bottom of Table 6 indicate an overall

rise in advertising and marketing expenditures from 1998 to 2005. This jump in total advertising

and marketing expenditures is frequently cited in the literature, in the press, and by the U.S.

Congress as evidence that the MSA failed to influence advertising expenditures for cigarettes.

However, advertising and marketing tallies that also include price discounts from the much

higher post-MSA cigarette prices are a quite misleading measure of the temporal shifts. By far

the three largest component categories in Table 6 involve pricing effects rather than advertising.

The largest component are promotional allowances and price discounts, which rose from $3.4

billion in 1998 to $10.6 billion in 2005. If these discounts had been at the wholesale level rather

than the retail level, they would not have appeared in the advertising and marketing expenditure

tally. The second largest category in 2005 is coupons, which likewise represent a form of price

discount. The third price-related component is the retail-value-added category. Almost all of the

retail-value-added component, or 99% in 2005, is from offers such as buy one pack, get one pack

free. The remainder involves bonus items such as a T-shirt given away when the customer

purchases three packs of cigarettes. Together the three price-related marketing practices involve

total expenditures in 2005 of $12.2 billion, which is 93% of all advertising and marketing

expenditures. In contrast, in 1998 these categories accounted for 76% of all expenditures, as the

advertising components had a larger share.

       The net effects over the 1998–2005 period involve substantial declines in the advertising

components, with the exception of the modest internet marketing that increased and sampling




                                                 18
distributions which were quite stable. Advertising in newspapers, magazines, outdoor ads, and

transit ads plummeted.

       The three largest advertising categories in 2005 were specialty item distribution, public

entertainment, and point-of-sale advertising, each of which accounted for about $200 million in

expenditures. The overwhelming share of specialty items distributed were non-branded items

such as lighters and sporting goods distributed with cigarettes. Sponsorships of events in adults-

only facilities such as a bar night and sponsorships of general-audience entertainment such as

fishing tournaments comprise the public entertainment category. Point-of-sale advertising

declined post-MSA. This advertising consists of ads posted at the retail location, not including

outdoor ads posted on the property.

       Table 7 reports the regression coefficient (standard error) from a regression of the

expenditure category against a simple time trend variable and a 0-1 dummy variable for the post-

MSA period. In most instances, data used for the regressions are available annually from 1975–

2005 so that there are 31 observations per expenditure category. There are two matters of

interest – whether there has been a general time trend in the spending category, and whether

there has been a post-MSA shift in the level of spending.

       As shown in Table 7, promotional allowances and price discounts have been rising by

$163 million annually, with an additional jump of $4.8 billion in the post-MSA period. There is

no temporal trend in the retail-value-added component, but there is an increase of $1.9 billion

after the MSA.

       The restrictions imposed by the MSA on marketing and advertising led to statistically

significant post-MSA declines for outdoor advertising, transit advertising, point-of-sale displays,




                                                19
and specialty item distribution. For total advertising and marketing expenditures, there has been

an annual temporal increase of $186 million coupled with a post-MSA rise of $6.0 billion.

         Coupled with the increase in product prices due to the MSA and subsequent state

cigarette tax increases, the advertising restrictions led to a substantial shift in the marketing

efforts for cigarettes. Constrained forms of marketing and advertising declined, while

unconstrained forms often increased. Chief among these marketing efforts is the use of price

discounts, which by their very nature are targeted to legal purchasers of cigarettes and are also

responsive to the demand effects arising from the increased cost of cigarettes.

         Reduced yield cigarettes such as Eclipse have not made major inroads in the market.

Consumers have continued to shift into the “light” cigarette segment, but the very low tar yield

cigarette share has declined. From 1998 to 2005 the market share of cigarettes with 12 mg. or

less of tar rose from 56.8% to 58.4%, but there was a decline from 22.9% to 18.7% for the 9 mg.

or less category, from 13.2% to 11.5% for the 6 mg. or less category, and from 1.6% to 0.6% for

the 3 mg. or less category (U.S. Federal Trade Commission 2007, Table 4A). Increases in

cigarette prices coupled with the rise of higher tar generic brands contributed to these trends.



5. Market Structure27

         In addition to the aforementioned effects of advertising on introducing new lower risk

products, there might also be effects of advertising restrictions on market structure. To the

extent that the MSA restrained market competition, one might expect there to be a rise in market

concentration. Such an increase may boost price-cost margins and diminish the consumer


27
  Data discussed in this section are drawn from the Maxwell Consumer Report, March 16, 1999, and the Maxwell
Report dated March 9, 2000; March 3, 2001; February, 2002; March, 2003; February, 2004; and February, 2006.
These are the year end and fourth quarter sales estimates for the cigarette industry in the respective preceding years.
Reports include data for multiple years.

                                                          20
surplus received by purchasers of cigarettes. An alternative hypothesis is that market

concentration will not be affected, but that advertising limitations will freeze market shares.

That there might be anti-competitive effects of the advertising restrictions is a concern that was

raised after the fact by some economists, though it was not a prominent part of the policy

debate.28 It is noteworthy that a classic textbook case of where industry collusion would be

desirable is with respect to advertising expenditures, which tend to have a Prisoners’ Dilemma

type of structure (Viscusi, Harrington, and Vernon 2005, p. 102). While industry collusion to

restrict advertising is illegal, collusion can be accomplished legally through a mechanism such as

the MSA in which the restrictions are instituted under the guise of decreasing smoking rather

than reducing advertising costs to the industry. Whether the MSA was in fact a form of collusion

is less important than whether it led to the anti-competitive effects associated with collusion.

         The data reported in Table 8 suggest that the most extreme fears of the effects of the

advertising restrictions were not well founded. Table 8 summarizes the market shares for the

major tobacco companies from 1997 through 2005. Philip Morris, the clear market leader, had a

48-51% market share throughout the period and a 49% share both in 1998 and 2005. Lorillard

likewise maintained a 9-10% share throughout this period, and Liggett remained an insignificant

player in the market in the 1-3% range.

         This considerable stability is not shared by the performance of the other firms. R.J.

Reynolds experienced a modest decline in market share from 24% in 1998 to 22% in 2005, but

the company with which it merged, Brown & Williamson, dropped from a 15% market share in

1998 to 11% in 2003. The two growth categories were the “Others” grouping of generic

cigarettes and Commonwealth Brands, which marketed six discount brands that it purchased

28
  Discussion of the possible anti-competitive effects appears in Viscusi (2002a) and in the Expert Report of Joseph
E. Stiglitz (2005) in Schwab et al. v. Philip Morris, Civil Action No. 04-1945. U.S. District Court, Eastern District
of New York.

                                                         21
from Brown & Williamson.29 The merger of two companies and the spinoff of the discount

brands complicated assessments of the MSA on market competition. Consistent with the

hypothesis that the MSA locked in market shares is that the market shares of Philip Morris and

Lorillard have remained virtually unchanged since the MSA. Such patterns could, of course,

reflect market stability rather than anti-competitive effects. The ultimate effects on market

competition will be manifested over the longer term.

        The effects on market concentration likewise are modest. The bottom row of Table 8

reports the Herfindahl Hirschman Index (HHI) values based on the cigarette industry categories

shown in the table.30 While the HHI values are relatively high, which would certainly be

expected given that a single firm accounts for half the market, there is no evidence of an anti-

competitive increase in concentration based on the change in the HHI. The HHI index in 1998 is

3327, which is a bit larger than the 2003 pre-merger value of 3222. After the R.J. Reynolds-

Brown & Williamson merger, the HHI index rises modestly to 3271 and continues to increase to

3336 in 2005.

        An additional instructive reference point is to ask what the pattern of HHI index values

would have been if R.J. Reynolds and Brown & Williamson were treated as a single entity

throughout the 1997–2005 period. If that industry structure had prevailed, the HHI index would

have exhibited a decline from 4066 in 1997 to 3336 in 2005, indicating a substantial decrease in

market concentration.




29
   The brands were Tuscany, which Commonwealth Brands calls its “premium” brand, and the generic brands USA
Gold, Montclair, Malibu, Sonoma, and Riviera.
30
   The HHI index is defined as follows. Letting si represent the fraction of industry sales by firm i, then HHI =
(100s1)2 + (100s2)2 + … + (100sn)2, where there are n firms in the industry. For purposes of our calculations, we
treat sales by “Others” as being sales by a single firm.

                                                       22
6. Legal Fees and Subsequent Litigation

        The MSA had four principal ramifications for subsequent litigation against the cigarette

industry. First, because the attorneys representing the states received billions of dollars in

payments associated with the settlement, the financial resources of the plaintiffs’ bar were

enhanced, thus providing potential financial backing for additional litigation. Second, the

tobacco industry’s payment of a record-breaking amount of $250 billion to settle lawsuits

launched by the states garnered substantial publicity and may have signaled to jurors that the

companies were guilty of record breaking wrongful conduct. Third, the settlement of the

lawsuits in the billions gave jurors a new anchor value for damages in the billions rather than the

millions.31 Fourth, the Minnesota settlement provided for the public disclosure of the tobacco

industry documents obtained during the discovery process, reducing litigation costs in future

lawsuits.

        The states contracted out the tobacco cases on a contingency fee basis. Because these

deals were not put out for open competitive bids, there is a strong possibility that the process was

used to reward political allies with excessively lucrative arrangements that were not in the public

interest. The attorneys representing Mississippi received 35% of the state’s settlement amount as

their fee, or equal to $1.43 billion.32 The attorney fee share of the Florida settlement amount was

26%, leading to a payout of $3.43 billion. The attorneys representing Texas in the litigation

received 19% of the settlement amount, or $3.3 billion. Attorney fees were $111 million for the

state of Missouri and $265 million for Ohio. Although no comprehensive tally of the amount of




31
   Some observers have hypothesized that the subsequent large verdicts against other companies, such as GM, were
also influenced by the anchoring effect of the MSA.
32
   The state-specific figures discussed here are from Viscusi (2002a), p. 51. References are provided therein.

                                                       23
the fees is available, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce’s partial tally in 2001 identified $11 billion

in fees that had been received by attorneys.33

         Until the MSA the tobacco industry had a record of never having paid out an individual

smoker liability claim. After the MSA the companies did not fare as well. In individual cases

and class actions resolved after the MSA, cigarette companies were not only found to be liable

for compensatory damages but also were found liable for punitive damages, for which there are

much more stringent legal criteria. To justify an award of punitive damages, there must be an

assessment that the defendant’s conduct displayed a reckless and callous disregard for the

victim’s safety.

         Table 9 summarizes the results of the five largest punitive damages verdicts against the

industry. Three of the cases were individual smoker cases but nevertheless involved enormous

verdicts, chiefly in the punitive damages component. The level of punitive damages awarded is

$150 million in Schwarz v. Philip Morris Inc., $3 billion in Boeken v. Philip Morris Inc., and $28

billion in Bullock v. Philip Morris Inc. The Florida cigarette class action Engle v. R.J. Reynolds

had punitive damages of $145 billion, while the Illinois “light” cigarettes class action Price v.

Philip Morris had punitive damages of $3.1 billion and compensatory damages of $7.1 billion.34

The Price case verdict had broad ramifications with respect to the market for securitizing the

MSA payments, as it threatened the solvency of Philip Morris and its continued participation in

the MSA payment system. While these decisions were all appealed, the litigation landscape of

the cigarette industry had undergone a dramatic shift. Rather than putting an end to litigation



33
   U.S. Chamber of Commerce, “Chamber Targets Excessive Legal Fees: Files 21 FOIA Requests on Tobacco
Settlements,” March 14, 2001.
34
   Although the Engle class action verdict was overturned, the findings in the case regarding the addictive properties
of cigarettes and wrongful conduct can be used in the thousands of individual Engle progeny cases that may follow.
To date, plaintiffs in the few Engle progeny cases that have been tried have had some successes in these individual
cases.

                                                         24
against the industry, the MSA increased it.35 The protections against punitive damages and class

actions that were part of the draft Proposed Resolution were not included in the MSA but would

have proven to be valuable to the industry.



7. Policy Ramifications

7.1 Tax Policy Changes

        The MSA also marked a pronounced shift in the treatment of the tobacco industry with

respect to taxes and regulations. Although the MSA imposed a tax equivalent fee that generated

revenues for the states, states also imposed substantial additional excise taxes. Table 10

summarizes the excise tax trends from 1998 to 2008.36 Only 5 states did not boost the excise tax

amounts over that decade. The absolute tax increase per pack is shown in the second to last

column of Table 10, and the percentage tax increase shown in the final column. New York has

been a leader in terms of the magnitude of the tax increase, as it raised excise taxes by $2.19 per

pack, or 391%. Altogether there were 20 states that boosted the cigarette tax by $1.00 or more in

addition to the MSA payments.

        Raising cigarette taxes and cigarette prices will have the expected economic effects on

demand. The estimates of the price elasticity of demand for cigarettes range from -0.4 to -0.7.37

The average price per pack before the enactment of the MSA was $2.175 (Orzechowski and

Walker 2001, p. 136). At that time the total state and federal excise tax amount averaged $0.63

per pack so that the MSA payments raised the tax equivalent penalty to about a dollar a pack.



35
   Sloan, Trogdon, and Mathews (2005) used daily stock market return data to estimate the effect on stock prices and
the cost of equity capital. Unfavorable information reduced tobacco company returns.
36
   Trogdon and Sloan (2006) estimate that post-MSA cigarette taxes in 2002 were $0.10 higher.
37
   Viscusi (1992) reviews dozens of cigarette demand studies, and Hersch (2000) provides recent demand elasticity
estimates.

                                                        25
The MSA per pack cost raised cigarette prices by 18.4%, implying a 7-13% decrease in sales

based on available demand elasticity estimates.

           This range of effects is consistent with the overall estimated effect of the MSA, which

includes the effect on prices and regulatory restrictions. Sloan and Trogdon (2004) found that

the MSA reduced smoking rates by 13% for the age 18-20 group and by 5% for older age

groups.

           The structure of cigarette taxes has also affected the mix of cigarette sales. U.S. cigarette

taxes are on a per pack basis rather than being proportional to the product price. The higher

cigarette taxes and MSA tax equivalents consequently have narrowed the relative price gap

between the premium cigarettes and lower end cigarettes, which has been to the advantage of

producers of premium cigarettes.38 To the extent that cigarettes taxes have a health-related

objective, the per pack tax approach is appropriate as there is no evidence indicating that the

health risks of premium cigarettes are greater. Indeed, the opposite may be the case, as many

generic cigarettes have higher tar and nicotine ratings.

           Higher cigarette taxes and the discrepancy of taxes across jurisdictions also create

potential problems of border effects. Consumers and possibly resellers of cigarettes may travel

to purchase cigarettes if the price gap is sufficiently large. A noteworthy instance of such a

discrepancy is that created by the combined New York State and New York City tax of $4.25 per

pack. In addition to creating a price gap with respect to neighboring states, there is a price gap

compared to cigarettes sold on Indian reservations, which by law are independent sovereign

nations not subject to these taxes. Because of the increased attractiveness of such cigarettes to

smokers in New York City, the City of New York sought an injunction in 2009 to prevent the



38
     “Tobacco Lights Up on Premium Blend,” Wall Street Journal, July 27, 2009, p. C10.

                                                         26
sale of cigarettes by the Unkechauge Indian Nation.39 Just as state legislators express surprise

when cigarette tax revenues are less than those predicted by projections assuming completely

inelastic demand, there is similar surprise and shock when consumers seek to make purchases

that evade the tax after creating a situation of substantial price disparities.

7.2 The Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act

           In many respects, the enactment of the 2009 legislation the Family Smoking Prevention

and Tobacco Control Act marked the culmination of the tax and regulatory effort that began with

the attempt to settle the state lawsuits against the industry. Various drafts of the Proposed

Resolution, which Congress considered in 1997 and 1998, would have provided legal protections

for the industry against major stakes lawsuits such as class actions and claims involving punitive

damages. While this 1997 proposal included tax components, it also included detailed regulatory

provisions. Among these provisions was a grant of authority to the Food and Drug

Administration (FDA) to regulate cigarettes. The proposal also sought to bolster the on-product

warnings requirements for cigarettes and to impose advertising restrictions, including bans on

descriptors such as “low tar” and “light” unless the cigarette could be shown to be safer for

health. While the MSA included some advertising restrictions and a tax equivalent fee, these

other components of the Proposed Resolution were not part of the MSA. An agreement with the

states could not, for example, grant FDA authority to regulate cigarettes.

           The combination of the MSA and the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control

Act achieved the anti-smoking objectives of the Proposed Resolution. The 2009 law introduced

a major increase in the degree of regulation of the cigarette industry. With the support of user

fees that are expected to raise the price of cigarettes by about $0.06 per pack, the Food and Drug

Administration will be regulating the labeling and content of cigarettes. Companies are not
39
     See City of New York v. Golden Feather et al.: U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York.

                                                           27
permitted to use artificial flavors such as cloves, though menthol is still permitted. Companies

must submit the cigarette ingredients and nicotine information to the FDA for approval. The Act

also imposes new labeling requirements so that the current series of four rotating warnings will

be replaced by nine rotating warnings that must comprise 50% of the front and rear panels of the

pack. The act also bans the use of descriptors such as “light” and “mild.”

         From the standpoint of efficient market operation, the FDA should foster a diversity of

market choices with varying level risks, including lower risk cigarettes, coupled with information

that enables consumers to have accurate assessments of the product risks. Whether the FDA

regulatory regime will encourage or discourage the introduction of lower risk cigarettes is yet to

be determined.40

         One component of the Act that has already faced a legal challenge is the series of

restrictions on advertising.41 The increased limitations on advertising may violate the First

Amendment protections afforded to commercial speech. A prominent rationale given in the Act

for the restrictions on advertising was the FTC figure of $13 billion in cigarette advertising and

marketing in 2005. However, as shown above, most of these costs took the form of promotional

discounts and price allowances. Additional advertising and marketing restrictions may impede

new entrants and the introduction of new products.




40
   FDA Commissioner Margaret Hamburg made the following comments regarding the focus of the new FDA
Center for Tobacco Products: “We need to study the composition of tobacco products and understand both the
addictive components of tobacco and the toxic chemical additives. We need to address how these substances are
impacting health and ensure that there are not additional innovations by the tobacco industry that will put new
products in the market that may be more addictive or more attractive to youth.” “Margaret Hamburg Aims to
Strengthen FDA Science,” Science. Vol. 325, August 14, 2009, p. 802.
41
   The motion for a preliminary injunction challenging provisions of the act was filed on August 31, 2009, in
Commonwealth Brands, Inc. et al. v. United States of America et al., U.S. District Court for the Western District of
Kentucky, Bowling Green Division, Case No. 1:2009cv00117.


                                                         28
8. Conclusion

       The state lawsuits against the cigarette industry introduced a wide range of novel legal

and policy issues. If the states had prevailed, it would have been the first time that states were

able to be reimbursed for financial externalities attributable to wrongful conduct that influenced

consumption decisions. Although no cases were tried to verdict, the MSA represented the largest

civil case damages payment in U.S. history. However, the settlement also took an unprecedented

form, as it did not involve a lump sum payment or a structured settlement. Rather, it took the

form of a cigarette excise tax and regulatory restrictions, all of which were negotiated privately

by representatives of industry and state attorneys general.

       The MSA served as a negotiated combination of tax equivalents and regulation that

emerged from an out-of-court settlement that completely bypassed all traditional governmental

inputs. Taxes are not the province of attorney general discretion but require the approval of state

legislatures or the U.S. Congress and must also be signed into law. The enactment of new

regulations likewise involves a detailed governmental and public review process. For major

regulations such as this, there must be a regulatory impact analysis, an opportunity for public

comment, and internal administration review to ensure that the regulation is consistent with

legislative requirements and societal interests. All of these checks on taxes and regulations were

bypassed by the MSA. As a policy approach, negotiated tax and regulatory policies such as

those resulting from the MSA are asymmetric, as they can only increase the tax and regulatory

penalties but cannot decrease them.

       The stakes involved have proven to be enormous, and the structure of the MSA payments

has established a commonality of financial interests between the tobacco industry and the states.

Bypassing the usual legislative process, or in the case of regulations the usual rulemaking



                                                 29
process, is not simply a breach of good government principles of civics books. Bargains in

which the key parties are the attorneys general and the cigarette industry may not be reflective of

the kinds of taxes and regulations that are in society’s best interests. Chief among the criticisms

to date is that the MSA might have anti-competitive effects by imposing per pack financial

penalties on new entrants that were not party to the litigation and by imposing limits on

advertising and marketing, which would impede entry and the introduction of new products.

Thus far, however, there is no firm evidence of significant adverse anti-competitive effects.

Market shares have remained quite stable, as the MSA may have locked in market shares. Any

anti-competitive effects will be more evident over time.

       The other major critique of the MSA has been with respect to the allocation of the funds,

as much less has gone to health care and anti-tobacco efforts than was anticipated. As with tax

revenues generally, states have treated these funds as fungible, so there has not been the

substantial increase in the allocation of funds to health and tobacco programs that many expected

to result from the MSA. Whether such a targeting of funds should have been the appropriate

policy objective is a different matter that involves comparison of the efficacy of such

expenditures with other uses of the resources. Even though the states reaped the funds windfall

because of the tobacco litigation, the allocation that best advances the interests of the citizenry

may not be closely tied to anti-tobacco initiatives.




                                                 30
References

Bulow, J. and P. Klemperer (1998). “The Tobacco Deal.” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 1998: 323-394.

Cutler, D.M., A.M. Epstein, R.G. Frank, R. Hartman, C. King, III, J.P. Newhouse, M.B.
Rosenthal, and E.R. Vigdor (2000). “How Good a Deal Was the Tobacco Settlement?: Assessing
Payments to Massachusetts.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 21(2/3): 235-261.

Cutler, D.M., J. Gruber, R.S. Hartman, M.B. Landrum, J.P. Newhouse, and M.B. Rosenthal
(2002). “The Economic Impacts of the Tobacco Settlement.” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 21(1): 1-19.

Farrelly, M.C., T.F. Pechacek, and F.J. Chaloupka (2003). “The Impact of Tobacco Control
Program Expenditures on Aggregate Cigarettes Sales: 1981-2000.” Journal of Health Economics
22(5): 843-859.

Gross, C.P., B. Soffer, P.B. Bach, R. Rajkumar, and H.P. Forman (2002). “State Expenditures for
Tobacco-Control Programs and the Tobacco Settlement.” New England Journal of Medicine
347(14): 1080-1086.

Hersch, J. (2000). “Gender, Income Levels, and the Demand for Cigarettes.” Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty 21(2/3): 263-282.

Hersch, J., A. Del Rossi, and W.K. Viscusi (2004). “Voter Preferences and State Regulation of
Smoking.” Economic Inquiry 42(3): 455-468.

Johnson, C.L. (2004). “The State of the Tobacco Settlement: Are Settlement Funds Being Used
to Finance State Government Budget Deficits? A Research Note.” Public Budgeting & Finance
24(1): 113-125.

McKinley, A., L. Dixon, and A. Devore (2003). State Management and Allocation of Tobacco
Settlement Revenue 2003. Denver: National Conference of State Legislatures.

Marlow, M.L. (2007). “Do Tobacco-Control Programs Lower Tobacco Consumption?: Evidence
from California.” Public Finance Review 35(6): 689-709.

Orzechowski, W., and R.C. Walker (2001). The Tax Burden on Tobacco: Historical Compilation
2001. Vol. 36. Arlington: Orzechowski and Walker.

Orzechowski, W., and R.C. Walker (2008). The Tax Burden on Tobacco: Historical Compilation
2008. Vol. 43. Arlington: Orzechowski and Walker.

Sloan, F.A., and J.G. Trogdon (2004). “The Impact of the Master Settlement Agreement on
Cigarette Consumption.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 23(4): 843-855.



                                              31
Sloan, F.A., E.S. Carlisle, J.R. Rattliff, and J.G. Trogdon (2005). “Determinants of States’
Allocations of the Master Settlement Agreement Payments.” Journal of Health Politics, Policy,
and Law 30(4): 643-686.

Sloan, F.A., J.G. Trogdon, and C.A. Mathews (2005). “Litigation and the Value of Tobacco
Companies.” Journal of Health Economics 24(3): 427-447.

Stiglitz, J.E. (2005). Expert Report in Schwab et al., v. Philip Morris, Civil Action No. 04-1945.
U.S. District Court, Eastern District of New York.

Trogdon, J.G., and F.A. Sloan (2006). “Cigarette Taxes and the Master Settlement Agreement.”
Economic Inquiry 44(4): 729-739.

U.S. Federal Trade Commission. 2007. Federal Trade Commission Cigarette Report for 2004
and 2005. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Federal Trade Commission.

U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2006. Tobacco Settlement: States’ Allocations of Fiscal
Year 2005 and Expected Fiscal Year 2006 Payments, GAO-06-502. Washington, D.C.:
Government Accountability Office.

U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2007. Tobacco Settlement: States’ Allocations of
Payments from Tobacco Companies for Fiscal Year 2000 through 2005, GAO-07-534T.
Washington, D.C.: Government Accountability Office.

Wagner, R.E. (1999). “Understanding the Tobacco Settlement: The State as Partisan Plaintiff.”
Regulation 22(4): 38-41.

Viscusi, W.K. (1992). Smoking: Making the Risky Decision. New York: Oxford University
Press.

Viscusi, W.K. (1995). “Cigarette Taxation and the Social Consequences of Smoking.” In Tax
Policy and the Economy, ed., James Poterba. Vol. 9. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic
Research, 51-101.

Viscusi, W.K. (1999). “The Governmental Composition of the Insurance Costs of Smoking.”
Journal of Law and Economics 42(2): 575-609.

Viscusi, W.K. (2002a). Smoke-Filled Rooms: A Postmortem on the Tobacco Deal. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Viscusi, W.K. (2002b). Tobacco: Regulation and Taxation through Litigation. In Regulation
through Litigation, ed., W. Kip Viscusi. p. 22-52. Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise
Institute – Brookings Institution.

Viscusi, W.K., J.E. Harrington, Jr., and J. Vernon, eds. (2005). Economics of Regulation and
Antitrust. 4th ed. Cambridge: MIT Press.

                                                32
Viscusi, W.K., and J. Hersch (2008). “The Mortality Cost to Smokers.” Journal of Health
Economics 27(4): 943-958.




                                             33
                                           Table 1
Ratio of the State Settlement Payment Share to the State Medical Care Cost Share for States
                               Participating in the Settlementa

                   Percentage Share Percentage Share          Settlement Share Divided
State
                    of Medical Cost   of Settlement            by Medical Cost Share
Alabama                  1.520            1.650                        1.080
Alaska                   0.280            0.350                        1.263
Arizona                  0.530            1.500                        2.850
Arkansas                 1.020            0.840                        0.828
California               8.551          12.997                         1.520
Colorado                 1.229            1.396                        1.136
Connecticut              1.948            1.890                        0.970
Delaware                 0.513            0.403                        0.784
Georgia                  3.154            2.499                        0.792
Hawaii                   0.212            0.613                        2.886
Idaho                    0.229            0.370                        1.615
Illinois                 5.609            4.739                        0.845
Indiana                  3.587            2.077                        0.579
Iowa                     0.983            0.886                        0.901
Kansas                   0.830            0.849                        1.023
Kentucky                 2.806            1.793                        0.639
Louisiana                2.424            2.296                        0.947
Maine                    0.724            0.783                        1.082
Maryland                 2.048            2.302                        1.124
Massachusetts            3.170            4.113                        1.297
Michigan                 3.326            4.431                        1.332
Missouri                 2.722            2.316                        0.851
Montana                  0.244            0.432                        1.774
Nebraska                 0.569            0.606                        1.065
Nevada                   0.521            0.621                        1.191
New Hampshire            0.894            0.678                        0.759
New Jersey               4.262            3.937                        0.924
New Mexico               0.351            0.607                        1.729
New York                15.170          12.995                         0.857
North Carolina           3.491            2.375                        0.680
North Dakota             0.211            0.373                        1.764
Ohio                     6.148            5.129                        0.834

                                            34
    Oklahoma              1.199               1.055                     0.880
    Oregon                1.003               1.169                     1.165
    Pennsylvania          5.298               5.853                     1.105
    Rhode Island          0.736               0.732                     0.995
    South Carolina        1.422               1.198                     0.842
    South Dakota          0.256               0.355                     1.389
    Tennessee             2.874               2.485                     0.865
    Utah                  0.220               0.453                     2.058
    Vermont               0.321               0.419                     1.306
    Virginia              2.766               2.082                     0.753
    Washington            1.498               2.091                     1.396
    West Virginia         0.978               0.903                     0.923
    Wisconsin             1.983               2.110                     1.064
    Wyoming               0.178               0.253                     1.420

a
 Viscusi (2002a), Table 3. Medical cost externality figures assume a 3% discount rate and
cost levels for 1995.




                                            35
                                             Table 2
                             Regression Estimates for Settlement Share
                                 and Relative Gain in Settlement

                                         Share of Settlement            Relative Gain in Settlementa
Constant                                      -0.572                               -0.259
                                              (0.297)                              (0.151)
Share of medical costs                         0.934**                               ----
                                              (0.048)                                ----
Cigarette tax rate, 1998                       1.472*                               1.075**
                                              (0.619)                              (0.320)
Republican governor                            0.357                                0.119
                                              (0.266)                              (0.135)
Adjusted R2                                    0.90                                 0.18
a
 Relative gain in settlement = (settlement share – share of medical costs) / (share of medical
costs).

* Significant at 0.05 level, ** significant at 0.01 level, two-tailed test.




                                                   36
                                       Table 3
        Cigarette Tax Revenue and MSA Revenue in Relation to State Budgets in 2003

                                                    MSA                         Cigarette
                  Total State      MSA             Percent     Cigarette       Tax Percent
State             Revenues        Revenue          Share of   Tax Revenue       Share of
                     (in $         (in $            State         (in $        Total State
                   billions)      millions)        Revenue      millions)       Revenue
Alabama             19.10         109.22            0.57           61.16          0.32
Alaska                6.92         23.07            0.33           40.24          0.58
Arizona             17.93          99.61            0.56         216.94           1.21
Arkansas            11.81          55.96            0.47           86.74          0.73
California         195.55         862.59            0.44        1040.62           0.53
Colorado            13.81          92.64            0.67           56.33          0.41
Connecticut         18.24         125.47            0.69         251.98           1.38
Delaware              5.04         26.73            0.53           35.22          0.70
Florida             55.21         546.50            0.99         426.55           0.77
Georgia             29.87         165.87            0.56           83.61          0.28
Hawaii                6.81         40.67            0.60           70.59          1.04
Idaho                 5.49         24.55            0.45           25.06          0.46
Illinois            44.42         314.54            0.71         653.70           1.47
Indiana             24.55         137.85            0.56         343.66           1.40
Iowa                12.97          58.77            0.45           89.89          0.69
Kansas              10.40          56.34            0.54         119.41           1.15
Kentucky            18.38         119.02            0.65           21.44          0.12
Louisiana           19.44         152.42            0.78         117.93           0.61
Maine                 6.80         51.99            0.76           95.97          1.41
Maryland            21.80         152.76            0.70         266.06           1.22
Massachusetts       30.37         272.96            0.90         438.74           1.44
Michigan            50.08         294.11            0.59         828.68           1.65
Minnesota           25.60         152.91            0.60         171.13           0.67
Mississippi         13.39         149.61            1.12           46.90          0.35
Missouri            22.02         153.72            0.70         105.04           0.48
Montana               4.61         28.71            0.62           16.74          0.36
Nebraska              7.29         40.21            0.55           60.86          0.83
Nevada                8.35         41.22            0.49           63.95          0.77
New Hampshire         5.21         45.00            0.86           95.76          1.84
New Jersey          46.08         261.33            0.57         612.09           1.33
New Mexico            9.85         40.30            0.41           20.56          0.21
New York           118.27         862.46            0.73        1015.81           0.86
North Carolina      30.04         157.62            0.52           40.31          0.13
North Dakota          3.36         24.74            0.74           18.35          0.55
Ohio                49.90         340.44            0.68         548.77           1.10
Oklahoma            14.92          70.02            0.47           58.91          0.39
Oregon              19.25          77.56            0.40         224.18           1.16
Pennsylvania        49.46         388.37            0.79         887.86           1.80

                                              37
Rhode Island         5.86           48.58          0.83            94.00          1.60
South Carolina      19.67           79.50          0.40            25.84          0.13
South Dakota         3.00           23.58          0.79            21.67          0.72
Tennessee           20.56          164.96          0.80           107.04          0.52
Texas               82.62          449.99          0.54           490.72          0.59
Utah                11.53           30.07          0.26            57.53          0.50
Vermont              3.64           27.79          0.76            44.39          1.22
Virginia            28.19          138.18          0.49            17.16          0.06
Washington          29.66          138.76          0.47           337.78          1.14
West Virginia        9.77           59.91          0.61            44.99          0.46
Wisconsin           25.17          140.03          0.56           298.47          1.19
Wyoming              3.40           16.78          0.49             6.85          0.20

Sources: Total revenue figures were obtained from the U.S. Census Bureau website.
(http://www.census.gov/govs/www/state03.html). The MSA revenues by state for 2003 were
obtained from McKinley et al. (2003). The cigarette tax revenues were obtained from
Orzechowski and Walker (2008, Table 8: Gross State Cigarette Taxes, p. 22).




                                            38
                                    Table 4
Total Amount of Securitized Proceeds Received by States, Fiscal Years 2000–2005

                                       Total Securitized Proceeds
            State
                                              ($ millions)
            Alabama                              153.8
            Alaska                               203.0
            Arkansas                              58.3
            California                         2,485.0
            Iowa                                 643.1
            Louisiana                          1,069.5
            New Jersey                         2,751.8
            New York                           4,200.0
            Oregon                               657.6
            Rhode Island                         545.9
            South Carolina                       785.9
            South Dakota                         278.0
            Virginia                             390.0
            Washington                           517.9
            Wisconsin                          1,275.0
            Total                             16,014.7

Source: U.S. Government Accountability Office (2006), Table 3.




                                       39
                                          Table 5
 Amount and Percentage of States’ Allocations of Master Settlement Agreement Payments and
                Securitized Proceeds by Category, Fiscal Years 2000–2005

       Category                                     Dollars (millions)   Percent
       Health                                         $16,807               30.0
       Budget shortfalls                               12,806               22.9
       Unallocated                                       6,639              11.9
       General purposes                                  3,955               7.1
       Infrastructure                                    3,350               6.0
       Education                                         3,078               5.5
       Debt service on securitized funds                 3,005               5.4
       Tobacco control                                   1,943               3.5
       Economic development for tobacco regions          1,490               2.7
       Social services                                     961               1.7
       Reserves/rainy day funds                            810               1.4
       Tax reductions                                      616               1.1
       Payments to tobacco growers                         521               0.9
       Total                                          $55,981              100.1

Source: U.S. Government Accountability Office (2007), Table 2.




                                             40
                                             Table 6
                      Cigarette Advertising and Marketing, 1998 and 2005a

                                               Expenditures (thousands of dollars)
           Expenditure Category
                                                    1998               2005
           Promotional allowances and             3,449,404         10,623,755
           price discounts
           Retail value added                        1,863,606          732,536
           Coupons                                   747,890            870,137
           Newspapers                                35,279             1,589
           Magazines                                 337,038            44,777
           Outdoor                                   353,123            9,821
           Transit                                   48,116             0
           Point-of-sale                             348,352            182,193
           Sampling distribution                     17,297             17,211
           Specialty item distribution               426,347            230,534
           Public entertainment                      297,786            214,227
           Direct mail                               69,220             51,844
           Endorsements                              0                  0
           Internet                                  150                2,675
           Total                                     7,993,606          12,981,299
a
 Expenditure categories included in the total but not reported in the table are sponsorships,
endorsements, and telephone. All data converted to 2005$ using the CPI.

Source: U.S. Federal Trade Commission (2007), Tables 2B and 2C.




                                                41
                                              Table 7
                          Cigarette Advertising and Marketing Regressiona

            Expenditure Category                     Time Trend         Post-MSA
            Promotional allowances and               163,125**         4,765,772**
            price discounts                          (50,743)          (1,085,489)
            Retail value added                       13,604            1,875,498**
                                                     (27,432)          (586,820)
            Coupons                                  13,909**          438,279**
                                                     (4,826)           (103,242)
            Newspapers                               -31,435**         223,472**
                                                     (3,224)           (68,958)
            Magazines                                -16,509**         -65,246
                                                     (3,434)           (73,452)
            Outdoor                                  -2,404            -386,441**
                                                     (2,435)           (52,094)
            Transit                                  -490              -49,212**
                                                     (434)             (9,275)
            Point-of-sale                            12,286**          -226,607**
                                                     (2,594)           (55,497)
            Sampling distribution                    -7,305**          12,091
                                                     (1,732)           (37,049)
            Specialty item distribution              30,778**          -579,662**
                                                     (5,134)           (109,829)
            Public entertainment                     7,496**           25,477
                                                     (1,598)           (34,182)
            Direct mail                              3,126             1,691
                                                     (2,333)           (49,899)
            Internet                                 15.4              1,284**
                                                     (12.3)            (264)
            Total                                    186,199**         6,036,261**
                                                     (30,141)          (644,773)
a
  A constant is included in the regressions but is not reported. Expenditure categories included in
the total but not reported in the table are sponsorship, endorsements, and telephone. All data
converted to 2005$ using the CPI.

**Statistically significant at 0.01 level, two tailed test.

Source: Data used for the regressions are from the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (2007),
Tables 2B and 2C.




                                                   42
                                                               Table 8
                                                    Year-End Market Shares and HHI


                              1997        1998      1999      2000         2001      2002      2003    2004    2005
 Philip Morris                0.487       0.494     0.496     0.505        0.510     0.490     0.504   0.475   0.487
 RJ Reynolds                  0.242       0.240     0.230     0.230        0.223     0.231     0.215   0.288   0.282
 Brown & Williamson           0.160       0.150     0.134     0.117        0.109     0.112     0.105 .       .
 Lorillard                    0.087       0.091     0.104     0.096        0.093     0.091     0.093   0.088   0.092
 Commonwealth Brands      .           .             0.011     0.018        0.022     0.030     0.031   0.029   0.035
 Liggett                      0.013       0.013     0.012     0.015        0.022     0.024     0.026   0.023   0.022
 Others                       0.010       0.012     0.023     0.019        0.021     0.023     0.025   0.097   0.082
 HHI Index                3291.71     3327.30     3284.82   3317.40    3317.68     3162.91   3221.77   3270.92   3335.90



The data on year-end market shares are obtained from the Maxwell Consumer Reports issued in March 1999, March 2000, March
2001, February 2002, March 2003, February 2004, and February 2006. The year-end market shares are reported in each Maxwell
Consumer Report under the table entitled “Company Volume and Market Share.”




                                                                      43
                                                               Table 9
                                            Largest Cigarette Punitive Damages Verdicts

                                         Award ($ millions)
        Case Name               Compensatory Punitive                              Current Status
                                                                 Total
                                  Damages    Damages
Boeken v. Philip Morris Inc.                                                Punitive damages reduced to
                                     5.54           3,000.0    3,005.54
    (2001)                                                                  $50 million on appeal.a
Bullock v. Philip Morris Inc.                                               New trial ordered on the issue
    (2002)                                                                  of punitive damages,b led to
                                     0.65         28,000.0    28,000.65
                                                                            $13.8 million punitive
                                                                            damages award.c
Engle v. R.J. Reynolds                                                      Reversed; the class was
    Tobacco Co. (2000)              12.7         145,000.0    145,012.7     decertified and individuals
                                                                            claims are being filed.
Price v. Philip Morris Inc.                                                 Reversed by Illinois Supreme
     (2003)                      7,100.0            3,100.0   10,200.0
                                                                            Court.
Schwarz v. Philip Morris Inc.                                               Punitive damages vacated and
     (2002)                                                                 remanded for a new trial;
                                     0.17            150.0       150.17
                                                                            compensatory damages
                                                                            upheld.
a
  Source: Boeken v. Philip Morris Inc., 127 Cal.App.4th 1640 (2005).
b
  Source: Bullock v. Philip Morris USA, Inc., 159 Cal. App. 4th 655 (2008).
c
  Source: “Jury Awards $13.8 Million in Cigarette Suit,” New York Times, August 24, 2009.




                                                                44
                                          Table 10
                          State Cigarette Tax Changes, 1998–2008

                            State          State           State Tax
                       Cigarette Tax, Cigarette Tax,        Increase,     Percentage
State
                            1998           2008            1998-2008     Tax Increase,
                        ($ per pack)   ($ per pack)       ($ per pack)    1998–2008
Alabama                      0.165         0.425             0.260           157.6
Alaska                       1.000         2.000             1.000           100.0
Arizona                      0.580         2.000             1.420           244.8
Arkansas                     0.315         0.590             0.275            87.3
California                   0.370         0.870             0.500           135.1
Colorado                     0.200         0.840             0.640           320.0
Connecticut                  0.500         2.000             1.500           300.0
Delaware                     0.240         1.150             0.910           379.2
District of Columbia         0.650         1.000             0.350            53.8
Florida                      0.339         0.339             0                 0
Georgia                      0.120         0.370             0.250           208.3
Hawaii                       0.800         1.800             1.000           125.0
Idaho                        0.280         0.570             0.290           103.6
Illinois                     0.580         0.980             0.400            69.0
Indiana                      0.155         0.995             0.840           541.9
Iowa                         0.360         1.360             1.000           277.8
Kansas                       0.240         0.790             0.550           229.2
Kentucky                     0.030         0.300             0.270           900.0
Louisiana                    0.200         0.360             0.160            80.0
Maine                        0.740         2.000             1.260           170.3
Maryland                     0.360         2.000             1.640           455.6
Massachusetts                0.760         1.510             0.750            98.7
Michigan                     0.750         2.000             1.250           166.7
Minnesota                    0.480         1.493             1.013           211.0
Mississippi                  0.180         0.180             0                 0
Missouri                     0.170         0.170             0                 0
Montana                      0.180         1.700             1.520           844.4
Nebraska                     0.340         0.640             0.300            88.2
Nevada                       0.350         0.800             0.450           128.6
New Hampshire                0.370         1.080             0.710           191.9
New Jersey                   0.800         2.575             1.775           221.9
New Mexico                   0.210         0.910             0.700           333.3
New York                     0.560         2.750             2.190           391.1
North Carolina               0.050         0.350             0.300           600.0
North Dakota                 0.440         0.440             0                 0
Ohio                         0.240         1.250             1.010           420.8
Oklahoma                     0.230         1.030             0.800           347.8
Oregon                       0.680         1.180             0.500            73.5
Pennsylvania                 0.310         1.350             1.040           335.5

                                           45
Rhode Island               0.710           2.460      1.750    246.5
South Carolina             0.070           0.070      0          0
South Dakota               0.330           1.530      1.200    363.6
Tennessee                  0.130           0.620      0.490    376.9
Texas                      0.410           1.410      1.000    243.9
Utah                       0.515           0.695      0.180     35.0
Vermont                    0.440           1.790      1.350    306.8
Virginia                   0.025           0.300      0.275   1100.0
Washington                 0.825           2.025      1.200    145.5
West Virginia              0.170           0.550      0.380    223.5
Wisconsin                  0.590           1.770      1.180    200.0
Wyoming                    0.120           0.600      0.480    400.0

Source: Orzechowski and Walker (2008, pp. 275-326).




                                            46
