                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION:
                                          FACTS

                                         Gian Luca Clementi
                                         Thomas F. Cooley

                                        Working Paper 15426
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15426


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2009




¸˛We are very grateful to Dave Backus, Heski Bar--Isaac, Kose John, Laura Veldkamp, and Larry
  White, as well seminar attendants at the Minneapolis Fed, NYU, the 2008 Midwest Macro Conference
  in Philadelphia, SED Meeting in Cambridge, and EEA conference in Milan, for their comments and
  suggestions. All remaining errors are our own responsibility. The views expressed herein are those
  of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Gian Luca Clementi and Thomas F. Cooley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Executive Compensation: Facts
Gian Luca Clementi and Thomas F. Cooley
NBER Working Paper No. 15426
October 2009
JEL No. G30,J33,M52

                                            ABSTRACT

In this paper we describe the important features of executive compensation in the US from 1993 to
2006. Some confirm what has been found for earlier periods and some are novel. Important facts about
compensation are that: the compensation distribution is highly skewed; each year, a sizeable fraction
of chief executives lose money; the use of equity grants has increased; the income accruing to CEOs
from the sale of stock has increased; regardless of the measure we adopt, compensation responds strongly
to innovations in shareholder wealth; measured as dollar changes in compensation, incentives have
strengthened over time, measured as percentage changes in wealth, they have not changed in any
appreciable way.


Gian Luca Clementi
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012
gclement@stern.nyu.edu

Thomas F. Cooley
Department of Economics
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, Room 7-88
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
tcooley@stern.nyu.edu
1    Introduction

In 2008 the precipitous drop in real estate prices put financial companies’ risk–taking in the
spotlight. It is not at all surprising that, in such a climate, executive compensation came under
increased attention. Compensation was singled out as one of the most important and deeply
flawed elements of the incentive system that induced firms to accumulate enormous amounts of
risk on their balance sheets. In Clementi, Cooley, Richardson, and Walter (2009) we describe
many of the flawed practices in financial firms. But executive compensation more broadly has
long been a sensitive issue and financial crises have a tendency to focus increased attention on
it. In 1929 for example much attention was focused on the compensation of Eugene Grace, the
president of Bethlehem Steel, who faced a huge uproar when it was revealed that he received
a base salary of $12,000 and a bonus of more than $1.6 million. That amounts to $150,000
salary in 2009 dollars with a nearly $20 million bonus.
    Throughout the 1930’s there was much hue and cry about executive compensation and
many proposals to cap it. The most important case in that era involved George Washington
Hill the President of American Tobacco and other senior executives. In that case several exec-
utives of American Tobacco Co. had received bonuses that plaintiffs claimed were excessive.
The bonuses were paid under a plan that had been approved by shareholders in the form of
a by–law adopted in 1912. The by–law provided that if the net profits of American Tobacco
exceeded about $8.2 million in any year, the president of the company would receive payment
of 2.5 percent of such excess, and each of five vice–presidents would receive 1.5 percent, an ag-
gregate of 10 percent of the annual net profit exceeding $8.2 million. The case eventually went
to the Supreme Court and in Rogers v. Hill (1933), the Court ruled that overall compensation
must be reasonable in proportion to the value of the services rendered. The dissenting opinion
of Judge Swan indicates the applicable rule: ”If a bonus payment has no relation to the value
of services for which it is given, it is in reality a gift in part, and the majority stockholders
have no power to give away corporate property against the protest of the minority.”
    In the past two decades there has been much discussion of executive compensation, many
public examples of lavish pay, but no real consensus on the extent of the problem if indeed there
is one. In part, this is because there is a lack of clarity about what the facts are. In this paper,
we take a careful look at executive compensation in the United States in the period 1993–
2006. We investigate the cross–sectional and time–series variation in compensation, paying
particular attention to the role played by the various components of executives packages and
to the implications for incentive provision.
    Our study differs from most other contributions to the literature in that our main measure



                                                 1
of compensation is the year–on–year change in the portion of executive’s wealth that is tied
to the firm. In other words, we define compensation as the sum of salary, bonus, the year–on–
year change in the value of stock and option holdings, the net revenue from the sale of stock
and exercise of options, and the value of newly awarded securities. We prefer this definition
because it aligns most closely with the concept that emerges from the analysis of multi–period
theoretical models of the relationship between managers and shareholders.
      The AFL–CIO, the federation of 56 US and international labor unions,1 recently stated
that “The chief executive officers of large U.S. companies averaged $10.8 million in total
compensation in 2006, more than 364 times the pay of the average U.S. worker, according to
the latest survey by the United for a Fair Economy.” We find that the average compensation
of CEOs of publicly traded US companies was actually much higher than $10.8 million but the
average is wildly misleading because the compensation distribution is always highly skewed.
The median compensation in 2006 was only $4.85 million.
      CEOs of large companies tend to sit on large stock and option portfolios. Accordingly,
rapid rises in their companies’ stock prices lead to handsome financial rewards. But it also
means that they suffer significant wealth losses when those prices fall. Every year a substantial
fraction of CEOs actually lose money.
      Salary and bonus payments account for a very small fraction of compensation, and their
cross–sectional dispersion is rather limited. In light of this finding, the policy debate on
capping these two components of compensation appears to be entirely misplaced.
      Looking at the characteristics of compensation over time, we find that the dollar value of
stock and option grants increased at a brisk pace for most of the 1990s. At the same time,
however, the median value of stock holdings declined. This is consistent with the finding that
during those years executives relinquished much of the stock price gains they acquired through
their compensation packages.
      We estimate the sensitivity of pay to firm performance using three of the many indicators
proposed in the literature. No matter the measure considered, we find that executives’ financial
rewards respond strongly to innovations in shareholder wealth.
      When using the methodology due to Aggarwal and Samwick (1999), we estimate that a
$1,000 increase in shareholder wealth is associated with almost a $35 rise in CEOs wealth
for the lowest–volatility companies. This is higher than the $28 estimated by Aggarwal and
Samwick (1999) for the 1993–1996 period. According to this measure, incentives have strength-
ened. However, the elasticity of CEO wealth with respect to shareholder wealth is shown to
be time–invariant at about 1.17. In light of the increase in shareholder wealth that occurred
  1
      http://www.aflcio.org/corporatewatch/paywatch/pay/index.cfm



                                                    2
after 1996, these findings are not inconsistent.
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the data
and define our measurement conventions. In Section 3 we document the extent of separation
between ownership and control in the population of US public corporations. Section 4 char-
acterizes the most salient features of the distribution of compensation across executives. In
Section 5 we study how compensation varies with firm size and across sectors. Section 6 is
dedicated to the analysis of the time variation. The estimates of pay–performance sensitivity
are illustrated in Section 7. Finally, Section 8 concludes.


2        Data and Measurement
We draw our data from the EXECUCOMP database, maintained by Standard & Poor’s.
EXECUCOMP gathers data from 1992 to the present on the compensation of up to nine
executives of all US companies whose stocks are traded on an organized exchange. The source
for the database are companies’ filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. The
information about executives’ securities holdings and their compensation packages is contained
in the DEF14A forms (or Schedule 14A), filed annually by Corporations pursuant Section 14(a)
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
        We confine our attention to the years 1992 through 2006, the last (fiscal) year for which
we have comprehensive information. Our sample consists of information on 31,587 executives,
employed by 2,872 companies, for a total of 33,896 company–executive matches and 167,822
executive–year observations.

2.1       Measuring Compensation

It is well known that executives are compensated in a wide variety of ways. Murphy (1999)
provides a detailed description of the main components of compensation packages. Among
them are salary, bonus, stock and options grants, severance payments, 401K contributions,
and life–insurance premia.
        Because of the complexity that characterizes compensation packages, defining summary
measures of compensation is far from straightforward. The most common among such mea-
sures, employed by Frydman and Saks (2006) and Bebchuk and Grinstein (2005) among others,
consists of the sum of salary, bonuses, long–term incentive plans, and grant–date value of se-
curities awards.2 In the remainder of the paper, we will refer to this as the classical definition
of compensation.
    2
    See page 9 of Frydman and Saks (2006) and page 284 of Bebchuk and Grinstein (2005) for their respective
definitions.


                                                    3
   Unfortunately the classical definition provides little information about the change in wealth
that accrues to an executive from his or her relationship with the company in a given year.
In fact, as will be clear below, the change in wealth is mostly the result of factors – such as
the change in value of stock and option holdings, and the net revenues from trade in stock –
that are not accounted for in this measure.
   In this paper we consider an alternative definition of compensation, along the lines of what
was proposed by Antle and Smith (1985) and what was adopted in studies of pay–performance
sensitivity by Hall and Liebman (1998) and Aggarwal and Samwick (1999). We will refer to it
as Total Yearly Compensation. Roughly speaking, it is defined as the year–on–year change in
Executive’s Wealth, which in turn consists of the expected discounted value of the portion of
executive’s wealth whose value is tied to his or her company’s performance. In the words of
Antle and Smith (1985), Total Yearly Compensation is meant to measure “the annual change
in executive’s total wealth associated with employment”.
   The adoption of Total Yearly Compensation in lieu of the classical measure is motivated by
the recent literature on multi–period models of executive compensation such as Wang (1997)
and Clementi, Cooley, and Wang (2006), among others. These models explicitly acknowledge
that the utility reward an executive receives from association with the company in a given
period depends on the change in current and future consumption that takes place during
that period. This change depends on awards of securities and promises of deferred payment
received in the past, current and expected compensation packages, and on the conditional
probability of termination.
   Since most securities awards are restricted, the design of current and future compensation
packages must depend on past compensation. Everything else equal, different stock and
options holdings will call for different contractual provisions both in the present and in the
future. For this reason, looking at these provisions in isolation will be misleading. That is, it
will give an inaccurate picture of the change in current and future consumption possibilities
that derive from employment by the company.
   This approach is supported by anecdotal evidence from corporate communications. For
example, according to 2006 Oracle Corporation’s DEF14A, the factors considered by that
company in determining the size of option grants include “the intrinsic value of outstanding,
un–vested equity awards and the degree to which such values supports our retention goals for
each executive.”
   Our ideal measure of wealth consists of the value of stock and options in the executive’s
portfolio plus the expected discounted value of all future handouts in form of cash and secu-
rities. Operationally we define it as the market value of securities holdings plus the expected


                                               4
discounted value of future salaries and bonuses. Total yearly compensation consists of the
sum of salary, bonus, the year–on–year change in the value of stock and option holdings, the
net revenue from the sale of stock and exercise of options, and the value of newly awarded
securities.
       Throughout the paper, we will also consider the partition of compensation into Current
and Deferred. Current compensation includes all claims that can be instantaneously traded for
consumption goods. Deferred compensation, the residual part, consists of the current expected
value of all claims over future consumption. This partition is of particular interest because
the theoretical analysis of executive compensation in dynamic moral hazard models, implies
restrictions on the relative role the two portions play in incentive provision.
       Operationally, we define Current compensation as the sum of salary, bonus, dividends, and
net revenues from trade in stock. Deferred compensation is the sum of the yearly changes in
the value of stock and options in portfolio, retirement benefits, expected future salaries, and
other deferred payments.
       The precise definition of all variables can be found in Appendix A. For our purposes, the
EXECUCOMP database presents two major shortcomings. To start with, EXECUCOMP only
includes the value of options that are in-the-money. This greatly complicates the estimation of
the year–on–year change in the value of option holdings. Furthermore, the database provides
no information on purchases and sales of stock by the executives. This makes it hard to come
up with an accurate measure of the net revenue from trade in stock.
       We consider two alternative definitions of option holdings. The first, which is used by
Aggarwal and Samwick (1999), is simply the sum of two EXECUCOMP variables, namely the
value of the un-exercisable in–the–money options and that of the exercisable in–the–money
options, both computed at the money at the end of the fiscal year.3 Since it does not take into
account the value of out–of–the money options, this definition introduces an upwards bias in
the absolute value of the fluctuations in options values. The alternative definition estimates
the value of out-of-the-money options by means of a simple algorithm due to Himmelberg and
Hubbard (2000). The details of the procedure are illustrated in Appendix A.1.4
       By net revenue from trade in stock, we mean the difference between the revenues from sales
of stock and the expense incurred in acquiring shares (either by purchase or option exercise).
Executives may (i) purchase and sell common stock on the open market, (ii) purchase common
   3
     In the latest version of the database, the two variables are labeled OPT UNEX UNEX UNEXER EST VAL
and OPT UNEX UNEX EXER EST VAL, respectively. In the previous version, their names were INMOUN
and INMONEX.
   4
     For the sake of brevity, this draft does not include the results obtained with this second method. They are
available from the authors upon request.




                                                       5
stock directly from the company at prices much lower than the market’s, (iv) inherit stock5
(iii) donate stock.6 Unfortunately, we cannot track either the prices or quantities of these
transactions. Furthermore, we do not know whether the shares obtained by exercising options
are kept or sold. For this reason, we resort to a simple algorithm that allows us to estimate
the net revenue from trade using other variables provided by EXECUCOMP. The algorithm
is described in Appendix A.2.


3        Separation Between Ownership and Control
In the last thirty years or so, thousands of pages have been written on executive compensation,
both in the academic and popular press. Among the reasons for this intense interest is that
executive compensation is thought of as the most powerful tool to align the goals of owners and
managers of modern corporations. That these goals are misaligned because of the separation
between ownership and control is taken to be one of the defining characteristics of public
corporations.
        Since the appearance of the influential work by Berle and Means (1932), the standard
characterization conceives of executives, and CEOs in particular, as professionals hired by
shareholders to run their companies. This view takes the separation between ownership and
control, intended in its most extreme version, as a fact. However, even to the distracted
observer it should be obvious that in reality there is an enormous variation in the degree of
separation. Figure 1 substantiates this claim, by showing the cumulative distribution of CEO
equity stakes among US public corporations in 2006.

                                                                      CEO Equity Stake
                                                                  Cumulative Distribution in 2006
                                    100


                                     80


                                     60
                              cdf




                                     40


                                     20


                                      0
                                          0   1   2   3   4   5                 10             15   20

                                                                  Stake in Percentage Points




                                          Figure 1: CEO Equity Stake in 2006.
    5
        For example, in 1999 Carnival CEO Mickey Arison inherited stock from his father.
    6
        Mr. Warren Buffett, the larger shareholder and CEO Berkshire Hathaway, made several donations in stock.



                                                                            6
    Our data shows that in 2006, about 25% of CEOs held more than 1% of their companies’
common stock, and about 10% held more than 5%.7 CEOs with relatively low stock holding
fit the Berle and Means’ stereotype, in the sense that they are likely to have been hired only
to manage the company. This is the case, for example, of Mr. John W. Thompson, who
spent most of his career at IBM before being hired as Symantec’s CEO in 1999. In 2006, Mr.
Thompson held about 0.16% of the company’s common stock. The CEOs with the largest
equity stakes are far from the Berle and Means’ ideal and are likely to be either the companies’
founders or to have family ties to them. This is the case of Micky Arison, CEO of Carnival
Corporation – the world’s largest cruise operator – and son of Ted Arison, the company’s
founder. In 2006, Mr. Arison held about 23.8% of Carnival’s common stock.
    As will be clear below, stocks have a primary role in incentive provision. In the case
of professional CEOs such as Symantec’s Mr. Thompson, the observed equity stake is the
result of the company’s compensation policy. Therefore, the incentives that result can be
used to assess the disciplining role of boards of directors. This is decidedly not the case for
company founders and for other executives, such as Mr. Arison, whose large equity holdings
have nothing to do with the company’s compensation policy. These individuals, although
disciplined by the requirements of public companies, essentially have absolute control over the
source of their pecuniary incentives. Compensation committees can have very little impact
on them.
    In light of this simple argument, in the remainder of this paper we will report certain
statistics for Professional CEOs only, arbitrarily defined as those that hold less than 1% of
their companies’ common stock. Our goal is discern the differences, if any, in the way in which
professional CEOs are compensated and in the incentives they face.


4    The Distribution of Compensation across Executives

Figure 2 depicts the cross–sectional distributions of wealth and total compensation for the
population of CEOs in 2006. The striking feature of both histograms is the right skewness.
Median CEO pay in 2006 was only 4.85 million dollars. The exorbitant average pay of 45.7
million was mostly the result of sky–high compensation at the very top of the distribution.
    Table 8 (refer to the rows labeled ”Gross”) reports a series of statistics of the compensation
distribution, for all sample years. The skewness index of 27.15           8   for 2006 was not an outlier.
Skewness has been a feature of the CEOs’ total compensation distribution throughout the
   7
     We need to warn the reader about two caveats. On the one hand, the SEC does not require companies to
disclose equity stakes lower than 1%. This is likely to bias our measure upwards. On the other hand, we don’t
include in our measure stocks held by other family members. This will introduce a downward bias.
   8
     By skewness index we mean the ratio of third moment about to the mean to the standard deviation.


                                                     7
sample period. Notice, however, that the distribution is not always right–skewed. In the three
(fiscal) years following the stock market peak of January 2000, the mean CEO compensation
was largely negative, while the median values were positive. The reason is that, as illustrated
in Section 5, CEOs of large companies have relatively high stock and option holdings. In turn,
this implies that their compensation is particularly sensitive to stock market fluctuations, of
either sign.

                                         CEO wealth in 2006                                                       Total CEO Yearly Compensation in 2006
                                         Millions of 2005 dollars                                                                 Millions of 2005 dollars
           700                                                                                      150

           600
                                                                                                    100
           500
 Medians




                                                                                          Medians
           400
                                                                                                     50
           300

           200                                                                                        0

           100
                                                                                                    −50
            0
                 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20                       1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
                             Quantiles of Compensation Distribution                                                   Quantiles of Compensation Distribution




                                                        Figure 2: CEO Compensation in 2006.

           This leads us to another salient feature of the data. Contrary to what has become common
wisdom, CEOs do lose money. Sometimes, they lose a lot. In 2006, with the S&P 500 index
rising by more than 9%, our measure of compensation was negative for as many as 264 CEOs.
As expected, the big losers were those at the helm of companies whose stock dropped the most
in value during the year. Among them, Yahoo (–33%), Amazon (–20%), and Ebay(–30%).
Conversely, the winners were the chief executives of the companies whose shareholders gained
the most, such as Mc–Graw Hill (+30%), Marriott (+38%), and Comcast (+65%). Table
8 shows that a sizeable fraction of CEOs lost money in every year. In 2002, that fraction
exceeded 40%.
           If executives hedge systematic risk, actual median gains and losses will be much smaller
(in absolute value) than our figures suggest. For this reason, we also report statistics for
Total Yearly Compensation, net of the return executives would have earned by investing their
wealth in the market portfolio. See the rows labeled “Net of Market” in Table 8.
           The Net definition yields the actual compensation under the assumption that executives
hedge systematic risk by selling short the market portfolio or by building a similar position
by trading on derivatives.9
      9
           An example of such a position is a zero–cost collar, which involves selling an out–of–the–money call option


                                                                                      8
   Hedging systematic risk has a large effect on the tails of the compensation distribution. It
moderates losses in bad years for the stock market and moderates gains in good years. As a
result, median net compensation tends to be smaller than gross compensation in a good year
for the stock market, and larger in bad years. Table 8 shows that median net compensation
ranged between –$100,000 (in 1998) and $5.82 million (in 2003). The main message we draw
from these data, however, is the same as above. In every single year both dispersion and
skewness were remarkably large.
   Since the SEC does not require executives to disclose trades in securities not issued by their
companies, we do not know whether executives indeed hedge market risk or not. However,
Garvey and Milbourn (2003) provides indirect evidence that this may be the case. They argue
that if companies recognize that they should use relative performance evaluation (RPE) only
for those executives that are unable to diversify systematic risk, estimates of pay–performance
sensitivity should depend on market volatility only in the case of younger and poorer execu-
tives, whose chances of diversification are slimmer. This is exactly what they found in their
study.
   Refer once more to Table 8. The third row illustrates the results that obtain with the
classical definition of compensation. The picture it conveys is rather different. In 2006,
mean and median CEO pay were $6.74 and $3.24 million , respectively. Interestingly, the
dispersion across executives is much lower than it is with our measure. According to the
classical definition, the mean compensation of the top 10% in the distribution was about
35 million dollars in 2006 (against our estimate of $450.33 million). The mean compensation
among the bottom 10% in 2002 was about $450,000, against a $336.86 million loss that obtains
according to our definition!
   Table 9 provides detailed information about the partition of total yearly compensation
between Current and Deferred. A clear fact, better illustrated in Figure 3 in the case of 2006,
is the cross–sectional dispersion in the deferred component. Both big winners and big losers
have large stock and option portfolios. To appreciate this, consider that the median equity
stake among CEOs in the top and bottom deciles of the compensation distribution are 1.15
and 0.77%, respectively, against a 0.24% median for the remainder.
   The cross–sectional dispersion of Current compensation is much lower. In 2006, the ratio
of median absolute deviation to the median is 0.76 for Current compensation, against 6.04 for
Deferred compensation. Another interesting finding, illustrated in Figure 4, is that most of the
variation in Current compensation comes from the proceeds from trade in stock. In fact, the
median absolute deviation for salary and bonus was only $270,000 (the median was $829,000).
and buying an out–of–the–money put option.



                                               9
                              CEO Wealth in 2006                                                                 Total CEO Yearly Compensation in 2006
                               Millions of 2005 dollars                                                                            Millions of 2005 dollars
                                                                                                       80
           300

                                                                                                       60
 Medians




                                                                                            Medians
           200                                                                                         40

                                                                                                       20

           100
                                                                                                        0

                                                                                                      −20
            0
                  1   2   3       4           5   6       7        8      9   10                             1     2       3        4      5     6      7     8         9   10
                          Deciles of Wealth Distribution                                                               Deciles of Compensation Distribution
                               Wealth (a)                     Stock (b)                                                        Total (a)                 Deferred (b)
                               Options (c)                                                                                     Current (c)




                                 Figure 3: Split of Compensation in the Cross–Section


In light of this finding, the policy debate on the possibility of capping salary and/or bonuses
appears to be misplaced.

                                                          Current Compensation in 2006 − All CEOs
                                                                              Millions of 2005 dollars

                                         15
                               Medians




                                         10



                                         5



                                         0
                                                      1        2          3        4    5              6     7         8       9         10
                                                                       Deciles of Compensation Distribution
                                                                   Current (a)                              From Trade in Stock (b)
                                                                   Salary + Bonus (c)




                               Figure 4: Current Compensation in the Cross–Section.

           Bebchuk and Fried (2004) argued that “... much executive compensation comes in forms
other than equity, such as salary and bonus.” and that “The evidence indicates that cash
compensation – including bonuses – has been at best weakly correlated with firms’ industry
adjusted performance.”10 The evidence presented in Section 7 is definitely in agreement with
the latter statement. But, our data do not confirm the first part of this claim. For most CEOs,
salary and bonus account for a rather small portion of total compensation. See Figures 3 and
  10
           See page 7, lines 1 through 4.


                                                                                       10
4.
     Table 10 illustrates compensation across professional CEOs. The distribution of Current
compensation is remarkably similar to that for the entire population of CEOs. At the same
time, both the median and the median absolute deviation of total compensation are smaller in
every single year. The main differences, however, are in the means. This should not come as
a surprise. We defined non–professional CEOs as those who own large equity stakes in their
companies. In turn, this implies that their total compensation will be particularly high in
good times and particularly low in bad times. This immediately leads us to wonder whether
the incentives faced by professional CEOs are as strong as previous analysis led us to believe.
We will address this question in Section 7.
     Finally, Table 11 illustrates the distribution of compensation across all non–CEO exec-
utives in our data-set. Both median and median absolute deviation are considerably lower.
This is the result of lower levels of compensation in all categories, and in particular in those
that are more sensitive to fluctuations in stock prices. At the margin, notice that all measures
of compensation are particularly high in the top and bottom 5% of executives, because most
company founders with no executive roles fall in these bins.


5     Compensation Variation in The Cross–Section of Firms

In this section we are interested in documenting how the various measures of compensation
vary with firm size and across sectors.
     Beginning with Kostiuk (1990), many have investigated the relationship between firm
size and executive compensation. Kostiuk himself, Murphy (1999), Bebchuk and Grinstein
(2005), and Gabaix and Landier (2008) among others, found evidence of a positive correlation
between the two variables. Even in our dataset, the classical definition of compensation is
unconditionally positively correlated with proxies for size such as sales and book value of
assets. The question is whether a similar pattern holds for total compensation.
     Figure 5 depicts median CEO Wealth and Total Yearly Compensation for each decile in
the distribution of book value of assets, in 2002. We have chosen 2002 because in that year
mean compensation was largely negative.
     The left panel tells us that, even in a year of relatively low stock prices, CEOs of larger
firms had substantially larger wealth tied to the firms they led. In particular, they had larger
stock and option holdings. This is why, as suggested by the right panel, the same CEOs
suffered substantial losses.
     Current compensation is also monotonically increasing in the size of the firm. Executives’



                                               11
                                                       CEO Wealth in 2002                                                                 Yearly Compensation in 2002 − All CEOs
                                                   Millions of 2005 dollars                                                                                         Millions of 2005 dollars

           60                                                                                                                5

                                                                                                                             3
 Medians




                                                                                                                  Medians
           40                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                            −1

           20
                                                                                                                            −3

                                                                                                                            −5
            0
                          1        2          3        4      5        6        7        8      9       10                            1         2          3          4        5        6        7          8       9       10
                                          Deciles of Book Value Distribution                                                                              Deciles of Book Value Distribution
                                                       Total (a)                    Stock (b)                                                                    Total (a)                           Deferred (b)
                                                       Options (c)                                                                                               Current (c)                         Salary (d)




                                                                  Figure 5: CEO Compensation and Firm Size.


salaries tend to be higher in larger firms, but the cross–sectional variation is minimal. Most
of the variation in Current compensation is accounted for by differences in the net revenues
from trade in stock.
           The patterns just described do not change substantially when we adopt sales rather than
book value as a measure of size.

                                                  CEO wealth in 2006                                                                                      Total Compensation in 2006
                                                   Millions of 2005 dollars                                                                                         Millions of 2005 dollars
           50

           40                                                                                                               6
 Medians




                                                                                                                  Medians




           30
                                                                                                                            4
           20
                                                                                                                            2
           10

            0                                                                                                               0
                           n



                                         g



                                                       le



                                                                  es



                                                                               l



                                                                                           g



                                                                                                    E




                                                                                                                                      g



                                                                                                                                                     g



                                                                                                                                                                 es



                                                                                                                                                                                   le



                                                                                                                                                                                                l



                                                                                                                                                                                                                n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E
                                                                               ai




                                                                                                                                                                                                ai
                       tio



                                        rin




                                                                                         in




                                                                                                                                     in



                                                                                                                                                    rin




                                                                                                                                                                                                            tio
                                                                                                    R




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        R
                                                   sa




                                                                                                                                                                               sa
                                                                           et




                                                                                                                                                                                            et
                                                                 ic




                                                                                                                                                                 ic
                                                                                      in




                                                                                                                                 in
                                                                                                FI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FI
                      ta




                                                                                                                                                                                                           ta
                                    tu




                                                                                                                                                tu
                                                             rv




                                                                                                                                                               rv
                                                  le




                                                                           R




                                                                                                                                                                              le



                                                                                                                                                                                            R
                                                                                     M




                                                                                                                                 M
                     or




                                                                                                                                                                                                       or
                                   ac




                                                                                                                                               ac
                                              ho



                                                            Se




                                                                                                                                                            Se



                                                                                                                                                                          ho
                 sp




                                                                                                                                                                                                      sp
                               uf




                                                                                                                                           uf
                                              W




                                                                                                                                                                          W
                an



                              an




                                                                                                                                          an




                                                                                                                                                                                                 an
            Tr



                           M




                                                                                                                                      M




                                                                                                                                                                                                Tr




                                                       Total (a)                    Stock (b)                                                                    Total (a)                           Deferred (b)
                                                       Options (c)                                                                                               Current (c)                         Salary (d)




                                                                  Figure 6: CEO Compensation across Sectors.

           Figure 6 illustrates the variation of CEO wealth and compensation across sectors. Inter-
estingly, CEOs in the Mining and Finance Insurance and Real Estate (FIRE) sectors stand
out as holding larger wealth. Table 13 shows that for the FIRE sector this has been the case
throughout the sample period. It is not clear whether this is due to the fact that CEOs in the
FIRE sector manage larger firms. In fact, firms in the FIRE sectors tend to be larger when
size is proxied by book value of assets, but not when we use either employment or sales.

                                                                                                             12
6    Compensation Over Time

Echoing the popular and business press, a number of recent papers have argued that the
level of executive compensation has increased dramatically over time. For example, Frydman
and Saks (2006) state that “The compensation of top executives increased by 6.8% per year
from 1980 to 2003.” Bebchuk and Grinstein (2005) find that “Among S&P 500 firms, average
CEO compensation climbed from $3.7 million in 1993 to $9.1 million in 2003 (an increase of
146%).”
    When considering the classical definition of compensation, our study delivers a similar
message. Once again, given the skewness of the distribution, we will look at median values
rather than means. The left panel of Figure 7 shows that the median compensation has
doubled over the 14 sample–years. On average, this amounts to a growth rate which is about
4 times that of average non–farm hourly wages. Interestingly, median compensation has
also increased in years in which most companies had rather poor financial results. This is
the evidence invoked by those observers that argue that CEOs never lose, even when their
companies’ results are negative.
    When we turn to our definition of compensation, the message is different. The right panel
of Figure 7 illustrates the dynamics of real median compensation, both gross and net of the
return on the market portfolio. Compensation has been quite variable over the sample years.
    As expected, the gross measure tracked aggregate stock market returns. Median gross
compensation was at its minimum of about 420,000 dollars in 2002, when the S&P500 index
lost about 30% of its value. In that year, 656 out of the 1,448 continuing CEOs lost money. It
reached its maximum of 8.56 millions in 2003, when the S&P500 gained about 21%. What is
clear is that there is no discernible trend. In fact, in 2005 median gross compensation turned
out to be about the same as ten years earlier.
    Our net definition displays less time–series variation than gross compensation. Once again,
however, we cannot discern any particular trend.
    Let’s now turn to the growth pattern of the various components of compensation. The
left panel of Figure 7 shows that the Current portion has increased over most of the sample
period, at a mean pace much faster than average non–farm hourly wages. The same graph
suggests that the growth in salaries accounts for a small portion of the increase. Indeed, the
salary of the median CEO has increased less than average wages in the non–farm sector.
    It turns out that most of the post–1999 increase in Current compensation is accounted for
by net proceeds from trade in stock, i.e. by options exercise and stock sale. This piece of
evidence is consistent with other findings.



                                              13
              Growth in Compensation − Selected Components                                                                  CEO Compensation
                                   Medians − 1993=100                                                                        Millions of 2005 dollars
   200
                                                                                                    8
   180
                                                                                                    6
   160




                                                                                          Medians
   140
                                                                                                    4
   120
                                                                                                    2
   100


                                                                                                    0
         93    94   95   96   97    98   99   00   01   02    03    04    05    06
                                                                                                        93   94   95   96   97   98   99      00   01   02     03   04    05      06

                    Salary                                   Current                                               Gross Definition (a)                      Net Definition (b)
                    Avg Non−Farm Hourly Wages                Classical Definition                                  Classical Definition (c)




                                              Figure 7: CEO Compensation over Time.


   The right panel in Figure 8 shows that the median dollar value of securities grants has
increased over pretty much the whole sample period. The pace of the increase was most
notable until 2001. However (see left panel), median stock holdings actually declined from
1998 to 2003 (and picked up later on).
   Let’s assemble the various pieces of the puzzle. At the end of 1990s, we had increasing
stock prices and security grants, but declines in the median value of both stock and option
holdings. It appears that companies stepped up the grant of securities, perhaps with the
purpose of sharpening incentives, but it looks like executives sold shares whenever they could.
   Our confidence in this rationalization of the facts is enhanced by the evidence provided
by Ofek and Yermack (2000), that (i) executives tend to immediately relinquish the shares
obtained via options’ exercise and that (ii) those among them that have higher equity stakes
sell stock whenever they are granted new restricted shares or new options.
   The right panel in Figure 8 points to a further change in compensation practices. The
relative importance of stock and options has changed. Since 2001, stock grants have become
more prominent, as companies scaled down the volume of option awards.
   Hall and Murphy (2003) argued that the increase in option grants over the 1995–2001
period was prompted by revisions to the tax code enacted in 1994. According to the new rules,
companies were allowed to deduct compensation expenses in excess of 1 million dollars, only
when the compensation was performance–based. It would be interesting to understand what
prompted companies to change their compensation practices after 2001 from using options to
stock grants.
   Changes in sectoral composition don’t appear to be among the causes of this phenomenon.
In fact the dynamics just described applies to both sectors whose relative importance shrank


                                                                                     14
           Growth in Median CEO Wealth − Selected Components                                                            Security Grants − All CEOs
                                           1993=100                                                                          Millions of 2005 dollars
                                                                                                   1.5

     400



     300                                                                                            1




                                                                                         Medians
     200
                                                                                                    .5

     100
           93   94   95   96   97     98    99   00   01   02   03   04   05   06
                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                         93   94   95   96   97   98   99   00   01   02   03   04   05   06
                                    Stock              Options
                                    S&P 500            CEO Wealth                                                        Stock + Options (a)               Options (b)




                                     Figure 8: Dynamics of Wealth and Securities Grants.


during the sample period – Paper and Allied Products (SIC 26) and Depository Institutions
(60) – and those whose importance grew over time, such as Electronic Equipment (SIC 36),
and Business Services (73).11


7          The Sensitivity of Compensation

Another important aspect of executive compensation is its sensitivity to changes in shareholder
wealth. Scholars have assessed it in a variety of ways. Here we will consider three of them.
The first, which we identify as JM–AS, measures the dollar increase in executive’s wealth per
$1,000 increase in shareholder wealth. The other two are the semi–elasticity and the elasticity
of executive’s wealth with respect to shareholder wealth, respectively.
         The three definitions reflect different hypotheses about how shareholders and executives
value risky prospects. For example, the first two definitions are valid only under the assump-
tion that the prospect of losing a given dollar amount has the same impact on executives, no
matter their wealth. The third is based on the postulate that what matters to executives is
the percentage change in wealth.
    11
    The two–digit SIC sectors that shrank the most in term of relative importance also include Printing and
Publishing (27), Chemicals and Allied Products (28), Petroleum Refining (29), Leather and Leather Products
(30), Primary Metal Industries (33), Transportation Equipment (37), Communications (48), Electric, Gas, and
Sanitary Services (49), Food Stores (54), and Depository Institutions (60). Among the sectors that gained the
most are Photographic, Medical, and Optical Goods (38), Insurance Carriers (63), and Holding And Other
Investment Offices (67).




                                                                                    15
7.1      The JM–AS Sensitivity Measure

The acronym JM–AS refers to the contributions by Jensen and Murphy (1990) and Aggarwal
and Samwick (1999). Having found that in their sample CEO wealth increased by only $3.25
for 1,000 dollar increase in shareholder wealth, Jensen and Murphy (1990) claimed that CEOs
were paid like bureaucrats. Or, in other words, that they faced rather weak incentives.
       Schaefer (1998) and Hall and Liebman (1998) showed that Jensen and Murphy (1990)’s
estimate was low because their sample was biased towards large firms. Stock market capital-
ization fluctuates more for large firms than it does for small firms. This implies that the risk
imposed on a CEO by a given pay–performance sensitivity tends to be larger, the larger the
firm.
       This motivates us to follow the lead of Aggarwal and Samwick (1999), and compute esti-
mates of sensitivity at different levels of volatility.

                                                                  Total Yearly Compensation and Shareholder Gain
                                                                                           2005 dollars


                                                            150
                           Total Compensation (Millions)




                                                            100

                                                             50

                                                              0

                                                           −50

                                                           −100

                                                           −150


                                                                     −15   −10        −5        0         5        10   15

                                                                                 Net Shareholder Gain (Billions)




                           Figure 9: Compensation and Shareholder Gain.

       The scatter plot in Figure 9 shows the association of changes in shareholder and executive’s
wealth over the sample period. While the unconditional correlation between the two variables
is positive, there are many instances in which CEOs end up making money at the time in
which their companies’ market values drop by billions of dollars. These are the cases in the
upper left quadrant and they are the ones that attract a lot of media attention.
       As an example, consider the case of Douglas Ivester, the CEO of Coca–Cola Co. from
October 1997 to February 2000. During the 1999 fiscal year, Coca–Cola’s shareholders lost
about 14%, or about 22.5 billion dollars. According to our calculations,12 in the same year,
Mr. Ivester made about 74 million dollars. As a result of the fall in the company’s stock
  12
    We reiterate that we do not have information about the actual stock sales by the executive. Our calculations
are simply approximations, based on the information included in the Schedule 14A.


                                                                                           16
price, the value of his stock holding dropped. This explains why his Deferred compensation
was negative (about –60.65 millions). However, his Current compensation was roughly $135
million, 91 of which came from the sale of company’s stock.13
       Following Aggarwal and Samwick (1999), we estimate the following equation:

         wijt = γ0 + γ1 ∆M KT CAPjt + γ2 ∆M KT CAPjt × F (σj ) + γ3 F (σj ) + λt + εit ,                                                        (1)

where i, j, t index the executive, the firm, and time, respectively. The letter w denotes com-
pensation, M KT CAPjt is total market capitalization, ∆ is the one–period lag operator, and
λt is a year dummy whose purpose is to control for aggregate shocks. Finally, σjt denotes
the standard deviation in shareholders’ dollar return (i.e. the change in market capital-
ization). F (·) is the cumulative distribution of standard deviations. The interaction term
∆M KT CAPjt × F (σj ) was introduced because the impact on compensation of a 1, 000 dol-
lar change in shareholder wealth is expected to be larger, the smaller the average change in
capitalization. The measure of sensitivity for company j in year t will be γ1 + γ2 × F (σjt ).
Our estimates are reported in Table 1.

               Table 1: Median Regression Estimates of Pay–Performance Sensitivities
                                           All Executives                            All CEOs                           Professional CEOs
 Dependent Variables:            Total        Current       Deferred      Total      Current     Deferred       Total        Current    Deferred
 Shareholder Gain                 6.803         0.686          0.966       34.630      2.015       28.868       21.317         1.475      17.522
                                ( 0.017)      ( 0.008)       ( 0.012)    ( 0.149)     ( 0.060)    ( 0.139)     ( 0.133)      ( 0.056)    ( 0.090)
 Sh Gain × Variance distrib      -6.366        -0.679         -0.574      -32.704      -1.961      -27.214      -19.744       -1.414     -16.208
                                ( 0.017)      ( 0.008)       ( 0.012)    ( 0.151)     ( 0.061)    ( 0.141)     ( 0.136)      ( 0.057)    ( 0.092)
 Variance distrib              2,072.019     1,250.416      -955.392    3,471.623    3,710.679   -1,331.193   3,891.368     3,483.049   -525.600
                               ( 16.827)      ( 8.213)      ( 11.706)   ( 146.512)   ( 59.542)   ( 137.043)   ( 136.235)    ( 57.582)   ( 92.073)
 Number of observations         103,113       105,103       103,113      16,953       17,182      16,953       11,357         11,489        11,357
 Pseudo R2                       0.049         0.020         0.033       0.077        0.022        0.063        0.219          0.061         0.174
 Note: Standard errors in parenthesis.



       In the case of CEOs, a 1, 000 dollar increase in capitalization induces a $34.63 dollar
increase in compensation for the firm with the lowest volatility and a $1.93 dollar increase for
the firm with the highest. These estimates are substantially larger than those obtained by
Aggarwal and Samwick (1999) for the period 1993–1996. When we restrict attention to that
period, we find that the sensitivity of the lowest–variance firm is $25.60, slightly smaller than
the value reported by Aggarwal and Samwick (1999) ($27.596).
       What explains the increase in the JM–AS measure? Can it simply be the result of a
decrease in the volatility of shareholder value?
       Let’s think first of systematic volatility. Garvey and Milbourn (2003) argue that if execu-
tives hedge systematic risk, then the magnitude of the JM–AS measure should only vary with
  13
   The remainder of Mr. Ivester’s Current compensation in 1999 consisted of 1.5 millions in salary, and in
about 20 millions in both the EXECUCOMP variables ALLOTHPD and OTHANN.


                                                                         17
the idiosyncratic portion of the volatility of shareholder’s wealth. They provide evidence that
this is indeed the case between 1992 and 1998. We followed their methodology and retrieved
measures of systematic and idiosyncratic volatility by means of simple CAPM regressions.
Then, we modified equation (1) by replacing the c.d.f. of firm volatility with the distributions
of systematic and idiosyncratic volatility.
   Our results are reported in Table 14. The bottom line is that the relationship between
the sensitivity measure and volatility is accounted for almost completely by the idiosyncratic
portion of the latter. This also means that changes in systematic volatility are not likely to
rationalize the increase in the sensitivity measure we have documented.
   How about changes in idiosyncratic risk? Brandt, Brav, and Kumar (2009) found that
the idiosyncratic volatility of percent returns declined over the 1997–2007 period. Obviously,
this may matter. There are at least two reasons, however, why this may not be the whole
story. First of all, the volatility of shareholder wealth also depends on market valuation, which
has increased over the period in exam. Furthermore, Brandt, Brav, and Kumar (2009) argue
that most of the decline in volatility applied to a subset of stocks (low price stocks, held
proportionally more by retail investors). This means that the decline in volatility may have a
sizeable impact on OLS estimates, but should have a more limited effect on median estimates.
   The results reported so far suggest that the increase in performance–based compensation
may have led to stronger incentives. The next two sections will tell us whether our other
measures of pay–performance sensitivity yield a consistent picture.

           Table 2: Sensitivity at different levels of volatility – Professional CEOs

                                              Total    Current   Deferred
                           Lowest Variance    21.317    1.475     17.522
                           Median Variance    11.445    0.768     9.418
                           Largest Variance    1.573    0.061     1.314




   Table 1 also reports our sensitivity estimates for all the executives and for the group of
professional CEOs, respectively. As expected, the estimates for non–CEO executives are much
lower than reported above for CEOs. The picture that emerges for professional CEOs is more
interesting. On the one hand, the sensitivity of Current compensation is about the same as for
the totality of CEOs. On the other hand, we find that the deferred component responds much
less to fluctuations in shareholder value. This is obviously due to the lower stockholding.
   To determine whether the JM–AS sensitivity varies across sectors, we interact the variable




                                                18
∆M KT CAPjt with sector–specific dummies. We estimate the equation

      wijt = γ0 + γ1 ∆M KT CAPjt × ψs + γ2 ∆M KT CAPjt × F (σj ) + γ3 F (σj ) + εit ,

where ψs equals 1 if the firm j belongs to sector s and equals 0 otherwise. Table 3 reports
our estimates of the sensitivity for lowest–volatility firms. The parameter γ1 is estimated to
be -18.573. There appears to be limited variation across sectors.

             Table 3: JM–AS Sensitivity Coefficients by Sector – Professional CEOs
 Mining      Construction   Manufacturing   Transportation   Wholesale   Retail   FIRE     Services
 20.678        23.426          19.863           19.214        19.332     20.327   20.979    22.698


   Next, we follow Core and Guay (2002) and Cichello (2005) among others, and investigate
whether firm size per–se has any effect on pay–performance sensitivity. To this end, we
augment equation (1) by interacting the gain in shareholder wealth with the c.d.f. of sales
(lagged one period). Our estimates are displayed in Table 15. As in the previous literature,
we find that firm size does matter. That is, even conditioning on the standard deviation of
shareholders’ dollar return, the sensitivity is negatively associated to size. Our findings do
not change qualitatively when we proxy size with book value of assets.
   We conclude this section by outlining a few basic issues that cast some doubts on the
reliability of these estimates and that have gone unremarked in earlier studies. We start
by observing that the decision to use the c.d.f. of the standard deviation, rather than the
standard deviation itself is not innocuous. It amounts to a concave transformation that
lowers the impact of relatively large observations and therefore increases the magnitude of the
estimates.
   A second issue has to do with the fit of the model. With the exception of professional
CEOs, the Pseudo R2 are very low, suggesting that the linear model model accounts for a
rather small fraction of the total variance.
   Finally, we notice that the correlation between∆ M KT CAPjt and its interaction with
F (σj ) is always larger than 0.99. This is a even bigger issue when we include in the re-
gression the c.d.f. of sales or other proxies for firm size. In those scenarios, the regressor
∆M KT CAPjt × F (sizej ) is also very highly correlated with the other two. However, in spite
of the multicollinearity, the large size of the sample ensures that the estimates are stable and
appear to be statistically significant. These are serious issues.




                                                 19
7.2   The Semi–Elasticity of Compensation with Respect to Shareholder
      Wealth

The semi–elasticity measures the dollar increase in executive’s wealth associated with a 1%
increase in shareholder wealth. We estimate the following equation:

          wijt = γ0 + γ1 Sh %Gainjt + γ2 Sh %Gainjt × F (σj ) + γ3 F (σj ) + λt + εit ,         (2)

where Sh %Gainjt is the percentage gain of firm j’s shareholders over the fiscal year t. Here
σjt represents the standard deviation of shareholder percent return. F (·) is the c.d.f of the
standard deviation.
   Our estimate of the expected dollar increase in total yearly compensation associated with
a 1% increase in shareholder return is γ1 + γ2 × F (σjt ). The results are listed in Table 4.

                              Table 4: Semi–elasticity Estimates
                                             All CEOs     Professional CEOs
                Dependent Variables
                Shareholder Return             368.739         265.708
                                              ( 4.444)         ( 3.596)
                Sh Ret × Variance distrib     -228.716         -202.888
                                              ( 5.780)         ( 4.822)
                Variance distrib               278.012         -617.408
                                             ( 254.988)       ( 222.393)
                No. Observations               16,953          11,357
                Pseudo R2                      0.043           0.092
                Note: Standard errors in parenthesis.


   In the previous Section, we showed that our JM–AS sensitivity estimates over the 1993–
2006 are larger than those obtained by Aggarwal and Samwick (1999) for the 1993–1996
period. Similarly, the estimates reported in Table 4 are larger than those that we obtain by
running the same regression over data for the earlier period. When we discard post–1996 data,
the coefficients of shareholder return are 237.61 and 186.56 for CEOs and professional CEOs,
respectively.
   Hall and Liebman (1998) simply regressed dollar compensation on a constant and share-
holder return. When we do the same (running robust regressions as they did), we obtain that
a 1% increase in return was associated on average with a 195,000 dollar increase in compen-
sation, an estimate considerably larger than the 43,000 dollars reported by Hall and Liebman
(1998) for the period 1980–1994.
   In order to determine whether the semi–elasticity varies across sectors, we proceed to
interact the variable Sh %Gainjt with sector–specific dummies, as we did in the previous

                                               20
section. The estimate of γ2 is −183.137. Table 5 reports our estimates of the sensitivity for
lowest–volatility firms.

                   Table 5: Semi–elasticities by Sector – Professional CEOs
 Mining    Construction              Manufacturing               Transportation            Wholesale     Retail      FIRE     Services
 215.850     230.859                   252.287                      201.615                 191.395     268.963     365.961   291.699



   The FIRE sector stands out as the one displaying the highest sensitivity. However, digging
a little deeper reveals that the differences are not as large as Table 5 may lead one to believe.
The point, very simply, is that the FIRE sector has a relatively large fraction of low–volatility
firms.
   To see that this is indeed the case, consider Figure 10, which plots the frequency distribu-
tion of estimated sensitivities by sector. That is, the frequency distribution of γ1 +γ2 ×F (σjt ).
The middle panel on the top row shows that the FIRE sectors has a large portion of firms
with low volatility. This is in part responsible for the large estimate we obtain for that sector.

                                            Construction                    FIRE                 Manufacturing
                               .02
                              .015
                               .01
                              .005
                                 0
                                                 Mining                     Retail                 Services
                               .02
                              .015
                    Density




                               .01
                              .005
                                 0
                                                                                             0   100   200    300
                                           Transportation               Wholesale
                               .02
                              .015
                               .01
                              .005
                                 0
                                     0     100     200     300    0   100     200    300

                              Graphs by sector_label




                                 Figure 10: Distribution of sensitivity estimates.


7.3      The Elasticity of Executive’s Wealth With Respect to Shareholder
         Wealth

The elasticity measures the percentage change in the portion of executive’s wealth tied to
the firm which is associated with a 1% increase in market capitalization. Since typically
non–CEOs executives have little wealth invested in the companies they work for, we focus on



                                                                       21
CEOs. The equation we estimate is

                       CEO %Gainijt = γ0 + γ1 Sh %Gainjt + λt + εit ,                        (3)

where CEO %Gainijt denotes the percentage increase in the wealth of CEO i in year t. Our
results are listed in Table 6.

                                 Table 6: Elasticity Estimates
                                           All CEOs     Professional CEOs
                    Dependent Variables
                    Shareholder Return        1.175           1.304
                                            ( 0.006)        ( 0.011)
                    Constant                  0.218           0.326
                                            ( 0.015)        ( 0.026)
                    No. Observations         19,146          12,810
                    Pseudo R2                0.318           0.279
                    Note: Standard errors in parenthesis.


   At the median, the percentage increase in CEO wealth associated with a 1% increase in
shareholder wealth is 1.17 for the totality of CEOs and 1.3 for professional CEOs. The likely
reason for this difference is that professional CEOs tend to have less wealth invested in their
companies.
   Unlike the JM–AS measure and the semi–elasticity, our estimates of the elasticity are
stable over the sample period. For the sake of consistency, let’s consider the 1993–96 period.
The point estimate for the CEOs is the same as in Table 6. The elasticity for professional
CEOs was 1.25 in the earlier period as opposed to 1.3 - different but not hugely so.
   In light of the increase in shareholder wealth that occurred after 1996, the time variation
of our elasticity estimates is not inconsistent with the results obtained for the other two
sensitivity measures. According to Table 13, median CEO wealth was only $16.13 million in
1993 and grew to $19.29 million in 1996. In 2006, it had risen to 26.75 million, about 39%
higher. These figures lead to two possible rationalizations of the evidence.
   It may be the case that what matters to executives is really the percentage fluctuations in
their wealth. If this is the case, the increase in the JM–AS and semi–elasticity measures were
needed in order to maintain incentives (i.e. the elasticity) intact in the face of an increase in
shareholder wealth.
   Alternatively, it may be dollar changes that matter. If so, the increase in the dollar
volatility of compensation would reflect a strengthening of incentives. The increase in CEO



                                               22
wealth may have been necessary in order to retain CEOs in the faceof the higher risk they are
called to bear.
    When we investigate the cross–sectoral variation in elasticity, we find that it varies from
about 1.25 for Construction and FIRE to 1.53 for Transportation. See Table 7.

                     Table 7: Elasticities by Sector – Professional CEOs
 Mining   Construction   Manufacturing    Transportation   Wholesale    Retail   FIRE    Services
 1.466       1.239          1.343             1.535         1.409       1.266    1.256    1.287




8    Conclusion

The compensation of executives of public corporations is a compelling issue with strong polit-
ical overtones. It is compelling because economic theory tells us a lot about how to structure
contracts to align the goals of professional managers with those of the shareholders. And yet,
there is a popular perception that this is not working and that incentives are weak. Much of
this perception is based on a set of ”facts” that are not completely reflective of reality.
    When one looks at compensation and its components in detail, a number of features stand
out. To start with, the distribution of total compensation is highly skewed so averages are
highly misleading. The dispersion of the cross–sectional distribution is also remarkable. In
every single year, a large fraction of CEOs lose money. Sometimes, they lose a lot.
    Over the sample period, the use of security grants has increased. However, this has not led
to a one for one increase in the portion of executives’ wealth that is tied to their companies.
In fact, revenues from the sale of stock have also increased.
    No matter how we measure it, the sensitivity of pay to performance is substantial. However,
whether the sensitivity has increased or not, crucially depends on the proxy we use. If one
believes that what matters to executives is changes in the level of compensation, then the
conclusion is that incentives are now stronger then they used to be. Instead, if what really
matters is percentage changes in wealth, then we are led to conclude that incentives did not
change over time.




                                               23
A      Definitions of CEO Wealth and Total Yearly Compensation

As stated in the main body of the paper, our definition of Executive’s Wealth proxyes for the
dollar value of the executive’s wealth that is tied to the firm at the beginning of the year. It
is defined as the sum of the following elements:

    1. Market Value of Stock – SHROWN×PRCCF, where SHROWN is the number of shares
      owned at the end of the previous fiscal year and PRCCF is the share price at the same
      date

    2. Market Value of Stock Options – INMONEX+INMONUN, where INMONEX is the
      value of exercisable in–the–money options and INMONUN is the value of unexercisable
      in–the–money options

    3. Salary

    4. Bonus

    5. Total value of Restricted Stock Granted – RSTKGRNT

    6. Total value of Stock Options Granted – SOPTVAL

    7. Expected Discounted Value of Future Cash Payments – See Appendix A.3 below

    Total Yearly Compensation is our best estimate of the net increase in executive’s wealth
that occurred during the fiscal year, due to her relation with the company. It is defined as
the sum of the following elements:

    1. Salary

    2. Bonus

    3. Net revenue from Trade in Stock – See Appendix A.2 below

    4. Dividends

    5. Long–Term Incentive Payouts – ALLOTHTOT-ALLOTHPD

    6. A miscellanea of items, among which payouts for cancellation of stock options, payment
      for unused vacation, tax reimbursements, and signing bonuses – ALLOTHPD+OTHANN

    7. Yearly change in the Market Value of Stock



                                              24
  8. Yearly change in the Market Value of Options

   The first six elements define what we call Current Compensation. The sum of the remaining
ones identify Deferred Compensation.

A.1    The Value of Option Holdings according to the HH Algorithm

The analysis carried out in the main body of the paper posits that the change in the value of
the executive’s option holdings equals the year–on–year change in the sum of un-exercisable
and in–the–money options, both computed at the money at the end of the fiscal year. This is
strategy followed by most other studies, among which Aggarwal and Samwick (1999).
   In this section we describe the algorithm devised by Himmelberg and Hubbard (2000)
in order to estimate the value of out–of–the–money options in executives’ portfolios. The
algorithm makes use of the following EXECUCOMP variables:14

   • UEXNUMEX = number or un-exercised but exercisable options held by the executive
      at year–end, both in–the–money and out–of–the–money

   • UEXNUMUN = number of un-exercisable un-exercised options held by the executive at
      year–end, both in–the–money and out–of–the–money

   • SOPTEXSH = number of options exercised by the executive during the fiscal year

   • SOPTGRN = total number of stock options awarded during the fiscal year

   • SOPTVAL = total value of options granted during the fiscal year

   Under the assumption that none of the options awarded in a given year are immediately
exercisable, the total value of options at year–end is the sum of (i) the value of newly granted
options (SOPTVAL), (ii) the value of un–exercisable options (in number U EXN U M U Nt −
SOP T GRNt ), and (iii) the value of exercisable options (in number U EXN U M EXt ).
   Unfortunately we lack data on strike prices and vesting horizons of the options in portfolio.
Therefore we assume that (i) a stock option grant vests gradually over four years, at a constant
rate and (ii) SOPTEXSH includes the options that are let expire. It follows that the laws of
  14
     Some of the variables have changed labels in the latest version of the EXECUCOMP dataset.
UEXNUMEX is now called OPT UNEX EXER NUM. UEXNUMUN is OPT UNEX UNEXER NUM. OP-
TION EXER NUM. SOPTEXSH is OPTION EXER NUM. SOPTGRNT is OPTION AWARDS NUM. Fi-
nally, OPTION AWARDS RPT VALUE coincides with SOPTVAL. However, the latest version of the dataset
uses OPTION AWARDS FV for those records that follow the new FASB123 reporting requirements.




                                               25
motion for the stocks of un–exercisable and exercisable options are

      U EXN U M U Nt = (1 − 0.25)U EXN U M U Nt−1 + SOP T GRN Tt
      U EXN U M EXt = 0.25 × U EXN U M U Nt−1 + U EXN U M EXt−1 − SOP T EXSHt .

Then, we compute the value of the executive’s option portfolio to be

 opvtt = SOP T V ALt + U EXN U M EXt × bsvext + [0.75 × U EXN U M U Nt−1 ] × bsvunt . (4)

The second addendum is the value of the exercisable options. The third addendum is the value
of un-exercisable options inherited from the past.15 We need to determine U EXN U M U Nt−1 .
Without it, we would have to discard one more observation for every executive–firm match.
The above conditions imply that

      U EXN U M U Nt−1 = [U EXN U M U Nt − SOP T GRN Tt ]/0.75
      U EXN U M EXt−1 = U EXN U M EXt + SOP T EXSHt − 0.25 × U EXN U M U Nt−1 .

Notice that, implicit in this formulation, is the fact that U EXN U M EXt and U EXN U M U Nt−1
are computed at some average price, in spite of the fact that they have different maturities
(and therefore different risk–free rates) and different strike prices.

A.1.1       Option Pricing

Options awarded to executives are American options on dividend–paying securities. Since
there is no closed form pricing formula for them, we will use the Black–Scholes formula for
European options with continuous payment of the underlying:

                                       Se−qT N (d1) − Xe−rT N (d2),

where
                                    S
                                log X + (r − q + 12 σ 2 )T              √
                            d1 =           √               ; d2 = d1 − σ T .
                                         σ T
      It is left to specify how we determine the volatility of stock returns σ, the dividend yield
q, the risk–free rate r, and the strike prices.

      • EXECUCOMP provides data for σ in the variable BS V OLAT . Since it has many
        missing observation, we computed our own measure, based on CRSP data. If pt is stock
                                                                  pt +dt
        price and dt is dividend, the return is computed as log adj×p t−1
                                                                          . The factor adj is equal
        to CF ACSHRt /CF ACSHRt−1 .
 15
      Notice that stock splits imply a slight modification to this formula. See Appendix A.1.1 below.


                                                       26
    • EXECUCOMP provides data for q in the variable BS Y IELD. Since it has many
      missing observation, we computed our own measure, based on CRSP data. That is,
      q = log(1 + d/p).

    • Risk–free rates come from FRED at the St. Louis Fed. We use monthly data, as I
      follow the convention that we evaluate everything at the end of the fiscal year – not
      the calendar year. The series are GS3 and GS5 (Monthly returns on 3– and 5–year
      Treasuries – Constant Maturity).

    • Following Himmelberg and Hubbard (2000) once again, we assume that

         – out of the exercisable options (U EXN U M EXt ), 10% are 1–year old, 30% are 2–
              year old, and 60% are 3–year old. This implies a strike price for the representative
              option of .1pt−1 + .3pt−2 + .6pt−3 . The average maturity is assumed to be 3 years
         – out of the un-exercisable options (U EXN U M U Nt−1 ), 60% are 1–year old, 30% are
              2–year old, and 10% are 3–year old. This implies a strike price for the representative
              option of .6pt−1 + .3pt−2 + .1pt−3 . The average maturity is assumed to be 5 years.

    One last caveat about stock splits. When evaluating options, we need to exercise some
care in order to make sure that strike prices and current prices are comparable. We decide to
use the market price for current price and adjust the strike prices and the number of options
for splits.
    If the split is Z shares per each owned (in terms of EXECU variables, Z = AJEXt−1 /AJEXt ),
we need to introduce only two minor alterations: (i) the strike price is by Z and (ii) the equa-
tion (4) becomes

opvtt = BLKV ALU Et + U EXN U M EXt × bsvext + [0.75 × Z × U EXN U M U Nt−1 ] × bsvunt .

A.2     Computation of the net revenue from trade in stock

In this appendix, we briefly describe the algorithm we employ to estimate the net revenue
from trade in stock. We start by estimating the cost of exercising options, i.e. V EXt . We
postulate that all options exercised had the same strike price and were exercised when the
stock price was the maximum for the fiscal year. This amounts to assuming that the following
relationship holds:

                 SOP T EXER = [M AX P RICE − ST RIKE] × SOP T EXSH,

where M AX P RICE is the maximum price for the fiscal year and the EXECUCOMP vari-
ables SOPTEXER and SOPTEXESH are the net value realized from exercising options and

                                                  27
the number of options exercised, respectively.16 ST RIKE is our unknown, the estimated strike
price for the options exercised during the year.17 Then CEXt , the cost of exercising the op-
tions, is given by
                                  CEXt = SOP T EXSHt × ST RIKEt .

Next, we estimate the net number of shares sold. EXECUCOMP provides us with the hold-
ings of restricted stock, RSTKHLD. The restricted stock granted GRN Tt can be estimated
by dividing the value of restricted stock granted by the price at the end of the fiscal year:
GRN Tt = RST KGRN T /P RCCF . The law of motion for restricted stock allows us to recover
the number of vested shares V ESTt .

                        RST KHLDt = RST KHLDt−1 + GRN Tt − V ESTt .

Abstracting from donations, the law of motion for common stock SHROW Nt is given by

               SHROW Nt = SHROW Nt−1 + Pt + V ESTt − St + SOP T EXSHt ,

where Pt and St denote the stock purchased and sold, respectively. Our estimate of the net
number of shares sold is

               St − Pt = SHROW Nt−1 − SHROW Nt + V ESTt + SOP T EXSHt .

If Pt −St > 0, we assume that the net revenue from stock trade is identically zero. If St −Pt > 0,
we assume that the net revenue from stock trade is max[0, AV G P RICE × (St − Pt ) − CEXt ].
That is, we assume that the executive sold St − Pt shares at the average market price for the
year, but we impose that the net revenue is always non–negative.

A.3       Expected Discounted Value of Future Cash Payments

Estimating the expected discounted value of future cash payments is extremely challenging,
as it entails (i) projecting the evolution of expected cash payments over time, (ii) estimating
the conditional expectation of years left in office, and (iii) conjecture a discount rate.
       The evidence shown in the main body of the paper indicates that the sum of salaries
and bonuses has increased very little over our sample period. For this reason, we do not feel
particularly uncomfortable assuming that such payments are expected to stay constant at the
current value, in real terms.
  16
     Notice that from the database it is not possible to tell whether the stock the executive acquires by exercising
options was sold or held on to.
  17
     According to the EXECUCOMP manual, SOPTEXER is computed using the price of the day of the
exercise. This implies that our procedure over–estimates the strike price. Alternatively, we may assume that
the option was exercised when the stock price was equal to the average for the fiscal year.


                                                        28
    We find that in our sample the hazard rate varies very little for the first ten years in office.
For this reason, we make the drastic choice of assuming that the hazard rate is constant at its
sample mean of 0.1156. This figure implies that the expected number of years in charge after
the current one, is constant and equal to about 7 and a half. It is clear that this assumption
is going to bias our estimates upwards. Finally, we assume that the discount factor is 0.9615,
the value commonly used in the macroeconomics literature.
    Let ρ be the survival rate (1 minus the hazard rate) and let β be the discount factor.
Given our assumptions, the expected discounted value of future cash payments is estimated
to equal payments in the current year, multiplied by the following factor:

                                           !
                                           ∞             !
                                                         t
                                                                        ρβ
                                                     t
                                 (1 − ρ)         ρ             βs =          .
                                                                      1 − ρβ
                                           t=1           s=1


B     More Details on the Data

    Effects of FAS 123. The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has mandated all
public companies registrants that are not small business filers to apply Statement 123R by
the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB), as of the start of their first annual period
beginning after June 15, 2005. FAS 123R prescribes that equity based compensation has to
be expensed and be reflected in the financial statements based on fair value of the awards.
This policy change had a minor effect on the definitions of EXECUCOMP’s variables. The
conventions adopted in order to bridge variables whose definitions have changed, are available
from the authors upon request.
    Dating Convention. All compensation data refers to the date of the annual shareholder
meeting, which is held within three months of the end of the fiscal year. We don’t have
information about meetings’ dates. Therefore we assume that the information refers to the
last day of the fiscal year.
    Market Return. Our proxy for market return is the variable VWRETD from CRSP,
the Center for Research in Security Prices at the Booth School of Business. VWRETD is the
value–weighted return (with dividends) on an index drawn from the combined NYSE/AMEX
and NASDAQ data.
    Volatility of Dollar Returns. When computing the JM–AS measure of pay–performance
sensitivity in Section 7, we include among the regressors the (c.d.f. of the ) volatility of dollar
return to shareholders. We follow Aggarwal and Samwick (1999) (see page 76 of their paper)
and define volatility in a given month as the standard deviation of the monthly total returns
to shareholders over the 60 previous months.


                                                         29
   Idiosyncratic Volatility of Dollar Returns. We compute idiosyncratic and systematic
volatility following the methodology described in Garvey and Milbourn (2003). For every
month, we run simple CAPM regressions over the preceding 60 month. Systematic volatility
is equal to the portion of return volatility that is explained by the model, multiplied by market
capitalization. Idiosyncratic volatility is the portion of return volatility not explained by the
model, multiplied by market capitalization.
   Inflation Adjustment. All dollar–denominated variables in EXECUCOMP are reported
in current prices. We transformed them in constant (2005) prices, dividing them by the chain–
weighted CPI (All Urban Consumers, US City Average, All Items) from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics.
   Wages. Average non–farm hourly wages is the series produced by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics bearing the same name, deflated by the CPI.



References

Aggarwal, R. K., and A. A. Samwick (1999): “The Other Side of the Trade-off: The
  Impact of Risk on Executive Compensation,” Journal of Political Economy, 107(1), 65–105.

Antle, R., and A. Smith (1985): “Measuring Executive Compensation: Methods and An
  Application,” Journal of Accounting Research, 23(1), 296–325.

Bebchuk, L., and J. Fried (2004): Pay Without Performance. The Unfulfilled Promise of
  Executive Compensation. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Bebchuk, L., and Y. Grinstein (2005): “The Growth of Executive Pay,” Oxford Review
  of Economic Policy, 21(2), 283–303.

Berle, A. A., and G. C. Means (1932): The Modern Corporation and Private Property.
  MacMillan Publishing Corportation, New York, NY.

Brandt, M. W., A. Brav, and A. Kumar (2009): “The Idiosyncratic Volatility Puzzle:
  Time Trend of Speculative Episodes?,” Forthcoming on the Review of Financial Studies.

Cichello, M. S. (2005): “The Impact of Firm Size on Pay–Performance Sensitivities,”
  Journal of Corporate Finance, 11, 609–627.

Clementi, G. L., T. Cooley, M. Richardson, and I. Walter (2009): “Rethinking
  Compensation in Financial Firms,” in Restoring Financial Stability, ed. by V. Acharya, and
  M. Richardson. John Wiley and Sons.

                                               30
Clementi, G. L., T. Cooley, and C. Wang (2006): “Stock Grants as a Commitment
  Device,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 30(11), 2191–2216.

Core, J., and W. Guay (2002): “The Other Side of the Trade–Off: The Impact of Risk on
  Executive Compensation – A Revised Comment,” The Wharton School.

Frydman, C., and R. Saks (2006): “Historical Trends in Executive Compensation,” MIT
  Sloan School of Management, MIT.

Gabaix, X., and A. Landier (2008): “Why Has CEO Pay Increased So Much?,” Forthcom-
  ing, Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Garvey, G., and T. Milbourn (2003): “Incentive Compensation When Executives Can
  Hedge the Market: Evidence of Relative Performance Evaluation in the Cross Section,”
  Journal of Finance, 58(4), 1557–1581.

Hall, B., and J. Liebman (1998): “Are CEOs Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 102, 653–691.

Hall, B., and K. Murphy (2003): “The Trouble with Stock Options,” Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 17(3), 49–70.

Himmelberg, C. P., and G. Hubbard (2000): “Incentive Pay and the Market for CEOs:
  An Analysis of Pay–for–Performance Sensitivity,” Columbia GSB.

Jensen, M. C., and K. J. Murphy (1990): “Performance Pay and Top–Management In-
  centives,” Journal of Political Economy, 98(2), 225264.

Kostiuk, P. F. (1990): “Firm Size and Executive Compensation,” Journal of Human Re-
  sources, 25, 90–105.

Murphy, K. (1999): “Executive Compensation,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. by
  O. Ashenfelter, and D. Card, pp. 2485–2563. Elsevier Science.

Ofek, E., and D. Yermack (2000): “Taking stock: Equity–Based Compensation and the
  Evolution of Managerial Ownership,” Journal of Finance, 55(3), 1367–1384.

Schaefer, S. (1998): “The Dependence of Pay–Performance Sensitivity on The Size of The
  Firm,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 80, 436–443.

Wang, C. (1997): “Incentives, CEO Compensation, and Shareholder Wealth in a Dynamic
  Agency Model,” Journal of Economic Theory, 76, 72–105.

                                             31
       Table 8: Distribution of Total Compensation – Millions of 2005 dollars – All CEOs
Year    Obs.                 Mean     Median    MAD    Skewness                                       Means by Decile
                                                                    1          2       3       4        5       6        7       8       9        10
1993    715       Gross      21.57      3.09    2.95      11.50    -59.15     -0.20   0.82    1.50     2.42     3.98     5.96   10.12   21.05    230.30
                Net of Mkt   14.98      2.50    3.03      10.06    -80.57     -1.45   0.47    1.13     1.97     3.27     5.14    8.77   17.81    193.83
                 Classical    2.55      1.60    0.82       5.21      0.42      0.72   0.94    1.19     1.44     1.81     2.27    2.91    4.07      9.76
1994    1,334     Gross       5.46      1.01    2.34      17.45    -46.18     -4.25   -0.75   0.31     0.74     1.37     2.28    4.00    8.04     89.28
                Net of Mkt    4.60      0.92    2.39      18.92    -47.77     -4.58   -0.94   0.26     0.69     1.26     2.14    3.85    7.63     83.75
                 Classical    2.67      1.57    0.87       4.69      0.38      0.64    0.85   1.13     1.41     1.78     2.25    3.05    4.38     10.90
1995    1,401     Gross      30.70      3.81    3.71      20.95    -13.62     -0.18    0.85   1.69     2.92     4.83     7.67   13.24   24.85    265.00
                Net of Mkt   14.29      1.80    3.72      19.85    -47.67     -5.32   -0.49   0.58     1.30     2.50     4.38    7.87   15.05    165.40
                 Classical    2.79      1.62    0.88       8.50      0.39      0.68    0.90   1.14     1.45     1.83     2.33    3.17    4.67     11.33
1996    1,439     Gross      24.15      3.56    3.91      19.69    -24.86     -0.64    0.72   1.51     2.76     4.51     7.54   12.14   23.54    215.43
                Net of Mkt    7.67      1.58    4.03      -0.84    -79.48     -5.19   -0.76   0.52     1.22     2.33     4.43    7.88   15.35    130.58
                 Classical    3.71      1.90    1.11      16.62      0.41      0.72    1.01   1.30     1.70     2.16     2.82    3.91    5.93     17.16
1997    1,432     Gross      53.70      6.67    6.41      29.18    -41.76      0.15    1.45   3.02     5.23     8.35    13.28   22.08   41.05    484.88
                Net of Mkt   23.89      2.99    5.74      26.14   -111.43     -5.82   -0.61   0.86     2.08     4.01     6.96   12.71   24.05    306.69
                 Classical    4.51      2.27    1.38       8.71      0.45      0.81    1.15   1.52     1.98     2.55     3.33    4.64    6.93     21.79
1998    1,438     Gross      70.15       1.68   6.42      23.40    -65.21     -7.54   -2.26   -0.03     1.06    2.56     5.76   12.94   34.93    723.01
                Net of Mkt   34.31      -0.10   7.29      23.38   -129.31    -19.09   -8.74   -3.77    -0.92    0.43     1.77    5.81   19.56    478.71
                 Classical    5.30       2.32   1.41      28.30      0.43      0.85    1.19    1.59     2.05    2.66     3.57    4.97    7.59     28.18
1999    1,485     Gross      98.45      1.74    6.64      24.95   -177.03     -8.35   -2.18    0.14    1.11     2.67     6.57   14.45   37.96   1,112.32
                Net of Mkt   66.58      0.49    7.75      23.60   -281.30    -18.04   -6.73   -1.98    0.02     1.05     3.34    9.43   27.55     932.43
                 Classical    5.87      2.51    1.58       8.57      0.43      0.89    1.24    1.66    2.21     2.92     4.01    5.81    9.12      30.58
2000    1,430     Gross      -12.38     4.12    8.39     -29.32   -525.47     -8.15   -0.65   1.05     2.89     5.87    10.85   20.81   46.95    322.08
                Net of Mkt     1.89     4.88    8.69     -23.27   -451.67     -5.73   -0.04   1.45     3.51     6.79    12.85   23.49   52.01    375.98
                 Classical     7.47     2.74    1.84      16.19      0.41      0.84    1.25   1.70     2.29     3.16     4.38    6.12   10.43     44.22
2001    1,396     Gross      -2.00      2.08    6.26      14.37   -339.37    -12.21   -2.17   0.47     1.52     3.02     5.82   10.69   20.87    291.31
                Net of Mkt   23.09      3.62    6.01      20.34   -218.16     -5.33    0.15   1.47     2.76     4.99     8.51   14.90   29.31    393.06
                 Classical    6.93      2.78    1.94      12.95      0.42      0.84    1.25   1.73     2.38     3.31     4.74    6.95   11.49     36.32
2002    1,448     Gross      -20.90     0.43    4.81     -24.79   -336.86    -15.63   -5.42   -1.55    0.02     0.91     2.32    4.71    9.92    131.62
                Net of Mkt    12.12     2.46    4.79     -11.11   -173.41     -4.71   -0.47    0.74    1.83     3.26     5.82   10.58   20.55    257.30
                 Classical     5.26     2.81    1.83       5.52      0.45      0.90    1.30    1.79    2.43     3.25     4.41    6.10    9.43     22.55
2003    1,522     Gross      35.02      8.56    7.14      13.17    -28.12     1.37    2.94    4.82     7.18    10.66    15.53   24.53   44.57    267.06
                Net of Mkt   12.63      5.82    5.42     -14.61    -95.12     0.07    1.42    2.79     4.58     7.05    10.70   16.96   31.42    146.65
                 Classical    4.83      2.68    1.67       3.86      0.46     0.90    1.30    1.79     2.33     3.07     4.02    5.69    8.56     20.17
2004    1,517     Gross      28.85      6.54    6.51      13.48    -36.84     -0.70   1.39    2.90     5.10     8.01    12.03   18.55   32.99    246.01
                Net of Mkt   19.19      5.07    6.00      11.40    -57.45     -2.13   0.70    2.14     3.88     6.50    10.03   15.55   27.26    185.79
                 Classical    5.31      3.10    1.96       5.71      0.50      1.01   1.55    2.09     2.74     3.56     4.70    6.27    9.37     21.36
2005    1,529     Gross      18.47      3.91    5.07      11.67    -45.81     -2.91    0.28   1.40     2.95     4.98     8.05   14.15   27.00    175.34
                Net of Mkt   14.32      3.28    5.05       6.30    -64.34     -4.19   -0.09   1.05     2.43     4.31     7.25   12.74   24.74    159.84
                 Classical    5.42      3.16    1.97       4.06      0.53      1.05    1.53   2.08     2.79     3.65     4.63    6.21    9.37     22.33
2006    1,428     Gross      45.70      4.85    5.58      27.15    -60.11     -1.35    0.76   1.92     3.66     6.18    10.14   16.94   30.66    450.33
                Net of Mkt   31.55      3.04    5.55      29.90   -104.94     -4.65   -0.50   0.87     2.15     4.08     7.14   13.08   23.35    375.72
                 Classical    6.74      3.24    2.00      38.53      0.54      1.07    1.49   2.07     2.80     3.64     4.73    6.44    9.54     35.15

Note: The heading Gross denotes Total Yearly Compensation.
      Net of Mkt denotes Total Yearly Compensation, net of the return on the market portfolio.
      MAD stands for Median Absolute Deviation.
      Skewness is the ratio of third moment about to the mean to the standard deviation.




                                                                        32
       Table 9: Distribution of Yearly Compensation – Millions of 2005 dollars – All CEOs
Year    Obs.               Mean     Median    MAD    Skewness                         Means by Decile of Total Compensation
                                                                  1          2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9        10
1993     715     Total     21.57      3.09    2.95      11.50    -59.15     -0.20    0.82    1.50   2.42     3.98    5.96   10.12   21.05    230.30
                Current     4.50      1.33    0.70      17.81     12.42      1.54    1.10    1.51   1.63     2.44    2.47    4.49    6.06      5.70
                Deferred   15.62      0.92    2.75      11.52    -71.57     -1.74   -0.28   -0.02   0.79     1.55    3.48    5.63   15.00    204.30
1994    1,334    Total       5.46      1.01   2.34      17.45    -46.18     -4.25   -0.75    0.31    0.74    1.37    2.28    4.00    8.04     89.28
                Current      6.43      1.40   0.78      31.19     30.97      4.52    1.77    1.04    1.43    1.56    2.07    3.84    3.78     10.67
                Deferred    -1.31     -0.14   2.26      -1.67    -77.15     -8.77   -2.52   -0.74   -0.69   -0.19    0.21    0.16    4.26     72.40
1995    1,401    Total     30.70      3.81    3.71      20.95    -13.62     -0.18   0.85    1.69    2.92     4.83    7.67   13.24   24.85    265.00
                Current     5.41      1.46    0.81      19.81      3.25      1.50   0.83    1.22    1.79     2.11    2.48    4.87    9.57     19.85
                Deferred   25.09      1.88    3.30      21.22    -16.87     -1.68   0.02    0.48    1.13     2.72    5.19    8.38   15.28    236.49
1996    1,439    Total     24.15      3.56    3.91      19.69    -24.86     -0.64    0.72   1.51    2.76     4.51    7.54   12.14   23.54    215.43
                Current     5.22      1.51    0.86       8.85      6.02      1.52    1.11   1.41    1.78     2.38    3.74    6.39    7.45     15.74
                Deferred   18.74      1.44    3.56      20.34    -30.88     -2.17   -0.39   0.10    0.98     2.13    3.80    5.75   16.09    192.96
1997    1,432    Total     53.70      6.67    6.41      29.18    -41.76      0.15   1.45    3.02    5.23     8.35   13.28   22.08   41.05    484.88
                Current    11.68      1.88    1.16      19.17     21.96      1.01   1.24    2.00    3.09     3.70    4.66    6.49    8.59     44.34
                Deferred   41.39      3.43    5.31      28.81    -63.71     -0.85   0.21    1.02    2.14     4.65    8.62   15.59   32.46    414.39
1998    1,438    Total     70.15       1.68   6.42      23.40    -65.21     -7.54   -2.26   -0.03    1.06    2.56    5.76   12.94   34.93    723.01
                Current    14.51       1.76   1.10      20.65      6.81      3.20    2.33    1.37    1.39    3.83    3.06    5.41   10.14     67.46
                Deferred   54.64      -0.01   5.92      22.86    -72.02    -10.74   -4.59   -1.40   -0.33   -1.28    2.70    7.53   24.79    604.78
1999    1,485    Total     98.45      1.74    6.64      24.95   -177.03     -8.35   -2.18    0.14    1.11    2.67    6.57   14.45   37.96   1,112.32
                Current    28.05      1.76    1.12      38.83     33.35      3.22    2.61    1.73    1.94    2.31    5.04    7.51   11.83     133.83
                Deferred   68.47      0.02    6.65      29.00   -210.38    -11.57   -4.78   -1.59   -0.83    0.37    1.53    6.94   26.13     881.22
2000    1,430    Total     -12.38     4.12    8.39     -29.32   -525.47     -8.15   -0.65    1.05   2.89     5.87   10.85   20.81   46.95    322.08
                Current     11.74     1.92    1.28      21.45     25.01      4.38    1.76    2.10   1.97     3.30    5.22    7.21   13.13     33.44
                Deferred   -24.96     1.36    8.02     -29.84   -550.48    -12.54   -2.41   -1.05   0.92     2.57    5.63   13.61   33.82    260.29
2001    1,396    Total      -2.00     2.08    6.26      14.37   -339.37    -12.21   -2.17    0.47    1.52    3.02    5.82   10.69   20.87    291.31
                Current     10.07     1.97    1.29      15.85     26.56      6.56    4.48    1.76    2.10    2.64    4.62    5.49    7.92     25.45
                Deferred   -12.81     0.23    5.94      14.03   -365.94    -18.77   -6.65   -1.29   -0.58    0.38    1.21    5.20   12.95    245.10
2002    1,448    Total     -20.90      0.43   4.81     -24.79   -336.86    -15.63   -5.42   -1.55    0.02    0.91    2.32    4.71    9.92    131.62
                Current      7.16      1.93   1.27      11.51     22.78      5.77    4.00    2.99    1.89    1.62    2.74    4.67    7.41     13.06
                Deferred   -28.51     -1.58   4.60     -24.43   -359.64    -21.40   -9.42   -4.54   -1.87   -0.71   -0.42    0.04    2.51    109.19
2003    1,522    Total     35.02      8.56    7.14      13.17    -28.12     1.37    2.94    4.82    7.18    10.66   15.53   24.53   44.57    267.06
                Current    12.10      2.08    1.34      16.97     21.62     1.14    1.61    2.42    2.75     3.82    4.95    7.29   11.64     47.85
                Deferred   22.46      5.19    5.22       6.98    -49.74     0.23    1.33    2.40    4.43     6.83   10.57   17.24   32.93    198.63
2004    1,517    Total     28.85      6.54    6.51      13.48    -36.84     -0.70    1.39   2.90    5.10     8.01   12.03   18.55   32.99    246.01
                Current    12.94      2.49    1.65      14.06      8.69      2.44    2.34   2.42    3.21     3.79    6.63    9.32   14.02     54.88
                Deferred   15.35      2.35    5.49      13.82    -45.53     -3.14   -0.95   0.48    1.89     4.23    5.40    9.23   18.97    163.51
2005    1,529    Total     18.47      3.91    5.07      11.67    -45.81     -2.91    0.28    1.40    2.95    4.98    8.05   14.15   27.00    175.34
                Current    23.01      2.49    1.70      37.77     28.25      4.64    1.54    3.49    3.07    4.88    5.15    6.84   11.51    120.63
                Deferred   -5.40      0.48    4.92     -32.40    -74.05     -7.55   -1.27   -2.08   -0.12    0.10    2.90    7.31   15.49      4.99
2006    1,428    Total     45.70      4.85    5.58      27.15    -60.11     -1.35    0.76    1.92   3.66     6.18   10.14   16.94   30.66    450.33
                Current    22.09      2.08    1.51      36.05     16.46      2.79    3.32    2.09   3.27     4.08    6.29   12.50   17.50     89.92
                Deferred   21.65      0.85    5.13      30.51    -76.57     -4.14   -2.56   -0.16   0.39     2.10    3.85    4.44   13.15    277.16

Note: MAD stands for Median Absolute Deviation.
      Skewness is the ratio of third moment about to the mean to the standard deviation.




                                                                      33
Table 10: Distribution of Yearly Compensation – Millions of 2005 dollars – Professional CEOs
 Year   Obs.               Mean     Median    MAD    Skewness                        Means by Decile of Total Compensation
                                                                  1          2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9       10
 1993   472      Total      4.64      2.36    1.82       2.19     -5.25      0.46    1.00   1.48    2.03    2.90     4.06    5.45    8.94    25.50
                Current     2.49      1.33    0.65       7.16      2.80      1.19    1.01   1.44    1.73    1.73     2.78    2.71    4.86     2.86
                Deferred    1.66      0.63    1.21       0.87     -8.05     -0.73   -0.01   0.04    0.31    1.16     1.28    2.74    4.08    15.83
 1994   832      Total       2.17      1.12   1.12      -0.09     -7.24     -0.42    0.31    0.62    0.93    1.41    2.02    3.09    5.19    15.80
                Current      2.34      1.29   0.64       7.04      3.25      1.35    0.89    0.95    1.15    1.52    1.90    2.65    3.76     4.64
                Deferred    -0.23     -0.01   0.97      -1.76    -10.49     -1.77   -0.58   -0.33   -0.21   -0.11    0.12    0.43    1.43     9.22
 1995   889      Total      8.21      2.99    2.47       9.62     -2.25      0.53   1.01    1.64    2.45    3.75     5.63    9.30   16.42    43.97
                Current     2.64      1.34    0.68      11.08      1.77      0.71   0.92    1.21    1.53    1.78     2.07    3.33    4.76     6.37
                Deferred    5.50      1.36    1.91      10.39     -4.02     -0.17   0.08    0.43    0.93    1.97     3.56    5.97   11.66    34.90
 1996   920      Total      7.24      3.04    2.61       6.62     -6.16      0.41    0.90   1.55    2.38    3.76     5.68    8.86   13.57    41.48
                Current     2.80      1.39    0.71       7.23      1.82      0.79    1.03   1.29    1.66    2.01     2.44    3.16    5.65     6.20
                Deferred    4.36      1.20    1.95       6.52     -7.98     -0.38   -0.13   0.26    0.72    1.75     3.24    5.70    7.92    32.53
 1997   928      Total     12.86      5.17    4.42       5.96     -6.15      0.72   1.54    2.63    4.25    6.37     9.46   14.70   25.64    69.89
                Current     4.47      1.73    0.97      13.39      2.68      0.88   1.24    1.76    2.37    3.51     4.09    4.94    7.51    11.21
                Deferred    8.19      2.51    3.15       6.32     -8.83     -0.16   0.30    0.87    1.88    2.86     5.37    9.76   18.13    52.01
 1998   927      Total     11.78      1.60    3.56       6.95    -22.80     -3.41   -0.61    0.41    1.12   2.15     4.17    8.60   19.93   108.93
                Current     5.43      1.71    0.98      19.17      4.28      3.19    1.61    1.03    1.50   2.08     4.96    3.85    6.44    16.33
                Deferred    6.02      0.02    3.30       4.05    -27.08     -6.61   -2.23   -0.62   -0.38   0.07    -0.80    4.75   13.48    80.10
 1999   941      Total     17.87      1.53    3.84      14.08    -25.05     -3.62   -0.49    0.47    1.11   2.20     4.32    8.84   22.66   168.48
                Current     5.64      1.68    0.99       7.72      4.93      2.97    1.90    0.99    1.46   2.04     2.59    4.37    7.95    17.47
                Deferred   11.94      0.04    3.78      15.35    -29.98     -6.59   -2.39   -0.52   -0.35   0.16     1.73    4.47   14.70   138.51
 2000   911      Total     11.71      3.26    5.18       3.79    -76.31     -3.25    0.21    1.18   2.60    4.58     7.91   13.97   27.72   138.71
                Current    10.03      1.86    1.13      24.70     13.50      3.37    1.09    1.28   1.69    2.83     4.29    5.44   10.05    34.68
                Deferred    1.04      0.97    4.93      -4.34    -89.81     -6.62   -0.88   -0.10   0.91    1.75     3.62    8.53   17.66    75.44
 2001   922      Total     19.10      1.79    3.91      29.93    -76.49     -5.99   -0.83    0.70    1.46    2.48    4.29    7.25   12.87   245.85
                Current     6.37      1.85    1.11      18.98     14.64      5.39    2.12    1.17    2.32    2.57    2.93    4.97    6.81    13.32
                Deferred   12.24      0.16    3.76      29.83    -91.14    -11.39   -2.96   -0.46   -0.86   -0.10    1.35    2.27    6.06   220.23
 2002   997      Total     -21.27      0.54   3.16     -31.41   -237.55     -8.43   -2.75   -0.69    0.25    0.92    2.05    3.71    7.04    21.39
                Current      4.41      1.88   1.17      17.52      8.35      4.58    2.89    2.20    1.69    1.50    2.31    3.36    4.97     8.38
                Deferred   -25.95     -1.15   2.87     -31.41   -245.90    -13.01   -5.64   -2.88   -1.44   -0.57   -0.26    0.36    2.07     6.36
 2003   1,075    Total     16.56      6.93    5.35       9.54     -1.72     1.35    2.62    4.04    5.88    8.26    11.60   17.04   27.15    89.72
                Current     6.55      2.06    1.27      19.72      2.16     1.04    1.48    1.93    2.89    3.40     4.19    5.80    8.09    25.21
                Deferred    9.78      3.94    3.80      -5.11     -3.88     0.31    1.15    2.12    2.99    4.86     7.41   11.24   19.07    52.71
 2004   1,069    Total     12.60      5.05    4.81      14.57     -9.76     -0.11    1.35   2.52    4.05    6.56     9.59   14.47   22.36    75.46
                Current     7.79      2.46    1.54      27.98      5.84      2.03    1.83   2.18    2.92    3.40     4.93    8.12    9.79    25.91
                Deferred    4.47      1.94    4.09      -1.56    -15.60     -2.14   -0.47   0.34    1.13    3.16     4.66    6.35   12.58    34.95
 2005   1,103    Total      9.16      3.64    3.83       8.72    -18.72     -0.95    0.62    1.54    2.83    4.45    6.68   10.74   18.95    65.61
                Current     8.79      2.41    1.57      31.85     11.18      2.73    1.77    4.09    2.87    5.50    4.85    5.87    9.84    28.91
                Deferred    0.04      0.44    3.56     -24.36    -29.90     -3.67   -1.15   -2.55   -0.03   -1.05    1.83    4.87    9.11    22.99
 2006   1,045    Total     13.04      4.37    4.53      21.75    -20.38     -0.37    0.89    1.91   3.27    5.45     8.78   14.30   23.93    92.95
                Current    11.64      2.04    1.44      22.91      8.31      2.58    1.60    2.12   3.13    4.05     6.44    9.12   23.76    34.36
                Deferred    0.42      0.69    3.80      -6.65    -28.69     -2.95   -0.71   -0.22   0.13    1.40     2.34    5.18    0.17    27.56

 Note: Professional CEOs are those whose equity stake is less than 1%
       MAD stands for Median Absolute Deviation.
       Skewness is the ratio of third moment about to the mean to the standard deviation.




                                                                      34
  Table 11: Distribution of Yearly Compensation – Millions of 2005 dollars – Non–CEOs
Year   Obs.               Mean    Median   MAD    Skewness                     Means by Decile of Total Compensation
                                                               1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9      10
1993   4,601    Total      3.98     0.90   0.64      36.13    -3.20    0.25    0.39   0.56    0.77    1.07    1.53    2.36    4.31   31.74
               Current     1.07     0.45   0.21      27.44     1.91    0.29    0.44   0.51    0.61    0.75    0.96    1.23    1.73    1.20
               Deferred    2.48     0.20   0.42      35.21    -5.11   -0.04   -0.05   0.05    0.16    0.32    0.57    1.13    2.58   25.18
1994   6,993    Total      1.14     0.52   0.41      12.32    -6.12   -0.02    0.21    0.32    0.45    0.61   0.85    1.29    2.22   11.60
               Current     0.97     0.45   0.22      15.71     2.26    0.54    0.34    0.39    0.47    0.68   0.78    0.99    1.40    1.21
               Deferred    0.02     0.01   0.32       8.79    -8.39   -0.56   -0.13   -0.07   -0.03   -0.08   0.07    0.29    0.82    8.30
1995   7,243    Total      3.98     0.97   0.73      30.71    -1.86    0.24    0.37   0.55    0.81    1.17    1.71    2.65    4.76   29.41
               Current     1.27     0.48   0.23      32.89     0.84    0.28    0.40   0.48    0.58    0.77    0.93    1.23    1.85    2.40
               Deferred    2.51     0.28   0.45      29.64    -2.70   -0.04   -0.04   0.07    0.22    0.40    0.78    1.42    2.90   22.06
1996   7,369    Total      3.85     0.91   0.71      37.91    -5.08    0.21    0.35   0.52    0.76    1.12    1.74    2.79    5.10   30.99
               Current     1.27     0.49   0.24      70.54     1.31    0.32    0.41   0.50    0.66    0.78    1.01    1.22    1.83    2.19
               Deferred    2.39     0.23   0.52      35.18    -6.39   -0.11   -0.05   0.02    0.10    0.35    0.72    1.57    3.27   24.43
1997   7,419    Total      7.03     1.32   1.07      43.37    -5.15    0.27   0.46    0.71    1.08    1.66    2.52    4.13    7.53   57.21
               Current     1.66     0.52   0.26      63.44     1.25    0.30   0.45    0.59    0.75    0.93    1.12    1.73    2.47    2.96
               Deferred    5.01     0.48   0.73      43.89    -6.39   -0.04   0.01    0.13    0.33    0.73    1.41    2.40    5.06   46.49
1998   7,668    Total      7.17     0.70   0.89      44.97    -8.48   -0.35    0.20    0.36    0.57   0.90    1.53    2.76    6.01   68.22
               Current     2.50     0.52   0.26      49.81     2.40    0.87    0.37    0.44    0.63   0.80    1.08    1.52    2.69    5.31
               Deferred    4.06     0.04   0.82      39.00   -10.88   -1.21   -0.17   -0.07   -0.06   0.10    0.45    1.24    3.32   47.94
1999   7,854    Total      8.10     0.72   0.84      59.90   -14.02   -0.28    0.23    0.39    0.59    0.92   1.53    2.87    6.79   82.00
               Current     2.49     0.56   0.29      69.50     4.26    0.90    0.36    0.49    0.67    0.95   1.12    1.76    2.68    5.24
               Deferred    5.18     0.04   0.78      57.14   -18.28   -1.18   -0.13   -0.10   -0.08   -0.03   0.41    1.12    4.11   65.96
2000   7,295    Total      3.45     1.03   1.07       0.94   -45.49   -0.10    0.30    0.51   0.83    1.32     2.22   4.02    8.27   62.61
               Current     4.76     0.60   0.33      65.99    27.54    0.75    0.36    0.66   0.77    1.02     2.42   2.08    3.69    5.74
               Deferred   -2.38     0.15   1.02     -37.42   -73.03   -0.85   -0.06   -0.15   0.06    0.30    -0.19   1.94    4.58   43.55
2001   7,160    Total     -0.71     0.80   0.91     -56.70   -43.23   -0.58    0.24    0.43   0.66    1.01    1.55    2.52    4.50   25.76
               Current     2.92     0.58   0.31      87.66    14.38    1.35    0.45    0.51   0.64    0.97    1.16    1.64    2.59    3.59
               Deferred   -4.25     0.06   0.88     -70.62   -57.61   -1.92   -0.21   -0.08   0.02    0.04    0.39    0.88    1.91   14.13
2002   7,557    Total     -2.01     0.54   0.72     -79.08   -41.77   -0.98    0.06    0.28    0.44    0.66    1.00    1.56   2.71   15.93
               Current     2.44     0.60   0.31      65.07    11.17    1.37    0.59    0.42    0.55    0.70    1.13    1.61   2.31    3.05
               Deferred   -4.92     0.00   0.59     -79.03   -52.94   -2.35   -0.53   -0.14   -0.11   -0.03   -0.12   -0.05   0.40    6.66
2003   7,913    Total      5.92     1.70   1.27     -15.68    -4.75    0.40   0.66    0.99    1.43    2.01    2.88    4.30    7.53   43.82
               Current     2.38     0.63   0.34      65.53     4.14    0.41   0.57    0.70    0.97    1.13    1.36    1.84    2.80    4.68
               Deferred    3.15     0.66   0.71     -55.32    -8.89   -0.01   0.09    0.29    0.46    0.88    1.52    2.46    4.73   30.03
2004   7,902    Total      6.19     1.43   1.17      57.85    -5.46    0.23    0.49   0.80    1.19    1.74    2.55    3.88    6.67   49.77
               Current     3.81     0.75   0.42      77.43    11.12    0.54    0.56   0.76    1.00    1.21    1.50    2.13    3.63    9.30
               Deferred    2.04     0.34   0.87     -13.08   -16.58   -0.31   -0.07   0.04    0.20    0.53    1.05    1.75    3.04   30.71
2005   6,816    Total      3.34     1.28   1.12     -43.77   -19.31    0.09    0.41    0.70    1.05   1.56     2.35   3.68    6.18   36.70
               Current     4.14     0.83   0.47      65.00    13.46    0.68    0.66    0.90    1.24   1.28     6.08   2.39    4.18    7.69
               Deferred   -1.07     0.17   0.91     -41.97   -32.78   -0.59   -0.25   -0.20   -0.19   0.28    -3.72   1.29    2.00   23.43
2006   5,414    Total      4.95     1.30   1.14       4.79   -14.79    0.09    0.41    0.68    1.05   1.59    2.39    3.82    6.75   47.56
               Current     3.72     0.62   0.34      42.22     8.66    0.71    0.61    0.97    1.35   1.41    2.14    2.69    4.56    5.83
               Deferred    0.02     0.13   1.01     -26.60   -23.46   -0.63   -0.20   -0.29   -0.30   0.18    0.26    1.13    2.18   21.36

Note: MAD stands for Median Absolute Deviation.
      Skewness is the ratio of third moment about to the mean to the standard deviation.




                                                               35
  Table 12: Compensation Across Sectors – Millions of 2005 dollars – All CEOs
Year             All     Mining   Manuf.   Transp.   Whole   Retail   FIRE      Services

1993   Mean      21.99     5.87     8.41     34.26   11.72    -3.05     22.88     64.81
       Median     3.17     3.01     3.19      1.95    4.95     4.85      3.26      5.87
        Obs.       715       30      342       112      17       51        92        60
1994   Mean       5.46    -0.00     4.97     -5.27   -2.77    -5.49      1.70     28.25
       Median     1.01     0.34     1.58      0.59    0.65     0.12      1.36      2.57
        Obs.     1,334       58      592       202      41      107       185       125
1995   Mean      30.77     4.67    20.72      8.52    6.24    13.26     39.04     86.84
       Median     3.81     2.47     4.29      1.75    2.25     1.22      9.58      5.16
        Obs.     1,401       62      627       208      44      118       183       135
1996   Mean      24.04     9.04    15.98      9.12    6.13    21.40     31.49     82.74
       Median     3.56     5.98     3.36      1.34    1.65     4.10      9.72      3.40
        Obs.     1,439       65      639       204      43      127       190       146
1997   Mean      53.74    12.12    25.73     43.46    8.68    38.85     63.75    173.07
       Median     6.67     1.68     5.79      3.06    3.57     9.12     20.68      6.97
        Obs.     1,432       63      655       184      45      129       177       156
1998   Mean      69.78    -9.65    42.37     43.97    7.57    59.51     38.55    199.99
       Median     1.68    -2.04     0.97      1.95    1.51     5.34      3.64      5.80
        Obs.     1,438       59      652       162      46      128       178       190
1999   Mean      97.87    10.61    35.33     68.21    7.00    26.52     24.01    520.16
       Median     1.71     3.11     2.61      1.01    1.32     0.34     -0.97      4.41
        Obs.     1,485       62      661       161      51      133       181       210
2000   Mean     -12.12    26.94    11.51    -16.55   13.72   -51.30     67.28   -190.04
       Median     4.05     7.72     2.47      3.35    2.72     3.44     17.49      2.00
        Obs.     1,430       62      629       155      49      130       181       197
2001   Mean      -1.67   -14.74    -6.53      1.57   16.72     6.59     76.01    -76.73
       Median     2.09     0.15     1.87      1.44    3.94     6.20      2.81      2.53
        Obs.     1,396       56      614       145      49      125       180       203
2002   Mean     -20.98     5.27    -8.72    -11.22   -4.65    -1.00   -110.76      3.69
       Median     0.42     2.47     0.31      0.83    0.19     0.23      1.67     -0.69
        Obs.     1,448       57      638       145      48      117       203       214
2003   Mean      35.12    13.37    27.50     33.55    9.68    61.72     42.44     23.58
       Median     8.56     5.41     7.71      6.60    3.80    12.03     16.45      9.26
        Obs.     1,522       65      654       152      47      125       222       230
2004   Mean      28.56    21.06    24.18     36.27   14.38     6.10     34.47     32.18
       Median     6.55     8.06     5.39      5.27    8.10     6.58     10.79      6.08
        Obs.     1,517       61      650       155      49      130       217       225
2005   Mean      18.27    42.95    10.88     15.53   12.13    11.38     33.16     24.84
       Median     3.90    16.11     2.51      4.01    5.26     6.02      4.82      4.43
        Obs.     1,529       58      649       156      50      121       238       224
2006   Mean      46.32    34.70    19.98     63.31   10.32     9.80     35.75    120.15
       Median     4.89     3.22     4.16      5.82    4.81     4.65      7.59      4.43
        Obs.     1,428       54      617       152      46      118       213       196

Note: Whole stands for Wholesale Trade.
      FIRE stands for Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate.


                                             36
 Table 13: Median Wealth Across Sectors – Millions of 2005 dollars – All CEOs
Year              All    Mining   Manuf.   Transp.   Whole   Retail   FIRE    Services

1993   Wealth    16.13     9.20    16.69      8.78    9.62   27.80    23.30     22.25
        Stock     4.99     2.39     5.36      1.68    4.79   12.47     6.60      9.43
       Options    1.38     0.73     1.42      0.40    0.67    1.81     3.32      1.18
1994   Wealth    17.16     8.39    19.25      8.97   14.81   24.00    19.08     23.49
        Stock     5.67     2.14     6.58      1.50    3.67   13.17     6.21      7.63
       Options    1.75     0.98     1.82      0.41    1.43    1.34     2.84      3.04
1995   Wealth    16.21     9.32    17.91      8.33   12.26   22.12    20.01     23.63
        Stock     4.82     2.70     5.06      1.34    3.09   12.19     6.51      6.99
       Options    1.53     0.96     1.83      0.21    1.01    1.04     2.26      3.10
1996   Wealth    19.29    12.85    20.38      9.63   14.08   23.32    26.82     26.19
        Stock     5.55     2.40     5.91      1.93    4.52    9.71     9.35      6.81
       Options    2.57     1.74     2.83      0.58    1.63    0.86     5.04      4.57
1997   Wealth    23.40    16.36    23.39     10.76   14.63   29.56    36.86     28.04
        Stock     6.93     3.03     6.61      2.25    5.06   10.06    11.21     11.78
       Options    3.72     3.84     3.65      0.84    3.23    2.36     8.09      4.53
1998   Wealth    27.16    18.29    25.16     14.27   20.40   36.59    46.95     35.35
        Stock     8.26     4.98     7.22      3.16    6.40   13.61    15.18     11.51
       Options    4.99     3.85     4.68      1.70    3.32    4.29    12.09      7.04
1999   Wealth    25.89    11.51    22.79     17.35   18.51   32.37    48.85     33.79
        Stock     7.84     2.13     6.39      3.29    7.15   12.54    18.18     12.25
       Options    4.21     0.86     3.49      2.39    3.02    3.78    10.97      7.39
2000   Wealth    25.87    12.14    24.83     19.18   20.11   25.54    41.97     42.51
        Stock     7.60     1.83     6.55      3.13    6.15    9.27    16.94     11.45
       Options    3.70     1.81     3.75      1.69    2.17    2.04     6.50      6.98
2001   Wealth    27.49    20.46    23.54     20.13   20.09   27.53    54.99     34.64
        Stock     6.79     5.58     5.68      4.54    5.38    8.03    21.32      7.90
       Options    5.05     5.19     4.42      3.39    2.04    4.48    12.17      7.20
2002   Wealth    26.70    17.76    23.06     19.61   20.35   34.03    43.26     31.83
        Stock     6.58     3.88     5.38      3.53    4.41   10.10    18.16      6.18
       Options    5.25     3.17     4.75      3.38    2.95    7.71     7.83      7.10
2003   Wealth    21.40    18.21    19.19     17.16   15.43   25.69    38.49     20.10
        Stock     5.27     4.13     4.51      3.21    4.83    5.00    13.72      4.34
       Options    2.89     3.07     2.62      2.10    2.08    3.82     5.16      2.45
2004   Wealth    28.47    23.60    26.89     21.39   22.48   32.28    44.77     27.42
        Stock     7.19     6.93     6.32      5.02    7.28    6.10    16.80      6.43
       Options    5.62     4.55     5.41      3.15    3.40    7.91     9.22      6.52
2005   Wealth    30.83    28.79    25.94     22.06   26.92   37.83    49.80     28.00
        Stock     7.43     7.39     5.71      4.36    7.41    7.39    19.68      6.43
       Options    6.38     7.81     5.37      3.31    7.87    8.71     9.20      6.92
2006   Wealth    26.75    40.56    21.82     20.72   23.30   29.02    46.46     25.63
        Stock     8.50    12.67     6.60      8.00    5.90    6.86    23.14      7.31
       Options    5.93    12.08     4.56      3.01    6.22    7.58     8.06      6.15

Note: Whole stands for Wholesale Trade.
      FIRE stands for Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate.


                                             37
            Table 14: Median Regression Estimates of Pay–Performance Sensitivities
                                          All Executives                            All CEOs                        Professional CEOs
Dependent Variables:            Total        Current       Deferred       Total      Current    Deferred       Total       Current     Deferred
Shareholder Gain                 6.724         0.859         4.817       34.370        2.573      27.925       21.861        2.000      17.580
                               ( 0.026)      ( 0.013)       ( 0.014)    ( 0.205)     ( 0.093)    ( 0.149)     ( 0.149)     ( 0.084)    ( 0.101)
Sh Gain × Variance idio         -6.662        -0.945         -4.706     -33.211       -2.795     -27.135      -20.547       -2.172     -16.056
                               ( 0.029)      ( 0.014)       ( 0.016)    ( 0.209)     ( 0.102)    ( 0.163)     ( 0.151)     ( 0.085)    ( 0.102)
Sh Gain × Variance sys           0.390         0.095         0.282       1.025         0.299       1.120       0.311        0.260       -0.172
                               ( 0.011)      ( 0.006)       ( 0.006)    ( 0.036)     ( 0.040)    ( 0.065)     ( 0.022)     ( 0.012)    ( 0.015)
Number of observations          87,589        88,320         87,589      14,253      14,339       14,253       9,529        9,591          9,529
Pseudo R2                        0.045         0.007         0.033       0.076       0.009         0.063       0.212        0.023          0.176
Note: Standard errors in parenthesis.




            Table 15: Median Regression Estimates of Pay–Performance Sensitivities
                                          All Executives                            All CEOs                           Professional CEOs
Dependent Variables:            Total        Current       Deferred      Total      Current     Deferred       Total       Current     Deferred
Shareholder Gain                 6.897         0.659         5.374        36.866       2.209      31.609       23.550         1.597       19.466
                               ( 0.017)      ( 0.009)       ( 0.012)    ( 0.145)     ( 0.056)    ( 0.132)     ( 0.122)      ( 0.052)    ( 0.080)
Sh Gain × Variance distrib      -2.955        -0.507         -1.996      -11.427      -1.427       -7.457       -8.993       -1.021       -7.271
                               ( 0.018)      ( 0.009)       ( 0.013)    ( 0.157)     ( 0.060)    ( 0.143)     ( 0.133)      ( 0.056)    ( 0.087)
Variance distrib              1,562.742     1,080.894       171.277    3,917.409    3,598.408   -1,035.553   3,576.366     3,203.788    -258.470
                              ( 23.421)     ( 11.244)      ( 16.096)   ( 197.215)   ( 74.491)   ( 179.887)   ( 177.601)    ( 73.906)   ( 115.977)
Sh Gain × Sales distrib         -4.802        -0.197         -4.085      -32.047      -1.015      -30.434      -17.789       -0.720      -14.738
                               ( 0.007)      ( 0.004)       ( 0.005)    ( 0.067)     ( 0.026)    ( 0.061)     ( 0.058)      ( 0.024)    ( 0.037)
Sales distrib                  530.745       340.554         11.397     605.461      319.166      576.259    1,193.952      598.993      -17.240
                              ( 30.006)     ( 13.899)      ( 20.622)   ( 250.497)   ( 91.950)   ( 228.469)   ( 228.758)    ( 93.277)   ( 149.336)
Number of observations         103,113       105,103       103,113      16,953       17,182      16,953       11,357        11,489         11,357
Pseudo R2                       0.056         0.021         0.038       0.094        0.023        0.079        0.251         0.063          0.204
Note: Standard errors in parenthesis.




                                                                        38
