                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      WHERE DOES ENERGY R&D COME FROM? EXAMINING CROWDING OUT
                 FROM ENVIRONMENTALLY-FRIENDLY R&D

                                            David Popp
                                         Richard G. Newell

                                        Working Paper 15423
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15423


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2009




We thank Neelakshi Medhi for excellent research assistance, and Rebecca Henderson, Iain Cockburn,
Nat Keohane, and seminar participants at the 2008 AEA Winter Meetings, 2008 Spring NBER Productivity
Meeting and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s National Center for Environmental Economics
for helpful comments on earlier drafts. This research was supported by the Office of Science (BER),
U.S. Department of Energy, Grant No. DE-FG02-04ER63927. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by David Popp and Richard G. Newell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Where Does Energy R&D Come From? Examining Crowding Out from Environmentally-Friendly
R&D
David Popp and Richard G. Newell
NBER Working Paper No. 15423
October 2009
JEL No. O33,Q4,Q42,Q55

                                             ABSTRACT

Recent efforts to endogenize technological change in climate policy models demonstrate the importance
of accounting for the opportunity cost of climate R&D investments. Because the social returns to
R&D investments are typically higher than the social returns to other types of investment, any new
climate mitigation R&D that comes at the expense of other R&D investment may dampen the overall
gains from induced technological change. Unfortunately, there has been little empirical work to guide
modelers as to the potential magnitude of such crowding out effects. This paper considers both the
private and social opportunity costs of climate R&D. Addressing private costs, we ask whether an
increase in climate R&D represents new R&D spending, or whether some (or all) of the additional
climate R&D comes at the expense of other R&D. Addressing social costs, we use patent citations
to compare the social value of alternative energy research to other types of R&D that may be crowded
out. Beginning at the industry level, we find some evidence of crowding out in sectors active in energy
R&D, but not in sectors that do not perform energy R&D. This suggests that funds for energy R&D
do not come from other sectors, but may come from a redistribution of research funds in sectors that
are likely to perform energy R&D. Given this, we proceed with a detailed look at climate R&D in
two sectors – alternative energy and automotive manufacturing. Linking patent data and financial
data by firm, we ask whether an increase in alternative energy patents leads to a decrease in other types
of patenting activity. We find crowding out for alternative energy firms, but no evidence of crowding
out for automotive firms. Finally, we use patent citation data to compare the social value of alternative
energy patents to other patents by these firms. Alternative energy patents are cited more frequently,
and by a wider range of other technologies, than other patents by these firms, suggesting that their
social value is higher.


David Popp
Associate Professor of Public Administration
Syracuse University
The Maxwell School
426 Eggers
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
and NBER
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu

Richard G. Newell
Nicholas School of the Environment
Duke University
Box 90227
Durham, NC 27708
richard.newell@duke.edu
       Throughout the world, proposals to reduce carbon emissions include increased research

and development (R&D) funding (de Coninck et al 2008; Newell 2007). Both a 1997 report

from the President’s Committee of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) and a 2004

report from the bipartisan National Commission on Energy Policy recommended doubling U.S.

government energy R&D spending. Others advocate increases by a factor of five or ten, likening

the need for new energy technologies to the Manhattan Project’s efforts to create a nuclear

weapon (Kammen & Nemet, 2005). Such proposals raise two concerns. First, R&D subsidies

will likely have little effect unless accompanied by policies requiring significant emissions

reductions. Second, dramatic increases in energy R&D may come at a high cost, as these

research efforts may draw away research funding and scientists from other productive sectors

(Popp, 2006a, Yang & Oppenheimer, 2007, Schneider & Goulder, 1997). This paper focuses on

the second of these concerns, by asking whether new energy R&D efforts crowd out other types

of R&D spending.

       Recent efforts to endogenize technological change in Integrated Assessment (IA) models

of climate policy highlight the need to properly account for the opportunity cost of

environmental R&D investments. Because the social returns to R&D investments are typically

higher than the social returns to other types of investment, any new environmental R&D that

comes at the expense of other R&D investment will dampen the cost-savings potential of

induced technological change. Popp (2004) shows that assumptions about the magnitude of such

crowding out explain much of the variation in results across IA models with induced

technological change. For example, among models that use R&D expenditures as the means by

which technology improves, Nordhaus (2002) assumes a fixed supply of R&D labor, so that new

energy R&D completely crowds out other R&D. As a result, he finds induced technological
                                                                                               2

change has little effect on welfare or climate policy. In contrast, Buonanno et al. (2003) model

energy R&D and other R&D as complements, so that crowding out does not occur. Their model

finds a stronger effect for policy-induced R&D than other models.

       Note that the question of crowding out is even more important for IA models than it is for

energy R&D policy. In many IA models, such as those cited above, overall technological change

is treated as exogenous. While crowding out may be observed in the data, so that other R&D

falls when energy R&D increases, this may simply be a result of rational, profit maximizing

firms switching R&D resources from opportunities that become less profitable as energy prices

increase (e.g. designing larger, gas-guzzling vehicles) to opportunities that are more profitable

(e.g. designing hybrid vehicles). In such a case, one might not be concerned about crowding out

from the perspective of a policy maker increasing spending on energy R&D – in fact, such

crowding out may be a desired policy effect. However, in terms of these models, whether or not

it is profitable to reduce R&D on other projects is irrelevant. Since energy R&D is endogenous

in these models, but other R&D is not, R&D resources switched from non-energy to energy

projects will be double-counted unless the reduction in non-energy R&D is accounted for by

reducing the level of autonomous technological change when more energy R&D is induced. That

is, exogenous levels of autonomous technological change in these models should only include

the effects of non-energy R&D. If energy R&D replaces other forms of R&D, the effects of

autonomous technological change must fall.

       Unfortunately, there has been little empirical work addressing the potential magnitude of

such crowding out effects. Related work includes Link (1982), who finds evidence that part of

the measured decline in productivity R&D in the 1970s occurred because more R&D was

directed towards environmental research, whose benefits (e.g. a cleaner environment) were not
                                                                                                                 3

measured in traditional market outcomes. Using macroeconomic data, Nemet and Kamen (2007)

find little evidence of crowding out from federal energy R&D spending. However, in a survey of

Austrian firms, Roediger-Schluga (2003) finds most firms cancelled or postponed other R&D

projects in order to increase environmental R&D after passage of new volatile organic compound

standards.1 This paper addresses the crowding out issue directly, focusing on both the private

and social opportunity costs of climate R&D. Here, the key question is whether increases in

energy R&D are likely to represent new R&D spending, or whether some (or all) of the

additional climate R&D comes at the expense of, or crowds out, other R&D. To address the

social opportunity costs of climate R&D, we ask whether the social value of energy R&D differs

from other types of innovation. The paper also contributes to the literature on energy R&D by

providing a detailed description of who performs this R&D.

        We explore the question of private R&D opportunity costs at several levels. First, we

examine the effect of economy-wide increases in energy R&D on total R&D spending at the

industry level in order to investigate whether investment dollars flowing to energy-related

research are coming at the expense of overall R&D in specific sectors. While this first question

addresses flows across sectors, it does not tell us whether and how research activity changes

within individual firms as energy R&D activities increase. To address this second question, we

use patent data to examine changes in the research portfolios of companies actively performing

energy R&D. New climate R&D undertaken by firms will crowd out other R&D if firms are

financially constrained. Several papers have examined factors determining firm-level R&D

financing and conclude that financial constraints are often present. These results vary by country

(e.g., financial constraints appear more binding in the U.S. and U.K. than in France and


1
 In a related vein, several authors have asked whether increases in defense R&D spending crowds out other R&D.
Examples include Morales-Ramos (2002), Buck et al. (1993), and Mueller and Atesoglu (1993).
                                                                                                                  4

Germany) and by firm size (financial constraints are more binding for smaller firms).2

Moreover, Lach & Schankerman (1988) show that firms tend to smooth R&D investment over

time, suggesting that there are large adjustment costs to changing the level of R&D within a firm.

However, such studies have typically used aggregate industry or firm-level R&D data. Thus,

they are unable to distinguish between types of R&D performed. In this paper, we combine

firm-level financial data taken from the Compustat database of publicly traded firms, with patent

records for the same firms. We use patent classifications to separately identify the results of

energy research projects from other research. Using these data, we can investigate whether

increases in energy patents crowd out other patenting activity at the firm level.

        As we find some evidence of crowding out within sectors, we conclude by considering

the social value of research by energy firms. Using patent citation data as a measure of the social

value of innovations, we ask whether energy patents are more valuable than other innovations.

While we do find evidence that energy R&D patents are more valuable, they do not appear to be

more valuable than the patents most likely to be crowded out by an increase in energy R&D.



I. Crowding Out Across Sectors

        We begin by looking at the effect of energy R&D spending on overall R&D activity at

the sectoral level. Here, we are interested in whether R&D flows across sectors when energy

R&D levels change, so that there is a net draw on R&D away from specific sectors. For this, we

use R&D data from the National Science Foundation Survey of Industrial Research and

Development. Defining IRDi,t as company-financed R&D performed in industry i at time t, ERDt


2
  Recent papers on R&D financing constraints include Hall et al. (1999), who find stronger financial constraints in
the U.S. than in Japan and France; Harhoff (1998), who finds weaker constraints in Germany, with smaller firms
most affected; and Bougheas, Görg, & Strobl (2003), who find evidence of financial constraints in Irish firms. Hall
(2002) provides a review of this literature on firm-level financing of R&D.
                                                                                                                       5

as the level of total company-financed energy R&D spending in year t, FEDRDt as federally-

funded R&D performed by industry,3 and Yi,t as value added in industry i at time t, we propose

the following relationship:

(1)               IRDi,t = f(IRDi,t-1, Yi,t-1, FEDRDt-1, ERDt).

We include the lagged dependent variable to allow for gradual adjustment of R&D in response to

changing conditions.              Standard errors are corrected for both autocorrelation and

heteroskedasticity.

         In this equation, energy R&D is endogenous, as both it and total sectoral-level R&D are

influenced by factors such as energy prices.                     Lagged industry-performed R&D is also

endogenous. Thus, we use an instrumental variables approach, using lagged values of the other

independent variables, total company-financed energy R&D spending in year t-2 (ERDt-2), the

price of energy,4 gross domestic product, defense spending, and lagged federal energy R&D

spending as instruments.5

         One limitation to the above analysis is that industry-level energy R&D data are not

available for all industries.          Although published energy R&D data include industry-level

breakdowns, there are many missing observations in these data. This is particularly true in

industries that do not perform much energy R&D. Thus, in this regression we are only able to

include economy-wide energy R&D financed and performed by industry. This allows us to

focus on crowding out across sectors. That is, as the total level of energy R&D spending goes


3
  Unfortunately, there are several missing observations in the industry-level data for federally-funded R&D
performed by industry, so that we can only include aggregate levels of government-funded R&D.
4
  Energy price data come from the US Energy Information Administration, and are the consumption-weighted
average price for primary energy and retail electricity in the four end-use sectors (residential, commercial, industrial,
and transportation).
5
  Because of the large share of R&D spending that goes to defense, particularly during the 1980s, Lichtenberg
(1987) finds a negative relationship between defense spending and the share of R&D going to energy. Based on
this, we include defense R&D as an instrumental variable.
                                                                                                                     6

up, do R&D resources flow from non-energy sectors to those doing more energy R&D? Figure 1

shows the trends in this variable, for both company-financed and federal-government financed

energy R&D performed by industry.

           Our strategy for identifying crowding out across industries is to see how changes in the

overall level of energy R&D spending affect company R&D performance at the industry-level.

However, because we have total industry-level R&D on the left-hand side, but economy-wide

energy R&D on the right-hand side, our dependent variable includes energy R&D financed by

that industry. Since our dependent variable will, in some cases, include energy R&D for that

industry, careful interpretation of the coefficient on overall energy R&D is needed. A coefficient

of 0 suggests that R&D in that industry is not affected by increases in overall energy R&D.

Whether no effect on total industry-level R&D should be considered crowding out depends on

the ex ante level of energy R&D in the industry. In industries that perform a significant amount

of energy R&D, finding no increase in industry-wide R&D when energy R&D increases suggests

the industry has cut back on other types of R&D. However, a coefficient of 0 in an industry that

does not perform energy R&D, such as the food industry, suggests that crowding out is not a

problem. For these industries, we would be concerned about crowding out only if the coefficient

on energy R&D was negative – implying that an economy-wide increase in energy R&D took

R&D resources away from this industry.

           Thus, we divide our sample of industries into two groups. We begin by looking at the

percentage of R&D devoted to energy R&D in years for which data are available. We then

separately consider industries for which spent, on average, 5% or more of total R&D

expenditures on energy R&D and those which spent less than 5% on energy R&D.6 Because of


6
    For sensitivity analysis, we also present results using cutoffs of 1% and 10% for energy-R&D intensive industries.
                                                                                                  7

data availability, we look at two samples. Using data from 1983-1997, we are able to include 16

industries. However, this does not allow us to look at crowding out during the energy crisis of

the 1970s, when energy R&D levels were highest. Thus, we also look at a subsample of 7

industries that have data available from 1973-1997. Tables 1 and 2 list the industries in the

larger and smaller samples, respectively, along with descriptive data on the key industry

variables. The tables also show the average percentage of R&D devoted to energy within each

sector, for the years in which industry-level detail is available. In each table, the industries are

sorted by this percentage. Finally, note that the last two lines of each table present summary

statistics for all industries with more than or less than five percent of R&D devoted to energy. In

both samples, energy intensive industries are larger. These include industries such as petroleum

refining and transportation equipment.

       We start with the results for the larger sample, which begins in 1983. Table 3 presents

these results. Panel A presents results for our preferred model. The first two columns present

results for industries that perform little energy R&D. Here, we see no evidence of crowding out.

The insignificant coefficient on economy-wide private energy R&D spending suggests that

increases in energy R&D elsewhere in the economy have no effect on overall R&D spending in

these specific industries. This result holds using either a 1% or 5% cut-off for energy-R&D

intensive industries. Thus, we find that increases in energy R&D spending do not appear to

crowd out R&D in unrelated sectors.

       Results for other variables are generally as expected. The model suggests that R&D

adjusts gradually, as the coefficient on lagged company R&D spending is significant and close to

1. Industry value added increases R&D, although the magnitude of this effect is small. Note

from Table 1 that several of the industries in the low energy R&D group are industries with low
                                                                                                  8

overall R&D intensities, which might explain this low magnitude. Finally, the negative sign on

federal R&D suggests crowding out from government R&D, although this coefficient is

insignificant for low energy R&D industries.

        For industries that spend 5% or more of their R&D budget on energy R&D, the results

are similar, but the interpretation is different. In columns 3 and 4, we see a coefficient on energy

R&D that is not statistically different from zero. Since these are industries that perform energy

R&D, the null hypothesis of no crowding out would be that the coefficient on energy R&D

equals 1. That is, every dollar spent on energy R&D should be new spending, so that total R&D

in the industry increases.    That null hypothesis is clearly rejected in all cases, suggesting

crowding out within those sectors that perform energy R&D. As before, the coefficients on other

variables appear reasonable. Of particular interest here is the coefficient on value added of about

0.02. This is consistent with the fact that just over two percent of GDP is devoted to energy

R&D. We also see evidence for a small crowding out effect from federal R&D that is now

statistically significant.

        One concern is the negative coefficient on energy R&D in column 4. One issue may be

endogeneity, particularly if other shocks to the economy, such as higher energy prices, affect

industry value added. To address this, we remove one outlier industry: petroleum refining and

extraction. Over 50% of R&D goes to energy in this sector, compared to 9% in the next highest

sector. Without petroleum, the results are similar, but the coefficient on energy R&D is now

positive. Still, we can reject the null hypothesis that this coefficient equals 1, suggesting some

crowding out in these industries.

        A second potential concern with these results is that we have a weak instruments

problem. While our instruments our valid, as suggested by the high p-values for Hansen’s J-
                                                                                                  9

statistic (Baum et al. 2007), the Wald F statistic based on the Kleibergen-Paap rk statistic is less

than the “rule of thumb” of 10, suggesting weak instruments (Staiger and Stock, 1997; Baum et

al., 2007). This results from the poor fit between our instruments and the lagged dependent

variable. For each regression, the F-stat for the first-stage regression of the lagged dependent

variable is less than 10, whereas the F-stat for the first-stage regression of the energy R&D

variable is consistently much larger than 10. To address this, panel B of Table 3 presents an

alternative estimation strategy, in which the three-year lag of the dependent variable is also used

as an instrument. While one might expect the three-year lag to be endogenous, particularly if

adjustment is gradual, Hansen’s J-statistic still confirms the validity of our selected instruments.

Moreover, for three of our specifications, the Wald F statistic based on the Kleibergen-Paap rk

statistic is now greater than 10, and we reject the null hypothesis that the model is

underidentified, at least at the 10 percent level, for each specification. Most importantly, the

main results do not change. We still see no evidence of crowding out in low energy R&D

industries, and evidence suggestive of crowding out in high-energy R&D industries.

       Turning in Table 4 to the sample of 7 industries with data from 1973-1998, we find

similar results. Because of the larger amount of energy R&D performed during the 1970s, here

we use 5% and 10% as cutoffs for energy R&D intensity, as none of the industries in this sample

spend less than one percent of R&D on energy research. Once again, in low energy R&D

industries, there is no measurable crowding out effect: Moreover, the value of other coefficients,

such as value added, is also consistent with expectations. In high energy R&D industries, we

again get a negative effect on total energy R&D. Here, omitting petroleum extraction and

refining does not change the result. Also as before, the results do not change when the three-year

lag of the dependent variable is used as an additional instrument.
                                                                                                10

        The results of these regressions suggest that, during past spikes in energy research

activity, research funding did not flow from non-energy R&D sectors to sectors performing

R&D. While the results raise the possibility of crowding out within these energy R&D sectors –

that is, that new energy R&D in these sectors comes at the expense of other R&D in these

sectors, these results appear less certain. For example, the conclusions about crowding out in

these sectors do not change as the cutoff used to define high energy R&D sectors changes. This

poses problems for interpretation. Consider the chemical industry, which spends 3.2% of its

R&D on energy-related research. Using the one percent cutoff in table 3 would suggest that the

chemical industry experiences crowding out when energy research increases. However, using a

five percent cutoff would suggest that it does not.

        A final concern with the regressions for high energy R&D industries is that all energy

R&D spending does not go to a single industry. For example, if one new dollar of energy R&D

is equally shared among four industries, the appropriate test for crowding out would be whether

the coefficient on energy R&D equals 0.25. Using the average share of energy R&D assigned to

industry i for years for which industry-level energy R&D data are available, we find that this

ranges from 1.5% for primary metals to 27% for petroleum refining. Thus, while we reject the

null hypothesis that the coefficient on energy R&D is 1 in these models, in most cases we cannot

reject the null hypothesis that the coefficient is 0.27 – that is, that 27% of the total energy R&D

is going to industry i.

        Given this concern, Table 5 presents one additional set of regressions for high-energy

R&D industries. Here, we replace the economy-wide level of energy R&D with an estimated

value for each industry, found by multiplying the economy-wide energy R&D data by the

average share of energy R&D going to that industry from years in which industry-specific data
                                                                                                               11

are available. These results are suggestive of crowding out, but are very imprecise.7 Here, the

null hypothesis of no crowding out again implies that the coefficient on energy R&D be one –

that all new energy R&D is new R&D. Except for the 1983-1997 data without refineries, we

reject this null hypothesis. However, the negative signs on these coefficients are troubling

(although not significant), as are the large magnitudes. At best, we can only say that the results

for industries that perform energy R&D are ambiguous, and await better data. Given this

ambiguity, we turn next to firm-level patent data, to take a closer look at the changes occurring

within firms as energy R&D increases.



II. Crowding Out Within Sectors

        To address the question of crowding out within sectors, we look at the research decisions

made by individual firms. In principle, we would like to know if increases in energy R&D at the

firm level crowd out other types of R&D. Unfortunately, R&D data are not available at the firm

level with this level of detail. Instead, we use patents as a proxy for energy and other R&D.8

Using patent data, we classify firm research outcomes as energy-related or not. We then ask

whether increases in energy-related research lead to decreases in other research.

        Our model specification is purposely sparse.               Define OPATi,t as non-energy patents

assigned to firm i, with an application year of t. Similarly, EPATi,t represents energy patents

from these same firms. Xi,t represents a vector of firm-specific control variables, such as capital,

sales, or debt, to control for firm size. We estimate an equation of the form:


7
  Table 5 is equivalent to panel A of Tables 3 and 4. Results do not change when using R&Di,t-3 as an instrument,
except for the case without refineries between 1973-1997. However, for that case, Hansen’s J test shows that the
instruments are invalid. Results are available from the authors upon request.
8
  Griliches (1990) shows that patents, sorted by their year of application, are strongly correlated with R&D
expenditures, and thus make a good proxy for R&D spending. For a discussion of other applications of patent data
in environmental economics, see Popp (2005).
                                                                                                12

(2)                         OPATi,t = f(OPATi,t-1, EPATi,t, Xi,t, ai, bt),

where ai and bt represent firm and year fixed-effects. Note that because we are using patents as a

proxy for R&D spending, we do not include R&D spending as a control variable. While one

would expect increases in R&D to increase patenting activity, it does not allow us to determine

whether one type of R&D has replaced the other. We include year effects to allow for changes

in patent policy that change the propensity to patent among all inventors, and to control for

truncation problems in the last years of our data. Because not all patent applications are made

public, we obtain the application years of our patents from the final granted patent publication.

We have data on patents granted through 2002. Since some patent applications filed in the late

1990s and early 2000s would still have been pending in 2002, counts of patent applications in

these years will be too low. As such, we restrict our analysis to patent applications filed between

1970 and 1999. Year dummies correct for any remaining truncation problem.



A. Data

       We examine data for two types of energy innovations. First, we look at patents aimed at

new energy technologies. These include renewable technologies such as wind and solar power,

as well as new sources that may use fossil fuels, such as fuel cells and coal liquefaction. This

sample includes firms from a broad cross-section of industries. To focus more closely on a

specific industry, we also look at new technologies in the automotive sector. Here, we include

fuel cells and hybrid vehicles, as well as innovations designed to improve the fuel economy of

internal combustion engines.

       Our patent data comes from two sources. First, we identify relevant energy patents using

the Delphion patent database, using a combination of patent classification codes and, in the case
                                                                                                                   13

of energy efficiency patents, appropriate keywords.9                   Appendix A shows the technologies

included in our paper, along with the relevant search strategies for each. To identify all patents

granted to firms working in these fields, we use the NBER patent database (Hall, Jaffe, &

Trajtenberg, 2001). Based on the firm information available in the NBER database, this leaves

us with a sample of patents granted from 1971-2002.10

         From this, we calculated the total number of patents granted to each firm in our sample,

along with the number of energy patents. We eliminated firms where nearly all patents are

energy patents, such as International Fuel Cells or Ballard Power Systems (a fuel cell

manufacturer).11 We also eliminated firms with less than 1.5% of their patents in one of our

energy categories. This eliminates large, diversified firms such as General Electric and some

chemical companies. In both cases, the percentage of energy patents is so small that one would

not expect to identify any reasonable relationship between energy and other patents. For the

remaining firms, we searched Compustat to identify firm-specific variables. Our firm-specific

variables, all measured in billions of 2000 dollars, are capital (Compustat item #8: Property,

Plant, and Equipment – Total (Net)), net sales (Compustat item #18), and debt (Compustat item

#9). Using only firms with greater than 1.5% of their patents in either technology area, this

leaves us with a sample of 13 firms for automotive technology and 31 firms for alternative

energy. Table 6 displays, by firm, average values for each of the variables in our dataset.

         To get a sense of who patents in these technology areas, Tables 7 and 8 present the top

patent assignees by field. Table 7 lists the top 20 assignees for each field. Note that these two

9
  Available at www.delphion.com.
10
   The NBER database limits us to patents granted from 1968, as firm identifiers are not available before that date.
Similarly, the NBER data currently ends in 2002. However, we only use patents granted from 1971 because the
Delphion database only includes abstracts for keyword searching on patents beginning in 1971.
11
   Our initial cutoff for this was firms with more than 2/3 of their patents pertaining to energy. However, once we
search for financial data on the remaining firms, no firm with more than 29% of their patents pertaining to energy
remain in the dataset.
                                                                                                 14

lists are dominated by large firms with just a few percent of their total patents falling in these

categories. Only a few predominately energy companies, such as Ballard Power Systems and

International Fuel Cells Corporation, appear in the top 20. For each technology area, Table 8

lists the top 20 firms having the greatest percentage of their patents falling in one of these

categories. Here, we only include firms with 10 or more patents in these areas, as there are

hundreds of firms that have only one relevant energy patent and no other patents. There are

many companies specializing in the alternative energy field, as relevant energy patents comprise

70% or more of the total patent portfolio for each of the firms in the top 20. In contrast, the top

20 automotive energy firms include companies for which energy patents comprise just 16% or

more of their patent portfolio.

       In both cases, the distribution of assignees is highly skewed. Not counting patents

assigned to individuals, there are 3,059 unique patent assignees in the alternative energy field. Of

these, 1,935 have just one alternative energy patent. Only 17% of alternative energy patents are

assigned to the top 20 assignees (not counting individually assigned patents). There are 18,107

total patents in this field. The companies included in our regression have 2,011 of these, or 11

percent. For these 32 firms, energy patents represent 3.6 percent of their total patenting activity.

For automotive technologies, there are 1,438 unique patent assignees for 9,895 total patents. Of

these, 813 have just one automotive energy patent. Larger firms play a more important role here,

as 32 percent of patents are assigned to the top 20 assignees (again, not counting individually

assigned patents). The companies included in our regression have 1,269 of these, or 13 percent.

Energy patents represent 3.9 percent of total patenting activity for these 14 firms.

       Finally, Figures 2 and 3 show energy and non-energy patents for the firms in our

alternative energy and automotive energy regressions, respectively. In each, patents are sorted
                                                                                               15

by the year of application. The number of energy patent applications per year is on the left y-

axis, and the number of non-energy patent applications per year is on the right y- axis. Note that

alternative energy patents increase during the energy crises of the 1970s. Afterwards, energy

patents decline, and non-energy patents increase, suggesting possible crowding out.           For

automotive energy patents, the bulk of applications occur more recently, as a result of research

on fuel cell and hybrid vehicles. Until this recent spike, both energy and non-energy patents

tended to move together. The figure suggests crowding out may occur at the end of the sample.



B. Results

       Tables 9 through 12 present results for alternative energy patents and automotive energy

patents, respectively. In each case, the null hypothesis is that energy patents do not crowd out

other patents, which we fail to reject unless the coefficient on energy patents is significantly

different from zero. Tables 9 and 11 include six specifications – three including year dummies,

and three that replace the year dummies with a time trend. Using the time trend provides

additional degrees of freedom, and allows us to use energy prices as an additional instrument for

energy patents. However, the trend may fail to capture discrete changes in patent policy, nor any

remaining truncation bias in our data. To allow for the possibility of gradual adjustments, we

present specifications with a lagged dependent variable. In these models, both the lagged

dependent variable and energy patents are endogenous. We use the first two lagged values of the

exogenous dependent variables (sales, debt, and capital, as well as the time dummies or trend) as

instruments, along with second-year lagged values of energy patents. In addition, we use current

and lagged energy prices as instruments in the model using a time trend. Tables 10 and 12

present additional sensitivity analysis to assess the validity of our instruments. All regressions
                                                                                                                   16

use GMM estimation with firm fixed effects.                       Standard errors are corrected for both

autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity.

         We look first at the results for alternative energy technologies. The first three columns of

Table 9 present results of the model with year dummies, and the last three present results of the

model with a time trend. The evidence for crowding out is mixed. In each model, the coefficient

on energy patents is negative, and slightly larger than 1, suggesting that a new energy patent

fully crowds out a non-energy patent. However, these coefficients are only significant in column

(1), which uses year dummies and a full set of controls. As expected the effect of sales is

positive, but is not significant in the model including capital and debt.12 The effect of capital and

debt is insignificant. Lagged other patents has a positive coefficient less than one, suggesting a

gradual adjustment process.

         The positive effect of sales on patenting is also suggestive of crowding out. Crowding

out is most likely to occur when firms face financial constraints, so that they are unable to take

advantage of all profitable research opportunities. In the existing literature on R&D financing,

tests of financial constraints are indirect (see, for example, Hall 2002). Intuition about these tests

can be gained by considering what firms choose to do with new cash flow. If firms choose to

invest new cash flow in additional R&D, this suggests that the firm faced research opportunities

that it had not taken advantage of due to financial constraints. That increased revenues from

sales leads to more patenting suggests that these alternative energy firms may face R&D

financing constraints.13



12
   The model uses lagged sales, on the assumption that increased revenues from new sales are used to fund R&D in
the following year.
13
   We choose not to overemphasize this result, as the ideal measure of cash flow would be net profits. In results not
reported here, we found net profits to consistently have an insignificant effect on other patenting. As these results
also magnify the weak instruments problem noted below, we omit profits from the models in this paper.
                                                                                                    17

           Unfortunately, regression diagnostics suggest that our instrumental variables may not be

sufficient. The fit of the model is generally good, with R2 statistics near 0.6. As shown by the p-

value from Hansen’s J statistic presented below the estimates, we cannot reject the null

hypothesis that the instruments are valid.                   However, the Wald F statistic based on the

Kleibergen-Paap rk statistic is less than the “rule of thumb” of 10, suggesting weak instruments

(Staiger and Stock, 1997; Baum et al., 2007).

           Further exploration suggests that the weak instruments problem comes from the lagged

dependent variable. For instance, in column (1), the F-statistic for the first-stage equation for

lagged other patents is just 2.69, where as it is 13.03 for the first-stage equation for energy

patents. Given this, Table 10 shows results from two additional specifications.14 First, in

columns (2) and (5) we use 3-year lagged Other Patents as an additional instrument. While one

might expect this to be endogenous, particularly if the adjustment process is slow, we still do not

reject the null hypothesis that the instruments are valid using Hansen’s J-statistic. As would be

expected, the F-statistic for our instruments now improves substantially. Most importantly, this

does not change our crowding out result, which is still significant when using a complete set of

year dummies. The magnitude of the adjustment parameter falls slightly, but is still significant.

Moreover, with better instruments, the effect of sales is now significant in both columns (2) and

(5). Finally, columns (3) and (6) present results of a model that excludes the lagged dependent

variable. As expected, the F-statistic now suggests that our instruments for energy patents are

sufficient. However, our estimates are slightly less precise, and the R2 statistics are much lower

without the lagged dependent variable. Moreover, while the coefficient on energy patents is still




14
     To conserve space, we focus on the model with all three controls for firm characteristics.
                                                                                                                     18

negative, it is now insignificant. Given the strong significance of the lagged dependent variable,

dropping it from the model provides unsatisfactory results.

         The results for automotive energy technologies (Table 11) are less satisfying. As noted

in the previous section, there are fewer firms in this dataset, leaving us with only 254

observations, compared to 608 for the alternative energy regressions. As a result, although the

signs of our estimated coefficients are as expected, only capital is statistically significant at even

the 10 percent level.15         As before, we have a weak instruments problem.                       Moreover, the

Kleibergen-Paap rk statistic (2006) suggests that the model is unidentified except when sales are

the only dependent variable. As shown in Table 12, using the three-year lag of the dependent

variable partially addresses the weak instruments problem, although the F-statistic for the

instruments is still less than 10. However, the improved fit of the first stage regressions results

in statistical significance for both capital and the lagged dependent variable. As before, dropping

the lagged dependent variable completely leads to less satisfactory results. Overall, crowding

out seems to be less of a problem for the automotive industry. While this may be due to the

larger size of these firms, given our smaller sample size, we have less confidence in this result

than for our results using alternative energy patents.



C. What is Crowded Out?

         Given the evidence of crowding out from alternative energy innovations, we take a closer

look at innovations in a subset of our sample to see what might be lost when alternative energy

innovation increases. To be able to categorize these other patents in greater detail, we limit our

15
   Following the discussion of financial constraints above, it is somewhat comforting that both energy patents and
sales have no effect on other patents. Also, the automotive firms in our sample are larger than the alternative energy
firms, with an average value of capital two billion dollars higher, and average assets that are more than double those
of the alternative energy firms. One would expect larger firms to be less likely to face financial constraints, and thus
less likely to suffer from crowding out of R&D resources.
                                                                                                      19

focus to the 12 firms from our alternative energy sample that are energy refinery companies.16

Using patent classifications, we categorize all of the patents from these 12 firms into one of 7

technology groups: alternative energy, coal-based fuels, environmental, refining, chemistry,

drilling wells, and other technologies. Alternative energy patents include traditional renewable

sources such as wind, solar, and geothermal. Coal-based fuels include coal gasification and coal

liquefaction patents.     In the regression analysis of the previous section, both of these are

categorized as alternative energy patents. Among the refineries, these coal-based fuels are an

important component of alternative energy innovation, comprising two-third of the alternative

energy patents for these firms. Thus, we consider these separately from other alternative energy

patents. Environmental patents pertain to pollution control, and include techniques for cleaning

up oil spills, as well as isomerization refining techniques developed as part of the phase-out of

lead from gasoline and reformulated fuels. Appendix B presents a complete list of the patent

classifications in each technology group. Figure 4 shows trends in these seven groups over time.

        Table 13 shows the correlation between patent applications per year in each category.17

Because overall patent counts move together over time (for instance, as a result of changing firm

revenues), we look at both correlations between counts of patents in each group, as well as

correlations between the percentage of each year’s patents belonging to each group. Using raw

patent counts, all correlations are positive. However, the two smallest correlations are between

alternative energy and refining, and coal-based fuels and refining. The correlations between

either alternative fuels or coal-based fuels and environmental patents are also small. Using

correlations between the percentage of patents in each category per year, we now see several

negative correlations. This is expected, since the sum of percentages in each year must sum to
16
   These firms are Amoco, Atlantic Richfield, Chevron, Conoco, ExxonMobil, Gulf, Kerr-McGee, Mobil,
Occidental, Standard Oil, Texaco, and Tosco.
17
   We use patents from 1973-1999, as these are the years appearing in the regression analysis.
                                                                                                              20

100. Here, the correlation between alternative energy patents and refining patents is strongly

negative, at -0.70. The same holds true for the correlation between coal-based fuels and refining.

The correlation between alternative energy and pollution control innovations is also negative, but

its magnitude is much smaller, at -0.39. Finally, to focus on the period where crowding out is

most likely, panels C and D of Table 13 repeat the analysis for only those patents from 1973-

1987. As shown in Figure 4, this covers the period in which alternative energy innovation

increased and then returned to pre-energy crisis levels. While refinery patents still are most

likely to be crowded out, we also see evidence of crowding out for patents pertaining to drilling

wells. The correlation between the number of alternative energy patents and wells patents is

0.30, and the correlation between the percentages of these patents is -0.65.                        While only

suggestive, these correlations provide evidence that much of what is crowded out from increased

alternative energy research are innovations on refining and drilling wells, both of which would

increase production of fossil fuels. Thus, while it is important for such crowding out to be

accounted for in integrated assessment models, these results also suggest that one effect of

policies designed to increase alternative energy R&D is to lower incentives for R&D on

traditional fossil fuel energy sources.



III. The Social Value of Energy Innovations

        While the analysis of the preceding section provides some evidence as to the types of

research that are crowded out, it does not tell us anything about the social value of this research.

Economists consistently find that the social returns to research are higher than a firm’s private

returns.18 This deviation results from knowledge spillovers due to the public-good nature of new


18
  See, for example, Mansfield (1977, 1996), Pakes (1985), Jaffe (1986), Hall (1996), and Jones and Williams
(1998).
                                                                                                             21

knowledge. A successful innovator will capture some rewards, but those rewards will always be

only a fraction—and sometimes a very small fraction—of the overall benefits to society of the

innovation. Hence innovation creates positive externalities in the form of knowledge spillovers

for other firms and consumers.

        If the social returns to new alternative energy R&D are no different from the social

returns to the R&D that is crowded out, then simply measuring the magnitude of crowding out is

sufficient. However, if these social returns differ, the ultimate economic effect of crowding out

will be miscalculated unless these differences are accounted for. A priori, there are two reasons

to expect that alternative energy research may have a greater social value than other research.

First, comparatively less research has been done on alternative energy than other fields,

particularly at the beginning of our sample. As a result, alternative energy starts from a lower

knowledge base, leading to greater opportunities for big breakthroughs and positive spillovers

than more mature technologies. Second, energy technologies may have influence in many

sectors, raising the possibility that innovations will have the characteristics of General Purpose

Technologies (GPT) (see, for example, Helpman, 1998).

        We use two measures of social value. Both make use of patent citation data. Many

researchers have used patent citations as an indicator of the value of a patent.19 First, we

consider the number of patent citations received by each patent in our sample. We assume more

frequently cited patents have more value to society, as they provide the building blocks to a

larger number of future innovations. Second, we use a measure of patent generality described in

Hall et al. (2001). Generality asks whether a patent is cited by other patents from many different

technological fields, or just by other similar patents. The index ranges from 0-1, with higher


19
  See, for example, Lanjouw & Schankerman (2004) Popp (2006b), and the papers cited in Jaffe & Trajtenberg
(2002).
                                                                                                 22

values representing more general patents. More formally, generality is a Herfindahl index

defined as

                                                           ni
(3)                                   Generality i = 1 − ∑ s ij2
                                                            j



where sij denotes the percentage of citations received by patent i from patents in patent class j,

out of a total of ni patent classes. Our assumption is that more general patents provide more

social value, as they provide building blocks to innovations in more sectors of the economy.

       Our analysis makes use of the patents from the previous section. Citation data come from

the NBER patent database, which includes all citations made by patents granted between 1975

and 2002. Based on this, we restrict our analysis to patents with application years between 1975-

1999. Table 14 provides descriptive data on generality and citations received by both energy and

non-energy patents in our database. In addition, a more detailed breakdown is provided for the

seven technology groups introduced for refineries in the previous section. The descriptive data

suggests that alternative energy patents are cited more frequently, and are more general, than

other patents.

       However, simply looking at descriptive data does not tell the whole story, as citation

patterns vary over time, as well as across technologies.           For example, the number of

opportunities to be cited is important. Patents are likely to receive more citations if there are

more patents in the years immediately following publication. Moreover, older patents, such as

the bulk of alternative energy patents, have had more chances to be cited than more recent

patents. In addition, more recently granted patents are more likely to cite previous patents, as a

result of both computerized data bases making searching for relevant patents easier, as well as

increasing legal pressure to include all relevant citations in the final patent. Regression analysis
                                                                                                   23

allows us to control for such features, using fixed effects for patent application year to control for

the number of citing opportunities that follow.

       For both citations and generality, our regression takes the following form. Define yi as

the variable of interest – either the subsequent citations received by patent i, or the generality

index of patent i. Dummy variables indicate whether or not the patent is assigned to a firm from

our alternative energy sample or our automotive sample, and whether or not the patent is an

alternative energy or automotive energy patent. For non-energy patents, we also include a

dummy variable for the general technology type, based on the classification system used in the

NBER patent database. This accounts for the general finding that some fields are more active

than others, and thus more likely to receive citations. Our regression becomes:

(4)    yi = f(Alternative Energy Dummy, Automotive Energy Dummy, Alternative Energy Firm

              Dummy, Technology Dummy, year fixed effects)

As many patents are never cited, we use a generalized negative binomial regression for the

citation analysis, allowing the overdispersion parameter to differ for automotive and alternative

energy firms. Results are reported as eβ, so that they can be interpreted as the likelihood of

citation relative to a base case patent, a non-energy patent belonging to an automotive firm.

Because generality is bounded by 0 and 1, we use a Tobit regression to examine whether energy

patents are more general than other patents assigned to the firms in our sample. We do a similar

analysis of refinery patents, using only dummies for the seven technology groups and year fixed

effects. Because refinery patents are most likely to be crowded out, they are the excluded

category.

       Table 15 presents our results. Panel A confirms that both alternative energy patents and

automotive energy patents are more likely to be cited than other patents from these firms.
                                                                                                   24

Interestingly, the social value of all patents from the energy companies is higher, as patents from

these firms are 88 percent more likely to be cited than those from automotive firms. Alternative

energy patents from these firms an additional 15 percent more likely to be cited. Automotive

energy patents are 53 percent more likely to be cited than non-energy patents from these firms.

Similarly, as shown in the last column, both alternative energy patents and automotive energy

patents are more general than other patents from these firms.

       Panel B shows the results using only patents from the 12 energy refineries, allowing us to

compare the value of alternative energy patents to those most likely to be crowded out. Our

excluded category is refining patents. While alternative energy patents are more general than

refining patents, suggesting that they do impact more areas of the economy than the innovations

they replace, their social value is not much higher. These patents are 7 percent more likely to be

cited, but the result is not statistically significant. Thus, while the crowding out effect within the

refining sector appears to have a positive environmental effect, by crowding out research

designed to enhance the production of fossil fuels, the value of these innovations to future

researchers is no different than the value of the research that is crowded out.



IV. Discussion

       As calls for increased energy R&D strengthen, it is important to know where funding for

these efforts will come from. In particular, to the extent that new energy R&D funding crowds

out other R&D efforts, the social benefits to new energy R&D will be dampened. Using both

industry and firm-level data from the United States, this paper takes a first look at the source of

energy R&D. Using industry data, we find little evidence of crowding out across sectors.

Economy wide increases in energy R&D do not appear to draw R&D resources away from those
                                                                                                25

industries that are not actively involved in energy research, mitigating the concern that new

energy R&D programs will draw resources away from other innovative sectors of the economy.

       Looking within sectors that do perform significant energy R&D, the results are mixed.

Industry-level regressions suggest that within-sector crowding out may be an issue, as increases

in energy R&D within these industries do not appear to be associated with equivalent increases

in overall R&D within these industries. While better data are needed to substantiate this claim,

the results raise the possibility that firms in these industries move R&D resources from other

areas to support increases in energy R&D. Data limitations make the results difficult to interpret,

however, particularly for firms performing moderate levels of energy R&D. One particular

concern is that our energy R&D variable measures economy-wide energy R&D levels, rather

than industry-specific levels.

       Because of these concerns, we use firm-level patent data to take a closer look at two

types of energy research.        Since we combine these patent data with financial data from

Compustat, our sample is restricted to large, publicly traded firms. Within these firms, we find

evidence of crowding out among companies working on alternative energy technologies –

increases in the number of energy patents assigned to a firm do lead to decreases in other types

of patents by these firms – but not for companies working on automotive technologies. Using

more detailed patent data on refinery companies, we find that alternative energy research most

likely crowded out innovations on refining and wells. This is consistent with the notion that any

apparent crowding out reacts to market incentives – as opportunities for alternative energy

research become more profitable, we would expect research opportunities for traditional fossil

fuels to appear less appealing to firms. Given that the broader sample of energy firms does

appear to face some financing constraints (as shown by the positive effect of sales on patents),
                                                                                                26

we cannot conclude that the observed crowding out is only a result of firms moving resources

from less profitable to more profitable ventures. However, it does suggest that any crowding out

which occurred in this industry had a positive environmental effect, by enhancing greener

technologies at the expense of dirtier ones.

       Finally, we use patent citation data to compare the social value of energy research to

other research by these firms. We find that energy patents are cited more frequently, suggesting

that they provide greater value to future inventors. They are also more general as they are cited

by a larger range of other patents than non-energy innovations. This is consistent with the notion

that energy innovations can have a broad impact on the economy, because of the importance of

energy use throughout the economy. However, confining our analysis to refineries, we find no

difference in the social value of alternative energy patents compared to the refining and wells

patents most likely to be crowded out by alternative energy research.

       Our results have implications both for policy and for integrated assessment modelers.

For policy, a key result is that any crowding out that may occur appears to affect dirty

technologies. Thus, policies enhancing research incentives for green technologies have the

additional desired effect of reducing incentives for research on dirty technologies such as fossil

fuels. To illustrate the importance of this, consider the results of Gerlagh (2008), who presents a

climate model allowing for a choice of carbon-energy producing R&D, carbon-energy saving

R&D, and neutral R&D. Gerlagh simulates the effect of a carbon tax on his model, and finds

that carbon-producing R&D, rather than neutral R&D, is crowded out by induced carbon-energy

saving R&D. As a result, the impact of induced technological change is larger than in other

models with crowding out, with optimal carbon taxes falling by a factor of 2.
                                                                                             27

       For integrated assessment modelers, the results highlight the importance of incorporating

the costs of R&D in the model.         Many integrated assessment models include detailed

descriptions of alternative energy research, but treat other forms of technological change as

exogenous. As this exogenous technological change includes research that may decline when

alternative energy research increases, not adjusting this exogenous rate will double-count gains

from induced technological change, even if the decrease in research results from profit-

maximizing decisions of how to allocate research inputs, rather than crowding out from financial

constraints.
                                                                                              28


References

Baum, C.F., M.E. Schaffer, and S. Stillman (2007), “Enhanced routines for instrumental
      variables/GMM estimation and testing,” Boston College Economics Working Paper No.
      667.
Bougheas, S., Görg, H., & Strobl, E. (2003). Is R&D Financially Constrained? Theory and
      Evidence from Irish Manufacturing. Review of Industrial Organization , 22, 159-174.
Buck, D., K. Hartley, and N. Hooper (1993). Defence Research and Development, Crowding-
      Out and the Peace Dividend. Defence Economics, 4, 161-178
Buonanno, P., Carraro, C., & Galeotti, M. (2003). Endogenous induced technical change and the
      costs of Kyoto. Resource and Energy Economics , 25 (1), 11-34.
de Coninck, H., C. Fischer, R.G. Newell, and T. Ueno. 2008. International technology-oriented
      agreements to address climate change. Energy Policy 36:335-356.
Gerlagh R. (2008), “A Climate-Change Policy Induced Shift from Innovations in Carbon-Energy
       Production to Carbon-Energy Savings”, Energy Economics, 30: 425-448.
Griliches, Z. (1990). Patent Statistics As Economic Indicators: A Survey. Journal of Economic
       Literature , 28 (4), 1661-1707.
Hall, B. H. (2002). The Financing of Research and Development. Oxford Review of Economic
       Policy , 18 (1), 35-51.
Hall, B.H. (1996). The private and social returns to research and development. In Smith and
       Barfield, Technology, R&D and the Economy, Washington, The Brookings Institution
       and American Enterprise Institute, 140-162.
Hall, B. H., Jaffe, A. B., & Trajtenberg, M. (2001). The NBER Patent Citation Database: Data
       File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools. NBER Working Paper #8498 .
Hall, B. H., Mairesse, J., Branstetter, L., & Crepon, B. (1999). Does Cash Flow cause Investment
       and R&D: An Exploration Using Panel Data for French, Japanese, and United States
       Scientific Firms. In D. Audretsch, & R. Thurik (Eds.), Innovation, Industry Evolution,
       and Employment. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Harhoff, D. (1998). Are There Financing Constraints for R&D and Investment in German
       Manufacturing Firms? Annales D'Économie et de Statistique , 49/50, 421-456.
Helpman, E. (ed.) (1998) General Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth. Cambridge,
      MA: MIT Press.
Jaffe, A.B. (1986). Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms'
        Patents, Profits, and Market Value. American Economic Review, 76(5), 984-1001.
Jaffe, A. B., & Trajtenberg, M. (2002). Patents, Citations, & Innovations: A Window on the
        Knowledge Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jones, C and Williams, J. (1998). Measuring the Social Rate of Return to R&D. Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 113(4), 119-35.
                                                                                               29

Kammen, D. M., & Nemet, G. F. (2005). Reversing the Incredible Shrinking Energy R&D
     Budget. Issues in Science and Technology , 22 (1), 84-88.
Kleibergen, F. and R. Paap (2006), “Generlized reduced rank tests using the singluar value
       decomposition,” Journal of Econometrics, 127(1), 97-126.
Lach, S., & Schankerman, M. (1988). Dynamics of R&D and Investment in the Scientific Sector.
       Journal of Political Economy , 97 (4), 880-904.
Lanjouw, J. O., & Schankerman, M. (2004). Patent Quality and Research Productivity:
      Measuring Innovation with Multiple Indicators. Economic Journal , 114 (495), 441-465.
Lichtenberg, F. R. (1987). Changing market opportunities and the structure of R&D investment:
       The case of energy. Energy Economics , 9 (3), 154-158.
Link, A.N. (1982). Productivity growth, environmental regulations and the composition of R&D.
       Bell Journal of Economics, 13(2), 548-554.
Mansfield, E. (1977). Social and Private Rates of Return from Industrial Innovations. Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, 91, 221-240.
Mansfield, E. (1996). Estimating social and private returns from innovationsbased on the
      Advanced Technology Program: Problems and opportunities. NIST GCR 99-780.
      Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology.
Morales-Ramos, E. (2002). Defence R&D Expenditure: The Crowding Out Hypothesis. Defence
      and Peace Economics, 13(5), 365-383
Mueller, M. and H.S. Atesoglu (1993). Defence Spending, Technological Change, and Economic
      Growth in the United States. Defence Economics, 4, 259-269
Nemet, G.F. and D.M. Kammen (2007). U.S. energy research and development: Declining
      investment, increasing need, and the feasibility of expansion. Energy Policy, 35, 746-755.
Newell, R.G (2007). Climate technology research, development, and demonstration: Funding
      sources, institutions, and instruments. Issue Brief 9 in Assessing U.S. Climate Policy
      Options. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.
Nordhaus, W. D. (2002). Modeling induced innovation in climate-change policy. In A. Grübler,
      N. Nakicenovic, & W. D. Nordhaus (Eds.), Technological Change and the Environment
      (pp. 182-209). Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.
Pakes, A. (1985). On patents, R&D, and the stock market rate of return. Journal of Political
       Economy, 93(2), 390-409.
Popp, D. (2004). ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global
      Warming. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management , 48 (1), 742-768.
Popp, D. (2005). Lessons From Patents: Using Patents to Measure Technological Change in
      Environmental Models. Ecological Economics , 54 (2-3), 209-226.
Popp, D. (2006a). R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy: Is there a "Free Lunch"? Climatic
      Change, 77 (3-4), 311-341.
                                                                                          30

Popp, D. (2006b). They Don't Invent Them Like They Used To: An Examination of Energy
      Patent Citations Over Time. Economics of Innovation and New Technology , 15 (8), 753-
      776.
Roediger-Schluga, T. (2003). Some Micro-Evidence on the “Porter Hypothesis” from Austrian
      VOC Emission Standards. Growth and Change, 34(3), 359-379.
Schneider, S. H., & Goulder, L. H. (1997). Achieving low-cost emission targets. Nature , 389,
       13-14.
Staiger, D. and J.H. Stock (1997). Instrumental variables regression with weak instruments.
        Econometrica, 65(3), 557-586.
Yang, C.-J., & Oppenheimer, M. (2007). A “Manhattan Project” for climate change? Climatic
      Change , 80 (3-4), 199-204.
                                                                                                                            31


                             Table 1 – Descriptive Statistics by Industry, 1983-1997


                                                                                                                    mean
                                                                                                                      %
                                                       mean         std dev                    std dev     mean    energy
Industry                                               R&D            R&D      mean VA            VA      R&D/VA    R&D
Petroleum refining and extraction                    2,429.25        376.04   135,536.20 33,348.48          1.9%   51.4%
Electrical equipment                                13,196.52 4,150.16 125,681.77 26,125.15                10.4%    8.7%
Nonmanufacturing                                    15,788.65 11,779.22 487,836.17 84,824.31               2.9%     8.4%
Primary metals                                        817.09         128.02    49,976.08       6,619.26    1.7%     7.1%
Transportation equipment                            16,727.32 3,301.58 132,206.80 21,309.51                12.6%    5.9%
Fabricated metal products                             974.87         246.80    80,014.54      11,812.58    1.2%     3.5%
Chemicals and allied products                       13,944.62 4,127.69 117,557.85 30,869.13                11.8%    3.2%
Lumber, wood products, and furniture                  250.10         113.62    53,943.03       9,914.92    0.5%     2.4%
Rubber products                                      1,077.57        260.80    39,516.49       8,706.95    2.7%     2.1%
Machinery                                           12,970.96 3,099.84 128,507.71 15,149.11                10.1%    2.0%
Stone, clay, and glass products                       734.05         253.28    30,349.00       4,903.97    2.5%     1.9%
Other manufacturing industries                        855.52         684.55   103,745.37 18,819.92          0.8%    0.7%
Professional and scientific instruments              6,974.03      1,639.46    44,042.07      11,333.53    16.1%    0.6%
Paper and allied products                            1,082.87        329.40    48,453.50       8,702.04    2.2%     0.4%
Food, kindred, and tobacco products                  1,460.15        239.14   118,867.46 17,700.17          1.2%    0.3%
Textiles and apparel                                  300.20         86.53     53,845.03      4,486.15     0.6%     0.2%
 all industries w/energy R&D > 5% of R&D             9,791.77       8,856.97 186,247.41 160,707.60          5.9%
 all industries w/energy R&D < 5% of R&D             3,693.18       5,206.13   74,440.19      37,667.08    4.5%
  NOTE: all dollar values are in 2000 dollars. Industries sorted by % of R&D devoted to energy R&D.
                                                                                                                          32


                            Table 2 – Descriptive Statistics by Industry, 1973-1997


                                                                                                                  mean
                                                                                                                    %
                                                     mean          std dev                   std dev     mean    energy
Industry                                             R&D            R&D       mean VA          VA       R&D/VA    R&D
Petroleum refining and extraction                  2,163.25        494.11    121,537.37     37,845.35    1.9%    56.3%
Nonmanufacturing                                  10,706.81 11,813.35 443,782.35            92,503.91    2.0%    16.1%
Electrical equipment                              11,096.76       4,448.64 108,781.24       31,859.27    10.0%   12.5%
Primary metals                                      856.10         121.64     57,170.03     11,784.00    1.5%     7.7%
Chemicals and allied products                     11,166.28       5,108.05 102,408.95       32,669.41    10.5%    3.8%
Fabricated metal products                           889.23         233.30     76,250.66     11,096.48    1.2%     3.5%
Machinery                                         10,806.75       3,938.94 121,354.62       16,594.16    8.8%     1.7%
 all industries w/energy R&D > 5% of R&D           6,205.73       7,825.66 182,817.75 161,902.20         3.9%
 all industries w/energy R&D < 5% of R&D           7,620.75       6,041.47 100,004.74       28,675.73    6.8%
 NOTE: all dollar values are in 2000 dollars. Industries sorted by % of R&D devoted to energy R&D.
                                                                                                             33


                    Table 3 – Industry-level Crowding Out Results, 1983-1997

A. Base results
                                      low energy R&D                          high energy R&D
                                                                                             no refineries
  Variable                             < 1%      < 5%            > 1%        > 5%          > 1%        > 5%
  R&D(i,t-1)                          0.7498    0.9724          0.8966      0.9332        0.9605      0.9562
                                     (0.2201) (0.0827)         (0.1016) (0.1137)         (0.0898) (0.1198)
  energy R&D(i,t)                     -0.0576   0.0014          0.0744      -0.0251       0.2010      0.1986
                                     (0.1213) (0.0585)         (0.1052) (0.1932)         (0.1212) (0.1992)
  Value Added(i,t-1)                  0.0054    -0.0005         0.0168      0.0125        0.0132      0.0139
                                     (0.0036) (0.0074)         (0.0108) (0.0112)         (0.0117) (0.0149)
  Federal R&D(t-1)                    -0.0058 -0.0061           -0.0264 -0.0432           -0.0324 -0.0618
                                     (0.0049) (0.0051)         (0.0128) (0.0235)         (0.0137) (0.0345)
  N                                      75       165             165          75           150         60
  r2                                   0.885     0.712           0.919       0.948         0.916       0.949
  p-value for Hansen's J               0.689     0.156           0.522       0.970         0.509       0.983
  Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F stat       0.395     1.540           1.833       2.093         3.219       3.035
  underidentification test p-value     0.799     0.149           0.127       0.256         0.012       0.082
Dependent variable is all company-financed R&D performed in industry i at time t. Lagged R&D and energy R&D
treated as endogenous. Instruments are Value Added(i,t-2), Federal R&D(t-2), energy R&D(t-2), energy prices(t),
gross domestic product(t), defense spending(t), and federal energy R&D spending(t-1). Standard errors in
parentheses.

B. Including 3-year lagged R&D as an instrument
                                      low energy R&D                             high energy R&D
                                                                                                no refineries
  Variable                              < 1%        < 5%            > 1%        > 5%          > 1%        > 5%
  R&D(i,t-1)                           0.9216      0.8561          0.7207      0.7038        0.7871      0.7182
                                      (0.0731) (0.1227)           (0.1065) (0.1189)         (0.1179) (0.1309)
  energy R&D(i,t)                      0.0515      0.0361          0.0103      -0.3046       0.3065      0.2279
                                      (0.0316) (0.1113)           (0.1664) (0.2641)         (0.1631) (0.1837)
  Value Added(i,t-1)                   0.0047      0.0092          0.0336      0.0361        0.0332      0.0438
                                      (0.0033) (0.0118)           (0.0131) (0.0139)         (0.0167) (0.0172)
  Federal R&D(t-1)                     -0.0086 -0.0159             -0.0332 -0.0619          -0.0532 -0.1189
                                      (0.0037) (0.0110)           (0.0199) (0.0349)         (0.0188) (0.0325)
  N                                       70         154             154          70           140         56
  r2                                    0.872       0.685           0.905       0.940         0.913       0.949
  p-value for Hansen's J                0.293       0.487           0.517       0.827         0.052       0.188
  Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F stat       13.420      12.486          10.708       7.194         7.184       5.015
  underidentification test p-value      0.062       0.001           0.002       0.017         0.005       0.082
Dependent variable is all company-financed R&D performed in industry i at time t. Lagged R&D and energy R&D
treated as endogenous. Instruments are R&D(i,t-3), Value Added(i,t-2), Federal R&D(t-2), energy R&D(t-2),
energy prices(t), gross domestic product(t), defense spending(t), and federal energy R&D spending(t-1). Standard
errors in parentheses.
                                                                                                             34


                    Table 4 – Industry-level Crowding Out Results, 1973-1997

A. Base results
                                      low energy R&D                          high energy R&D
                                                                                             no refineries
  Variable                             < 5%     < 10%            > 5%       > 10%          > 5%       > 10%
  R&D(i,t-1)                          0.9081    0.9291          0.8364      0.7939        1.0558      1.0314
                                     (0.0896) (0.0676)         (0.1067) (0.1267)         (0.0690) (0.0899)
  energy R&D(i,t)                     0.1630    0.1053          -0.4168 -0.6402           -0.0244     0.0830
                                     (0.1783) (0.1074)         (0.2027) (0.3126)         (0.1368) (0.2725)
  Value Added(i,t-1)                  0.0170    0.0103          0.0221      0.0261        0.0042      0.0083
                                     (0.0139) (0.0093)         (0.0096) (0.0116)         (0.0071) (0.0100)
  Federal R&D(t-1)                    0.0198    0.0188          -0.0129 -0.0356           0.0119     -0.0039
                                     (0.0165) (0.0127)         (0.0150) (0.0240)         (0.0148) (0.0290)
  N                                      69        92              92          69            69         46
  r2                                   0.894     0.891           0.969       0.969         0.969       0.970
  p-value for Hansen's J               0.082     0.047           0.638       0.752         0.104       0.103
  Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F stat       4.922     4.450           1.001       0.869         3.876       4.140
  underidentification test p-value     0.004     0.003           0.578       0.675         0.021       0.031
Dependent variable is all company-financed R&D performed in industry i at time t. Lagged R&D and energy R&D
treated as endogenous. Instruments are Value Added(i,t-2), Federal R&D(t-2), energy R&D(t-2), energy prices(t),
gross domestic product(t), defense spending(t), and federal energy R&D spending(t-1). Standard errors in
parentheses.

B. Including 3-year lagged R&D as an instrument
                                      low energy R&D                             high energy R&D
                                                                                                no refineries
  Variable                              < 1%        < 5%            > 1%        > 5%          > 1%        > 5%
  R&D(i,t-1)                           0.8897      0.9154          0.7936      0.7369        0.9384      0.8366
                                      (0.1045) (0.0870)           (0.0945) (0.1102)         (0.1015) (0.1188)
  energy R&D(i,t)                      0.1438      0.0562          -0.5043 -0.7504           -0.3448 -0.7371
                                      (0.2170) (0.1320)           (0.1637) (0.2390)         (0.1661) (0.2669)
  Value Added(i,t-1)                   0.0204      0.0128          0.0255      0.0314        0.0132      0.0250
                                      (0.0165) (0.0118)           (0.0096) (0.0118)         (0.0113) (0.0138)
  Federal R&D(t-1)                     0.0203      0.0186          -0.0165 -0.0429           -0.0087 -0.0492
                                      (0.0190) (0.0159)           (0.0178) (0.0291)         (0.0216) (0.0337)
  N                                       69          92              92          69            69          46
  r2                                    0.895       0.893           0.967       0.967         0.971       0.973
  p-value for Hansen's J                0.234       0.181           0.857       0.933         0.022       0.006
  Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F stat       10.308      10.721          12.603       9.056        10.820       6.607
  underidentification test p-value      0.004       0.002           0.003       0.007         0.023       0.048
Dependent variable is all company-financed R&D performed in industry i at time t. Lagged R&D and energy R&D
treated as endogenous. Instruments are R&D(i,t-3), Value Added(i,t-2), Federal R&D(t-2), energy R&D(t-2),
energy prices(t), gross domestic product(t), defense spending(t), and federal energy R&D spending(t-1). Standard
errors in parentheses.
                                                                                                                                                   35


                            Table 5 – Industry-Level Crowding Out with Estimated Energy R&D

                                                  high energy R&D 1973-1997                            high energy R&D 1983-1997
                                                                       no refineries                                         no refineries
 Variable                                   > 5%       > 10%         > 5%       > 10%           > 1%         > 5%          > 1%          > 5%
 R&D(i,t-1)                               0.8335      0.8435        1.0587      1.0403         0.9525       0.9295        1.0062        0.9550
                                         (0.1113) (0.1107)         (0.0678) (0.0912)          (0.0832) (0.0936)          (0.0870) (0.1208)
 energy R&D(i,t)                          -1.4906 -1.3663           0.2666      1.4106         -0.2777 -0.3585            2.9388        3.4952
                                         (0.8972) (0.8556)         (1.3385) (2.0013)          (0.4846) (0.5104)          (2.8544) (2.9155)
 Value Added(i,t-1)                        0.0246     0.0247        0.0040      0.0081         0.0099       0.0129        0.0080        0.0151
                                         (0.0109) (0.0113)         (0.0069) (0.0100)          (0.0089) (0.0105)          (0.0111) (0.0150)
 Federal R&D(t-1)                         -0.0182 -0.0387           0.0130     -0.0036        -0.0258 -0.0439            -0.0303 -0.0641
                                         (0.0175) (0.0264)         (0.0149) (0.0288)          (0.0119) (0.0234)          (0.0140) (0.0345)
 N                                           92          69            69          46            165           75           150           60
 r2                                        0.968       0.969         0.969       0.970          0.916        0.948         0.912         0.948
 p-value for Hansen's J                    0.762       0.778         0.101       0.128          0.339        0.956         0.434         0.939
 Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F stat            1.366       1.487         4.383       4.092          3.693        2.560         4.511         3.418
 underidentification test p-value          0.452       0.418         0.012       0.032          0.011        0.300         0.005         0.061
The table presents results using estimated values for energy R&D for each industry, as described in the text. Dependent variable is all company-
financed R&D performed in industry i at time t. Lagged R&D and energy R&D treated as endogenous. Instruments are Value Added(i,t-2),
Federal R&D(t-2), energy R&D(t-2), energy prices(t), gross domestic product(t), defense spending(t), and federal energy R&D spending(t-1).
Standard errors in parentheses.
                                                                                                                                           36


                                              Table 6 Descriptive Statistics by Firm

                                                                                                         pct
                                                                                 pct alt                auto
                                      alt.     auto                    pct alt   energy     pct auto   energy     Capital      Sales       Debt
                                    energy    energy         all      energy     (pct of     energy    (pct of   (billions   (billions   (billions
Company                     Freq.   patents   patents     patents    (average)    total)   (average)    total)    2000 $)     2000 $)     2000 $)
Ametek, Inc.                 30      0.53                   6.27       9.39%     8.51%                              0.15        0.70       0.10
Amoco Corporation            28      2.21      0.50        90.36       2.47%     2.45%      0.58%      0.55%       20.67       27.98       3.27
Atlantic Richfield           30      4.20      0.27        72.00       5.23%     5.83%      0.38%      0.37%       16.71       20.77       4.43
Babcock & Wilcox              7      0.57      0.00        32.29       1.44%     1.77%      0.00%      0.00%       0.76         3.29       0.11
Chevron                      30      3.60      0.67       102.00       2.77%     3.53%      0.68%      0.65%       20.48       37.47       3.96
Chrysler                     28                2.04        65.39                            3.37%      3.11%       8.75        33.39       4.90
Cities Service Company       17      1.06                  21.12      10.65%      5.01%                            5.02         6.99       0.98
Combustion Engineering       19      3.05      0.05        54.63      5.26%       5.59%     0.15%      0.10%       0.79         4.04       0.13
Conoco                       30      1.47                  47.93      2.15%       3.06%                            9.23        14.45       2.67
Cummins Engine Co.           30                 2.67       20.77                            8.63%      12.84%      0.93        3.47        0.31
Daimler-Benz                 10      0.40       2.20       98.50      0.38%       0.41%     1.79%       2.23%      17.69       67.31       5.06
Daimler-Chrysler              2      3.00      19.50      560.00      0.69%       0.54%     3.71%       3.48%      61.56      162.32       25.69
Detroit Diesel                8                 1.50        8.25                            14.32%     18.18%      0.25         2.07       0.06
Dorr-Oliver                   9      0.89                   8.33      10.34%     10.67%                            0.02         0.30       0.00
Energy Conversion Devices    30      3.07      0.27        13.10      14.33%     23.41%     2.65%      2.04%       0.01         0.02       0.00
Engelhard Corporation        19      1.32      2.11        24.16      5.89%      5.45%      9.45%      8.71%       0.60         3.13       0.19
Exxon                        30      11.07     2.20       240.70      4.38%      4.60%      0.88%      0.91%       57.55      110.49       5.40
Ford Motor Company           30      0.83      8.00       233.73      0.51%      0.36%      2.96%      3.42%       20.84       92.64       24.72
Foster Wheeler               30      3.43                  17.57      19.69%     19.54%                            0.38         2.41       0.25
Grumman Aerospace            24      0.83                  29.25      4.77%      2.85%                              0.40        3.39        0.32
Gulf                         12      5.08      0.00        79.50      6.13%       6.39%     0.00%      0.00%       0.05         0.04       0.02
Honda                        30      0.93      8.17       215.63      0.23%      0.43%      2.99%      3.79%        5.13       23.80       2.27
Kerr-McGee                   30       0.97     0.03         3.30      26.24%     29.29%     2.00%      1.01%       2.59         3.50       0.63
Lubrizol                     30                1.23        27.43                            4.18%      4.50%       0.41         1.30       0.07

                                                       (table continued on next page)
                                                                                                                                                           37


                                               Table 6 Descriptive Statistics by Firm (continued)

                                                                                                                       pct
                                                                                           pct alt                    auto
                                             alt.      auto                    pct alt     energy       pct auto     energy      Capital      Sales       Debt
                                           energy     energy         all      energy       (pct of       energy      (pct of    (billions   (billions   (billions
 Company                          Freq.    patents    patents     patents    (average)      total)     (average)      total)     2000 $)     2000 $)     2000 $)
 Mobil                             29       4.59       3.31       224.86       1.89%       2.04%         1.40%       1.47%        24.40       60.91       4.37
 Molten Metal Technology            5       1.60                    6.60      22.67%       24.24%                                 0.04         0.03       0.04
 Nissan                            11       0.00        6.55      213.73       0.00%       0.00%         2.99%       3.06%        26.92       56.98       15.32
 Occidental                        30       2.67        0.37       29.73       6.94%       8.97%         1.18%       1.23%        10.20       14.74       3.78
 Optical Coating Laboratory        30       0.37                    4.50       9.13%       8.15%                                  0.05         0.11       0.02
 Owens-Illinois                    30       1.23                   65.53       1.34%       1.88%                                   2.29        4.89       1.84
 Praxair Technology                 9       1.33        0.56       55.56       2.53%       2.40%         1.07%       1.00%        3.64         3.83       1.47
 Sanyo Electric                    10       6.50        2.40      188.40       4.14%       3.45%         1.34%       1.27%        5.19        16.12       3.31
 Spire Corp.                       18       0.44        2.72                  13.97%       16.33%                                 0.01         0.02       0.00
 Standard Oil                      17       2.12        0.29        77.53      2.75%       2.73%         0.41%       0.38%        10.45       10.46       2.75
 Texaco                            30       3.57        0.50       140.97      2.76%       2.53%         0.49%       0.35%        20.09       47.28       4.29
 Tosco Corporation                 30       0.30                     1.03     25.97%       29.03%                                 0.86         3.87       0.49
 Toyota                            18       2.44        13.67      266.11      0.70%       0.92%         4.65%       5.14%        20.44       75.09       10.47
 United Technologies               30       6.13        5.47       178.30      3.58%       3.44%         3.16%       3.07%        3.31        18.20       1.27
 UOP                                8       5.38        0.25       181.88      2.99%       2.96%         0.16%       0.14%         0.33        1.67       0.07
 Varian Associates                 28       0.79                    35.36      2.28%       2.22%                                   0.21        1.12       0.05
 Volvo                             17       0.06        0.41        20.53      0.45%        0.29%        1.90%       2.01%         3.58       18.70       1.74
 Westinghouse Electric             22       6.82        4.82       423.96      1.70%       1.61%         1.21%       1.14%        3.28        13.83       0.63

The table shows average values for variables, by firm. The columns labeled “pct energy (pct of total)” are the percentage of energy patents in the firms total
patent portfolio (column3 or 4 divided by column 5). Columns labeled “pct energy (average)” show the average of the annual share of energy patents for each
firm. Only patents with application years between 1970 & 1999 are used for this table, as these cutoffs are used in the regression analysis that follows.
                                                                                                                                   38


                                         Table 7 – Top Patent Assignees by Field, 1971-2002



A. Alternative Energy                                                B. Automotive Energy Patents

                                       Energy       All       %                                              Energy       All       %
Assignee                               patents   patents   energy     Assignee                               patents   patents   energy
Individually Owned Patents               4457    521560    0.85%      Individually Owned Patents              1624     521560    0.31%
Exxon                                     340      7839     4.34%     Ford Motor Company                       345      7785     4.43%
Canon                                    318      24454    1.30%      Toyota                                   335       7083    4.73%
US Department of Energy                  303      6028     5.03%      Honda                                    300      7243     4.14%
Siemens Aktiengesellschaft               216      16024    1.35%      Nissan                                   209      6947     3.01%
United Technologies                      201      5655     3.55%      International Fuel Cells Corporation     199       244     81.56%
Westinghouse Electric                    180      10891    1.65%      United Technologies Corporation          181      5655     3.20%
International Fuel Cells Corporation     179       244     73.36%     General Motors                           180      11408    1.58%
General Electric                          147     27557    0.53%      Mitsubishi                               159      20951    0.76%
Mobil                                    137      6798     2.02%      Hitachi                                  153      24920    0.61%
Atlantic Richfield Copmany                131      2323    5.64%      General Electric                         150      27557    0.54%
Sanyo Electric                            122      3047    4.00%      Westinghouse Electric                    138      10891    1.27%
Hitachi                                   116     24920    0.47%      Siemens Aktiengesellschaft               133      16024    0.83%
Texaco                                   115       4523    2.54%      Robert Bosch                             108      9002     1.20%
Chevron                                   111      3332    3.33%      Mobil                                     98       6798    1.44%
Foster Wheeler                            106      565     18.76%     US Department of Energy                  98       6028     1.63%
NASA                                      106      4177     2.54%     Daimler-Chrysler                          88      2196     4.01%
Mitsubishi                               101      20951    0.48%      Cummins Engine Company                   85        682     12.46%
Energy Conversion Devices, Inc.            94       429    21.91%     Ballard Power Systems                     84        90     93.33%
Fuji Electric                             91       1478    6.16%      NGK Insulators Ltd.                      82       2597     3.16%
TOTAL (top 20 except individuals)       3114                          TOTAL (top 20 except individuals)       3125
ALL ASSIGNEES                           18107    2933721   0.62%      ALL ASSIGNEES                           9895     2933721   0.34%
                                                                                                                               39


                  Table 8 – Top Patent Assignees, by% of Patents Pertaining to Energy, by Field, 1971-2002


A. Alternative Energy                                             B. Automotive Energy Patents

                                    Energy      All         %                                         Energy      All         %
Assignee                            patents   patents    energy   Assignee                            patents   patents    energy
JX Crystals, Inc.                      23        23     100.00%   H-Power Corp.                         16         16     100.00%
Solarco Corporation                    12        12     100.00%   ZTek Corporation                      16         16     100.00%
Sunworks, Inc.                         12        12     100.00%   Ballard Power Systems, Inc.            84        90     93.33%
Magma Power Company                    10        10     100.00%   Plug Power L.L.C.                      54        60      90.00%
H-Power Corp.                          15        16     93.75%    M-C Power Corporation                  10        12     83.33%
Electrochemische Energieconversie      12        13      92.31%   International Fuel Cells Corp.        199       244     81.56%
Solarex Corporation                    55        60      91.67%   Phillips & Temro Industries, Inc.     11         16      68.75%
M-C Power Corporation                  11        12      91.67%   Energy Research Corporation           58         91     63.74%
Chronar Corporation                    24        27      88.89%   National Power PLC                     11        19     57.89%
Plug Power L.L.C.                      53        60      88.33%   Xcellsis GmbH                         17         31     54.84%
Sovoncis Solar Systems                 19        23      82.61%   Electric Fuel Limited                  16        36     44.44%
Spectrolab, Inc.                       13        16      81.25%   AER Energy Resources, Inc              18        49     36.73%
ZTek Corporation                       13        16      81.25%   Kabushikikaiha Equos Research         23         64     35.94%
Ballard Power Sytems, Inc.             73        90      81.11%   Lynntech, Inc.                         21        61      34.43%
Astropower, Inc.                       12        15      80.00%   Energy Development Associates          21        68     30.88%
AER Energy Resources, Inc.             38        49      77.55%   Tanaka Kikinzoku Kogyo K.K.            19        77      24.68%
United Solar Systems Corporation       33        44      75.00%   Reveo, Inc.                            19        77     24.68%
International Fuel Cells Corp.        179       244     73.36%    SMH Management Services                10        53     18.87%
Evergreen Solar, Inc.                  11        15     73.33%    Detroit Diesel Corporation            19        113     16.81%
Photon Power, Inc.                     16        23      69.57%   Ceramatec, Inc.                        10        61     16.39%
TOTAL (top 20)                        634                         TOTAL (top 20)                        652
ALL ASSIGNEES                        18107    2933721   0.62%     ALL ASSIGNEES                        9895     2933721   0.34%
                                                                                                            40


                  Table 9 – Crowding Out from Alternative Energy Patents

 Variable                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
 Other Patents (t-1)                    0.809       0.691      0.612        0.918       0.866       0.759
                                      (6.194)     (3.829)     (3.075)     (6.264)     (4.379)     (3.495)
 Energy Patents(t)                     -1.650      -1.486      -1.131      -1.234      -1.190      -0.925
                                     (-2.031)    (-1.800)    (-1.799)    (-1.512)    (-1.483)    (-1.372)
 Sales (t-1)                           0.584       0.765        0.809       0.440       0.509       0.565
                                      (1.733)     (1.970)     (1.658)     (1.276)     (1.266)     (1.151)
 Capital(t)                            -0.776      -0.549                  -0.819      -0.607
                                     (-1.617)    (-1.029)                (-1.659)    (-1.164)
 Debt(t)                               -0.022                              0.704
                                     (-0.018)                             (0.546)
 trend                                                                     -0.595     -0.622      -0.814
                                                                         (-2.302)    (-1.891)    (-2.470)
 Year Dummies                          YES         YES         YES           NO         NO          NO
 N                                      608         608         608         608         608         608
 r2                                    0.616       0.620       0.616       0.584       0.597       0.613
 p-value for Hansen's J                0.654       0.886       0.647       0.775       0.991       0.942
 Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F stat        2.628       2.658       3.990       2.603       2.727       3.837
 underidentification test p-value        0.004       0.011     0.001       0.010       0.025        0.004
NOTE: Dependent variable is Other Patents(t). T-statistics presented under estimates. 1 & 2 year lagged
independent variables and 2-year lagged energy patents used as instruments for Other Patents(t-1) and Energy
Patents. Regressions run from 1973-1999, with lagged data back to 1970 used for instruments. Energy prices
and lagged energy prices also used as instruments in (4)-(6).
                                                                                                             41


Table 10 – Crowding Out from Alternative Energy Patents – Additional Specifications
 Variable                                (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)
 Other Patents (t-1)                      0.809      0.711                   0.918      0.724
                                        (6.194)   (10.639)                 (6.264)   (10.236)
 Energy Patents(t)                       -1.650     -1.618      -1.439      -1.234     -1.130      -1.440
                                       (-2.031)   (-2.033)    (-1.354)    (-1.512)   (-1.448)    (-1.446)
 Sales (t-1)                             0.584       0.753       1.994       0.440      0.697       1.811
                                        (1.733)    (2.442)     (5.164)     (1.276)    (2.218)     (4.690)
 Capital(t)                              -0.776     -0.598       0.677      -0.819     -0.426       0.777
                                       (-1.617)   (-1.293)    (0.891)     (-1.659)   (-0.892)    (0.997)
 Debt(t)                                 -0.022     -0.225      -1.718      0.704      0.487       -0.390
                                       (-0.018)   (-0.178)    (-0.892)    (0.546)     (0.368)    (-0.196)
 trend                                                                      -0.595     -0.845      -1.856
                                                                          (-2.302)   (-4.865)    (-6.702)
 Year Dummies                           YES         YES         YES           NO         NO          NO
 N                                       608         608         608        608         608         608
 r2                                     0.616       0.618       0.180      0.584       0.610       0.144
 p-value for Hansen's J                 0.654       0.687       0.031      0.775       0.445       0.032
 Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F stat         2.628      11.112      13.034      2.603      11.604      13.643
  underidentification test p-value      0.004     2.1E-09 3.7E-09          0.010      5.4E-11 5.9E-11
NOTE: Dependent variable is Other Patents(t). T-statistics presented under estimates. 1 & 2 year lagged
independent variables and 2-year lagged energy patents used as instruments for Other Patents(t-1) and Energy
Patents. Regressions run from 1973-1999, with lagged data back to 1970 used for instruments. Energy prices
and lagged energy prices also used as instruments in (4)-(6). Other Patents(t-3) also used as an instrument in
columns (2) and (5).
                                                                                                            42


                 Table 11 – Crowding Out from Automotive Energy Patents

 Variable                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
 Other Patents (t-1)                    0.417       0.504      0.272        0.477       0.552      0.365
                                      (1.272)     (1.390)     (0.797)     (1.369)     (1.444)     (1.045)
 Energy Patents(t)                     -0.511      -1.602      1.036       -0.729      -1.633      0.922
                                     (-0.171)    (-0.434)     (0.336)    (-0.267)    (-0.470)     (0.337)
 Sales (t-1)                           1.014        0.404      2.108        0.587       0.063      1.709
                                      (0.817)     (0.380)     (1.958)     (0.461)     (0.058)     (1.880)
 Capital(t)                             4.655       5.210                   5.016       5.514
                                      (1.706)     (1.793)                 (1.767)     (1.803)
 Debt(t)                               -0.788                              -0.715
                                     (-0.973)                            (-0.870)
 trend                                                                      0.578      0.504       0.782
                                                                          (0.740)     (0.608)     (0.908)
 Year Dummies                          YES         YES         YES           NO         NO          NO
 N                                      254         254         254         254         254         254
 r2                                    0.703       0.692       0.660       0.690       0.681       0.653
 p-value for Hansen's J                0.194       0.053       0.081       0.168       0.040       0.109
 Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F stat        1.667       2.287       2.686       1.673       2.283       2.939
 underidentification test p-value        0.255       0.121     0.035       0.280       0.148        0.031
NOTE: Dependent variable is Other Patents(t). T-statistics presented under estimates. 1 & 2 year lagged
independent variables and 2-year lagged energy patents used as instruments for Other Patents(t-1) and Energy
Patents. Regressions run from 1973-1999, with lagged data back to 1970 used for instruments. Energy prices
and lagged energy prices also used as instruments in (4)-(6).
                                                                                                             43


Table 12 – Crowding Out from Automotive Energy Patents – Alternative Specifications

   Variable                               (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
   Other Patents (t-1)                    0.417       0.565                 0.477       0.616
                                        (1.272)     (3.404)               (1.369)     (3.658)
   Energy Patents(t)                     -0.511      -1.277      1.606     -0.729      -1.412      1.257
                                       (-0.171)    (-0.560)   (0.576)    (-0.267)    (-0.696)   (0.484)
   Sales (t-1)                           1.014        0.599      2.192      0.587       0.239      1.805
                                        (0.817)     (0.538)    (2.161)    (0.461)     (0.218)    (1.867)
   Capital(t)                             4.655       5.234      3.037      5.016       5.525      3.440
                                        (1.706)     (2.175)    (1.238)    (1.767)     (2.255)    (1.344)
   Debt(t)                               -0.788      -0.728     -0.958     -0.715      -0.676     -0.848
                                       (-0.973)    (-0.917)   (-0.946)   (-0.870)    (-0.846)   (-0.816)
   trend                                                                    0.578       0.331      1.458
                                                                          (0.740)     (0.738)    (2.639)
   Year Dummies                          YES         YES        YES          NO          NO         NO
   N                                      254        254        254         254        254        254
   r2                                    0.703      0.718      0.578       0.690      0.704      0.524
   p-value for Hansen's J                0.194      0.208      0.380       0.168      0.109      0.029
   Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F stat        1.667      8.010      9.473       1.673      8.826      8.787
   underidentification test p-value       0.255   1.1E-04 6.0E-05          0.280     9.1E-04      0.001
  NOTE: Dependent variable is Other Patents(t). T-statistics presented under estimates. 1 & 2 year lagged
  independent variables and 2-year lagged energy patents used as instruments for Other Patents(t-1) and
  Energy Patents. Regressions run from 1973-1999, with lagged data back to 1970 used for instruments.
  Energy prices and lagged energy prices also used as instruments in (4)-(6). Other Patents(t-3) also used
  as an instrument in columns (2) and (5).
                                                                                                           44


Table 13 – Correlations Among Refinery Patent Types

A. Correlations with annual number of patents in each type, 1973-1999
                                                                                    Coal        Alt
                    Refining   Chemistry      Wells      Other     Environment      Fuels     Energy
 Refining                  1
 Chemistry            0.635             1
 Wells                0.676         0.831          1
 Other                0.574         0.813      0.894          1
 Environment          0.746         0.781      0.689      0.640               1
 Coal Fuels           0.182         0.496      0.582      0.772           0.301          1
 Alt Energy           0.243         0.662      0.583      0.744           0.376      0.850           1



B. Correlations with annual percentage of patents in each type, 1973-1999
                      %           %                                     %          % Coal      % Alt
                    Refining   Chemistry    % Wells     % Other    Environment     Fuels      Energy
 % Refining                1
 % Chemistry          0.154             1
 % Wells             -0.198        -0.355          1
 % Other             -0.513        -0.805      0.128           1
 % Environment        0.312         0.423     -0.069      -0.615              1
 % Coal Fuels        -0.703        -0.543      0.046       0.595         -0.451          1
 % Alt Energy        -0.704        -0.222     -0.036       0.342         -0.391      0.776           1

C. Correlations with annual number of patents in each type, 1973-1987
                                                                                    Coal        Alt
                    Refining   Chemistry      Wells      Other     Environment      Fuels     Energy
 Refining                  1
 Chemistry            0.368             1
 Wells                0.388         0.583          1
 Other                0.488         0.516      0.315          1
 Environment          0.161         0.603      0.301      0.350               1
 Coal Fuels           0.334         0.255      0.193      0.819           0.211          1
 Alt Energy           0.380         0.646      0.296      0.757           0.418      0.747           1

D. Correlations with annual percentage of patents in each type, 1973-1987
                        %           %                                  %          % Coal       % Alt
                     Refining Chemistry % Wells % Other Environment                Fuels      Energy
 % Refining                 1
 % Chemistry           -0.465           1
 % Wells                0.337       0.033            1
 % Other                0.329      -0.878      -0.148          1
 % Environment         -0.142       0.285       0.071     -0.324              1
 % Coal Fuels          -0.391      -0.420      -0.562      0.257        -0.302           1
 % Alt Energy          -0.601       0.197      -0.648     -0.296        -0.136      0.634            1
Tables show the correlation between patents in each technology group. The top two panels include all refinery
patents with application years between 1973-1999. The bottom two panels include all refinery patents with
application years between 1973-1987. This covers the period of growth and reduction for alternative energy
patents.
                                                                                       45


Table 14 – Descriptive Data on Citations and Generality

                                                     citations          generality
                                          N       mean     std dev   mean    std dev
           Alternative Energy
              Energy                    2,018      8.722    10.682   0.509    0.342
              Non-energy               49,295      6.658    8.840    0.470    0.364

           Automotive
              Energy                    1,519      7.840    8.721    0.422    0.351
              Non-energy               43,062      6.718    8.206    0.434    0.358

           Refineries
              Alternative energy           302      7.805    6.662   0.631    0.298
              Coal-based fuels             627      6.260    6.306   0.424    0.353
              Refining                    3,152     7.076    8.733   0.422    0.343
              Environmental                995      7.513    9.023   0.483    0.354
              Chemistry                   7,442     7.606   12.303   0.529    0.357
              Wells                       2,362     6.738    7.132   0.410    0.352
              Other Technologies          9,778     5.741    7.408   0.437    0.370
           Descriptive data on patents from 1975-1999.
                                                                                                      46


Table 15 – Are Alternative Energy Patents More Valuable?

                 A. All Patents
                  Variable                                     Citations       Generality
                  Alternative Energy patent                       1.1548           0.0595
                                                                  (5.735)          (3.858)
                  Automotive Energy Patent                        1.5260           0.0987
                                                                (15.209)           (5.473)
                  Alternative Energy firm                         1.8813           0.1471
                                                                  (3.901)          (1.415)
                  Chemistry patent                                0.9413           0.0376
                                                                 (-4.905)          (4.824)
                  Computer patent                                 1.3542           0.1455
                                                                (19.039)         (14.400)
                  Medical patent                                  0.7708          -0.1167
                                                                 (-5.441)         (-3.844)
                  Electronics patent                              1.0503          -0.0255
                                                                  (3.742)         (-3.072)
                  Mechanical patent                               0.9647          -0.0606
                                                                 (-2.997)         (-7.992)
                  Σ                                                                0.5958
                                                                                (273.622)

                  N                                              90,288            90,288
                  log-likelihood                             -258451.96         -78550.89

                 B. Refinery Patents Only
                  Variable                                     Citations       Generality
                  Alternative Energy patent                       1.0711          0.2551
                                                                 (1.349)          (6.591)
                  Coal-based Fuel patent                          0.8284         -0.0366
                                                                (-4.177)         (-1.250)
                  Chemistry patent                                1.1239          0.1279
                                                                 (5.130)          (8.959)
                  Wells patent                                    1.0329         -0.0270
                                                                 (1.162)         (-1.468)
                  Environment patent                              1.1043          0.0715
                                                                 (2.640)          (2.986)
                  Other patent                                    0.8555         -0.0182
                                                                (-7.177)         (-1.300)
                  Σ                                                                0.6123
                                                                                (142.528)

                   N                                               24,658           24,658
                   log-likelihood                               -71205.43        -22082.40
         NOTES: T-statistics in parentheses. Generality results from a Tobit regression, and
         citation results from a general negative binomial regression. Citation results presented
         as eβ, and are interpreted as the likelihood of receiving a citation, compared to the base
         case of a non-energy automotive patent in panel A, or a refining patent in panel B.
                                                                                                    47


Figure 1 – Energy R&D Spending




The figure shows company-financed and federal-government financed energy R&D performed by industry from
1973-1997. All values are in 2000 dollars.
                                                                                                                 48


 Figure 2 – Total Alternative Energy Patents from All Energy Firms, by Application Year




The figure shows the total number of alternative energy patents and non-energy patents assigned to firms in our
regression analysis. The number of energy patents is on the left axis, and number of other and related patents is on
the right axis. Patents are sorted by the year of application.
                                                                                                           49


Figure 3 – Total Automotive Energy Patents from All Energy Firms, by Application Year




The figure shows the total number of energy patents and non-energy patents assigned to firms in our automotive
energy regression analysis. The number of energy patents is on the left axis, and number of other and related
patents is on the right axis. Patents are sorted by the year of application.
                                                                                                                                             50


Figure 4 – Trends in Refinery Patent Types


                      200


                      180


                      160


                      140


                      120                                                                                                 Alt Energy
                                                                                                                          Coal Fuels
             number




                                                                                                                          Refining
                      100
                                                                                                                          Chemistry/10
                                                                                                                          Wells
                       80
                                                                                                                          Environment
                                                                                                                          Other/10
                       60


                       40


                       20


                       0
                        1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998
                                                           application year

           Figure includes refinery patents with application years between 1970-1999. The number of Chemistry and Other patents is divided
           by 10 for ease of presentation.
                                                                                            A1


                       Appendix A – Patent Classes for Energy Patents
NOTE: Patent classes for the alternative energy data set are based on the U.S. patent
classification system. Patent classes for the automotive energy data set are based on the
International Patent Classification system (IPC).

Alternative Energy
Coal Liquefaction:
208/400-435        Mineral Oils: Processes and Products/By treatment of solid material (e.g.
                   coal liquefaction)

Coal Gasification:
48/200               Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Processes/Coal, oil and water
48/201               Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Processes/Coal and oil
48/202               Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Processes/Coal and water
48/210               Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Processes/Coal
48/71                Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Generators/Cupola/Coal, oil and water
48/72                Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Generators/Cupola/Coal and oil
48/73                Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Generators/Cupola/Coal and water
48/77                Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Generators/Cupola/Producers/Coal
48/98                Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Generators/Retort/Coal, oil and water
48/99                Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Generators/Retort/Coal and water
48/100               Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Generators/Retort/Coal and oil
48/101               Gas: Heating and Illuminating/Generators/Retort/Coal

Solar Energy:
60/641.8-641.15      Power Plants/Utilizing natural heat/Solar
62/235.1             Refrigeration/Utilizing solar energy
126/561-568          Stoves and Furnaces/Solar heat collector for pond or pool
126/569-713          Stoves and Furnaces/Solar heat collector
126/903              Stoves and Furnaces/Cross-Reference Art/Solar collector cleaning device
126/904              Stoves and Furnaces/Cross-Reference Art/Arrangements for sealing solar
                     collector
126/905              Stoves and Furnaces/Cross-Reference Art/Preventing condensing of
                     moisture in solar collector
126/906              Stoves and Furnaces/Cross-Reference Art/Connecting plural solar
                     collectors in a circuit
126/910              Stoves and Furnaces/Cross-Reference Art/Heat storage liquid

Solar Energy – Batteries:
136/206               Batteries: Thermoelectric and Photoelectric/Thermoelectric/Electric power
                      generator/ Solar energy type
136/243               Batteries: Thermoelectric and Photoelectric/Photoelectric
136/244-251           Batteries: Thermoelectric and Photoelectric/Photoelectric/Panel
136/252-265           Batteries: Thermoelectric and Photoelectric/Photoelectric/Cells
                                                                                              A2


Fuel Cells:
429/12-46            Chemistry: Electrical Current Producing Apparatus, Product, and
                     Process/Fuel cell, subcombination thereof or method of operating

Wind:
290/44               Prime-Mover Dynamo Plants/Electric control/Fluid-current motors/Wind
290/55               Prime-Mover Dynamo Plants/Fluid-current motors/Wind
416/132B             Fluid Reaction Surfaces (i.e., Impellers)/Articulated resiliently mounted or
                     selfshifting impeller or working member/Sectional, staged or non-rigid
                     working member/windmills
416/196A              Fluid Reaction Surfaces (i.e., Impellers)/Lashing between working
                     members or external bracing/Connecting adjacent work surfaces/Non-
                     turbo machine (windmills)
416/197A              Fluid Reaction Surfaces (i.e., Impellers)/Cupped reaction surface normal
                     to rotation plane/Air and water motors (natural fluid currents)

Using waste as fuel:
110/235-259          Furnaces/Refuse incinerator
110/346              Furnaces/Incinerating refuse

Geothermal energy:
60/641.2 -641.5 Power Plants/Utilizing Natural Heat/Geothermal
                                                                                           A3



Automobiles
Energy efficiency:
      (((((fuel OR gas*) <near/1> (consum* OR use OR using OR usage OR burn*)) <near/3>
      (reduc* OR less OR lower)) <in> (AB, TI, BACKGROUND)) OR ((((fuel OR gas*)
      <near/1> (efficien* OR economy OR mileage)) <near/3> (improv* OR increas* OR
      better OR greater)) <in> (AB, TI, BACKGROUND))) AND (internal combustion <in>
      (AB, TI, BACKGROUND))

Fuel cells:
H01M 8               PROCESSES OR MEANS, e.g. BATTERIES, FOR THE DIRECT
                     CONVERSION OF CHEMICAL ENERGY INTO ELECTRICAL
                     ENERGY /Fuel cells; Manufacture thereof

Electric & hybrid vehicles:
B60W 20               CONJOINT CONTROL OF VEHICLE SUB-UNITS OF DIFFERENT
                      TYPE OR DIFFERENT FUNCTION; CONTROL SYSTEMS
                      SPECIALLY ADAPTED FOR HYBRID VEHICLES; ROAD VEHICLE
                      DRIVE CONTROL SYSTEMS FOR PURPOSES NOT RELATED TO
                      THE CONTROL OF A PARTICULAR SUB-UNIT /Control systems
                      specially adapted for hybrid vehicles, i.e. vehicles having two or more
                      prime movers of more than one type, e.g. electrical and internal
                      combustion motors, all used for propulsion of the vehicle
B60L 7 NOT B60L 7/28          ELECTRIC EQUIPMENT OR PROPULSION OF
                      ELECTRICALLY-PROPELLED VEHICLES; MAGNETIC
                      SUSPENSION OR LEVITATION FOR VEHICLES;
                      ELECTRODYNAMIC BRAKE SYSTEMS FOR VEHICLES, IN
                      GENERAL/ Electrodynamic brake systems for vehicles in general
B60L 8                ELECTRIC EQUIPMENT OR PROPULSION OF ELECTRICALLY-
                      PROPELLED VEHICLES; MAGNETIC SUSPENSION OR
                      LEVITATION FOR VEHICLES; ELECTRODYNAMIC BRAKE
                      SYSTEMS FOR VEHICLES, IN GENERAL/ Electric propulsion with
                      power supply from force of nature, e.g. sun, wind
B60L 11               ELECTRIC EQUIPMENT OR PROPULSION OF ELECTRICALLY-
                      PROPELLED VEHICLES; MAGNETIC SUSPENSION OR
                      LEVITATION FOR VEHICLES; ELECTRODYNAMIC BRAKE
                      SYSTEMS FOR VEHICLES, IN GENERAL/ Electric propulsion with
                      power supplied within the vehicle
                          Appendix B – Patent Classes for Refineries

In addition to the alternative energy patent classes in Appendix A, the following patent classes
are used to categorize remaining patents by their intended use.

Refining technologies
Refining:
208/088-091          Mineral Oils: Processes and Products/Chemical Conversion of
                     Hydrocarbons/With preliminary treatment of feed/Refining
208/097-099          Mineral Oils: Processes and Products/Chemical Conversion of
                     Hydrocarbons/With subsequent treatment of products/Refining
208/177-307          Mineral Oils: Processes and Products/Refining (except where noted
                     below under environmental classes)

Catalytic cracking
208/108-112           Mineral Oils: Processes and Products/Chemical Conversion of
                      Hydrocarbons/Cracking/Hydrogenative/Catalytic
208/113-124           Mineral Oils: Processes and Products/Chemical Conversion of
                      Hydrocarbons/Cracking/Catalytic

Alkylation
585/446-468           Chemistry of Hydrocarbon Compounds/Aromatic Compound
                      Synthesis/By condensation of entire molecules or entire hydrocarbyl
                      moieties thereof, e.g., alkylation, etc/Using metal, metal oxide, or
                      hydroxide catalyst
585/709-732           Chemistry of Hydrocarbon Compounds/Saturated Compound
                      Synthesis/By condensation of a paraffin molecule with an olefin-acting
                      molecule, e.g., alkylation, etc.

Catalytic Reforming:
208/134-141          Mineral Oils: Processes and Products/Chemical Conversion of
                     Hydrocarbons/Reforming/Catalytic

Chemical conversion of hydrocarbons:
208/046-176          Mineral Oils: Processes and Products/Chemical Conversion of
                     Hydrocarbons (except where mentioned elsewhere)
                                                                                           B2


Wells/Drilling
Wells/Drilling
166                  Wells
405                  Hydraulic and Earth Engineering
507                  Earth Boring, Well Treating, and Oil Field Chemistry (except where
                     noted below)

Enhanced oil recovery
507/935-938          Earth Boring, Well Treating, and Oil Field Chemistry/Enhanced Oil
                     Recovery

Chemistry
Catalysts
502                  Catalyst, Solid Sorbent, or Support Therefor: Product or Process of
                     Making

Compositions/Products/Chemistry
252                 Compositions
423                 Chemistry of Inorganic Compounds
428                 Stock Material or Miscellaneous Articles
520-528             Synthetic Resins or Natural Rubbers -- Part of the Class 520 Series
585                 Chemistry of Hydrocarbon Compounds (if not included elsewhere)
                                                                                                B3


Environmental
Isomerization
585/253               Chemistry of Hydrocarbon Compounds/Adding Hydrogen to Unsaturated
                      Bond of Hydrocarbon, i.e., Hydrogenation/With subsequent diverse
                      conversion/Isomerization
585/477-482           Chemistry of Hydrocarbon Compounds/Aromatic Compound
                      Synthesis/By isomerization
585/664-670           Chemistry of Hydrocarbon Compounds/Unsaturated Compound
                      Synthesis/By double-bond shift isomerization
585/671               Chemistry of Hydrocarbon Compounds/Unsaturated Compound
                      Synthesis/By skeletal isomerization
585/734-752           Chemistry of Hydrocarbon Compounds/Saturated Compound
                      Synthesis/By isomerization

Carbon sequestration/removal
166/402-403          Wells/Processes/Distinct, separate injection and producing
                     wells/Sequentially injected separate fluids (e.g., slugs)/Injecting a gas or
                     gas mixture/CO2 or carbonated gas

Reformulated gas/adding ethers, MTBE, etc.
44/438              Fuel and Related Compositions/Organic oxygen compound containing
                    (e.g. , alicyclic alcohols, hypochorites, etc.)/The oxygen is part of a –
                    C(=O)- group/With alkanol or dialkyl ether
44/446              Fuel and Related Compositions/Organic oxygen compound containing
                    (e.g. , alicyclic alcohols, hypochorites, etc.)/Alkanol compound with
                    diaklyl ether compound
44/447-449          Fuel and Related Compositions/Organic oxygen compound containing
                    (e.g. , alicyclic alcohols, hypochorites, etc.)/Ether
44/451-453          Fuel and Related Compositions/Organic oxygen compound containing
                    (e.g. , alicyclic alcohols, hypochorites, etc.)/Alkanol
568/692-699         Organic Compounds – Part of the 532-570 Series/Oxygen Containing
                    (e.g., Perchlorylbenzene, etc.)/Ethers/Acyclic/Preparing by
                    dehydrohalogenaition [This is 692. Others also are variants of processes
                    using hydration)

Removal of gases (e.g. SO2, NOX, hydrogen sulfides)
423/210-248 Chemistry of Inorganic Compounds/Modifying or Removing Component of
              Normally Gaseous Mixture
423/569-577 Chemistry of Inorganic Compounds/Sulfur or Compound Thereof/Reducing
              sulfur dioxide by carbon containing material

Emissions control
422/168-183           Chemical Apparatus and Process: Disinfecting, Deodorizing, Preserving,
                      or Sterilizing/Chemical Reactor/Waste gas purifier
                                                                                               B4


Cleaning spills
405/60-72      Hydraulic and Earth Engineering/Fluid Control, Treatment, or
               Containment/Floatable Matter Containment
210/671        Liquid Purification or Separation/Processes/Ion exchange or selective
               sorption/Including diverse separating or treating of liquid/Of oil sorbent material
210/680        Liquid Purification or Separation/Processes/Ion exchange or selective
               sorption/Utilizing exchange or sorbent material associated with inert
               material/Including oil sorbent
210/693        Liquid Purification or Separation/Processes/Ion exchange or selective
               sorption/Sorbing organic constituent/From aqueous material/Utilizing synthetic
               resin/Oil removed
210/776        Liquid Purification or Separation/Processes/Separating/Skimming
210/242.3      Liquid Purification or Separation/With Movable Support/Float/With oil water
               skimmer
210/242.4      Liquid Purification or Separation/With Movable Support/Float/With oil water
               sorption means
210/922-925 Liquid Purification or Separation/Cross-Reference Art Collections: Miscellaneous
               Specific Techniques/Oil spill cleanup (e.g., bacterial, etc.)

Water Pollution
Rather than using patent classes to identify these patents, the following keyword search of patent
abstracts was used:
        (water <near/5> (pollut* OR effluent)) OR (waste <near/1> water) OR (ground <near/1>
        water) OR wastewater OR groundwater
