                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           LARGE CHANGES IN FISCAL POLICY:
                               TAXES VERSUS SPENDING

                                        Alberto F. Alesina
                                         Silvia Ardagna

                                       Working Paper 15438
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15438


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2009




Prepared for Tax Policy and the Economy 2009. We thank Jeffrey Brown, Roberto Perotti, Matthew
Shapiro and other conference participants for useful comments and discussions. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Alberto F. Alesina and Silvia Ardagna. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Large Changes in Fiscal Policy: Taxes Versus Spending
Alberto F. Alesina and Silvia Ardagna
NBER Working Paper No. 15438
October 2009, Revised January 2010
JEL No. H2,H3

                                              ABSTRACT

We examine the evidence on episodes of large stances in fiscal policy, both in cases of fiscal stimuli
and in that of fiscal adjustments in OECD countries from 1970 to 2007. Fiscal stimuli based upon
tax cuts are more likely to increase growth than those based upon spending increases. As for fiscal
adjustments, those based upon spending cuts and no tax increases are more likely to reduce deficits
and debt over GDP ratios than those based upon tax increases. In addition, adjustments on the spending
side rather than on the tax side are less likely to create recessions. We confirm these results with simple
regression analysis.


Alberto F. Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 210
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu

Silvia Ardagna
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
sardagna@fas.harvard.edu
1 Introduction
As a result of the fiscal response to the financial crisis of 2007-2009 the US will
experience the largest increases in deficits and debt accumulation in peacetime.
Virtually all other OECD countries will also face fiscal imbalances of various sizes.
After the large reduction in government deficits of the nineties and early new cen-
tury, public finances in the OECD are back in the deep red.
     Only a few months ago the key policy question was whether tax cuts or spend-
ing increases were a better recipe for the stimulus plan in the US and other countries
as well. By and large these decisions have been taken, and we are in the process
of observing the results. The next question which governments all over the world
will face next year, assuming, as it seems likely, that a recovery next year will be
under way, is how to stop the growth of debt and return to more “normal” public
finances.
     The first question, namely whether tax cuts or spending increases are more
expansionary is a critical one, and economists strongly disagree about the answer.
It is fair to say that we know relatively little about the effect of fiscal policy on
growth and in particular about the so called fiscal multipliers, namely how much
one dollar of tax cuts or spending increases translates in terms of GDP. The issue is
very politically charged as well, since right of center economists and policymakers
believe in tax cuts and the left of center ones believe in spending increases. While
the differences are often rooted in different views about the role of government and
inequality, not so much about the size of fiscal multipliers, both sides also wish
to "sell" their prescription as growth enhancing and more so than the other policy.
Unfortunately both sides can’t be right at the same time!
     As far as reduction of large public debts the lesson from history is reasonably
optimistic. Large debt/GDP ratios have been cut relatively rapidly by sustained
growth. This was the case of post WWII public debts in belligerent countries; it
was also the case of the US in the nineties when without virtually any increase in
tax rates or significant spending cuts, a large deficit turned in a large surplus.1 In
the UK the debt over GDP ratio at the end of WWII was over 200 percent but that
country did not suffer a financial crisis due to its historically credible fiscal stance
and the debt was gradually and relatively rapidly reduced. However, it would be
probably too optimistic to expect another decade like the nineties ahead of us;
that kind of sustained growth would certainly do a lot to reduce the debt/GDP
ratio but the lower growth which we will most likely experience will do much
less. Inflation also has the effect of chipping away the real value of the debt but
it may be a medicine worse than the disease. While a period of controlled and
  1 See Alesina (1998) for a discussion of the budget surplus in the nineties in the US.




                                                 2
moderate inflation would have the potential to reduce the real value of outstanding
debt, pursuing such a strategy would run the risk of uncontrolled inflation. It took a
sharp recession in the early eighties to eliminate the great inflation of the seventies,
and the last thing we need is another major recession in the medium run. The post
WWI hyperinflations are certainly not in the horizon, but we should keep them in
the back of our mind as an extreme case of debt induced runaway inflation.
    If growth alone cannot do it and inflating away the debt carries substantial risks,
we are left with the accumulation of budget surpluses to reign in the debt in the next
several years in the post crisis era. But then the same question returns: is raising
taxes or cutting spending more likely to result in a stable fiscal outlook?
    This is precisely what this papers is about. We focus upon large changes in
fiscal policy stance, namely large increase or reduction of budget deficits and we
look at what effects they had on both the economy and the dynamics of the debt.
In particular, for the case of budget expansions (increase in deficits or reduction of
surpluses) we look at which have been more expansionary on growth. On fiscal
adjustments (deficit reductions) we consider their effect on a medium term stabi-
lization/reduction of the debt over GDP level and their cost in terms of a downturn
in the economy. We focus only on large fiscal changes because we try to isolate
changes in fiscal policy which are policy induced as opposed to cyclical fluctua-
tions of the deficits, which in any event we try to cyclically adjust. Our method-
ology is rather simple. We identify episodes of large changes in fiscal policy. Ob-
viously the decision of when to engage is such policy changes is not exogenous to
the state of public finances and of the economy. But up to a point the decision of
whether to act upon the spending side or the revenue side is largely political and
due to bargaining amongst political and pressure groups. The uncertainty about
the size of fiscal multipliers make this discussion even less constrained by solid
economic arguments. Thus we cannot offer new measures of fiscal multipliers, but
we can look at what effects have different approaches (spending versus revenue
side) have had during and after large fiscal changes.
    Our results suggest that tax cuts are more expansionary than spending increases
in the cases of a fiscal stimulus. For fiscal adjustments we show that spending cuts
are much more effective than tax increases in stabilizing the debt and avoiding
economic downturns. In fact, we uncover several episodes in which spending cuts
adopted to reduce deficits have been associated with economic expansions rather
than recessions. We also investigate which components of taxes and spending af-
fect the economy more in these large episodes and we try uncover channels running
through private consumption and/or investment.
    The present paper is more directly related to several ones written in the early
nineties using a similar approach to ours. Giavazzi and Pagano (1990) were the first
to argue that fiscal adjustments (deficit reductions) large, decisive and on the spend-

                                           3
ing side could be expansionary. This was the case of Ireland and Denmark in the
eighties which were the episodes studied by Giavazzi and Pagano (1990), but there
were others as then discussed and analyzed by Alesina and Ardagna (1998). The
same authors and Alesina and Perotti (1997) investigate various episodes of fiscal
adjustments reaching conclusions similar to that of the present paper. But in this
paper we have many more episodes and we use more compelling techniques. There
is quite a rich literature that studies the determinants and economic outcomes of
large fiscal adjustments. A non exhaustive-list includes Ardagna (2004), Giavazzi,
Jappelli and Pagano (2000), Huges and McAdam (1999), Lambertini and Tavares
(2000), McDermott and Wescott (1996), Von Hagen and Strauch (2001), Von Ha-
gen, Hughes, and Strauch (2002), and more recently, OECD (2008) and IMF
(2009). Theoretically, expansionary effects of fiscal adjustments can go through
both the demand and the supply side. On the demand side, a fiscal adjustment
may be expansionary if agents believe that the fiscal tightening generates a change
in regime that “eliminates the need for larger, maybe much more disruptive ad-
justments in the future” (Blanchard (1990)).2 Current increases in taxes and/or
spending cuts perceived as permanent, by removing the danger of sharper and more
costly fiscal adjustments in the future, generate a positive wealth effect. Consumers
anticipate a permanent increase in their lifetime disposable income and this may
induce an increase in current private consumption and in aggregate demand. The
size of the increase in private consumption would depend, however, on the presence
or absence of “liquidity constrained” consumers. An additional channel through
which current fiscal policy can influence the economy via its effect on agents’ ex-
pectations is the interest rate. If agents believe that the stabilization is credible and
avoids a default on government debt, they can ask for a lower premium on gov-
ernment bonds. Private demand components sensitive to the real interest rate can
increase if the reduction in the interest rate paid on government bonds leads to a
reduction in the real interest rate charged to consumers and firms. The decrease
in interest rate can also lead to the appreciation of stocks and bonds, increasing
agents’ financial wealth, and triggering a consumption/investment boom.
     On the supply side, expansionary effects of fiscal adjustments work via the la-
bor market and via the effect that tax increases and/or spending cuts have on the
individual labor supply in a neoclassical model, and on the unions’ fall-back posi-
tion in imperfectly competitive labor markets (see Alesina and Ardagna (1998) and
Alesina et al. (2000) for a review of the literature). In the latter context, the compo-
sition of current fiscal policy (whether the deficit reduction is achieved through tax
increases or through spending cuts) is critical for its effect on the economy. On the
one hand, a decrease in government employment reduces the probability of finding
  2 For models that highlight this channel, see Bertola and Drazen (1993) and Sutherland (1997).




                                               4
a job if not employed in the private sector, and a decrease in government wages
decreases the worker’s income if employed in the public sector. In both cases, the
reservation utility of the union members goes down and the wage demanded by
the union for private sector workers decreases, increasing profits, investment and
competitiveness. On the other hand, an increase in income taxes or social secu-
rity contributions that reduces the net wage of the worker leads to an increase in
the pre-tax real wage faced by the employer, squeezing profits, investment, and
competitiveness.
     This is not the place to review in detail the large literature on the effect of fis-
cal policy on the economy. It is worth mentioning that Romer and Romer (2007)
also follow an event approach even though they identify events of large discre-
tionary changes in fiscal policy in a very different way from ours. Using a variety
of narrative sources, they identify changes in the US federal tax legislation that
are undertaken either to solve an inherited budget deficit problem or to achieve
long-run goals and estimate the effect of such changes on real output in a VAR
framework. They find that an increase in taxation by 1% of GDP reduces output in
the next three years by a maximum of about 3% and that the effect is smaller when
the only changes in taxes considered are those taken to reduce past budget deficits.
As Romer and Romer (2007), we also find that tax increases are contractionary, but
the magnitudes of our results are difficult to compare to theirs. In our estimates, we
find that a 1% increase in the cyclically adjusted tax revenue decreases real growth
by less than one-third of a percentage point. However, we estimate a very different
specification and, contrary to Romer and Romer (2007), our approach also controls
for changes in government spending undertaken to reduce budget deficits as well
as for changes in taxation.
     Blanchard and Perotti (2002) use structurally VAR techniques to identify ex-
ogenous changes in fiscal policy and estimate fiscal multipliers both on the tax and
on the spending side of the government. They find that positive government spend-
ing shocks increase output, consumption and decrease investment, while positive
tax shocks have a negative effect on output, consumption and investment. Mount-
ford and Uhlig (2008) use a very different identification approach and, while they
also find that both taxes and spending increases have a negative effect on private
investment (as previously shown by Alesina et al. (2002)), they show that spending
increases do not generate an increase in consumption and that deficit-financed tax
cuts are the most effective way to stimulate the economy. The result of a positive
effect of government spending shocks on private consumption is also challenged
by Ramey (2008). She finds that, capturing the timing of the news about govern-
ment spending increases with a narrative approach and not with delay as in a VAR
approach, consumption declines after increases in government spending. Our re-
sults on the negative correlation between both spending and tax increases on GDP

                                           5
growth are clearly consistent with the results of these papers using quite different
methodological approaches than ours.
    A substantial literature has investigated political and institutional effects on
fiscal policy and in particular on the propensity of different parties in different
institutional settings to prolong fiscal imbalances, or to reign them in promptly. On
delayed fiscal adjustments see Alesina and Drazen (1999), on politico institutional
effects, like the role of electoral laws, on the occurrence of loose or tight fiscal
policy see Persson and Tabellini (2003) and Milesi Ferretti, Perotti and Rostagno
(2002). Alesina Perotti and Tavares (1998) using an approach similar to that of
the present paper and based upon "episodes", investigate which parties are more
or less likely to run in fiscal stimuli or fiscal adjustments. One criticism that one
could raise to the literature on voting rules and institutions on fiscal imbalances is
that rules are not exogenous and third factors may indeed explain both the adoption
of certain voting rule (like proportional representation) and fiscal policy, a point
discussed in Alesina and Glaeser (2004) informally and Aghion Alesina and Trebbi
(2007) more formally. We do not pursue in the present paper this politico economic
analysis.
    This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses our data and the defin-
ition of episode which we adopt. Section 3 presents basis statistics on the episodes
showing rather striking results. Section 4 shows some regression analysis, which
although it has no pretence of having solved causality problems reinforces the re-
sults obtained by the simple statistics of Section 3. The last section concludes.


2 Data, Methodology and definitions
2.1 Methodology
Our approach is very simple. We identify major changes in fiscal policy, either
expansionary (deficit increases or surplus reductions) or the opposite. Obviously
the decision about whether to engage in this policy changes is endogenous to the
state of the economy and of the finances However we assume that at least up to a
point the decision of whether or not to act on the spending side or the revenue side
of the government is dictated by political preferences and political bargain which
is, at least to a point, exogenous to the economy and generated by ideological or
policy preferences. Looking at the debates proceeding major fiscal changes, and
considering the high degree of uncertainty about the size of fiscal multipliers this
assumption holds some water. Thus our only emphasis is on the effects of different
composition of fiscal stimuli and adjustments. We cannot and do not compute the
size of fiscal multipliers. We only compare the effects of different compositions of
major fiscal changes.

                                          6
2.2 Data and Sources
We use a panel of OECD countries for a maximum time period from 1970 to 2007.
The countries included in the sample are: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom,
and United States. All fiscal and macroeconomic data are from the OECD Eco-
nomic Outlook Database no. 84.
    Our approach identifies episodes of large changes in the fiscal stance and stud-
ies the behavior of fiscal and macroeconomic variables around those episodes to
investigate whether different characteristics of fiscal packages are correlated with
different macroeconomic outcomes. More specifically, we focus both on the size
of the fiscal packages (i.e.: the magnitude of the change of the government deficit)
and on its composition (i.e.: the percentage change of the main government budget
items relative to the total change) and we investigate whether large fiscal stimuli
and adjustments that differ in size and composition are associated with booms or
economic recessions (as defined below) and whether governments that implement
different types of fiscal adjustments are successful / unsuccessful in reducing gov-
ernment debt.
    We use a cyclically adjusted value of the fiscal variables to leave aside vari-
ations of the fiscal variables induced by business cycle fluctuations. The cyclical
adjustment is based on the method proposed by Blanchard (1993). It is a simple
method and rather transparent, which corrects various component of the govern-
ment budget for year to year changes in the unemployment rate. More precisely,
the cyclically adjusted value of the change in a fiscal variable is the difference be-
tween a measure of the fiscal variable in period t computed as if the unemployment
rate were equal to the one in t − 1 and the actual value of the fiscal variable in year
t − 1.3 We prefer this method to more complicated measures like those produced
by the OECD because the latter are a bit of a black box based upon many assump-
tions about fiscal multipliers upon which there is much uncertainty. Based on our
previous work (Alesina and Ardagna (1998)) we are confident that for the large
episodes which we consider the details of how to adjust for the cycle do not matter
much for the qualitative nature of the results. In fact, even not correcting at all
would give similar results.4
   3 To calculate the measure of the fiscal variable in period t as if the unemployment rate were
equal to the one in t − 1, we follow the procedure in Alesina and Perotti (1995). Specifically, for
each country in the sample, we regress the fiscal policy variable as share of GDP, on a time trend
and on the unemployment rate. Then, using the coefficients and the residuals from the estimated
regressions, we predict what the value of the fiscal variable as a share of GDP in period t would have
been if the unemployment rate were the same as in the previous year.
   4 More on this is available from the authors.



                                                  7
2.3 Definition of the episodes

To identify episodes of fiscal adjustments and fiscal stimuli we focus on large
changes of fiscal policy and use the following rule.


Definition 1 Fiscal adjustments and stimuli

    A period of fiscal adjustment (stimulus) is a year in which the cyclically ad-
justed primary balance improves (deteriorates) by at least 1.5 per cent of GDP.

    These are rather demanding criteria, which rule out small, but prolonged, ad-
justments/stimuli. We have chosen them because we are particularly interested in
episodes which are very sharp and large and clearly indicate a change in the fis-
cal stance. This definition misses fiscal adjustments and stimuli which are small
in each year but prolonged for several years. It would be quite difficult to come
up with a definition that captured the many possible pattern of multi years small
adjustments. Thus, the study of these episodes gives a clue on what happens with
sharp and brief changes in the fiscal stance.
    We use the primary deficit, (i.e.: the difference between current and capital
spending, excluding interest rate expenses paid on government debt, and total tax
revenue)5 rather than the total deficit, to avoid that episodes selected result from the
effect that changes in interest rates have on total government expenditures. Using
these criteria we try to focus as much as possible on episodes that do not result from
the automatic response of fiscal variables to economic growth or monetary pol-
icy induced changes on interest rates, but they should reflect discretionary policy
choices of fiscal authorities. Needless to say, there can still be an endogeneity issue
related to the occurrence of fiscal adjustments and expansions, because, in princi-
ple, discretionary policy choices of fiscal authorities can be affected by countries’
macroeconomic conditions. However, note that the budget for the current year is
approved during the second half of the previous year and, even though additional
measures can be taken during the course of the year, they usually become effective
with some delay, generally toward the end of the fiscal year.
    Definition 1 selects 107 periods of fiscal adjustments (15.1% of the observa-
tions in our sample) and 91 periods of fiscal stimuli (12.9% of the observations
in our sample). Table A1 in appendix lists all of them. Of the 107 episodes of
fiscal adjustments, 65 last only for one period, while the rest are multiperiods ad-
justments. The majority of the latter (13) last for two consecutive years, 4 are
  5 See the appendix for a detail definition of each variable used in the empirical analysis.




                                                 8
three years adjustments and the Denmark 1983-1986 fiscal stabilization is the only
episode lasting 4 consecutive years. As for fiscal stimuli, 52 episodes last one pe-
riod, in 12 cases the stimulus continues in the second year as well, and in 5 cases
definition 1 selects fiscal stimuli that last for 3 consecutive years.
    We are interested in two outcomes of very tight and very loose fiscal poli-
cies: whether they are associated with an expansion in economic activity during
and in their immediate aftermath and whether they are associated with a reduc-
tion in the public debt-to-GDP ratio. Thus, an episode is defined expansionary
according to definition 2 and successful according to definition 3; we define con-
tractionary/unsuccessful all the episodes of fiscal stimuli and adjustments that are
not expansionary/successful according to these definitions.


Definition 2 Expansionary fiscal adjustments and fiscal stimuli


    An episode of fiscal adjustment (fiscal stimulus) is expansionary if the average
growth rate of GDP, in difference from the G7 average (weighted by GDP weights),
in the first period of the episode and in the two years after is greater than the
value of 75th percentile of the same variable empirical density in all episodes of
fiscal adjustments (fiscal stimuli). This definitions selects 26 years of expansionary
periods during fiscal adjustments (3.7% of the observations of the entire OECD
sample) and 20 years of expansionary periods during fiscal stimuli (2.8% of the
observations of the entire OECD sample). See table A2 for a list.


Definition 3 Successful fiscal adjustments


    A period of fiscal adjustment is successful if the cumulative reduction of the
debt to GDP ratio three years after the beginning of a fiscal adjustment is greater
than 4.5 percentage points (the value of 25th percentile of the change of the debt-to-
GDP ratio empirical density in all episodes of fiscal adjustments).6 This definitions
selects 17 periods of successful fiscal adjustments (2.7% of the observations of the
entire OECD sample). In Table A3 in Appendix we list all the episodes.
    We have experimented with variation of the threshold of these definitions but
the results are robust, that is they do not change significantly as result of small
   6 If an episode of tight fiscal policy takes place in 2005, the cumulative change of the debt-to-
GDP ratio is computed over a two years horizon, not to loose too many observations at the end of
the sample. If the episode occurs after 2005, we cannot determine whether it is a successful or an
unsuccessful one.


                                                 9
changes of the definitions. A value of 1.5 change in deficits in a year is suffi-
ciently high to eliminate years of "business as usual" in which fluctuations of the
deficits may just be only cyclical. However it is not so large as to have very few
data points. Also, our “horizon” for the definition of “expansionary” and “success”
is relatively short. Choosing a longer horizon has two problems. First, one looses
many observations at the end of the sample; second, and more importantly, choos-
ing a longer horizon makes the connection between the episodes and economic
outcomes several years later more tenuous, given the extent of intervening factors.
Finally, note that according to definition 2 and 3, multiyears fiscal adjustments and
stimuli are considered as a "single" episode because the length of the time horizon
chosen for the definition of “expansionary” and “success” starts from the first year
of the episode. Alesina and Ardagna (1998), Alesina, Perotti and Tavares (1998),
instead, consider each year of a multiyear period as a single episode. This implies
that, in a multiyear episode, some years can be expansionary, some contractionary,
some can be successful, some unsuccessful. While we have no reason to prefer one
choice over the other, we find reassuring that results are robust to these alternative
methods used to select expansionary and successful episodes that last more than
one consecutive year.7


3 Basic Statistics
3.1 Fiscal stimuli
Let’s begin by analyzing what happens with fiscal stimuli, namely whether we can
detect differences in the effects of fiscal packages depending on their composition
on the economy. Table 1 shows the composition in terms of spending components
and revenue components of the 20 years of expansionary fiscal stimulus packages
versus the others. In Tables 1-6, the period [T − 2, T − 1] is the two year period
preceding the first year of a fiscal stimulus/adjustment. The period [T ] is the first
year and the period [T + 1, T + 2] is the two year period following the beginning
of an episode.8 All the variables in the tables are yearly averages.
    The most striking result of this table is that in expansionary episodes total
spending increases by roughly 1 per cent of GDP while revenues fall by more
than 2.5 per cent of GDP. In contractionary episodes total spending goes up by
   7 More details on these sensitivity analysis are available from the authors.
    8 The Denmark fiscal contraction is the only episode lasting 4 years. We have included the values
of the variables in 1986 in the column [T + 1, T + 2]. We checked and confirm that the qualitative
nature of the results does not change if the period [T ] inlcudes all the years of a tight/expansionary
episode of fiscal policy and the period [T + 1, T + 2] is the two year period following the last year
of an episode.


                                                 10
close to 3 per cent of GDP while revenues are roughly constant in terms of GDP.
This correlation seems to suggest that stimulus packages used upon the spending
side do not work or at least not as well as those based upon spending increases.
In terms of components of spending we note that there is no difference between
expansionary and contractionary episodes regarding public investment which goes
up by roughly the same amount in ratios of GDP. All the other components of
primary spending and, in particular transfers, go up much more in contractionary
episodes. This suggests that the non public investment components of the bud-
get are those which explain the different correlation with growth. As for revenues
note the large cut in income taxes in expansionary stimuli and the slight increase
in contractionary ones. Not surprisingly the debt over GDP ratio goes up less in
expansionary episodes since the denominator increases more.
    Figure 1 offers a striking visual image of the different compositions in terms
of revenues and spending of expansionary and contractionary episodes. The first
two comparison of total spending and revenues are rather striking even visually.
In Table 2 we look at the different components of GDP to check whether there
are difference in composition between expansionary and contractionary episodes.
The first two lines which refer to GDP growth are somewhat obvious since they
reflect the selection criteria of these episodes. All the components of aggregate
demand grow more after the stimulus in expansionary episodes. This result is a
bit different than that reported in Alesina and Ardagna (1998). In that sample the
difference between the two types of episodes seemed concentrated on investment
rather than consumption.9 In this sample both consumption and investment behave
differently, both increasing in expansionary cases and declining in contractionary
ones. This table also allows us to check whether the state of the economy before
the adjustments was different in the two groups. In terms of domestic growth and
relative to G7 average, expansionary episodes occurred when growth was higher.
As for the other components the only significant difference seem to be in the trade
balance. It is obviously cavalier to draw broad conclusions from this but enormous
differences in the preexisting state of the economy do not jump out from this table.

3.2 Fiscal adjustments
Fiscal adjustments can be judged in two ways, as discussed above. One is about
whether they have been successful in significantly reducing deficits and the debt
over GDP ratios and second whether they have been associated with a reduction
in growth or not. Obviously, the two criteria are correlated since a growth en-
hancing adjustment is more likely to be successful in reducing the debt-to-GDP
   9 See Also Alesina, Ardagna Perotti and Schiantarelli (2002) for related work on the effect of
fiscal policy on investment.


                                              11
ratio. However, the correlation is not perfect since a fiscal adjustment may lead to
a sharp reduction of the debt/GDP ratio because the numerator drops faster than
the denominator. Episodes with this characteristic, that is the ability to reduce the
debt-to-GDP ratio exist, for example Netherlands in 1993, Norway in 1989, and
Sweden in 1986-1987.
    Table 3 is organized in the same way as Table 1 above. The expansionary
episodes of fiscal adjustments are mostly characterized by spending cuts. Primary
spending as a percent of GDP falls by more than 2 per cent. Total revenues in-
stead increase slightly by about 0.34 per cent of GDP. On the other hand, in the
case of contractionary fiscal adjustments primary spending is cut by about 0.7 per
cent of GDP, while revenues increase by about 1.2 per cent of GDP. Thus, fiscal
adjustments occurring on the spending side have superior effects on growth than
those based upon increases in tax revenues. As far as the composition in compo-
nents probably the most striking difference between the two types of adjustments
has to do with the role of transfers. In contractionary cases transfers continue to
growth as a percentage of GDP of almost half of a percentage point. In expansion-
ary episodes, instead, transfers fall by roughly the same amount. Thus, in between
the two types of episodes there is a very large difference of 1 per cent of GDP in the
share of transfers. Looking at the composition of revenues one is struck by income
taxes: they go down quite significantly in expansionary adjustments and go up in
contractionary ones. The difference between the two is almost 1 percentage point
of GDP. This difference is by far the largest among revenue components.
    Figure 2 is organized in the same way as figure 1 and even in this case visually
the contrast between the two types of fiscal adjustments is quite obvious. When
we look at the different components of GDP, we find that both consumption and
investment grow more during expansionary episodes. We did not uncover any re-
markable composition effects, along the same line a Table 2 displayed for fiscal
stimuli. These sample statistics are reported in Table 4 which is organized as Ta-
ble 2. The other interesting observation is that at least in terms of GDP growth
and growth of its components the preexisting conditions of expansionary and con-
tractionary episodes look remarkably similar. One rather remarkable observation
comes from comparing the growth performance during expansionary stimuli and
expansionary adjustments: they are quite similar!
    Let’s now consider successful versus unsuccessful adjustments as shown in
Table 5. The comparison between the two is especially striking. In successful
episodes total primary spending as a percentage of GDP falls by about 2 per cent
of GDP. Total revenues actually decline of about half of percentage point of GDP.
Thus, successful fiscal adjustments are completely based on spending cuts accom-
panied by modest tax cuts! On the contrary, in unsuccessful adjustments total
revenue goes up by almost 1.5 per cent of GDP and primary spending are cut by

                                         12
about 0.8 of GDP. Once again this comparison points in the direction of spending
cuts as the more successful ways of fixing budget problems.
     Regarding the composition of spending and revenue the most striking com-
parison is given by the transfers item. In successful adjustments transfers fall by
0.83 per cent of GDP, while in unsuccessful adjustments they grow at about 0.4
per cent, a huge difference between the two episodes of 1.2 percent of GDP. This
comparison points in a clear direction: it is very difficult if not impossible to fix
public finances when in trouble without solving the question of automatic increases
in entitlements. Regarding the composition of revenues, again as above the most
striking difference is on income taxes. Figure 3, once again, gives a striking visual
image of these results.


4 Some regressions
In this section we present some simple regressions on GDP growth as a function
of changes of fiscal policy in the recent past. We should put up-front the fact that
causality issues are all over the place here and we do not claim to have solved them.
These regressions should be viewed as correlations, but we find them instructive
and the message which they send is on the same line of that emerging from our
descriptive analysis above.
     Let’s begin with fiscal stimuli. In Table 7, columns 1-4, we regress real GDP
growth in a year of fiscal stimulus on its one period and two period lagged values,
on the lagged value of the weighted average of the real GDP growth of the G7
countries, on the lagged value of the ratio of public debt to GDP ratio and on a
set of fiscal policy variables measuring the size and the composition of the fiscal
stimulus. Columns 5-8 are analogous to the previous 4 columns except for the lhs
variable, now equal to the average of real GDP growth in a year of fiscal stimulus
and in the two following ones.
     We find that, controlling for initial conditions, a one percentage point higher
increase in the current spending to GDP ratio is associated with a 0.75 percentage
point lower growth. The effect is statistically significant at the 5% level. Instead,
larger increases in spending on capital goods or larger cuts in taxes do not have sta-
tistically significant effects on growth (see column 2). When we try to investigate
whether the size of the fiscal stimulus or its composition is relevant for economic
growth, we find more evidence in favor of the composition. We measure the size of
the fiscal stimulus with the change in the cyclically adjusted primary balance. We
measure the composition of fiscal stimuli with two different variables: (i) the ratio
between the change in current spending to GDP ratio and the change in the primary
balance (columns 3 and 7), and (ii) the sum of the change in current spending and


                                         13
tax revenue to GDP ratios (column 4 and 8) to account for the fact that both current
spending increases and tax increases can be negatively associated with growth.
Both measures of composition are statistically significant at the 5% level in all
specifications. In column 3, the sign of the ratio between the change in current
spending to GDP ratio and the change in the primary balance indicates that the
larger the share of the worsening in the primary balance due to spending increases
the lower GDP growth. On average, during years of fiscal stimuli about 54% of
the deterioration in the primary balance is due to increases in current spending
items. A one standard deviation increase in this variable (equal to 51%, undoubt-
edly a very large number) would reduce growth by 1 percentage point. Finally, a
larger increase in the primary deficit to GDP ratio is associated with lower growth,
however, the effect is statistically significant only in column 3.
     Table 8 is very similar to Table 7 but we replace the change in current spend-
ing and taxes with their respective components. Consistent with the evidence in
Table 7, our regressions show that fiscal stimuli more heavily based on increases in
current spending items (government wage and non-wage components, subsidies)
are associated with lower growth, while fiscal stimulus packages based on cuts in
income, business and indirect taxes are more likely to be expansionary.
     When we turn to the sample of fiscal adjustments (Tables 9 and 10), our results
still point in the same direction: namely, the composition of the fiscal adjustment,
more than its size, matters for growth and fiscal adjustments associated with higher
GDP growth are those in which a larger share of the reduction of the primary
deficit-to-GDP ratio is due to cuts in current spending, to the government wage
and non-wage components, and to subsidies. All this evidence is consistent with
the previous literature on fiscal stabilizations and is robust if we introduce among
the regressors the change in the short-term interest rate as a control for the stance
of monetary policy or the rate of change of the nominal exchange rate to control
for exchange rate devaluations that can occur at the same time of large changes in
the fiscal stance (results are not shown but are available upon request).
     Finally, we have estimated the same specifications as in Tables 7 and 9, columns
1, 2, and 4 for the entire sample of OECD data that, hence, includes episodes of
fiscal adjustments, stimuli and years in which the cyclically adjusted primary bal-
ance changes between -1.5% and 1.5%. We have also checked whether there are
non-linearities associated with times of large fiscal adjustments and stimuli. Table
11 shows the results.10 Results are in line with the evidence shown so far: we
find that larger reductions in current spending and in taxation are associated with
higher GDP growth, while changes in capital spending do not show any significant
effect on growth. Moreover, the specifications in columns 4-9, do not support any
 10 Regressions in Table 11 include country and year dummies among the rhs variables.




                                             14
evidence of non-linearities in episodes of fiscal adjustments or stimuli. Both the
coefficients of the dummy variables T ight and Loose and the coefficients between
the interaction terms of these variables and the fiscal policy indicators are not sta-
tistically significant. As suggested by Alesina, Ardagna, Perotti, and Schiantarelli
(2002), there seems to be nothing special around such episodes that can explain the
behavior of growth relatively to normal times.


5 Conclusions
Rather than reviewing again our result it is worth elaborating, or perhaps speculat-
ing on the current and future fiscal stance in the US. As we well know a very large
portion of the current astronomical 12 percent of GDP deficit is the result of bailout
of various types of the financial sector. This is an issue on which this paper has
nothing to say. But part of the deficit is the result of the stimulus package that was
passed to lift the economy out of the recession. About two third of this fiscal pack-
age is constituted by increases in spending, including public investment, transfers
and government consumption. According to our results fiscal stimuli based upon
tax cut are much more likely to be growth enhancing than those on the spending
side. Needless to say when considering a single episode many other factors jump
to mind, factors which are difficult to capture in a multi country regressions. For
instance, American families were saving too little before the crisis. An income
tax cut might have just simply been saved and might have had not a big impact on
aggregate consumption. However, more saving might have reinforced the finan-
cial sector, think of the credit card crisis for instance. In addition, one could have
though of tax cuts that stimulate investment. The benefit of infrastructure projects
which have "long and variable lags" is much more questionable.
     After the "perfect storm" of this current crisis the US will emerge with an
unprecedented (for peace time) increase in government debt. As we argued in the
introduction it is unlikely that these deficits and debt will disappear simply because
growth will resume at very rapid pace very soon. Primary suppresses would be
needed since interest rates cannot go other than up from the close to zero actual
levels. The analysis of the present paper suggests that unless primary spending is
cut, it is difficult to acheive fiscal stability because spending may rise faster than
tax revenue. But what can be cut? Hopefully improvements in the peace process in
Afghanistan and Iraq might allow a reduction of military expenditure, but given the
instability in the region one cannot count on that for sure. Health care reforms seem
to imply large increases in spending, the retirement of the baby boomers is not too
far, and in the pressing time of the crisis the issue of Social Security has been in
the background, but it has not disappeared A relatively high unemployment for a


                                         15
couple of more years will require spending on subsidies. The budget outlook looks
rather grim on the spending side. The Congressional Budget Office predicts deficit
of 7 per cent of GDP up to 2020. This is not a rosy scenario.


References
 [1] Aghion Philippe, Alberto Alesina and Francesco Trebbi (2004) "Endogenous
     Political Institutions" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 565-612
 [2] Alesina Alberto (1988) “The End of Large Public Debts” in F. Giavazzi and
     L. Spaventa (eds.), High Public Debt: The Italian Experience, Cambridge,
     Cambridge University Press.
 [3] Alesina A., and S. Ardagna, 1998, Tales of Fiscal Adjustments, Economic
     Policy, October 1998, 489-545.
 [4] Alesina A., S. Ardagna, R. Perotti, and F. Schiantarelli, 2002, Fiscal Policy,
     Profits, and Investment, American Economic Review, vol. 92, no. 3, June
     2002, 571-589.
 [5] Alesina, Alberto and Allan Drazen (1991) “Why are Stabilizations De-
     layed?,” American Economic Review, 81, 1170-1188.
 [6] Alesina, Alberto and Edward Glaeser (2004) Fighting Poverty in the US and
     Europe: A World of Difference (Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK).
 [7] Alesina A., R. Perotti, and J. Tavares, 1998, The Political Economy of Fiscal
     Adjustments, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 1998.
 [8] Alesina A., and R. Perotti, 1997, The Welfare State and Competitiveness,
     American Economic Review, 1997, 87, 921-939.
 [9] Alesina A., and R. Perotti, 1995, Fiscal Expansions and Adjustments in
     OECD Countries, Economic Policy, n.21, 207-247.
[10] Ardagna Silvia (2004), “Fiscal Stabilizations: When Do They Work and
     Why”, European Economic Review, vol. 48, No. 5, October 2004, pp. 1047-
     1074.
[11] Blanchard O., 1993, Suggestion for a New Set of Fiscal Indicators, OECD
     Working paper.
[12] Blanchard O., 1990, Comment on Giavazzi and Pagano, NBER Macroeco-
     nomics Annual, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1990.

                                        16
[13] Blanchard, O.J.. and R. Perotti, (2002), “An Empirical Investigation of the
     Dynamic Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Revenues on Out-
     put”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, pp. 1329-1368.

[14] Bertola, G., Drazen, A., 1993. Trigger Points and Budget Cuts: Explaining
     the effects of Fiscal Austerity. American Economic Review 83 (1), 11–26.

[15] Giavazzi, F., T. Jappelli, and M. Pagano, 2000, Searching for Non-Linear
     Effects of Fiscal Policy: Evidence from Industrial and Developing Countries,
     European Economic Review, 2000, vol. 44, n.7, 1259-1289.

[16] Giavazzi F., and M. Pagano, 1996, Non-Keynesian Effects of Fiscal Policy
     Changes: International Evidence and the Swedish Experience, Swedish Eco-
     nomic Policy Review, vol. 3, n.1, Spring, 67-112.

[17] Giavazzi F., and M. Pagano, 1990, Can Severe Fiscal Contractions Be Expan-
     sionary? Tales of Two Small European Countries, NBER Macroeconomics
     Annual, MIT Press, (Cambridge, MA), 1990, 95-122.

[18] Lambertini L., and J. Tavares, 2001, Exchange Rates and Fiscal Adjustments:
     Evidence from the ECD and Implications for EMU.

[19] McDermott J., and R. Wescott, 1996, An Empirical Analysis of Fiscal Ad-
     justments, IMF Staff papers, vol. 43, n.4, 723-753.

[20] Milesi-Ferretti Gian Maria, Roberto Perotti, and Massimo Rostagno (2002)
     “Electoral Systems And Public Spending”, The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics, vol. 117(2), 609-657.

[21] Mountford A., H. Uhlig, (2008), “What Are the Effects of Fiscal Plicy
     Shocks?” NBER working paper 14551.

[22] Perotti, Roberto, 1999, Fiscal Policy When Things are Going Badly, Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics, 114, November 1999, 1399-1436.

[23] Persson Torsten and Guido Tabellini, (2003), “The Economic Effects of Con-
     stitutions”, MIT Press, Munich Lectures in Economics.

[24] Ramey V., (2008), “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s All in the
     Timing”

[25] Romer Christina and David Romer, (2007), The Macroeconomics Effects of
     Tax Change: Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks”, NBER
     working paper 13264.

                                       17
[26] Sutherland, A., 1997. Fiscal Crises and Aggregate Demand: Can High Public
     Debt Reverse the Effects of Fiscal Policy? Journal of Public Economics 65,
     147–162.

[27] von Hagen J., A. H. Hallett, R. Strauch, (2002), “Budgetary Consolidation
     in Europe: Quality, Economic Conditions, and Persistence”, Journal of the
     Japanese and International Economics, vol. 16, pp. 512-535.

[28] von Hagen J., R. Strauch, (2001), “Fiscal Consolidations: Quality, Economic
     Conditions, and Success, Public Choice, vol. 109, no.3-4, pp 327-346




                                      18
6 Data Appendix
  • Debt.= government gross debt as a share of GDP

  • Total deficit = cyclically adjusted total deficit as a share of GDP = primary
    deficit + (interest expenses on government debt/GDP)

  • Primary deficit = cyclically adjusted primary deficit as a share of GDP =
    Primary expenses - Total revenue

  • Primary expenses = cyclically adjusted primary expenditure as a share of
    GDP = Transfers + ((Government wage expenditures + Government non
    wage expenditures + Subsidies + Government investment)/GDP)

  • Curr. G = cyclically adjusted current expenditure as a share of GDP = Trans-
    fers + ((Government wage expenditures + Government non wage expendi-
    tures + Subsidies)/GDP)

  • Transfers = cyclically adjusted transfers as a share of GDP

  • Government wage expenditures = government wage bill expenditures

  • Government non wage expenditures = government non wage bill expendi-
    tures

  • Subsidies = subsidies to firms

  • Government investment = gross government consumption on fixed capital

  • Total revenue = Tax = cyclically adjusted total revenue as a share of GDP =
    Income taxes + Business taxes + Indirect taxes + Social security contribu-
    tions + (Other taxes/GDP)

  • Income taxes = cyclically adjusted income taxes as a share of GDP = cycli-
    cally adjusted direct taxes on household as a share of GDP

  • Business taxes = cyclically adjusted business taxes as a share of GDP =
    cyclically adjusted direct taxes on businesses as a share of GDP

  • Indirect taxes = cyclically adjusted indirect taxes as a share of GDP = cycli-
    cally adjusted indirect taxes as a share of GDP

  • Social security contributions = cyclically adjusted social security contribu-
    tions paid by employers and employees as a share of GDP


                                      19
•     Curr.G/ Pr.Deficit; Gov.Inv/ Pr.Deficit; Spending item/ Pr.Deficit;
    = an increase in these variables means that a larger share of the increase
    (reduction) of the primary deficit is obtained by increasing (cutting) current
    spending/gov. investment/spending item

•     Tax Revenue Item/ Pr.Deficit = an increase in these variables means that
    a larger share of the increase (reduction) of the primary deficit is obtained by
    cutting (increasing) a revenue item of the government budget

•     Curr.G+ Tax is actually equal to the negative of this variable. If both
    taxes and spending are cut during the episode of loose or tight fiscal policy,
    the variable has the “highest positive” value. If, instead, both spending and
    taxes increase the variable has the “highest negative value”.

• G7 GDP Growth = average growth rate of real GDP (with GDP weights) of
  the seven major industrial countries

• GDP Growth = growth rate of real capita GDP

• Trade Balance = Trade balance as a share of GDP = (Exports of goods and
  services - Imports of goods and services)/GDP.




                                       20
                                                   Figure 1
                       Contribution of expenditure and revenue items to the fiscal stimuli
                      116.87%
 120.00%




 100.00%




  80.00%
                                 70.99%



  60.00%
                                                       50.21%                                                                      51.38%
                                                                                                                                                   45.58%

  40.00%                                                               32.92%
                29.01%

                                                                                        18.52%                                                                      20.17%
  20.00%
                                                                                                                       10.70%                                11.93%
                                                                  8.84%                                            8.84%
                                                  4.97%                            4.42%           5.80% 4.53%

    0.00%
                  Primary       Total revenue      Transfers     Government       Government        Subsidies      Government      Income taxes    Business taxes   Indirect taxes   Social security
                expenditures                                        wage           non wage                        investment                                              -3.70% contributions
                                                                 expenditures     expenditures                                           -9.88%                                              -11.52%
 -20.00%                              -17.28%                                                                                                                                        -17.96%
                                                                         Expansionary episodes             Contractionary episodes
Note: Figure 1 shows the percentage of the increase (reduction) in the primary deficit (surplus) due to changes in spending and revenue items of the government budget. Positive values indicate that
expenditure items increase and revenue items decrease, contributing to a worsening of the primary balance. Negative values indicate that expenditure items decrease and revenue items increase,
contributing to an improvement of the primary balance.
                                                        Figure 2
                           Contribution of expenditure and revenue items to fiscal adjustments
100.00%

               86.22%


 80.00%

                                      65.41%

 60.00%



                                                                                                                        37.84%
 40.00%                   34.59%
                                                                                                                  30.31%
                                                                                                                                        25.95% 25.98%
                                                22.83%
                                                                                                                                                               18.92%
 20.00%                                                         15.75% 16.22%
                                13 39%
                                13.39%                                                           12 60%
                                                                                                 12.60%                                                                  11 35%
                                                                                                                                                                         11.35%
                                                                                  5.12%                     4.86%
                                                                                                                                                                    0.39%
   0.00%
                                                                                        -1.08%
                Primary           Total          Transfers      Government Government             Subsidies      Government Income taxes            Business      Indirect taxes      Social
              expenditures       revenue                           wage       non wage                           investment                          taxes                           security
                                                                expenditures expenditures                                         -10.63%                                          contributions

-20.00%                                                                                                                                                                            -2.76% -3.24%

                                                      -25.41%


-40.00%

                                                                      Expansionary episodes             Contractionary episodes

Note: Figure 2 shows the percentage of the decrease (increase) in the primary deficit (surplus) due to changes in spending and revenue items of the government budget. Positive values indicate that
expenditure items decrease and revenue items increase, contributing to an improvement of the primary balance. Negative values indicate that expenditure items increase and revenue items decrease,
contributing to a worsening of the primary balance.
                                                  Figure 3
                     Contribution of expenditure and revenue items to fiscal adjustments
               135.42%
140.00%


120.00%


100.00%


  80.00%
                                       66.20%
                                                 57.64%                                                                                             56.94%
  60.00%


                           33.80%                                36.11%                                                  35.68%
  40.00%
                                                                                                               26.39%                    24.88%
                                                                                                                                                                19 25%
                                                                                                                                                                19.25%
                                                                             15.02%               16.67%                                                                  14.55%
  20.00%
                                                                                                             5.63%                                                                         5.16%
                                                                                   1.39%
   0.00%                                                                                -1.88%
                 Primary           Total          Transfers      Government Government             Subsidies      Government Income taxes            Business      Indirect taxes      Social
               expenditures       revenue                           wage       non wage                           investment                          taxes                           security
 -20.00%                                                         expenditures expenditures                                                                                          contributions
                                                      -20.19%                                                                                                      -21.53%            -6.25%

 -40.00%                        -35.42%

                                                                                                                                   -47.92%
 -60.00%
                                                              Successful episodes           Unsuccessful episodes
Note: Figure 3 shows the percentage of the decrease (increase) in the primary deficit (surplus) due to changes in spending and revenue items of the government budget. Positive values indicate that
expenditure items decrease and revenue items increase, contributing to an improvement of the primary balance. Negative values indicate that expenditure items increase and revenue items decrease,
contributing to a worsening of the primary balance
Table 1: Fiscal stimuli: size and composition
                                                                                     Expansionary                                                          Contractionary

                                                               [T-2 - T-1]           T        [T+1 - T+2]          (c) - (a)           [T-2 - T-1]          T         [T+1 - T+2]        (c) - (a)
                                                                   (a)              (b)           (c)                                      (a)             (b)            (c)

Debt                                                              50.28           50.52            51.1             0.82                  60.79          62.38            63.3            2.51
                                                                  (9.03)          (9.09)          (9.48)                                  (5.18)         (5.18)          (4.46)
Change in debt                                                     -1.02           0.48            0.53             1.55                   -0.29          2.24            2.21            2.50
                                                                  (1.47)          (1.12)          (1.24)                                  (0.59)         (0.67)          (0.68)
Total deficit                                                      -1.04           2.19            3.27             4.31                    1.5           3.79            3.97            2.47
                                                                  (1.62)          (1.65)          (1.24)                                  (0.72)         (0.74)          (0.71)
Primary deficit                                                    -2.01           1.16            1.61             3.62                    -0.3          1.99            2.13            2.43
                                                                  (0.82)          (0.92)          (0.91)                                  (0.45)         (0.48)          (0.41)
Primary expenditures                                              36.79           37.72           37.84             1.05                  40.08          42.22           42.92            2.84
                                                                  (1.73)          (1.64)          (1.66)                                  (0.94)         (0.94)          (1.00)
Transfers                                                         14.93           14.88           15.11             0.18                  16.83          17.28           18.05            1.22
                                                                  (1.03)          (1.01)          (1.04)                                  (0.60)         (0.58)          (0.57)
Government wage expenditures                                      10.62           10.74           10.94             0.32                  11.78           12.2           12.58            0.80
                                                                  (0.52)          (0.47)          (0.50)                                  (0.41)         (0.43)          (0.46)
Government non wage expenditures                                   6.81            6.96            6.97             0.16                   7.73           8.15            8.18            0.45
                                                                  (0.49)          (0.49)          (0.55)                                  (0.29)         (0.28)          (0.31)
Subsidies                                                          2.03            2.09            2.24             0.21                   1.82           1.93            1.93            0.11
                                                                  (0 33)
                                                                  (0.33)          (0.32)          (0.37)                                  (0.13)         (0.14)          (0.15)
Government investment                                              2.26            3.05            2.58             0.32                   1.95           2.67            2.21            0.26
                                                                  (0.37)          (0.38)          (0.37)                                  (0.19)         (0.27)          (0.21)
Total revenue                                                      38.8           36.56           36.23             -2.57                 40.38          40.23            40.8            0.42
                                                                  (1.90)          (1.83)          (2.00)                                  (1.15)         (1.12)          (1.07)
Income taxes                                                      10.89             9.2            9.03             -1.86                 11.02          11.21           11.26            0.24
                                                                  (1.10)          (0.98)          (1.08)                                  (0.74)         (0.71)          (0.67)
Business taxes                                                     4.25            3.37             2.6             -1.65                  3.03           2.78            2.74            -0.29
                                                                  (0.83)          (0.63)          (0.33)                                  (0.25)         (0.20)          (0.22)
Indirect taxes                                                    13.33           12.57            12.6             -0.73                 12.67           12.5           12.76            0.09
                                                                  (0.61)          (0.61)          (0.69)                                  (0.39)         (0.40)          (0.36)
Social security contributions                                       8.7            8.93            9.35             0.65                  11.08          11.17           11.36            0.28
                                                                  (0.94)          (0.82)          (0.89)                                  (0.69)         (0.68)          (0.70)


Source: OECD. Variables are in share of GDP. Total deficit, Primary deficit, Primary expenditures, Transfers, Total revenues, and all revenue items are cyclically adjusted variables.
Standard deviations of the means in parenthesis. See the Data Appendix for the exact definition of the variables
Table 2: Fiscal stimuli and growth
                                                     Expansionary                                    Contractionary


                                     [T-2 - T-1]     T      [T+1 - T+2]   (c) - (a)   [T-2 - T-1]     T      [T+1 - T+2]   (c) - (a)
                                         (a)        (b)         (c)                       (a)        (b)         (c)


G7 GDP Growth                           0.39        1.6        2.03        1.64          0.2         -0.7       -0.74       -0.94
                                       (0.66)      (0.53)     (0.32)                    (0.23)      (0.23)     (0.19)
GDP Growth                              3.9        3.77        4.37        0.47          2.89       0.93        1.79         -1.1
                                       (0.65)      (0.35)     (0.32)                    (0.22)      (0.26)     (0.27)
Private Consumption Growth              3.49       3.47        3.72        0.23          3.08       1.54        1.86        -1.22
                                        (0.7)      (0.61)     (0.32)                    (0.22)      (0.3)      (0.29)
Total Investment Growth                 3.44       2.58        6.55        3.11          2.9        -1.39       0.04        -2.86
                                       (1.81)      (1.63)     (1.00)                    (0.59)      (0.82)     (0.64)
Private Investment Growth               3.5        1.14        7.49        3.99          3.36        -1.9       0.07        -3.29
                                       (2.05)      (2.04)     (1.25)                    (0.73)      (1.02)     (0.82)
Business Investment Growth              5.51        2.5        7.64        2.13          6.73       -0.34       -0.78       -7.51
                                       (2.06)      (3.21)     (1.53)                    (1.44)      (1.34)     (1.07)
Trade Balance                           0.53       0.61        -1.9        -2.43         0.19        -0.2       0.14        -0.05
                                       (2.07)      (2.2)      (2.11)                     (0.7)      (0.65)     (0.69)
Table 3: Expansionary and contractionary fiscal adjustments: size and composition
                                                                 Expansionary                                                                            Contractionary

                                                            [T-2 - T-1]           T        [T+1 - T+2]        (c) - (a)              [T-2 - T-1]           T        [T+1 - T+2]          (c) - (a)
                                                                (a)              (b)           (c)                                       (a)              (b)           (c)

Debt                                                           59.86           57.53            54.1               -5.76                69.15            71.8           69.52             0.37
                                                               (5.52)          (5.22)          (5.07)                                   (4.04)          (4.23)          (4.25)
Change in debt                                                  -1.46           -2.42            -2.3              -0.84                 3.28            1.97            1.28             -2.00
                                                               (1.03)          (1.14)          (0.54)                                   (0.62)          (0.54)          (0.52)
Total deficit                                                   3.61            1.33            0.56               -3.05                 5.67            3.89            4.14             -1.53
                                                               (1.09)          (1.18)          (0.98)                                   (0.63)          (0.70)          (0.72)
Primary deficit                                                 1.31            -0.84           -1.23              -2.54                  2.7            0.74            0.85             -1.85
                                                               (0.77)          (0.74)          (0.60)                                   (0.40)          (0.43)          (0.39)
Primary expenditures                                           41.32           39.71           39.13               -2.19                43.22           42.47           42.58             -0.64
                                                               (2.04)          (1.80)          (1.59)                                   (0.98)          (0.95)          (0.93)
Transfers                                                       18.1           17.66           17.52               -0.58                17.95           18.21           18.42             0.47
                                                               (1.37)          (1.21)          (1.08)                                   (0.54)          (0.54)          (0.54)
Government wage expenditures                                   11.65           11.41           11.25               -0.40                12.46           12.25           12.16             -0.30
                                                               (0.53)          (0.51)          (0.46)                                   (0.40)          (0.38)          (0.36)
Government non wage expenditures                                7.03            6.91             6.9               -0.13                 8.09            8.1             8.11             0.02
                                                               (0.53)          (0.49)          (0.48)                                   (0.27)          (0.28)          (0.28)
Subsidies                                                       2.17            1.95            1.85               -0.32                 2.07            1.98            1.98             -0.09
                                                               (0 33)
                                                               (0.33)          (0.30)          (0.28)                                   (0.13)          (0.13)          (0.14)
Government investment                                           2.38             1.77            1.61              -0.77                 2.66            1.95            1.96             -0.70
                                                               (0.29)          (0.27)          (0.25)                                   (0.18)          (0.17)          (0.14)
Total revenue                                                  40.02           40.56           40.36               0.34                 40.52           41.73           41.73             1.21
                                                               (1.99)          (1.90)          (1.84)                                   (0.98)          (0.94)          (0.96)
Income taxes                                                   10.62           10.59           10.35               -0.27                11.45           11.79           11.93             0.48
                                                               (1.04)          (1.07)          (0.97)                                   (0.63)          (0.63)          (0.63)
Business taxes                                                  2.92            3.49            3.58               0.66                  2.55            2.88             2.9             0.35
                                                               (0.41)          (0.51)          (0.50)                                   (0.17)          (0.22)          (0.25)
Indirect taxes                                                 13.52           13.61           13.53               0.01                 12.44           12.69           12.65             0.21
                                                               (0.46)          (0.40)          (0.40)                                   (0.31)          (0.30)          (0.30)
Social security contributions                                   9.63            9.52            9.56               -0.07                11.44           11.52           11.38             -0.06
                                                               (1.01)          (0.92)          (0.89)                                   (0.61)          (0.62)          (0.66)




Source: OECD. Variables are in share of GDP. Total deficit, Primary deficit, Primary expenditures, Transfers, Total revenues, and all revenue items are cyclically adjusted variables.
Standard deviations of the means in parenthesis. See the Data Appendix for the exact definition of the variables
Table 4: Expansionary and contractionary fiscal adjustments and growth
                                                          Expansionary                                    Contractionary


                                         [T-2 - T-1]      T      [T+1 - T+2]   (c) - (a)   [T-2 - T-1]     T      [T+1 - T+2]   (c) - (a)
                                             (a)         (b)             (c)                   (a)        (b)         (c)


G7 GDP Growth                               0.57        1.49         1.98       1.41         -0.32       -0.42       -0.49       -0.17
                                           (0.55)       (0.37)      (0.24)                    (0.2)      (0.2)      (0.17)
GDP Growth                                  3.14        4.73         4.68       1.54          2.03       2.36        2.25        0.22
                                           (0.56)       (0.39)      (0.33)                    (0.2)      (0.18)     (0.18)
Private Consumption Growth                  2.82        4.12         4.34       1.52          1.94       2.27        2.27        0.33
                                           (0.49)       (0.47)      (0.42)                   (0.26)      (0.24)     (0.19)
Total Investment Growth                     1.44        7.72         7.91       6.47           1         1.91         2.5         1.5
                                           (1.68)       (0.98)      (1.12)                   (0.61)      (0.54)     (0.72)
Private Investment Growth                   1.41         9.6         7.81        6.4          1.04       2.92        3.15        2.11
                                           (1.86)       (1.22)      (1.33)                   (0.75)      (0.69)     (0.89)
Business Investment Growth                  2.23        10.88        4.98       2.75          2.97       3.23        5.17         2.2
                                            (1.9)       (1.76)      (2.62)                     (1)       (1.18)       (1)
Trade Balance                               0.71        1.85         1.56       0.85         -0.54       0.15        0.95        1.49
                                           (1.58)       (1.61)      (1.81)                   (0.58)      (0.64)     (0.65)
Table 5: Successful and unsuccessful fiscal adjustments: size and composition
                                                                   Successful                                                                             Unsuccessful

                                                            [T-2 - T-1]           T        [T+1 - T+2]        (c) - (a)              [T-2 - T-1]           T        [T+1 - T+2]          (c) - (a)
                                                                (a)              (b)           (c)                                       (a)              (b)           (c)

Debt                                                           61.92           59.63           53.18               -8.74                68.29            71.4           72.06             3.77
                                                               (4.32)          (4.50)          (4.16)                                   (4.32)          (4.53)          (4.48)
Change in debt                                                  -1.6            -1.97           -3.88              -2.28                 3.68            2.29            2.14             -1.54
                                                               (0.72)          (1.14)          (0.34)                                   (0.64)          (0.53)          (0.43)
Total deficit                                                    2.5            0.29            0.66               -1.84                  5.6            3.77            3.69             -1.91
                                                               (1.00)          (1.06)          (1.09)                                   (0.71)          (0.83)          (0.85)
Primary deficit                                                  0.8             -1.2           -0.64              -1.44                  2.7            0.71            0.57             -2.13
                                                               (0.68)          (0.64)          (0.69)                                   (0.45)          (0.51)          (0.46)
Primary expenditures                                           45.78           43.67           43.83               -1.95                43.46           42.68           42.74             -0.72
                                                               (1.76)          (1.60)          (1.46)                                   (1.10)          (1.10)          (1.03)
Transfers                                                      19.86           19.07           19.03               -0.83                18.38           18.59           18.81             0.43
                                                               (1.11)          (0.94)          (0.89)                                   (0.63)          (0.64)          (0.61)
Government wage expenditures                                   12.82            12.5            12.3               -0.52                12.51            12.3           12.19             -0.32
                                                               (0.69)          (0.67)          (0.63)                                   (0.44)          (0.42)          (0.40)
Government non wage expenditures                                8.73            8.62            8.71               -0.02                 7.96            8.01              8              0.04
                                                               (0.49)          (0.47)          (0.45)                                   (0.30)          (0.31)          (0.30)
Subsidies                                                       2.29            2.14            2.05               -0.24                 2.05            1.94            1.93             -0.12
                                                               (0 36)
                                                               (0.36)          (0.35)          (0.34)                                   (0.14)          (0.14)          (0.15)
Government investment                                           2.12            1.34            1.74               -0.38                 2.57            1.85            1.81             -0.76
                                                               (0.38)          (0.34)          (0.27)                                   (0.19)          (0.18)          (0.16)
Total revenue                                                  44.98           44.86           44.47               -0.51                40.76           41.97           42.17             1.41
                                                               (1.61)          (1.57)          (1.67)                                   (1.04)          (1.04)          (1.03)
Income taxes                                                   13.69           13.43             13                -0.69                11.02           11.35           11.55             0.53
                                                               (1.18)          (1.17)          (1.16)                                   (0.64)          (0.65)          (0.64)
Business taxes                                                  2.77            3.37            3.59               0.82                  2.69            3.08             3.1             0.41
                                                               (0.26)          (0.31)          (0.35)                                   (0.22)          (0.28)          (0.31)
Indirect taxes                                                 13.77            13.6           13.46               -0.31                12.32           12.51           12.63             0.31
                                                               (0.68)          (0.61)          (0.62)                                   (0.33)          (0.32)          (0.33)
Social security contributions                                  10.82           10.73           10.73               -0.09                12.04           12.25           12.15             0.11
                                                               (1.26)          (1.15)          (1.20)                                   (0.62)          (0.62)          (0.64)

Source: OECD. Variables are in share of GDP. Total deficit, Primary deficit, Primary expenditures, Transfers, Total revenues, and all revenue items are cyclically adjusted variables.
Standard deviations of the means in parenthesis. See the Data Appendix for the exact definition of the variables
Table 6: Successful and unsuccessful fiscal adjustments and growth
                                                              Successful                                     Unsuccessful


                                         [T-2 - T-1]      T        [T+1 - T+2]   (c) - (a)   [T-2 - T-1]     T      [T+1 - T+2]   (c) - (a)
                                             (a)         (b)           (c)                       (a)        (b)         (c)


G7 GDP Growth                               0.4          0.8          0.85        0.45         -0.18       -0.22       -0.12       0.06
                                           (0.53)       (0.46)        (0.37)                   (0.23)      (0.22)     (0.18)
GDP Growth                                  2.99        3.61          3.45        0.46          2.07       2.56        2.52        0.45
                                           (0.58)       (0.5)         (0.28)                   (0.25)      (0.2)      (0.21)
Private Consumption Growth                  2.75        3.74          3.02        0.27          2.01       2.28        2.42        0.41
                                            (0.6)       (0.67)        (0.3)                    (0.26)      (0.23)      (0.2)
Total Investment Growth                     2.95        4.11          4.78        1.83          1.02       2.55        3.52         2.5
                                           (1.37)       (1.54)        (1.24)                   (0.69)      (0.56)     (0.73)
Private Investment Growth                   3.45         5.6          5.07        1.62          1.18       3.43        4.23        3.05
                                           (1.46)       (1.85)        (1.43)                   (0.81)      (0.73)      (0.9)
Business Investment Growth                  3.2         5.46          6.06        2.86          3.23       5.17        5.84        2.61
                                           (1.79)       (2.06)        (1.42)                   (1.07)      (0.97)     (1.08)
Trade Balance                               2.72        3.99          4.31        1.59         -0.19       0.48        1.15        1.34
                                            (1.1)       (1.03)        (1.51)                   (0.71)      (0.77)     (0.84)
Table 7: GDP growth during and in the aftermath of a fiscal stimulus
                             (1)            (2)              (3)     (4) (5)          (6)                                                                                   (7)                       (8)
                             GDP growth GDP growth GDP growth GDP growth Avg. GDP gr. Avg. GDP gr.                                                                          Avg. GDP gr.              Avg. GDP gr.

GDP growth (-1)                             0.467***             0.484***             0.51***7             0.48***         0.217*              0.236**                      0.266**                   0.237**
                                            (3.18)               (3.62)               (3.76)               (3.66)          (1.84)              (2.15)                       (2.40)                    (2.17)
GDP growth (-2)                             -0.16                -0.08                -0.10                -0.08           -0.08               -0.02                        -0.04                     -0.028
                                            (-1.16)              (-0.60)              (-0.78)              (-0.68)         (-0.74)             (-0.19)                      (-0.39)                   (-0.27)
G7 GDP growth (-1)                          0.36*                0.27                 0.25                 0.27            -0.164              -0.23                        -0.244                    -0.228
                                            (1.80)               (1.47)               (1.34)               (1.49)          (-1.03)             (-1.53)                      (-1.61)                   (-1.53)
Debt (-1)                                   -0.004               -0.007               -0.009               -0.0068         -0.003              -0.006                       -0.0061                   -0.005
                                            (-0.54)              (-0.90)              (-1.10)              (-0.93)         (-0.37)             (-0.78)                      (-0.74)                   (-0.77)
Δ Curr. G                                                        -0.75***                                                                      -0.44**
                                                                 (-2.87)                                                                       (-2.02)
Δ Gov. Inv                                                       -0.256                                                                        -0.076
                                                                 (-1.38)                                                                       (-0.50)
Δ Tax                                                            -0.177                                                                        -0.199
                                                                 (-0.62)                                                                       (-0.85)
Δ Pr. Deficit                               -0.283                                    -0.428**             -0.264          -0.102                                           -0.197                    -0.089
                                            (-1.51)
                                            (-1.51)                                   (-2.29)
                                                                                      (-2.29)              (-1.57)
                                                                                                           (-1. 57)        (-0.68)
                                                                                                                           (-0. 68)                                         (-1.30)
                                                                                                                                                                            (-1.30)                   (-0.64)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (-0.64)
Δ Curr. G/Δ Pr. Deficit                                                               -0.02***                                                                              -0.016***
                                                                                      (-3.43)                                                                               (-3.37)
Δ Gov. Inv/Δ Pr. Deficit                                                              -0.003                                                                                -0.005
                                                                                      (-0.39)                                                                               (-0.73)
Δ Curr. G + Δ Tax                                                                                          0.466***                                                                                   0.323***
                                                                                                           (4.07)                                                                                     (3.44)
Constant                                    0.008                0.012                0.026***             0.012           0.023***            0.026***                     0.037***                  0.026***
                                            (0.90)               (1.38)               (2.66)               (1.45)          (3.13)              (3.52)                       (4.57)                    (3.78)
Observations                                72                   72                   72                   72              69                  69                           69                        69
R-squared                                   0.28                 0.43                 0.40                 0.43            0.06                0.21                         0.21                      0.21

Notes: OLS regressions. Dependent variables: real GDP growth rate during the fiscal stimulus in columns 1-4; average real GDP growth rate during the fiscal stimulus and in the following two years
in columns 5-8. T-statistics in parenthesis. See the Data Appendix for the exact definition of the variables.
Table 8: GDP growth and the composition of a fiscal stimulus
                                                 (1)                 (2)                 (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)
                                                 GDP growth          GDP growth          GDP growth Avg. GDP gr. Avg. GDP gr. Avg. GDP gr.

GDP growth (-1)                                  0.36**              0.53**              0.48***              0.26**     0.38***       0.25**
                                                 (2.61)              (3.81)              (3.29)               (2.25)     (3.41)        (2.11)
GDP growth (-2)                                  0.05                -0.09               -0.23                0.046      -0.08         -0.11
                                                 (0.42)              (-0.71)             (-1.64)              (0.41)     (-0.81)       (-0.94)
G7 GDP growth (-1)                               0.14                0.08                0.26                 -0.343**   -0.357**      -0.27
                                                 (0.78)              (0.44)              (1.29)               (-2.28)    (-2.42)       (-1.64)
Debt (-1)                                        -0.0127*            -0.01               -0.0003              -0.008     -0.0004       -0.0017
                                                 (-1.69)             (-1.41)             (-0.04)              (-1.08)    (-0.05)       (-0.22)
Δ Tran                                           -0.23                                                        -0.345
                                                 (-0.50)                                                      (-0.87)
Δ Gov. non wage exp.                             -3.10***                                                     -3.01***
                                                 (-3.57)                                                      (-4.06)
Δ Gov. wage exp.                                 -1.32**                                                      -0.034
                                                 (-2.43)                                                      (-0.07)
Δ Subsidies                                      -1.50                                                        -0.623
                                                 (-1.49)                                                      (-0.73)
Δ Gov. Inv                                       -0.22                                                        -0.059
                                                 (-1.35)                                                      (-0.42)
Δ Income taxes                                   0.12                                                         -0.281
                                                 (0.30)                                                       (-0.85)
Δ Bus. taxes                                     -0.23                                                        -0.121
                                                 (-0.73)                                                      (-0.45)
Δ Soc. security contr.                           0.248                                                        0.186
                                                 (0.56)                                                       (0.50)
Δ Indirect taxes                                 -0.181                                                       -0.167
                                                 (-0.37)
                                                 (      )                                                     (-0.40)
                                                                                                              (      )
Δ other taxes                                    -3.001***                                                    -2.022**
                                                 (-2.80)                                                      (-2.24)
Δ Pr. Deficit                                                        -0.493***           -0.32*                          -0.276*       -0.077
                                                                     (-2.76)             (-1.80)                         (-1.93)       (-0.53)
Δ Tran/Δ Pr. Deficit                                                 0.002                                               -0.007
                                                                     (0.26)                                              (-1.06)
Δ Gov. non wage exp./Δ Pr. Deficit                                   -0.053***                                           -0.065***
                                                                     (-3.05)                                             (-4.72)
Δ Gov. wage exp/Δ Pr. Deficit                                        -0.032**                                            0.0019
                                                                     (-2.07)                                             (0.16)
Δ Subsidies/Δ Pr. Deficit                                            -0.062**                                            -0.04*
                                                                     (-2.14)                                             (-1.75)
Δ Gov. Inv/Δ Pr. Deficit                                             -0.0016                                             -0.007
                                                                     (-0.20)                                             (-1.10)
Δ Income taxes/Δ Pr. Deficit                                                             0.016*                                        0.015**
                                                                                         (1.93)                                        (2.29)
Δ Bus. taxes/Δ Pr. Deficit                                                               0.029***                                      0.017*
                                                                                         (2.83)                                        (1.88)
Δ Soc. security contr./Δ Pr. Deficit                                                     0.01                                          0.008
                                                                                         (0.99)                                        (1.00)
Δ Indirect taxes/Δ Pr. Deficit                                                           0.030**                                       0.023**
                                                                                         (2.50)                                        (2.42)
Δ other taxes/Δ Pr. Deficit                                                              0.032**                                       0.014
                                                                                         (2.48)                                        (1.34)
Constant                                         0.027***            0.035***            0.006                0.035***   0.041***      0.019***
                                                 (3.12)              (3.65)              (0.70)               (4.72)     (5.28)        (2.73)
Observations                                     67                  69                  70                   64         66            67
R-squared                                        0.63                0.51                0.43                 0.47       0.39          0.21
Notes: OLS regressions. Dependent variables: real GDP growth rate during the fiscal stimulus in columns 1-3; average real GDP growth
rate during the fiscal stimulus and in the following two years in columns 4-6. T-statistics in parenthesis.
S the
See h Data A
           Appendix
                di ffor the
                         h exact ddefinition
                                    fi i i off the
                                                h variables.
                                                     i bl
Table 9: GDP growth during and in the aftermath of a fiscal adjustment
                             (1)            (2)             (3)        (4) (5)        (6)                                                                                (7)                         (8)
                             GDP growth GDP growth GDP growth GDP growth Avg. GDP gr. Avg. GDP gr.                                                                       Avg. GDP gr.                Avg. GDP gr.

GDP growth (-1)                             0.296***            0.288***             0.269***             0.30***        0.198**             0.197**                     0.182**                     0.202***
                                            (2.99)              (3.12)               (3.04)               (3.29)         (2.41)              (2.56)                      (2.48)                      (2.66)
GDP growth (-2)                             -0.0013             0.08                 0.123                0.07           -0.059              0.01                        0.045                       0.007
                                            (-0.01)             (0.98)               (1.50)               (0.86)         (-0.80)             (0.14)                      (0.66)                      (0.10)
G7 GDP growth (-1)                          0.116               0.038                0.018                0.025          0.005               -0.068                      -0.08                       -0.07
                                            (0.76)              (0.27)               (0.13)               (0.18)         (0.04)              (-0.58)                     (-0.72)                     (-0.63)
Debt (-1)                                   -0.011*             -0.006               -0.007               -0.009         -0.008              -0.006                      -0.006                      -0.006
                                            (-1.84)             (-1.11)              (-1.33)              (-1.54)        (-1.42)             (-1.05)                     (-1.22)                     (-1.20)
Δ Curr. G                                                       -0.433**                                                                     -0.296**
                                                                (-2.55)                                                                      (-2.10)
Δ Gov. Inv                                                      0.082                                                                        0.046
                                                                (0.60)                                                                       (0.41)
Δ Tax                                                           -0.22                                                                        -0.26
                                                                (-1.09)                                                                      (-1.56)
Δ Pr. Deficit                               -0.044                                   -0.023               0.016          -0.027                                          0.006                       0.024
                                            (-0.33)                                  (-0.19)              (0.13)         (-0.24)                                         (0.06)                      (0.23)
Δ Curr.
  Curr G/Δ Pr.
           Pr Deficit
               Deficit                                                               0.017***                                                                            0.015***
                                                                                     (4.70)                                                                              (4.81)
Δ Gov. Inv/Δ Pr. Deficit                                                             0.0013                                                                              0.004
                                                                                     (0.28)                                                                              (0.96)
Δ Curr. G + Δ Tax                                                                                         0.34***                                                                                    0.284***
                                                                                                          (3.80)                                                                                     (3.84)
Constant                                    0.027***            0.024***             0.019***             0.027***       0.029***            0.029***                    0.024***                    0.03***
                                            (3.85)              (3.44)               (2.97)               (4.23)         (4.90)              (4.87)                      (4.28)                      (5.41)
Observations                                88                  88                   88                   88             83                  83                          83                          83
R-squared                                   0.22                0.35                 0.40                 0.34           0.12                0.27                        0.34                        0.27

Notes: OLS regressions. Dependent variables: real GDP growth rate during the fiscal adjustment in columns 1-4; average real GDP growth rate during the fiscal adjustment and in the following two years
in columns 5-8. T-statistics in parenthesis. See the Data Appendix for the exact definition of the variables.
Table 10: GDP growth and the composition of a fiscal adjustment
                                                 (1)                 (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)
                                                 GDP growth          GDP growth GDP growth Avg. GDP gr. Avg. GDP gr. Avg. GDP gr.

GDP growth (-1)                                  0.208**             0.26***            0.276**            0.127       0.187**           0.155*
                                                 (2.11)              (2.99)             (2.54)             (1.58)      (2.56)            (1.80)
GDP growth (-2)                                  0.112               0.13               0.072              0.079       0.06              0.036
                                                 (1.26)              (1.59)             (0.74)             (1.09)      (0.88)            (0.47)
G7 GDP growth (-1)                               0.068               -0.05              0.108              -0.048      -0.15             -0.04
                                                 (0.44)              (-0.37)            (0.61)             (-0.39)     (-1.33)           (-0.30)
Debt (-1)                                        -0.013**            -0.010*            -0.013*            -0.014**    -0.008*           -0.012*
                                                 (-2.08)             (-1.74)            (-1.95)            (-2.43)     (-1.69)           (-1.99)
Δ Tran                                           -0.057                                                    -0.30
                                                 (-0.20)                                                   (-1.27)
Δ Gov. non wage exp.                             -1.53**                                                   -0.46
                                                 (-2.59)                                                   (-0.94)
Δ Gov. wage exp.                                 -1.18***                                                  -1.05***
                                                 (-2.66)                                                   (-2.85)
Δ Subsidies                                      -1.98**                                                   -1.84***
                                                 (-2.61)                                                   (-2.93)
Δ Gov. Inv                                       0.044                                                     -0.002
                                                 (0.32)                                                    (-0.02)
Δ Income taxes                                   -0.016                                                    0.04
                                                 (-0.06)                                                   (0.18)
Δ Bus. taxes                                     -0.57*                                                    -0.79***
                                                 (-1.92)                                                   (-3.19)
Δ Soc. security contr.                           -0.04                                                     -0.24
                                                 (-0.10)                                                   (-0.64)
Δ Indirect taxes                                 -0.19                                                     -0.37
                                                 (-0.43)
                                                 (     )                                                   (-1.03)
                                                                                                           (     )
Δ other taxes                                    -0.27                                                     0.106
                                                 (-0.50)                                                   (0.24)
Δ Pr. Deficit                                                        -0.084             0.051                          -0.022            0.077
                                                                     (-0.70)            (0.35)                         (-0.22)           (0.67)
Δ Tran/Δ Pr. Deficit                                                 0.006                                             0.009*
                                                                     (1.01)                                            (1.93)
Δ Gov. non wage exp./Δ Pr. Deficit                                   0.025**                                           0.005
                                                                     (2.23)                                            (0.56)
Δ Gov. wage exp/Δ Pr. Deficit                                        0.026***                                          0.022***
                                                                     (3.16)                                            (3.04)
Δ Subsidies/Δ Pr. Deficit                                            0.043***                                          0.036***
                                                                     (2.69)                                            (2.66)
Δ Gov. Inv/Δ Pr. Deficit                                             -0.0004                                           0.0026
                                                                     (-0.08)                                           (0.66)
Δ Income taxes/Δ Pr. Deficit                                                            -0.009                                           -0.005
                                                                                        (-1.42)                                          (-1.11)
Δ Bus. taxes/Δ Pr. Deficit                                                              -0.011                                           -0.015*
                                                                                        (-1.16)                                          (-1.84)
Δ Soc. security contr./Δ Pr. Deficit                                                    -0.01                                            -0.015*
                                                                                        (-1.04)                                          (-1.93)
Δ Indirect taxes/Δ Pr. Deficit                                                          -0.015                                           -0.02***
                                                                                        (-1.62)                                          (-2.68)
Δ other taxes/Δ Pr. Deficit                                                             0.0012                                           0.0001
                                                                                        (0.11)                                           (0.01)
Constant                                         0.024***            0.019***           0.033***           0.03***     0.025***          0.04***
                                                 (3.29)              (3.11)             (3.99)             (4.92)      (4.56)            (5.78)
Observations                                     81                  88                 80                 77          83                76
R-squared                                        0.47                0.46               0.28               0.41        0.38              0.26
Notes: OLS regressions. Dependent variables: real GDP growth rate during the fiscal adjustment in columns 1-3; average real GDP growth
rate during the fiscal adjustment and in the following two years in columns 4-6. T-statistics in parenthesis.
S the
See h Data A
           Appendix
                di ffor the
                         h exact ddefinition
                                    fi i i off the
                                                h variables.
                                                     i bl
Table 11: GDP growth and fiscal policy
                                                            (1)                     (2)                    (3)                    (4)                    (5)                     (6)                    (7)                    (8)               9
                                                         GDP growth              GDP growth             GDP growth             GDP growth             GDP growth              GDP growth             GDP growth             GDP growth       GDP growth

GDP growth (-1)                                             0.35***                 0.37***                0.37***                 0.34***                0.36***                0.37***                0.34***                 0.35***       0.36***
                                                             (8.37)                  (9.24)                 (9.45)                  (8.14)                 (8.98)                 (9.21)                 (7.99)                  (8.77)        (8.93)
GDP growth (-2)                                              -0.038                  0.016                   0.014                  -0.035                  0.02                  0.017                   -0.03                  0.026         0.025
                                                             (-0.91)                 (0.41)                 (0.36)                 (-0.84)                 (0.51)                 (0.43)                (-0.71)                  (0.65)        (0.62)
Debt (-1)                                                    -0.004                  -0.005                 -0.005                  -0.004                 -0.005                 -0.005                 -0.004                  -0.005        -0.005
                                                             (-1.09)                (-1.31)                 (-1.34)                (-1.04)                (-1.22)                (-1.27)                (-1.10)                 (-1.28)       (-1.39)
Δ Pr. Deficit                                              -0.154***                                      -0.145***               -0.131**                                      -0.136**                  -0.11                                 -0.14
                                                             (-3.98)                                        (-3.99)                (-1.99)                                       (-2.19)                (-1.08)                               (-1.58)
Tight*Δ Pr. Deficit                                                                                                                                                                                       0.12                                  0.16
                                                                                                                                                                                                         (0.74)                                (1.05)
Loose*Δ Pr. Deficit                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.213                                -0.126
                                                                                                                                                                                                        (-1.27)                               (-0.80)
Δ Curr. G                                                                          -0.51***                                                              -0.51***                                                              -0.51***
                                                                                    (-8.37)                                                               (-6.20)                                                               (-4.59)
Tight*Δ Curr. G                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (1.48)
Loose*Δ Curr. G                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (-1.21)
Δ Gov. Inv                                                                            -0.07                                                                -0.067                                                                0.006
                                                                                     (-1.16)                                                               (-0.89)                                                               (0.04)
Tight Δ Gov. Inv
Tight*Δ                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.036
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (0.19)
Loose*Δ Gov. Inv                                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.246
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (-1.22)
Δ Tax                                                                               -0.12**                                                                 -0.12                                                               -0.134
                                                                                    (-1.97)                                                                (-1.45)                                                              (-1.29)
Tight*Δ Tax                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.025
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (0.11)
Loose*Δ Tax                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.038
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (0.17)
Δ Curr. G + Δ Tax                                                                                         0.314***                                                              0.312***                                                      0.315***
                                                                                                            (8.36)                                                                (8.32)                                                        (7.05)
Tight*Δ Curr. G + Δ Tax                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -0.145
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (-1.52)
Loose*Δ Curr. G + Δ Tax                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.124
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (1.34)
Tight                                                                                                                              -0.0016                -0.0024                -0.0020                 0.0019                 0.0006         0.0015
                                                                                                                                    (-0.69)                (-1.05)                (-0.87)                (0.52)                 (0.16)          (0.44)
Loose                                                                                                                              -0.0038                -0.0027                 -0.003                 0.0014                  0.002         0.0017
                                                                                                                                    (-1.45)                (-1.11)                (-1.23)                (0.35)                 (0.53)          (0.44)
Observations                                                   569                    569                     569                     569                    569                    569                    569                    569            569
R-squared                                                      0.58                   0.64                    0.63                   0.59                   0.64                   0.64                   0.59                    0.64           0.64
Notes: OLS regressions. Dep. var.: real GDP growth rate. Tight=1 in period of a fiscal adjustment, 0 otherwise. Loose = 1 in period of a fiscal stimulus, 0 otherwise. Country and year dummies included. T-stat in (). See Data Appendix.
Table A1: Episodes of fiscal stimuli and adjustments

                                                                Fiscal Stimuli

Australia              1990      1991
Austria                1975      2004
Belgium                1975      1981     2005
Canada                 1975      1982     1991         2001
Denmark                1974      1975     1980         1981       1982
Finland                1978      1982     1983         1987       1990     1991     1992   2001   2003
France                 1975      1981     1992         1993       2002
Germany                1995      2001
Greece                 1981      1985     1989         1995       2001
Ireland                1974      1975     1978         2001       2007
Italy                  1972      1975     1981         2001
Japan                  1975      1993     1998         2005       2007
Netherlands            1975      1980     1995         2001       2002
New Zealand            1988
Norway                 1974      1976     1977         1986       1987     1991     1998   2002   2007
Portugal               1978      1985     1993         2005
Spain                  1981      1982     1993
Sweden                 1974      1977     1979         1980       1991     1992     2001   2002
United Kingdom         1971      1972     1973         1990       1991     1992     2001   2002   2003
United States          2002

                                                              Fiscal Adj
                                                              Fiscal Adjustments
                                                                         ustments

Australia              1987      1988
Austria                1984      1996     1997         2005
Belgium                1982      1984     1987         2006
Canada                 1981      1986     1987         1995       1996     1997
Denmark                1983      1984     1985         1986       2005
Finland                1973      1976     1981         1984       1988     1994     1996   1998   2000
France                 1979      1996
Germany                1996      2000
Greece                 1976      1986     1991         1994       1996     2005     2006
Ireland                1976      1984     1987         1988       1989     2000
Italy                  1976      1980     1982         1990       1991     1992     1997   2007
Japan                  1984      1999     2001         2006
Netherlands            1972      1973     1983         1988       1991     1993     1996
New Zealand            1987      1989     1993         1994       2000
Norway                 1979      1980     1983         1989       1996     2000     2004   2005
Portugal               1982      1983     1986         1988       1992     1995     2002   2006
Spain                  1986      1987     1994         1996
Sweden                 1981      1983     1984         1986       1987     1994     1996   1997   2004
United Kingdom         1977      1982     1988         1996       1997     1998     2000
Table A2

                        Expansionary Fiscal Stimuli

Canada           2001
Finland          1978      1987
Greece           2001
Ireland          1974      1975     1978      2001    2007
Italy            1972
Japan            1975
Netherlands      1995
Norway           1974      1991     2007
Portugal         1978      1985
United Kingdom   2001      2002     2003


                   Expansionary Fiscal Adjustments


Finland          1973      1996     1998      2000
Greece           1976      2005     2006
Ireland          1976      1987     1988      1989    2000
Netherlands      1996
New Zealand      1993      1994     2000
Norway           1979      1980     1983      1996
Portugal
Portugal         1986      1988     1995
Spain            1986      1987
Sweden           2004


                    Successful Fiscal Adjustments


Austria          2005
Denmark          2005
Finland          1998
Ireland          2000
Italy            1982
Netherlands      1972      1973     1993      1996
New Zealand      1993      1994
Norway           1979      1980     1989      1996
Sweden           1986      1987     2004
United Kingdom   1977      1988     2000
