NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION, FINANCIAL CRISES AND CONTAGION
Enrique G. Mendoza
Vincenzo Quadrini
Working Paper 15432
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15432

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2009

This paper was prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy held April 17-18,
2009 at the University of Rochester. We would like to thank Gian Luca Clementi for discussing the
paper and providing us with insightful comments. We also thank conference participants, as well as
Frank Warnock and Luis Cespedes, for their comments and suggestions. Financial support from the
National Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Enrique G. Mendoza and Vincenzo Quadrini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Globalization, Financial Crises and Contagion
Enrique G. Mendoza and Vincenzo Quadrini
NBER Working Paper No. 15432
October 2009
JEL No. E44,F36,F41
ABSTRACT
Two observations suggest that financial globalization played an important role in the recent financial
crisis. First, more than half of the rise in net borrowing of the U.S. nonfinancial sectors since the mid
1980s has been financed by foreign lending. Second, the collapse of the U.S. housing and mortgagebacked-securities markets had worldwide effects on financial institutions and asset markets. Using an
open-economy model where financial intermediaries play a central role, we show that financial integration
leads to a sharp rise in net credit in the most financially developed country and leads to large asset price
spillovers of country-specific shocks to bank capital. The impact of these shocks on asset prices are
amplified by bank capital requirements based on mark-to-market.

Enrique G. Mendoza
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
mendozae@econ.umd.edu
Vincenzo Quadrini
Department of Finance and Business Economics
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
701 Exposition Boulevard
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
quadrini@usc.edu

1

Introduction

The global financial crisis that started with the meltdown of the U.S. subprime mortgage market in 2007 was preceded by a twenty-year period of
substantial growth in debt and leverages, in an environment of increasing
world financial integration, low real interest rates and growing U.S. external
deficits. During this period of widening “global imbalances” we also observed
several financial crises in emerging economies with cross-country contagion
that in some cases did not appear driven by fundamentals. Some of these
crises affected the capital markets of the industrial world (particularly the
LTCM crisis in the aftermath of the 1998 Russian crash).
These events have generated a large body of research with well-established
contributions. Until now, however, the study of global imbalances and the
study of financial crises and contagion have remained somewhat separate subjects. In contrast, this paper addresses the question of whether the ongoing
global financial crisis and the process of financial globalization are related. In
particular, we study two issues. First, whether financial globalization contributed to the buildup of high leverages in some industrialized countries,
especially the U.S. Second, whether credit frictions amplify the effects of
shocks to the balance sheet of banks and how these effects are transmitted
across countries.
The motivation for this paper derives from the evidence provided in Figure
1 according to which the U.S. credit boom was largely fueled by foreign
lending.
1. The first panel of Figure 1 shows that the net debt-income ratio of the
U.S. nonfinancial sectors doubled between 1982 and 2008 (net credit
market assets as a ratio of GDP of these sectors fell from -1 to about
-2). A surge in net debt of this magnitude, which affected all three
nonfinancial sectors (households, nonfinancial businesses, and the government), is unprecedented in the data available since 1946.1
2. Starting in the mid 1980s, the integration of world capital markets that
resulted from the removal of capital controls and innovations in financial markets produced significant changes in gross and net foreign asset
1

Data is from the Flow of Funds of the Federal Reserve Board. Net credit is defined
as credit market assets minus credit market liabilities. Credit market assets and liabilities
exclude all non-debt financial instruments, particularly equity holdings.

2

Figure 1: Net credit before and after financial integration.
U.S. Net Credit Market Assets as a Share of GDP
2.5

Domestic nonfinancial sector
Financial sector

2.0

Rest of the world
1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

‐0.5

‐1.0

‐1.5

‐2.0
1946

1951

1956

1961

1966

1971

1976

1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

2006

Foreign credit market borrowing and lending
(fraction of GDP)

0.6

Foreign borrowing
Foreign lending

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Ratio of Net U.S. Assets Held by Rest of the World to
Net U.S. Assets of the Domestic Nonfinancial Sector
0.6

net credit market debt
net total financial assets

0.5

U.S. Treasuries
0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

‐0.1
1946

1951

1956

1961

1966

1971

1976

3

1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

2006

positions worldwide (see Lane & Milesi-Ferretti (2006)). In the United
States, both gross and net foreign borrowing rose sharply. Regarding
net foreign credit, about half of the increase in the net debt-income
ratio of the nonfinancial sectors mentioned above was financed by a
rise in net credit assets held by the rest of the world (see again the top
panel of Figure 1), and this was also an unprecedented phenomenon
in the post-war period. Before the mid 1980s, the U.S. fitted well the
definition of financial autarky: The net debt of the domestic nonfinancial sectors was almost identical to the net credit assets of the financial
sector, with a zero net credit position for the rest of the world.2 In
terms of gross positions, the second panel of Figure 1 shows that the
foreign credit claims on U.S. nonfinancial sectors grew sharply since
1985, while U.S. lending to foreigners (i.e. claims of the U.S. nonfinancial sectors on foreign agents) experienced a relatively modest increase.
As a result, net credit assets held by the rest of the world vis-a-vis the
United States grew by 50 percentage points of U.S. GDP since 1982.
3. The above trends identified in net credit assets are even more pronounced for net total financial assets and net Treasury securities, as
shown in the bottom panel of Figure 1. The plot shows the net asset
positions of the U.S. vis-a-vis the rest of the world as a ratio of the
corresponding net asset positions held by the domestic nonfinancial
sectors for three asset categories: credit market assets (as in the top
two panels), total financial assets (which include non-credit assets like
equity), and U.S. Treasury bills. The ratios for credit assets and total
financial assets hover near zero before the mid 1980s, reflecting again
the fact that before financial globalization the U.S. was effectively in
financial autarky. By the end of 2008, however, net credit assets held
by the rest of the world amounted to 1/5 of U.S. net credit liabilities
of the nonfinancial sectors, and for total financial assets the ratio was
even higher at about 1/3. For T-bills, the rest of the world increased
its positive net position sharply with the collapse of the Bretton Woods
system in the early 1970s, but even that increase dwarfs in comparison
2

Note that the data for financial sectors combines domestic and international components, and hence it is not accurate to associate the financial sectors data with domestic
financial sectors. Before financial integration, the international components were negligible, so the association was valid. After the mid 1980s, however, part of the rise in net
credit of financial sectors reflects also the effects of financial globalization.

4

with the surge observed since the mid 1980s. By 2008, the rest of the
world was a net holder of about one in every two T-bills held outside
of the U.S. financial sectors.
The fact that a large fraction of the credit expansion experienced by the
U.S. economy was financed by foreign borrowing raises several questions.
First, was the surge in debt in the United States a consequence of financial
globalization? Second, if globalization led to higher U.S. leverages, did the
higher leverages make the current crisis worse for asset prices? Third, did
globalization strengthen the spillover effects of the crisis to other countries?
In order to address these issues, we start with a model that can rationalize both the expansion in domestic credit within the United States and
the growth of its liabilities, vis-a-vis the rest of the world, following financial integration. The model extends the framework of Mendoza, Quadrini,
& Rı́os-Rull (2009) which has proven useful for explaining these two features
of the data. This new setup, however, differs in two important dimensions.
The first difference is that the model features three sets of economic agents
within each country: savers (or wage earners), producers (or capital owners),
and financial intermediaries. In Mendoza et al. (2009) savers and producers
were merged in a single agent and financial intermediaries were not explicitly
modeled. As we will see, the intermediation sector plays a central role in
the analysis of the current paper. The second difference is that the analysis
conducted in Mendoza et al. (2009) is limited to steady states and transitions from a steady state with financial autarky to one with full financial
integration. In this paper, instead, we focus on the effects of unanticipated
(and hence non-diversifiable) shocks that hit the net worth of financial intermediaries.
In our model, savers receive endowment incomes that are subject to idiosyncratic shocks. They can trade state-contingent claims with financial
intermediaries but there are constraints to the set of feasible claims. These
constraints derive from incentive-compatibility conditions imposed by limited
enforceability of financial contracts, which differs across countries. Countries
with higher enforcement systems allow for better insurance of the idiosyncratic risks and lower propensity to save. As a result, these countries tend
to accumulate negative net foreign asset positions.
Producers do not face idiosyncratic uncertainty, so effectively we assume
a representative producer. They also trade with financial intermediaries
5

and face limited enforcement of contracts, which takes the form of a collateral constraint. Financial intermediaries raise funds from savers with statecontingent deposits and make loans to producers. They own a fixed amount
of physical capital and face a capital requirement that affects their ability
to intermediate funds from savers to producers. The capital requirement
is linked to the equity of the intermediaries valued at market prices (as in
mark-to-market accounting). The structure of the intermediation sector has
some similarities with Van-denHeuvel (2008).
The main simulation exercise we conduct in the paper consists in a ‘small’
unanticipated shock that reduces the value of banks’ equity (by about 0.5
percent the value of world wide loans). This unanticipated shock induces a
large reduction in asset prices (almost 13 percent on impact). Moreover, it
takes a long period of time for asset prices to fully recover (about 12 years).
Since in a financially integrated economy asset prices are global, this price
decline is the vehicle for international contagion of the financial crisis. Asset
price declines are smaller than they would be in the presence of the same
shock under financial autarky. This is precisely because the shock affects the
asset prices worldwide, and not just the country where the shock originated.
We then examine the quantitative effects of shifting from a capital requirement based on mark-to-market to a system based on historical prices. The
role played by mark-to-market accounting in the recent financial crisis has
been widely debated. Because of this accounting principle, the recent asset
price drop has caused a large decline in the equity value of banks, impairing
their ability to make loans. This has led many academics and practitioners to
propose the suspension or adjustment of this principle given the widespread
financial difficulties (see, for example, the interviews with Robert Shiller and
James Chanos in the March 30, 2009 Wall Street Journal). Our results indicate that, if the mark-to-market accounting was replaced with a system
based on historical prices, the response of asset prices to shocks affecting the
balance sheet of banks would be significantly smaller.
The financial mechanisms at work in our model are related to several
mechanisms studied in the literature on ‘credit channels’ and ‘financial accelerators’. Classic references include Fisher (1933), Bernanke & Gertler
(1989) and Kiyotaki & Moore (1997). Meh & Moran (2008) extended this
class of models to an environment where bank capital plays a central role
in the transmission of monetary shocks. Gertler & Karadi (2009) examined the effects of government credit provision to distressed banks. Aguiar
& Drumond (2007), Drumond & Jorge (2008), Van-denHeuvel (2008) and
6

Zhu (2007) also use models where the behavior of financial intermediaries
is important for macroeconomic fluctuations. Similar mechanisms, although
without an explicit modeling of the banking sector, have been used to study
Sudden Stops and financial contagion in emerging economies during the 1990s
(see, for example, Caballero & Krishnamurthy (2001), Calvo (1998), Cook &
Devereux (2006), Gertler, Gilchrist, & Natalucci (2007), Mendoza & Smith
(2006), Mendoza (2008) and Paasche (2001)). Our work is also related to
the recent studies examining the implications of financial integration among
countries that are heterogenous in the degree of domestic financial development (see Aoki, Benigno, & Kiyotaki (2007), Caballero, Farhi, & Gourinchas
(2008), Mendoza, Quadrini, & Rı́os-Rull (2008), Mendoza et al. (2009) and
Prades & Rabitsch (2007)).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the structure of the model. Section 3 explores the properties of the model numerically.
Section 4 examines the implications of changing the mark-to-market rule and
Section 5 conducts a sensitivity analysis. The final Section 6 concludes.
2

Analytical Framework

We extend the model studied in Mendoza et al. (2009) by adding a more
structured financial intermediation sector. The goal is to study how the
behavior of financial intermediaries in response to shocks to their balance
sheet propagate these shocks to the rest of the economy.
There are two countries, indexed by i ∈ {1, 2}, each inhabited by a continuum of agents of total mass µi . Agents are of two types: producers and
savers, each of mass µi /2. They all have the same preferences and maximize
P
t
the lifetime utility E ∞
t=0 β U (ct ), where ct is consumption at time t and β is
the intertemporal discount factor. The utility function is strictly increasing
000
and concave with U (0) = −∞ and U (c) > 0.
Each country is endowed with a fixed per-capita supply k̄ of a nonreproducible, internationally immobile asset, traded at price Pti . This asset is
used in production as specified below. We now describe the specific aspects
of the two types of agents.
2.1

Savers

Savers are very similar to the agents described in Mendoza et al. (2009) except that they do not have the managerial ability to generate income through
7

the use of the productive asset. They receive income in the form of an idiosyncratic stochastic endowment wt , with a Markov conditional probability
distribution denoted by g(wt , wt+1 ). We also assume that the savers are
the shareholders of the financial intermediaries from which they receive nonnegative dividends dt .
Savers can buy contingent claims, b(wt+1 ), that depend on the next period’s realizations of the endowment. In absence of aggregate uncertainty,
the price of one unit of consumption goods contingent on the realization of
wt+1 is qti (wt , wt+1 ) = g(wt , wt+1 )/(1+rti ), where rti is the equilibrium interest
rate.3 The budget constraint for an individual saver is:
dt + wt + b(wt ) = ct +

X

b(wt+1 )qti (wt , wt+1 ).

(1)

wt+1

Market incompleteness on the side of savers is modeled by assuming limited enforcement. Contracts are not perfectly enforceable due to the limited
(legal) verifiability of shocks. Because of this, savers can divert part of their
endowment but they lose a fraction φi of the diverted income. The parameter
φi characterizes the degree of enforcement of financial contracts in country
i. Appendix A shows that, under the assumptions that agents cannot be
excluded from financial markets and there is limited liability, incentive compatibility imposes the following two constraints:


b(w1 ) − b(wj ) ≤ φi · wj − w1



wj + b(wj ) ≥ 0

(2)
(3)

for all j ∈ {1, ..., J}. Here J denotes the number of all possible realizations
of the endowment and w1 is the lowest (worst) realization.
The first condition requires that insurance received through contingent
claims, b(w1 ) − b(wj ), cannot be bigger than the variation in income, scaled
by φi . When φi is sufficiently large, savers are able to get full insurance of
idiosyncratic risk and maintain constant consumption. When φi = 0, only
non-state-contingent claims are feasible. A key assumption is that φi pertains to the country of residency of the savers. Cross-country differences in
financial development are captured by differences in φi . The second constraint derives from limited liability. The assumption is that a saver can
3

The contingent claims are sold by competitive intermediaries as described below.

8

always default on a contract at the beginning of next period. At this point
the intermediary can only recover the endowment wj .
Let {qτi (wτ , wτ +1 )}∞
τ =t be a (deterministic) sequence of prices in country
i. The optimization problem of an individual saver can be written as:
(

Vti (w, b)

=

max

c, b(w0 )

U (c) + β

X

i
Vt+1



0

0

)



0

w , b(w ) g(w, w )

(4)

w0

subject to
(1), (2) and (3)
The solution to the saver’s problem yields decision rules for consumption,
cit (w, b), and contingent claims, bit (w, b, w0 ). The decision rules determine
the evolution of the distribution of savers over w and b. The distribution is
denoted by Mti (w, b).
We show in Appendix B that, by properly redefining the stochastic process for the endowments, the problem can be reformulated as if each saver
chooses non-contingent claims, that is,
(

Vti (w̃, b̄)

=

max

c, b̄0 ≥−w̃1

U (c) + β

X

i
Vt+1



0

0



)
0

w̃ , b̄ g(w̃, w̃ )

(5)

w0

subject to
d + w̃ + b̄ = c +

b̄0
1 + rti

where w̃ is a transformation of w derived in the appendix and b̄ is the expected
value of the contingent claims. The solution can then be characterized by
the first order condition:
U 0 (ct ) ≥ β(1 + rti )EU 0 (ct+1 )

(6)

which is satisfied with equality if b̄0 > −w̃1 .
2.2

Producers

Differently from Mendoza et al. (2009), we assume that the owners and
users of the productive asset—the producers—are different from other agents
9

(savers). This separation makes the model more tractable when we consider
unanticipated financial shocks.
Producers receive a constant flow of endowment wp and generate income
ν
, where kt+1 is the quantity of the productive asset
yt+1 = F (kt+1 ) = Akt+1
purchased at time t. The parameter ν is smaller than 1 because of limited
managerial capital that each producer has. Managerial capital is internationally mobile. Therefore, with capital mobility producers can choose to
operate at home, buying the domestic productive asset, or abroad, buying
the foreign productive asset. But they cannot do both. To keep the problem
simple we have deliberately assumed that producers do not face idiosyncratic
uncertainty neither in the endowment wp nor in production. Therefore, we
can focus on the representative producer.
As in the case of savers, producers can enter in contractual arrangements
with financial intermediaries. Because producers do not face idiosyncratic
uncertainty, their financial contracts are not state contingent. Denote by
lt+1 /(1 + rti ) the loan contracted with a financial intermediary. In addition
to the interest rate, the bank also charges a financial cost ϕit (lt+1 ) which is
nonnegative, increasing and convex in the loan size. Therefore, the producer
receives the funds [lt+1 − ϕit (lt+1 )]/(1 + rti ) at time t and promises to repay
lt+1 at t + 1. The precise nature of this cost will be specified later in the
description of the banking sector. We anticipate here that this cost will be
zero at steady state and it plays a role only in equilibria in which the equities
of the financial intermediaries are low.
Limited enforcement constrains the amount that the intermediary is willing to lend as follows:
h

i
lt+1 ≤ ψ i · kt+1 Pt+1
+ F (kt+1 )

i

(7)

This constraint derives from the assumption that the producer can always
default on a contract at the beginning of next period. At this point the
intermediary can only recover a fraction ψ i of the producer’s assets, that is,
the market value of productive capital plus production. The parameter ψ i
could differ across countries which justifies the superscript i.4
The producer starts the period with capital kt and liabilities lt and solves
4

As we will see, the equilibrium interest rate is usually lower than the intertemporal
discount rate due to the precautionary motive of savers. Because of this, producers have
an incentive to borrow as much as possible. The above enforcement constraint makes sure
that borrowing is bounded.

10

the following problem:
(

Wti (k, l)

= max
U (c) +
0 0
c,k ,l

i
βWt+1



0

k ,l

0



)

(8)

subject to
wp + kPti + F (k) +
h

l0 − ϕit (l0 )
= c + l + k0
i
1 + rt

i
l0 ≤ ψ i k 0 Pt+1
+ F (k 0 )

i

which is subject to the budget and enforcement constraints.
Given a deterministic sequence of prices {rτi , Pτi , ϕiτ (.)}∞
τ =t , the solution is
characterized by the following first order conditions:
U 0 (ct ) =
0

U (ct ) =

h

h

βU 0 (ct+1 ) + µt

1 + rti
1 − ϕit,d (lt+1 )

i

βU (ct+1 ) + µt ψ

i

i

!

i
Pt+1
+ Fk (kt+1 )
Pti

(9)
!

(10)

where µt is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the collateral constraint
(7). The multiplier is positive if the constraint is binding.
Assuming that all producers in each country start with the same initial
states, k and l, they all choose the same productive asset, k 0 , and next period
liabilities, l0 , and they enter the next period with the same states. Conditions (9) and (10), together with the budget and enforcement constraints,
determine the whole sequence of consumption for a given sequence of prices.
Of course, prices must satisfy the general equilibrium conditions that we will
describe below.
It is interesting to notice that conditions (9) and (10) imply that there
is an equity premium in the accumulation of productive assets. Because the
term ϕit,d (.) is nonnegative, the parameter restriction ψ i < 1 implies that the
return from the productive asset is bigger than the interest rate. Thus, asset
prices are lower than in the absence of the enforcement constraint.5 As we will
see, this feature will play an important role in characterizing the composition
5

Mendoza (2008) derives a similar result in a small open economy model with a collateral constraint on foreign borrowing.

11

of the net asset positions of different countries when the international capital
markets are liberalized.
2.3

Financial intermediaries

Financial intermediaries are profit maximizing firms owned by savers. They
sign financial contracts with savers and producers. We assume that financial
intermediaries own a fixed quantity k̄ f of the economy’s productive capital.
We think of k̄ f as the physical capital that is necessary to run the intermediation activity. For simplicity, this capital is assumed to be in the balance sheet
of the intermediary but it does not generate any income directly. What is
important for our analysis is that the balance sheet of financial intermediaries
depends on the market price of the asset.6
Financial intermediaries start the period with real assets k̄ f , a stock of
loans made in the previous period to producers, Lt , and deposits from savers,
Bt . The deposits are given by the value of all contingent claims purchased
by savers in the previous period, that is,
Bt =

Z

X

w−1 ,b−1 ,w w

bit−1 (w−1 , b−1 , w)g(w−1 , w)Mt−1 (w−1 , b−1 ).

where the subscript −1 denotes variables known in the previous period. In
writing this expression we are assuming that each intermediary diversifies
perfectly the claims purchased by workers. The beginning-of-period equity
of the financial intermediaries is equal to:
et = k̄ f Pti + Lt − Bt

(11)

Given the beginning of period equity, the financial intermediary raises
new deposits, makes new loans and pay dividends to shareholders (savers).
Therefore, the consolidated (per-capita) budget constraint of the intermediation sector is:
Lt+1
Bt+1
et +
= k̄ f Pti +
+ dt
(12)
i
1 + rt
1 + rti
6

The assumption that financial intermediaries choose to keep the productive asset even
if it does not generate income is ad hoc. In fact, because the productive asset has a market
value, intermediaries would be better off selling them and closing down operations. Of
course, there are ways to enrich the model to make the holding of k̄ f from intermediaries
fully rational. However, we decided to impose this by assumption to keep the analysis as
simple as possible. All we want to get is that the market price of the productive asset is
going to affect the equity of the bank.

12

The left-hand-side includes the source of funds, equity plus deposits. The
right-hand-side is the use of funds, productive asset plus loans and dividends.
So far, the description of the intermediation sector is standard, except for
the assumption that intermediaries own k̄ f . We now introduce some frictions
that will make the intermediation sector central to the analysis.
The first assumption is that intermediaries cannot issue new shares. This
simply means that dividends cannot be negative, that is, dt ≥ 0.
The second assumption is that banks can issue two types of loans. The
first type of loans are subject to a capital requirement, that is, they must be
backed by bank equities. The second type of loans are not subject to this
requirement but imply an extra cost.
Denote by L̄t+1 the stock of loans that are subject to the capital requirement. On this stock the bank faces the following constraint:
L̄t+1 ≤ α(et − dt )

(13)

where α > 1. The constraint imposes that this type of loans cannot be bigger
than a multiple of the bank equity after the payment of dividends. Next we
have to specify how L̄t+1 is determined.
Denote by lt+1 the total loan made to an individual producer. Part of
this loan, ¯lt+1 , is of the first type, and therefore, it is subject to capital
requirement. The remaining part of the loan, lt+1 − ¯lt+1 , is of the second
type and it is not subject to the capital requirement. However, in order to
exempt the loan from the capital requirement the intermediary has to incur
the cost κ(lt+1 − ¯lt+1 )2 . This cost can be interpreted as resources used by
the bank to improve the risk standard of the loan (so that it is exempted
from capital requirement) and/or to sell part of the loan directly to savers
through securitization. Notice that the quadratic cost has to be incurrent on
each individual loan.
The banking sector is competitive. Therefore, in a symmetric equilibrium,
each bank offers loans by charging a fee that depends on the size of the loan:




κ(lt+1 − χit )2

if lt+1 ≥ χit



0

otherwise

ϕt (lt+1 ) = 

Up to χit , the cost of the loan for a producer is the interest rate. Above χit ,
the bank also charges a convex cost on top of the interest rate.
13

Because of competition, banks minimize the cost charged to each costumer. This is obtained by choosing the largest χit compatible with the
owned equity. Compatibility here means that, in equilibrium, the total stock
of loans made by banks subject to the capital requirement does not violate
constraint (13). The largest χit is obtained when banks pay no dividend. In
equilibrium, all banks choose the same χit = α(k̄ f Pt +Lt −Bt ) = αet . In other
words, banks choose the threshold that in equilibrium is equal to the capital
requirement if they pay no dividend. Therefore, if the demand for loans does
not exceed the maximum capacity of the banking sector for capital-backed
loans (that is, the loans that the banking sector can make without incurring
the extra cost when it pays zero dividends), the borrowing cost for producers
is only the interest rate rti . However, if the demand exceeds the maximum
loans that can be backed by bank capital, banks will charge the additional
financial cost.
The threshold χit is essentially an equilibrium price which, together with
the interest rate rti , define the terms of the loan contract offered to producers
in country i. Both χit and rti are determined in equilibrium to clear the
market. Given symmetry, the total per-capita loans made by banks are
equal to the individual demand, that is, Lt+1 = lt+1 . Furthermore, we have:




Lt+1 = L̄t+1

if lt+1 ≤ χit




Lt+1 > L̄t+1

if lt+1 > χit

Banks take as given the pricing schedule for loans, that is, they take as
given χit and rti since they are determined by competitive forces. Because the
net return on loans is simply the interest rate rti , the problem solved by the
intermediary can be written as follows:
(

Υit (B, L) =

max

d≥0,B 0 ,L0

!



1
i
0
0
d+
Υ
B
,
L
t+1
1 + rti

)

(14)

subject to
L−B =

L0
B0
−
+d
1 + rt 1 + rt

where the constraint is obtained by eliminating et in equation (12) using
equation (11).
14

Notice that the cost ϕit (.) does not enter the budget constraint because
it is ultimately paid by the borrower. The capital requirement is implicit
in the pricing variable χit . The discount rate for a financial intermediary is
the relevant discount rate for its shareholders, that is, the savers. Under the
assumption that there is no aggregate uncertainty, this is the interest rate.
It is easy to see that the dividend policy of an individual intermediary
is undetermined. Because the discount rate is the interest rate, the intermediary is indifferent at the margin in the use of equity or deposits in the
financing of loans. Given the indeterminacy, we assume that when the capital requirement is not binding, that is, banks can satisfy the total demand
of loans without paying any financial cost, they distribute with dividends
all the equities in excess of the capital requirement. The relevance of this
assumption will be discussed below.
2.4

Unexpected shock to the balance sheet of banks

Starting from a steady state equilibrium, we consider a one-time, unanticipated shock that reduces the equity of the financial intermediaries. This
could be caused by an unexpected loss in some of the loans made to producers (because, for instance, some producers default on their debt). Alternatively we can think of this shock as an unexpected physical depreciation in
k̄ f . It is important to stress that the shock is unanticipated and arises only
once. Thus, the economy will experience transition dynamics that are fully
deterministic and will converge back to the initial steady state. The exact
nature of the experiment will be described in the quantitative section.
The assumed dividend policy of the financial intermediaries plays a crucial
role in characterizing the transition dynamics. Before the arrival of the unanticipated shock, intermediaries have minimized their stock of equity up to the
point in which the capital requirement is satisfied with equality. This has
been imposed by assumption given the indeterminacy of the dividend policy.
Therefore, if the shock is sufficiently large, intermediaries become unable to
fulfil the capital requirement. The inability to issue new shares (non-negative
dividends) implies that banks cannot rebuild their equity quickly by cutting
dividends. Thus, they are forced to lower χit and charge a positive financial
cost ϕit (.).
It is helpful to provide a graphical illustration of the market for loans
and how it is affected by this shock. Figure 2 plots the demand for loans
from producers (which is downward sloping in the cost of borrowing) and the
15

supply from banks (which is horizontal until the capital requirement binds
given the bank’s equity). The supply is plotted for a given interest rate,
before and after the shock. Before the shock, the economy is at the steady
state, with the equilibrium marginal cost of borrowing equal to the interest
rate because loan demand intersects the supply in the horizontal segment.

Marginal cost
of
borrowing

6
Supply of loans
after the shock

Supply of loans
before the shock
rti + ϕit (L0 )

ri
Before
ri
After

Demand of loans

L̄After

L̄Before

L0

Figure 2: Equilibrium in the market for loans for a given interest rate.
After the shock, the maximum amount of loans that can be backed by
bank equity shrinks to L̄After . Even if banks pay zero dividends, this is
the maximum volume of loans that banks can make without incurring a
cost. Anything above is offered at an increasing price. As a result of the
new intersection between loan demand and supply, the equilibrium cost of
borrowing increases and the volume of loans declines. Because banks cut
lending, however, they demand less deposits from savers and the interest rate
i
i
declines from rBefore
to rAfter
. Thus, the spread between the marginal cost
of borrowing and the interest rate on deposits widens. Even if the interest
rate declines, the marginal cost of borrowing is higher than in the pre-shock
equilibrium. The marginal cost of borrowing is what matters for asset prices
as can be seen from equations (9)-(10). It is the increase in this cost that
generates an asset price crash.7
The fall in the price of assets generates a further deterioration in the
balance sheet of banks. As a result, in the general equilibrium of the model
7

In the final equilibrium the demand for loans from producers also shifts, generating a
further declines in borrowing. We have ignored this shift to simplify the discussion.

16

L̄After shifts even further to the left inducing a larger credit contraction and a
larger drop in prices. This is the driving force of the amplification generated
by the banking sector. This mechanism is akin to the Fisherian debt-deflation
mechanism and the financial accelerator emphasized in models without an
explicit financial intermediation sector. With the explicit modeling of the
intermediation sector, the mechanism becomes more powerful because banks
are much more leveraged than non-financial businesses.
2.5

General equilibrium

We have already provided an informal description of the equilibrium. Here we
provide a formal definition. We start with the environment without mobility
of capital (financial autarky). We will then describe how the definition can
be adjusted for the case with capital mobility.
The sufficient aggregate states are given by the distribution of savers,
i
Mt (w, b), the liabilities of producers, Lit , and the stock of productive capital
owned by producers, Kti . Knowing the distribution of savers and the loans
made by banks, we can determine the net worth of producers and the equities
of banks (once the equilibrium price of the productive asset is determined).
We have the following definition:
Definition 1 (Financial autarky) Given the financial development parameters, φi and ψ i , initial distributions of savers, Mti (w, b), banks’ loans, Lit ,
productive capital owned by producers, Kti , for i ∈ {1, 2}, an equilibrium
without international mobility of capital is defined by sequences of: (i) savers’
∞
i
∞
i
policies, {biτ (w, b, w0 )}∞
τ =t ; (ii) producers’ policies, {lτ (k, l)}τ =t and {kτ (k, l)}τ =t
i
∞
i
∞
i
∞
(iii) intermediaries’ policies, {dτ (B, L)}τ =t , {Lτ (B, L)}τ =t and {Bτ (B, L)}τ =t ;
i
∞
(iv) prices {Pτi , rτi , χiτ , qτi (w, w0 )}∞
τ =t ; (v) distributions {Mτ (w, k, b)}τ =t+1 . Such
that: (i) the policy rules solve problems (4), (8) and (14); (ii) prices are
competitive and satisfy χiτR = α(k̄ f Pti + Lt − Bt ) and qτi = g(w, w0 )/(1 + rti );
(iii) asset markets clear, w,b,w0 biτ (w, b, w0 )Mτi (w, b)g(w, w0 ) = Bτi (B, L) and
kτi (K, L)/2 = k̄ − k̄ f for each i ∈ {1, 2} and τ ≥ t; (iv) the sequence of distributions of savers is consistent with the initial distributions, the individual
policies and the stochastic processes for the idiosyncratic shocks.
The definition of the equilibrium with globally integrated capital markets
is similar, except for the prices and market clearing conditions (ii) and (iii).
With financial integration there is a global market for assets and asset prices
17

are equalized across countries. Therefore, condition (ii) becomes χ1τ = χ2τ ,
qτ1 = g(w, w0 )/(1 + rt1 ) = g(w, w0 )/(1 + rt2 ) = qτ2 and Pτ1 = Pτ2 . Furthermore, asset markets clear globally instead of country by country. Hence, the
P
market clearing condition for the productive assets becomes 2i=1 kτi µi =
k̄ − k̄ f and the market clearing condition for contingent claims becomes
P2
P2 R
i
i
0
0
i i
i
i=1 Bτ (B, L)µ .
i=1 w,b,w0 bτ (w, b, w )Mτ µ (w, b)g(w, w ) =
3

Quantitative application

In this section we study the model’s quantitative predictions regarding the
effects of financial integration and shocks to the balance sheet of banks. The
parameter values are set as follows. We interpret the first country as the
United States and the second country as the rest of the world. Therefore,
we calibrate the model so that the economic size of the US is 30 percent the
size of the world economy. This is obtained by assuming that the population
size of the first country is µ1 = 0.3.8
Preferences take the logarithmic form U (c) = log(c). The intertemporal
discount rate is set to β = 0.94.
We interpret the endowments as labor income and the returns from productive assets as capital income. Based on this interpretation we set average
per-capita endowment, w̄ +wp , to 0.8 and the income generated with productive assets to y = Ak ν = 0.2. Given the normalization k = 1 this is obtained
by setting A = 0.2. Notice that the capital income is only 20 percent (and
correspondingly the labor income is 80 percent) because this is net of depreciation. The return-to-scale parameter is set to 0.75. The total endowment
is split equally between producers and savers, that is, w̄ = wp = 0.4.
The stochastic endowment of savers takes two values, w = w̄(1 ± ∆w ),
with symmetric transition probability matrix. We follow recent estimates
of the U.S. earnings process and set the persistence probability to 0.95 and
∆w = 0.6.
Next we choose the parameters of the financial structure. These are the
parameters φ1 , φ2 , ψ 1 and ψ 2 , where the superscript denotes the country. For
the parameters φ1 and φ2 , what matters is the difference not the absolute
8

There are two ways to impose different economic sizes of the two countries: by differentiating the population size and/or the per-capita quantities (endowment and productive
asset). However, what matters for the quantitative results is the total economic size of the
country, not the sources of the size differences. Therefore, to simplify the presentation we
have assumed that countries only differ in population size.

18

values. Therefore, we set φ2 = 0. We are then left with three parameters.
Their values are chosen to replicate the following targets in the steady state
equilibrium with capital mobility:
1. Domestic credit in country 1 (the US) is 195 percent the value of domestic output.
2. Domestic credit in country 2 (the Rest of the World) is 119 percent the
value of domestic output.
3. The net foreign asset position of country 1 (the US) is 30 percent the
value of domestic output.
These numbers come from the 2005 World Development Indicators. The
Rest of the World includes OECD countries (except the US) and emerging
economies. The parameters that generate these targets are: φ1 = 0.21,
ψ1 = 0.62 and ψ2 = 0.45.
At this point we are left with the parameters characterizing the intermediation sector. These parameters do not affect the steady state targets
imposed above, and therefore, they can be set independently. The parameter
determining the cost of loans κ is not important for the equilibrium outside
the steady state and its value will be specified below. The per-capita endowment of the productive asset is set to k̄ = 1.05 and the one held by financial
intermediaries is k f = 0.05. Therefore, the stock of productive assets owned
by financial intermediaries is only 5 percent of the stock owned by the rest
of the economy. The capital requirement for loans is set to α = 10. This
implies that loans must be backed by 10 percent of equity.9
We should emphasize that the parameters of the intermediation sector
(κ, k̄ f and α) are not pinned down using precise calibration targets since
it is difficult to identify these targets empirically. Therefore, although the
results we show in the next sections provide helpful information about the
quantitative potential of the model, they should be taken with caution.
3.1

Steady state properties and long-term effects of capital liberalization

In this section we show that the model generates an increase in leverages in
the most financially developed country (country 1) as a result of financial
9

For comparison, the Basle II accord sets a risk-weighted capital requirement on commercial banks equal to 8 percent of their assets.

19

liberalization. This provides an answer to the first question asked in the
Introduction: did the globalization of financial markets lead to higher US
borrowing? The key statistics showing the result are reported in Table 1.
Table 1: Statistics for financial variables in steady states with and without
mobility of capital.
Country 1
Autarky Mobility

Country 2
Autarky Mobility

Interest rate
Price productive asset

4.31
3.21

3.92
3.28

3.67
3.30

3.92
3.28

Total domestic credit
Foreign position in productive assets
Foreign borrowing
Net Foreign asset position

169
-

195
34
64
-30

126
-

119
-15
-27
12

Note: Financial variables are in percentage of domestic output.

Before looking at the various asset positions with and without financial
integration, let’s look at the equilibrium interest rates. In both countries and
in both financial regimes, the interest rates are smaller than the intertemporal discount rate 1/β − 1 ≈ 0.06. This is the consequence of precautionary
savings from savers who face uninsurable idiosyncratic risks. Because producers do not face any uncertainty (absence of precautionary motives), the
low interest rate implies that they will borrow as much as possible. Therefore,
the borrowing limit (7) is binding.
We can now look at the stock positions of the two countries. In the steady
state without capital mobility (autarky), the domestic credit of country 1 is
169 percent the value of domestic output while in the steady state with
financial integration this is 195 percent.10 Therefore, the model predicts
that capital markets liberalization has contributed to an increase in domestic
credit of 26 percentage points the value of domestic output. In country 2,
instead, capital liberalization has generated a decline in domestic credit of 7
percentage points.
10

Domestic credit is the sum of loans taken by producers plus the net worth of savers if
this is negative. Because the value of the contingent claims can be negative, some savers
are actually borrowing. However, the debt of savers is small in aggregate.

20

Capital liberalization has also induced country 1 to accumulate a positive net position in the productive asset of 34 percent the value of domestic
output.This is associated to an increase in foreign borrowing of 64 percent.11
Therefore, after capital markets liberalization, the net foreign asset position
of country 1 reaches the long-term value of minus 30 percent.
The mechanism leading to these changes can be explained as follows.
As can be seen from Table 1, in the pre-liberalization equilibrium country
1 has a higher interest rate and a lower price of the productive asset than
country 2. Prices equalize after liberalization. Therefore, in country 1 the
interest rate declines and the price of the productive asset increases. This
allows producers in country 1 to increase borrowing since the higher price
of the productive asset increases the value of the collateral. At the same
time, because producers in country 1 face enforcement constraints that are
less tight than in country 2, that is, ψ 1 > ψ 2 , we can see from condition (10)
that they require a lower return on the productive asset compared with the
return required by producers in country 2. The concavity of the production
function then implies that producers in country 1 operate larger scales. This
contributes to the positive position of country 1 in the productive asset.
To understand the negative net foreign asset position, we have to consider
the role played by savers. Because the interest rate in country 1 declines while
in country 2 increases (compared to the autarky equilibrium), savers decrease
their savings in country 1 and save more in country 2. As a result, a large
fraction of borrowing from producers is financed by foreign savers through
the banking system.
To summarize, the model captures the fact that capital liberalization
has contributed to generating a significant amount of foreign borrowing for
country 1, the US. The increase in borrowing induced by capital markets
liberalization is in the order of 64 percent the value of domestic income.
11

The net foreign position in the productive asset is the difference between the total
productive assets owned by domestic producers and the domestic endowment of the asset,
k̄, multiplied by the market price Pti . Foreign borrowing is the difference between domestic
credit, defined in the previous footnote, and the total loans made by domestic banks, that
is, loans financed by the ‘positive’ claims of domestic savers and the equities of domestic
banks.

21

3.2

Shock to bank equity and the short-term effects of capital
liberalization

In this section we address the second and third questions asked in the Introduction: Did the higher US leverages induced by globalization make the
current crisis worse? Did globalization allow the crisis to spread to other
countries?
In order to address these two questions we have to specify the driving
force behind the recent crisis. Although the events leading to the crisis are
complex and connecting the causes of these events to only one factor provides
an incomplete picture, there is no doubt that the balance sheet deterioration
of financial intermediaries played an important role. Therefore, we consider
a shock that decreases the equities of banks by a certain percentage of outstanding loans. This can be interpreted as unexpected losses due to unrecoverable loans made to producers. The goal of the paper is to understand
the consequences of these losses.
We consider a shock that generates a loss of bank equity in country 1
of 0.5 percent the value of worldwide loans. This is equivalent to about
1.5 percent the value of loans made in country 1. We start by studying
the impulse responses of asset prices which are reported in Figure 3 for the
economies with and without international mobility of capital.
Consider first the regime with capital mobility. As shown by the continuous line, the shock generates an initial drop in the price of assets of about 13
percent. In considering the transition dynamics, the cost of avoiding bank
capital requirement plays an important role. This is captured by the parameter κ, which in the simulation is set to 0.1. As banks become unable to fulfil
the whole demand of loans without violating the capital requirement, they
start charging the additional financial cost. Higher values of κ increase this
cost more rapidly and induce a larger drop in the demand for loans. This,
in turn, generates a larger drop in asset prices.12
Figure 4 plots the impulse responses for other variables (in levels) but
only in the case with capital mobility. The interest rate drops as banks
demand less deposits from savers in response to the reduction in the demand
of loans. The demand of loans decreases because of the higher marginal cost
of loans for producers, the ratio (1 + rti )/(1 − ϕit,l (lt+1 )). The total volume of
loans made by banks contracts significantly and, as a result, producers cut
12

As we increase κ, the response of asset prices becomes larger. However, for very large
values of κ we are unable to solve for the transition dynamics.

22

Figure 3: Impulse response of asset prices to an unanticipated shock to bank
equities. Economy with and without mobility of capital.

their consumption initially.
Next we consider the asset price response to the same shock but in the
regime without mobility of capital. As before, the shock derives from losses
made on country 1 loans. In the environment with mobility of capital it
does not matter whether the losses come from loans made in country 1 or
country 2. With capital mobility, in fact, firms can borrow indistinguishably
from domestic and foreign banks. Therefore, what matters is the worldwide
lending capacity of the whole banking sector. In the regime without capital
mobility, however, whether the losses are in country 1 or 2 matters. Only the
country in which the losses are materialized faces the type of consequences
shown in Figure 3 by the dashed line. Comparing the economies with and
without mobility of capital, we observe that the response of asset prices is
much bigger in the autarky regime.
Why is the asset price drop bigger in the autarky regime? The key to
the answer is the fact that globalization creates larger financial markets.
While in a closed economy borrowing is limited to the funds supplied by

23

Figure 4: Impulse response of asset prices to an unanticipated shock to bank
equities. Economy with mobility of capital.

24

domestic intermediaries, in a globalized economy producers can also borrow
from foreign intermediaries. As a result, in a globalized world the credit
contraction and the impact on aggregate prices are spread among all countries
that are financially integrated. The effect on country 1 is then smaller.
This finding seems to provide a negative answer to the question of whether
globalization made the crisis worse for the United States. More specifically,
the simulation exercise suggests that the crisis could have been much worse if
the US economy was not financially integrated in the world financial market.
However, this is an incomplete thought because it misses the fact (which is
consistent with the model) that leverage in the U.S. economy rose sharply
because of financial integration. Without financial integration, the economy
would have been less leveraged (as shown in the previous section), and hence
the aggregate volume of loans would have been smaller. Consequently, it
would have been possible that the losses incurred by financial institutions
and/or their likelihood were smaller. If we assume that the losses for the
banking sector are proportional to the stock of loans, then it is true that
the initial losses for banks in country 1 are smaller given the lower leverage.
However, the response of asset prices would still be higher than in the regime
with capital mobility. We will come back to this point in Section 5.
The results shown in Figures 3 and 4 also provide an answer to the question of whether globalization allowed the crisis to spill over other countries.
Here the model provides a clear answer: Although the impact on the originating country is smaller (as discussed above), other countries will be affected
by the shock even if the shock originated abroad. Therefore, with globalized
markets, country-specific shocks propagate to other economies inducing a
worldwide drop in asset prices.
4

Mark-to-market accounting

In this Section we explore how changes in the accounting principle used to
value assets in the banks’ balance sheet modifies the response of the model
to the initial financial shock. In the previous simulations we assumed that
the ‘equity’ of financial intermediaries relevant for the capital requirement
was determined by valuing assets at market prices. More specifically, capital
was valued at price Pt . Therefore, we assumed a mark-to-market approach.
We now consider an alternative scenario in which the banks’ assets are
valued at historical prices for the purpose of capital requirement, that is, for
the application of the constraint L̄t+1 ≤ α(et − dt ). In our context this means
25

that in order to calculate the value of bank equities, the asset k̄ f continues
to be valued at the steady state price P̄ even if the market price changes.
Using (12), the capital requirement can also be expressed as:
L̄t+1

Bt+1
Lt+1
−
≤ α k̄ P̄ +
i
1 + rt 1 + rti

!

f

The impulse responses of asset prices under mark-to-market and mark-tohistorical-price are shown in Figure 5. The initial drop in the market price of
assets is now about 7 percent, which is significantly smaller than the 13 drop
generated in the previous case. The changes in all the remaining variables
plotted in Figure 4 are also smaller when the capital requirement is assessed
using historical prices.
Figure 5: Impulse response of asset prices to an unanticipated shock to bank
equities. Economy with mobility of capital under mark-to-market and historical prices.

The intuition for this result is simple. Even if there is a drop in the
market price of assets, the ‘book value’ of equities does not fall and this allows
financial intermediaries to maintain higher levels of loans without incurring
26

an additional financial cost. On the other hand, when the bank equities are
valued at market prices, a drop in Pt generates a drop in et which reduces the
banks’ ability to make loans subject to capital requirement. If the drop in
Pt is small, banks may not be forced to cut lending because they can reduce
dividends. If the drop is large, the non-negativity of dividends binds and
banks are forced to charge high lending costs.
5

Sensitivity

What is the incidence of the capital requirement for banks? In our model this
is captured by the parameter α. To show the sensitivity of the results to this
parameter, Figure 6 plots the impulse response of asset prices when α = 9,
which implies a capital requirement of 11.1 percent of equity (compared with
α = 10, or 10 percent of equity, in the baseline calibration). As can be seen,
a lower value of α, that is, a stricter capital requirement for banks, reduces
the impact of the shock on asset prices. This is because with a higher capital
requirement, the fall in bank equity induces a smaller reduction in the supply
of loans that need to be backed by bank capital. Because of this, the marginal
cost of borrowing increases less and the impact on prices is lower.
Figure 6 also plots the impulse response when country 2 has the same
characteristics of country 1. More specifically, the financial parameters φ and
ψ of country 2 are set to the same values assigned to country 1 in the baseline
calibration. This implies that, financial liberalization does not induce an
increase in leverage in neither of the two countries. Therefore, comparing
this impulse response to the response for the baseline model allows us to
decompose in two factors the importance of capital markets liberalization for
country 1 (the US): the ability to access a larger market and the formation
of higher leverages.
As can be seen from the figure, the impact of the shock on asset prices
is smaller when country 2 is as financially developed as country 1. This is
because country 1 is now less leveraged (thus, the initial losses for banks
are smaller) and the bank capital in country 2 is larger (since producers in
the second country can borrow more). This effect, however, is more than
compensated by the fact that country 1 can now access a larger market.
Comparing the impulse response with that plotted in Figure 3, we observe
that the asset price drop is much bigger in autarky even if the leverage of
country 1 does not change in response to capital markets integration.
Another important observation that follows from these results is that
27

Figure 6: Impulse response of asset prices to an unanticipated shock to bank
equities in the economy with mobility of capital. Sensitivity to α and crosscountry heterogeneity.

financial globalization in the presence of differences in domestic financial development not only accounts for the surge in debt in country 1, it also implies
much larger amplification and global transmission in the response of asset
prices to small, unanticipated shocks to banks’ capital. Hence, this finding suggests that financial globalization among countries with heterogeneous
financial markets has made the crisis worse.
6

Conclusion

Financial integration among countries that differ in domestic financial development produces a significant increase in net credit for the most financially
developed country. In this paper we examined the connection between this
phenomenon, the effects of shocks to bank equities on asset prices, and the
cross-country contagion of financial turbulence.
We proposed a setup in which financial constraints induced by limited
28

enforcement affect the financial positions of savers, producers and financial
intermediaries. The model also captures the mark-to-market rules for financial intermediaries that have been at play in the recent crisis.
Cross-country differences in enforcement create the conditions for financial integration to generate a surge in debt in the most financially developed
country. Thus, the model captures the fact that the United States have experienced a large increase in leverage during the last two decades, largely
financed by foreign lending. Moreover, the model predicts that relatively
small shocks to the equity of one country’s financial intermediaries produce
large responses in equilibrium asset prices world wide. Thus, the model can
explain large asset price declines and global contagion in asset prices.
Replacing the accounting principle of mark-to-market for bank capital
valuation based on historical prices reduces the magnitude of the asset price
declines induced by shocks to the balance sheet of banks. Hence, our model
lends support to the view that the mark-to-market principle should be replaced with a more flexible rule or at least discontinued in times of financial
turbulence. Of course, the same outcome can also be reached by keeping the
mark-to-market principle but relaxing the constraint on capital requirement.
This conclusion should be taken with caution since our model abstracts from
frictions that are often used to defend mark-to-market accounting, such as
moral hazard problems on the part of bank managers.

29

A

Appendix: Set of feasible contingent claims

Suppose that agents have the ability to divert part of their income. Diversion
is observable but not verifiable in a legal sense. If an agent diverts x, he or
she retains (1 − φ)x while the remaining part, φx, is lost. We allow φ to be
greater than 1. This can be interpreted as a fine or additional punishment.
A similar assumption is made in Castro, Clementi, & MacDonald (2004) but
in an environment with information asymmetry.
Contracts are signed with financial intermediaries in a competitive environment. Financial contracts are not exclusive, meaning that agents can
always switch to another intermediary from one period to the other. The set
of state-contingent claims that an intermediary is willing to offer must be
incentive-compatible.
Let Vt (w, b) be the value function for an agent with current realization of
endowment w and non-endowment wealth b. After choosing the contingent
claims b(wj ), the next period value is Vt (wj , b(wj )). In case of diversion, the
agent would claim that the realizations of the endowment was the lowest
level w1 and divert the difference wj − w1 . In this process the agent retains
(1 − φ)(wj − w1 ) and receives b(s1 ). The non-endowment wealth would be
b̃(wj ) = b(w1 ) − φ(wj − w1 ) and the value of diversion is:




Vt wj , b(s1 ) − φ · (wj − w1 )
Incentive-compatibility requires:








Vt wj , b(wj ) ≥ Vt wj , b(w1 ) − φ · (wj − w1 )

which must hold for all j = 1, .., N .
It is important to emphasize that the financial intermediary can tell
whether the agent is diverting but there is no court that can verify this and
force the repayment of the diverted funds. Compared to the standard model
with information asymmetries, this assumption is convenient because it simplifies the contracting problem when shocks are persistent. Also convenient
is the assumption that financial contracts are not exclusive and agents can
switch to other intermediaries without a cost. This further limits the punishments available to the current intermediary. Also notice that, although
the new level of wealth after diversion is verifiable when a new contract is

30

signed, this does not allow the verification of diversion because the additional resources could derive from lower consumption in previous periods,
which is not observable and verifiable. Again, the intermediary knows that
the additional resources come from diversion but it cannot legally prove it.
The last assumption is limited liability for which agents renegotiate negative values of net worth, and therefore, wj + b(wj ) ≥ 0. The agent’s problem
can be written as:
(

Vt (w, b) = max0 U (c) + β
c,b(w )

X



0

0



)
0

Vt+1 w , b(s ) g(w, w )

w0

subject to
a = c+

X

b(w0 )q(w, w0 )

w0





Vt wj , b(wj )





≥ Vt wj , b(w1 ) − φ · (wj − w1 )

wj + b(wj ) ≥ 0
Using standard arguments for recursive problems, we can prove that there
is a unique solution and the function Vt (w, b) is strictly increasing and concave
in b. The strict monotonicity of the value function implies that the incentivecompatibility constraint can be written as:
b(wj ) ≥ b(w1 ) − φ · (wj − w1 )
for all j = 1, .., N . This is the constraint we imposed on the original problem.
B

Appendix: Equivalent economy

Let b̄t be the expected next period value of contingent claims, that is, b̄t =
claim can be rewritten as b(wt+1 ) =
wt+1 b(wt+1 )g(wt , wt+1 ). Then a contingent
P
b̄t + x(wt+1 ) where, by definition, wt+1 x(wt+1 )g(wt , wt+1 ) = 0. The variable
b̄t can be interpreted as a non-contingent bond and the variable x(wt+1 ) is
the pure insurance component of contingent claims.
Because agents choose as much insurance as possible, the constraint for
incentive-compatibility will be satisfied with equality, that is,
P

b(w1 ) − b(wj ) = φ · (wj − w1 )
31

Using b(wt+1 ) = b̄t + x(wt+1 ), the constraint can be rewritten as:
x(w1 ) − x(wj ) = φ · (wj − w1 )
which must hold for all j > 1. The variables x(sj ) must also satisfy the
zero-profit condition, that is,
X

x(sj )g(wt , wj ) = 0

j

Therefore, we have N conditions and N unknowns. We can then solve for
all the N values of x. The solution can be written as:
x(wj ) = −φ · Wj (wt )
where Wj (wt ) is an exogenous variable defined as Wj (wt ) = wj − i g(wt , wi )wi .
Notice that this variable depends on the current shock which affects the probability distribution of next period shock.
Define the following variable:
P

w̃j (wt ) = wj − φ · Wj (wt )
This is a transformation of the shock. Using this new shock, the budget
constraint can be written as:
dt + w̃j (wt ) + b̄tx = ct +

b̄t+1
1 + rt

By redefining the endowment to be w̃j (wt ), it is as if agents choose non
contingent claims b̄t . Differences in financial deepness are captured by difference in the stochastic properties of the transformed shock. So, for example,
if φ = 0, we go back to the original shock because contingent claims are
not feasible. If φ = 1 and shocks are iid, the transformed shock becomes a
constant. We are in the case of full insurance. Any intermediate values allow
only for partial insurance.

32

References
Aguiar, A. & Drumond, I. (2007). Business cycle and bank capital: monetary
policy transmission under the basel accords. FEP Working Paper no.
242, University of Porto.
Aoki, K., Benigno, G., & Kiyotaki, N. (2007). Capital flows and asset prices.
Unpublished Manuscript, Department of Economics, Princeton University.
Bernanke, B. & Gertler, M. (1989). Agency costs, net worth, and business
fluctuations. American Economic Review, 79 (1), 14–31.
Caballero, R. J., Farhi, E., & Gourinchas, P. O. (2008). An equilibrium
model of global imbalances and low interest rates. American Economic
Review, 98 (1), 358–93.
Caballero, R. J. & Krishnamurthy, A. (2001). International and domestic
collateral constraints in a model of emerging market crises. Journal of
Monetary Economics, 48 (3), 513–48.
Calvo, G. A. (1998). Capital flows and capital-market crises: the simple economics of sudden stops. Journal of Applied Economics, I (November),
35–54.
Castro, R., Clementi, G., & MacDonald, G. (2004). Investor protection, optimal incentives, and economic growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
119 (3), 1131–75.
Cook, D. E. & Devereux, M. B. (2006). External currency pricing and the
east asian crisis. Journal of International Economics, 69 (1), 37–63.
Drumond, I. & Jorge, J. (2008). Basel II capital requirements, firms’ heterogeneity, and the business cycle. Unpublished manuscript, University of
Porto.
Fisher, I. (1933). The debt-deflation theory of great depressions. Econometrica, 1, 337–57.
Gertler, M., Gilchrist, S., & Natalucci, F. (2007). External constraints on
monetary policy. Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 39 (2-3), 295–
330.
33

Gertler, M. & Karadi, P. (2009). A model of unconventional monetary policy.
Unpublished manuscript, New York University.
Kiyotaki, N. & Moore, J. H. (1997). Credit cycles. Journal of Political
Economy, 105 (2), 211–48.
Lane, P. R. & Milesi-Ferretti, G. M. (2006). The external wealth of nations
mark ii: revised and extended estimates of foreign assets and liabilities.
IMF Working Paper 06/69.
Meh, C. A. & Moran, K. (2008). The role of bank capital in the propagation
of shocks. Bank of Canada Working Paper, No. 2008-36.
Mendoza, E. (2008). Sudden stops, financial crises and leverage: a fisherian
deflation of tobin’s q. NBER Working Paper No. 14444.
Mendoza, E., Quadrini, V., & Rı́os-Rull, J. V. (2008). On the welfare implications of financial globalization without financial development. In
Clarida, R. & Giavazzi, F. (Eds.), NBER International Seminar, pp.
199–239. MIT Press, University of Chicago Press.
Mendoza, E., Quadrini, V., & Rı́os-Rull, J. V. (2009). Financial integration, financial development, and global imbalances. Journal of Political
Economy, 117 (3), 371–416.
Mendoza, E. G. & Smith, K. A. (2006). Quantitative implications of a debtdeflation theory of sudden stops & asset prices. Journal of International
Economics, 70 (1), 82–114.
Paasche, B. (2001). Credit constraints and international financial crises.
Journal of Monetary Economics, 48 (3), 623–50.
Prades, E. & Rabitsch, K. (2007). Capital liberalization and the U.S. external
imbalance. Unpublished manuscript. European University Institute,
Florence.
Van-denHeuvel, S. J. (2008). The welfare cost of bank capital requirements.
Journal of Monetary Economics, 55 (2), 298–320.
Zhu, H. (2007). Capital regulation and banks’ financial decisions. Working
Papers No 232, Bank of International Settlements.

34

