                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      PARAMETRIC ESTIMATIONS OF THE WORLD DISTRIBUTION OF INCOME

                                        Maxim Pinkovskiy
                                        Xavier Sala-i-Martin

                                        Working Paper 15433
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15433


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2009




We would like to thank Alexei Onatski and Bernard Salanié for insightful comments. Pinkovskiy would
like to thank the Paul and Daisy Soros Fellowship for New Americans and the National Science Foundation
Graduate Research Fellowship Program for funding. This work represents the opinion of the writers
alone, and all remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Maxim Pinkovskiy and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Parametric Estimations of the World Distribution of Income
Maxim Pinkovskiy and Xavier Sala-i-Martin
NBER Working Paper No. 15433
October 2009
JEL No. F01,O1

                                              ABSTRACT

We use a parametric method to estimate the income distribution for 191 countries between 1970 and
2006. We estimate the World Distribution of Income and estimate poverty rates, poverty counts and
various measures of income inequality and welfare. Using the official $1/day line, we estimate that
world poverty rates have fallen by 80% from 0.268 in 1970 to 0.054 in 2006. The corresponding total
number of poor has fallen from 403 million in 1970 to 152 million in 2006. Our estimates of the global
poverty count in 2006 are much smaller than found by other researchers. We also find similar reductions
in poverty if we use other poverty lines. We find that various measures of global inequality have declined
substantially and measures of global welfare increased by somewhere between 128% and 145%. We
analyze poverty in various regions. Finally, we show that our results are robust to a battery of sensitivity
tests involving functional forms, data sources for the largest countries, methods of interpolating and
extrapolating missing data, and dealing with survey misreporting.


Maxim Pinkovskiy
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
maximpinkovskiy@yahoo.com

Xavier Sala-i-Martin
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, 1005
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
xs23@columbia.edu
    (1)     Introduction

        Poverty, inequality, and growth of income are three subjects of major interest to
economists, analysts, and policymakers around the world. Whether it is the rise of China
over the past 30 years, the economic collapse and inequality explosion of the former
Soviet Union 20 years ago, or the waves of anti-globalization protests and the push for
aid to Africa in the past 10 years, the “facts” on these three variables are fundamental
constants in almost every policy debate, and form the basis of heated debates when they
are questioned. The United Nations has made halving the number of people living on less
than $1 a day one of its eight Millennium Development Goals, indicating the high
priority assigned to poverty reduction.
        These three subjects represent different aspects of the same object: the
distribution of income. Growth (of per capita GDP) usually relates to the percentage
change of the mean of the distribution. Poverty relates to the integral of the distribution to
the left of a particular poverty line. Inequality refers to the dispersion of the distribution.
        However, although poverty, inequality, and growth are three different ways of
looking at the same object (the distribution of income), researchers traditionally analyzed
the three separately. They even used different data sources to analyze them. For example,
when discussing issues related to growth, people used national accounts data to estimate
the mean of the distribution (per capita GDP), and ignored distributional data available
through thousands of surveys that had been conducted in many countries over time
(Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992); Quah (1996, 1997); Jones (1997); Kremer, Onatski and
Stock (2001); Bourguignon and Morrison (2002)) . Conversely, when researchers
analyzed poverty or income inequality they tended to use survey data ignoring the
numbers given by the national accounts (Milanovic (2002), Chen and Ravallion (2001,
2004), Chotikapanich (2007).)
        We are not the first ones to merge survey and national account data to estimate
characteristics of the WDI. Early work by the World Bank on poverty estimation also
combined microeconomic surveys with national accounts data (Ahluwalia, Carter,
Chenery (1979)). However, the World Bank decided to abandon this tradition in the mid-
1990s and to anchor their data to the survey mean. In fact, they recommended that


                                               2
individual countries estimating poverty rates do the same thing so that countries like
India, which had long anchored the survey distributions to the national account means
decided to use both distributions and means from surveys. As argued by Deaton (2001),
“no very convincing reason was ever given for the change.” Authors such as Bhalla
(2002), Chotikapanich et al (1997, 2007) Bourguignon and Morrison (2002), Quah
(2002), and Sala-i-Martin (2002a and b) also combine national accounts and survey data.
        Sala-i-Martin (2006) uses a kernel density function to estimate the income
distribution for each country-year between 1970 and 2006. This method seeks to
incorporate variation in income at the level of individuals rather than of countries or
quintiles, while avoiding parametric assumptions on the country distribution of income.
In this paper we build on Sala-i-Martin (2006) but, instead of using nonparametric kernel
density functions to approximate each country/year income distribution, we assume that
the functional form for the distribution of income is a parametric distribution, specifically
a lognormal distribution in our base specification2. The level of per capita GDP is used to
anchor the mean of the distribution income. The variance is estimated using least squares
on the quintile shares reported in surveys. For each year, the lognormal individual income
distributions for all countries are integrated to construct an estimate of the world
distribution of income as well as various measures of poverty and inequality.
        The literature has either made explicit functional form assumptions for the
distribution of income, or approximated income distributions by flexible forms such as
polynomials. Chotikapanich et al (1997, 2007) and Quah (2002) use lognormal and more
flexible specifications of income distributions, but have looked only at a few countries, or
at a few years. Dikhanov and Ward (2001) use fourth-order polynomials to interpolate
between income classes and estimate the world distribution of income for 1970-99,
motivating their procedure by its precision in a class of income distributions. Part of our
contribution is considering multiple classes of income distributions and arguing for the
use of some distributions over others.
        The empirical validity of the lognormal distribution has been tested widely.
López and Servén (2006) use close to 800 country-year observations and conclude that

2
 We allow for two exceptions to this rule: China and India. For these two countries, we estimate a mixture
of two lognormals: one for the rural population and one for the urban population. More on this in Section
2.c.


                                                    3
the null hypothesis that per capita income follows a lognormal distribution cannot be
rejected. Hill (1959), Cowell (1977), and Airth (1985) suggest that the upper tail of the
distribution for the United States is thicker than implied by lognormality, specifically at
the top 3-4 percentiles. This prompted attempts to fit more complex functional forms :
truncated versions of the lognormal density (Metcalf (1969), Salem and Mount (1974)),
alternative functional specifications (Fisk (1961), Salem and Mount (1974), Singh and
Maddala (1976), McDonald (1984), Chotikapanich et al (2007)), and the five-parameter
generalized beta function, which nests most of the previously proposed candidates for the
functional forms like Pareto, lognormal, gamma, Weibull, Fisk and Singh-Maddala
distributions (McDonald (1984); McDonald and Xu (1995); Parker (1999), Jenkins
(2007)). Pinkovskiy (2008) uses lognormal mixtures in 37 data sets to allow for
multimodality and finds that they perform no worse on average, and occasionally better,
than do the generalized beta functions.
       Using lognormal rather than kernel distributions has several advantages. First, the
lognormal distribution has some nice theoretical foundations. Gibrat (1931) argued that
the good empirical performance of the lognormal density could be rationalized under
three conditions: (i) individual income for a particular period is given by the income of
the previous period times a random component, (ii) the random component is a function
of a large number of small factors, and (iii) each factor is independently distributed of
others in the population. Under these conditions, the log of income is a sum of many
independent random variables so it should be approximately normal according to the
Central Limit Theorem. Since the kernel density estimator used by Sala-i-Martin (2002 a
and b, 2006) is a mixture of 5 lognormals, the results of Sala-i-Martin (2006) could be
reinterpreted as estimates under the assumption of separate Gibrat stochastic processes
with equal variances for each quintile. A large body of research expanded Gibrat’s work
over the following decades. Kalecki (1945) realized that the variance of log income
remained relatively constant so he allowed for the probability of negative shocks to be
smaller at low income levels. Sargan (1957), Pestieau and Posen (1979) developed
rigorous models that under fairly general conditions also yield lognormal distributions of
earnings.




                                              4
         The assumption of multiplicative influence of small factors is also consistent with
the assumptions underlying Mincer (1974) wage regressions in labor economics, in which
log wage is an additive function of multiple variables, all of which account for a small
amount of the variation in the wage, and all of which are presumably independent of the
error term, which may be decomposed into additional determinants of the wage. The low
R 2 reported by such regressions (e.g. Lemieux and Card (1998), Table 5b4, which
reports an R 2 of 0.094 in a Mincerian wage regression with 46,279 observations)
suggests that even the important variation in education and job tenure identified by
Mincer explain only a small fraction of total variability in wages, making it plausible that
log income is a function of many small shocks.
         The second advantage is that parametric estimation offers ways to reduce the
uncertainty of poverty and inequality estimates that kernel density estimation cannot.
Since most household surveys have large sample sizes (many thousand), pure sampling
error in the estimation of quintile shares is dwarfed by 1) uncertainty in the shape of the
income distribution, and 2) bias in the surveys. By considering several plausible
parametric forms and seeing which fits the data better, we can substantially reduce
distributional uncertainty. While we make the lognormal distribution our baseline
specification, we also consider the gamma distribution (analyzed by Salem and Mount
(1974) as a better fit to U.S. household data than the lognormal), and the Weibull
distribution (found to be the best two-parameter distribution for a group of surveys in
OECD data by Bandourian et. al 2002). 3 Our results demonstrate that the lognormal
distribution offers far superior fit to the data than do either of these common two-
parameter alternatives, and that estimates obtained under the lognormality assumption are
close to those obtained from the use of kernel density estimates.
         A third advantage is that parametric estimation of the distribution allows us to
correct for one of the potentially largest problems of the survey data: the bias in the
surveys arising from the underreporting of the very rich and the very poor. It is widely
known that sampling is hard at the very top and very bottom of the income distribution.
The rich tend to not respond to surveys more systematically than the middle income (their

3
 Initially we also experimented with Pareto distributions but they fit the data much worse than the three
alternatives we consider here, and the literature documents that they are useful only for modeling the
extreme upper tail of the distribution.


                                                     5
houses are less accessible, their time may be more valuable) and they may tend to
underreport a larger fraction of their income as they have more incentives to hide. The
very poor, on the other hand, may be hard to interview (especially in poor countries) as
they do not have identification or a fixed address. It may also be difficult to value the
income of the very poor, as it often accrues in kind, rather than in currency. In Section
2.b. of this paper we suggest a methodology that may correct some of this problem under
a broad variety of patterns of misreporting, conditional on the distributional assumption.
        In our paper, we also check if the conclusions of Sala-i-Martin (2006) are robust
to a general sensitivity analysis. We expand the coverage of Sala-i-Martin (2006) to more
years (from 1970-2006 rather than 1970-2000) and include 191 countries rather than 138,
representing 97.9% of the world’s population.4 We also use an updated and more detailed
version of the WIDER-DS database described in Deininger and Squire (1996), which
allows us to obtain more comparable data on income distributions over time in a given
country. Furthermore, as the performance of China and India is a crucial part of our story,
we experiment with multiple alternative specifications, notably breaking down China and
India into rural and urban components to better capture the distributional dynamics of
these two key countries. We also experiment with different ways to impute distributional
information for countries and years for which surveys are not available. Finally, we
consider alternative estimates of PPP-adjusted GDP aside from the standard estimates of
Heston, Summers, and Aten (2006), and use them to argue that the most important task in
an account of convergence is to correctly describe the evolution of country GDP, with
within-country distributions playing a secondary role.
        Policy discussions of a tradeoff between growth and inequality often struggle to
specify a measure of “welfare” that could be used to judge whether a particular reform
that increases growth and inequality together is, on net, beneficial. Sala-i-Martin (2006)
has documented that the world experienced both GDP growth and a decline in inequality,
which increase any sensible measure of welfare, since growth is taken to be good, and
inequality is taken to be bad. In this paper, we cease being agnostic on the welfare
measure, and present reasons for adopting a specific one: Atkinson’s (1970) welfare

4
 The U.S. Bureau of the Census International Data Base estimates world population in 2006 to have been
6,554 million people at midyear, with the midyear estimate for 2005 being 6,476 million. Hence, our
coverage is nearly universal.


                                                   6
index, which can be interpreted as the certainty equivalent of the income distribution
considered as a lottery. We argue that sensible variations of this measure of welfare have
been moving relatively similarly together, and have not only been growing, but have been
growing at increasing rates. We also document the growth in welfare over the period
1970-2006 and find it to be staggering. Finally, we show that the same contentions hold if
countries are judged to be the relevant communities for computing welfare, so welfare is
an average of all the country distribution certainty equivalents.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and the
methodology used to estimate the country as well as the world distributions. Section 3
makes some theoretical considerations regarding inequality and welfare indexes. Section
4 describes the baseline distributions for the largest countries and the world distribution
of income. Section 5 analyzes the evolution of poverty. Section 6 discusses various
measures of inequality and welfare. Section 7 presents regional analysis. Section 8
discusses some sensitivity analysis. Finally, Section 9 concludes.



(2)    Data and Statistical Procedure
   (a) Least-Squares Procedure for Obtaining Distributional Parameters
         from Surveys
       We first estimate distributional parameters for country-years for which we have
income distribution data in the form of a Gini coefficient and five quintile shares. We
use the assumption that the income distribution for each country-year is of a specified
parametric form to derive the expressions for the population quintile shares. These
formulas are very useful in that they express the cumulative quintile shares as functions
of the scale parameter alone. We then estimate the scale parameter by the value that
minimizes the sum of squared deviations between the population cumulative quintile
share expressions and the actual data. This least-squares method is common in the
literature (e.g. Chotikapanich et. al. (2007)), and should generate a consistent,
asymptotically normal estimator of the scale parameter, since the sample quintile means
are consistent, asymptotically normal estimators of the population quintile means (see
Moore (1968)), and the scale parameter estimator is an implicitly defined continuous



                                              7
function of the sample quintile shares. Since all other estimators that we use are
continuous functions of the scale parameter estimator and the national accounts means
(which are assumed to be the true mean income values for the respective country-years),
all our estimators of the distributional parameters and poverty and inequality measures
should be consistent and asymptotically normal. We then estimate the location parameter
of the parametric distribution from the scale parameter and the national accounts mean,
and thus define the distribution of income for each country-year completely. This allows
us to get point estimates of the poverty and inequality measures for each country-year,
and hence for the world as a whole for any year.
        An alternative and often used method (Quah 2002) is to compute the scale
parameter by inverting the Gini coefficient. If our distributional assumptions are correct,
these two methods should be identical, as the Gini coefficient is also a continuous
function of the scale parameter of each distribution under consideration. We have
computed some poverty and inequality estimates using this method, but we have chosen
to retain the quintile share method for our baseline specification in order to be able to
perform the survey misreporting adjustment described below, and to ensure greater
comparability with Sala-i-Martin (2006), which did not use Gini data.
        After computing the least-squares scale parameter of each distribution under
consideration, we use the distributional assumption to compute the Gini coefficient
resulting from the scale parameter. We use these coefficients both as our estimates of the
population Gini coefficients, and as data for accounting for inequality in country-years
for which surveys are not available, since the Gini coefficient is a one-dimensional
distribution-independent summary of the inequality of a distribution.

    (b) Estimation of Distributions for Country-Years with No Inequality
           Data
        Following the current literature, we break up our sample of countries into regions,
roughly corresponding to the World Bank region definitions.5 Following Sala-i-Martin

5
  The regions are: East Asia (excluding Japan and Hong Kong), South Asia (the Indian subcontinent
including Afghanistan), Sub-Saharan Africa, Middle East-North Africa, Latin America (including
Caribbean), Eastern Europe (Soviet Bloc satellites), the (former) Soviet Union, and the OECD (North
America excluding Mexico, Western Europe, and Japan) . There are a few non-OECD countries with high
income (Cyprus, Israel, Hong Kong, Macao and Singapore) but they are negligible for the analysis.


                                                 8
(2006), we also divide the countries into 3 groups according to survey availability. For
each group, we use a separate procedure to interpolate, extrapolate or impute the Gini
coefficients for country-years with no inequality data. After we have obtained Gini
coefficients for all country-years with GDP data, we use the Gini and the GDP to solve
for the scale and location parameters of all income distributions.


Group I – countries with several years of distribution data
        For each country in Group I, we calculate the Gini coefficients of years with no
income distribution data that are WITHIN the range of the set of years with data by
interpolation of the implied Gini time series for the country, where the implied Ginis
have been derived from the least-square minimizing scale parameters. Since there is no
interpolation method to use that is suggested by theory, we experiment with three
methods that satisfy an appealing property: the interpolated series between two data
points is a monotonic function in the direction of the data points. This property is implied
by the assumption that the survey data captures all turning points of the Gini series for all
countries with multiple data points, which may be plausible.6 All these methods imply
virtually identical poverty and inequality measures, whether for the world or for regional
aggregates. Calculating Gini coefficients for years with no data that are OUTSIDE the
range of the WIDER surveys is more difficult, as we do not even know the direction of
changes in inequality, so our previous method does not work. We therefore use one of the
three extrapolation methods described below: projecting Gini coefficients horizontally
into the extrapolation period, projecting Gini coefficients linearly, or a mixture of the
two.


Group II – countries with only one year of distribution data.
        We keep the single year of data, and impute the Ginis for other years to have the
same deviations from this year as does the average Gini time series taken over all Group I
countries in the given region, relative to the year for which we have data for the given

6
  It may be argued that surveys are rarely conducted during extreme rises in inequality because these are
accompanied by social unrest, and if so, we do not record these jumps in our estimates. However, since we
are concerned with inequality trends, our task is to record persistent rises in inequality rather than the
temporary effects of crises. Presumably, surveys conducted with regularity should capture a permanent
change in the level of inequality.


                                                    9
country. Thus, we assume that the country’s inequality dynamics are the same as those of
its region, but we use the single data point to determine the level of the country’s income
distribution.


Group III – countries with no distribution data.
        We impute the average Gini time series taken over all Group I countries in the
given region.

    (c) Reconstruction of GDPs of Special Countries
For any GDP series, we perform several aggregations (or disaggregations) in order to
analyze urban/rural China and India, the Soviet Union, Germany, and Czechoslovakia.
        To disaggregate China into urban and rural components, we use rural population
share and rural and urban mean income data (in yuan) from Chen-Ravallion (2007) and
from the Chinese Statistical Yearbook. To take advantage of the different time ranges of
the two sources, we construct hybrid series for the rural and urban mean incomes by
regressing the Chen-Ravallion series on the Statistical Yearbook series and extending the
Chen-Ravallion series using the predicted values. We are then able to compute the
fraction of GDP held by the rural population in China for the years 1978-2005, and we
extend this series by extrapolation on the basis of the trends in the first two and last two
observations.
        To disaggregate India, we use rural and urban survey mean income data from
POVCAL, and rural population share from the World Bank. We interpolate both mean
income series by means of piecewise cubic splines, and construct the fractions of national
GDP held by the urban and rural populations from these series. We use these fractions to
construct urban and rural GDPs from the sources of GDP data that we use.
        To construct the USSR aggregate for 1970-1989, we calculate Soviet GDP as a
population-weighted average GDP of all the constituent republics in 1990, and use the
growth rates from PWT 5.6 (Summers and Heston, 1991) to impute Soviet GDP for the
1970s and 1980s.
        To disaggregate Germany into East and West for 1970-1989, we compute the East
German GDP by using the fraction of all-German GDP held by East Germany and East
German growth rates in the PWT 5.6 dataset.


                                             10
       To aggregate Czechoslovakia, we compute the Czechoslovak GDP in 1990 from
Czech and Slovak GDPs, and use Czechoslovak growth rates from PWT 5.6 to compute
Czechoslovak GDP for the years 1970-1989.

   (d) Sensitivity to GDP
       We compute the world distribution of income for 3 different sources of GDP.
These are 1) the Penn World Tables data from the 6.2 edition, 2) World Bank data from
2007, and 3) data from Angus Maddison’s website, dated 2007. We normalize all the
GDP data by scaling the World Bank and Maddison data to coincide for U.S. GDP in
2000. Hence, we express all figures in constant 2000 international dollars, as does the
PWT.
       We also extend both the PWT62 and the WB GDP series to span the period 1970-
2006. The PWT62 series spans the period 1970-2004, whereas the WB series spans 1975-
2006. For years in which GDP is available from only one series, we impute its growth
rate for the other series. For some countries, GDP is not available for the last few years
for any series, so rather than dropping these countries from our analysis, we forecast GDP
in these years by assuming that the growth rate of GDP is a 4-year moving average. The
effects of this forecasting procedure are very small; for the PWT62 series, only the years
2004-2006 are affected, with 1-3% of the world population affected each year.

   (e) Income Surveys
       We divide the surveys in the WIDER-DS database into groups according to the
country in which the survey was conducted, and according to the survey description
provided in the WIDER-DS database. Specifically, all the surveys in a given survey
group have the same area cover, population cover, age cover, income sharing unit, unit of
analysis, equivalence scale, definition of income, primary source and secondary source of
the survey. We select the surveys from the WIDER-DS database for each country by
finding the set of survey groups that gives the longest time coverage, while having all
groups be temporally disjoint (with overlap of at most one year between successive
groups), and having all groups be based on the same definition of income, if possible. If
we choose to use consumption surveys, we perform an adjustment procedure that
parallels Bhalla (2002), which is described in Appendix C. For African countries, we


                                             11
include all surveys regardless of income concept, since survey coverage is sparse. For
China and India rural and urban surveys, we use income and consumption data from the
World Bank POVCAL database.
        The WIDER-DS dataset has been criticized for its sparseness of coverage and for
the potential comparability problems between its surveys owing to differences in the
definition of income (gross or net) and to differences in adjustments for household size
(Atkinson and Brandolini (2001)). While these may be severe problems for estimating
the level of world inequality in a particular year, these problems are far less serious when
analyzing changes in inequality across time. The single most important danger of survey
heterogeneity would be if surveys tended to switch to reporting a more equally
distributed type of income (net income over gross income, for instance) over time within
countries. However, this problem does not occur for the largest countries in our sample
(China, India, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Nigeria, Ethiopia, and the US), which
account for an overwhelming proportion of the world population, so we do not believe
that income concept heterogeneity is a serious problem in our calculations.
       It is particularly important for our purposes to correctly estimate the changes in
income distribution for the two largest fast-growing countries in the sample: China and
India. Since we have survey and GDP data on the rural and urban sectors of both
countries, and since development often proceeds differently in urban and rural parts of a
country, we find it important to consider these sectors separately. We experiment with
three options: 1) China and India are treated as unitary countries, 2) China and India are
broken up into rural and urban sectors, and only income surveys are used for China, and
3) China and India are broken up into rural and urban sectors, and both income and
consumption surveys are used for China. Including Chinese consumption surveys violates
the spirit of our survey-selection methodology, but may be warranted on the grounds that
the surveys move together, and we should make an effort to incorporate all the
information about China that is available. We use option 2 in our baseline as a
compromise between methodological consistency and maximal incorporation of
information.




                                             12
         Overall, we use 1069 surveys, which directly cover over 25% of the world
population in an average year in the baseline case.7 Since we have 193 countries or
subdivisions of countries covered by separate surveys (the 191 countries, plus rural
components for China and India), we have on average 5.5 surveys per country, or one
survey every six country-years of the sample period. Given the inconsequentiality of the
interpolation method for the estimates (which we show in section 8.a), a better measure
of the quality of the survey coverage is the percentage of the world population in each
year that is either covered by surveys directly or is subject to interpolation. This number
rises to 85% or more for all years from 1980 to 1998 for the baseline case. Under our
alternative survey selection regimes for China and India, coverage is even better: it is
over 64% before 2003 if China and India are treated as single countries, whereas it is
over 64% from 1980 to 2003 if consumption surveys for urban and rural China are
considered.

    (f) Sensitivity to the Interpolation Method
         We compute estimates for three methods of interpolation: 1) nearest-neighbor
interpolation, 2) linear interpolation, and 3) piecewise-cubic Hermite polynomial
interpolation (PCHIP). All these methods satisfy a monotonicity assumption, by which
interpolated values change (weakly) monotonically, without leaving the interval defined
by the true values of the measure between which interpolation takes place. The purpose
of varying interpolation methods is to demonstrate that the main results of falling poverty
and inequality are largely invariant to changes in assumptions about years for which we
do not have surveys. We use PCHIP in our baseline specification, as it allows Ginis to
vary smoothly from year to year, without introducing arbitrary kinks or discontinuities.

    (g) Sensitivity to the Extrapolation Method
         We experiment with three methods of extrapolation: 1) remaining agnostic about
changes in inequality and assuming that the Gini coefficient remains constant at its latest
(earliest) value for the extrapolation period, 2) assuming that the trends closest to the

7
  Of these 1069 surveys, 85 lie outside the period of interest, and are used in order to replace extrapolation
with interpolation for the early part of the period. These surveys tend to be post-independence surveys in
Africa, or republic-wide studies in the USSR in the late 1980s. Hence, we have 984 surveys in the period of
interest proper.


                                                     13
extrapolation period in the survey data continue unabated and extrapolating linearly using
the slope of the Gini coefficient between the last two data points, and 3) a mixture of the
two methods in which we assume the Gini coefficient to remain constant into the
extrapolation period, except if the last two years before the extrapolation period both
have true survey data. The last method is a way of taking account of recent trends only if
they are “strong.” For some country-years, the latter extrapolation methods lead to the
Gini coefficient violating its range in the unit interval. To keep all Ginis within historical
bounds while allowing them to potentially rise or fall a large amount, for the countries for
which extrapolations violate the range of the Gini in the survey data (from 0.17 to 0.81),
we downweight in absolute value the changes in the Gini by a factor of                   δi ,   where i is the
distance between the given year and the last (or first) year with survey data, and                   δ   is a
discount factor chosen to make the Gini coefficient attain the boundary of the empirical
range in 2006 (or 1970 if we are extrapolating backwards).8
         To avoid unnecessary proliferation of variations, we vary extrapolation methods
and interpolation methods together: we use PCHIP splines with horizontal projection,
linear interpolation with linear extrapolation, and nearest-neighbor interpolation with the
hybrid method. As it will be shown that the interpolation methods are largely equivalent,
we consider that no generality is lost by so doing.

    (h) Sensitivity to Functional Forms
         We compute estimates for three types of parametric distributions – the lognormal,
gamma and Weibull – as well as for kernel density estimates from Sala-i-Martin (2006).
These distributions were chosen for their tractability and for their popularity in income
distribution analysis. All our parametric distributions come from two-parameter location-
scale families, which allows us to use the estimation framework described above. In
addition to computing worldwide estimates for all these distributions, we also consider
estimates that would result from different countries possessing distributions with different
functional forms. We assign to each country the distribution that minimizes the sum of

8
 Informal analysis of the Gini coefficient time series resulting from interpolation and extrapolation
suggests that option (1) presents more plausible inequality dynamics than does option (2); the extreme
values of the Gini in the series are attained far more frequently in the extrapolation period using linear
extrapolation than using nearest-neighbor extrapolation. Therefore, linear extrapolation should be
considered as a “sensitivity analysis” for extreme changes in inequality based on recent trends.


                                                      14
squared deviations between the survey cumulative quintile shares and the cumulative
quintile shares of the optimal parametric distribution across all three functional forms
across all available surveys.9 We present estimates from the resulting “optimal” world
distribution along with the other estimates.

       (i) Survey Misreporting Adjustment
           The fact that we are working with parametric distributions allows us to go further
than Sala-i-Martin (2006) by explicitly controlling for a wide range of potential
misreporting problems in the surveys. It is known (Deaton (2005)) that concerns with
household surveys often arise from their inability to assess the income of very poor or
very rich people, either owing to income censoring at the top, or to difficulties in
converting in-kind income into monetary equivalents. However, under the assumptions
that 1) individuals are placed correctly into quintiles, and 2) measurement error is present
only for individuals in the first or last quintile, the ratios of the middle three quintiles to
the sum of the middle three quintiles are measured correctly, since these statistics involve
only the observations on the middle three quintiles. Under the assumption of known
parametric form of the distribution, it is easy to compute these quintile share ratios, and
to estimate the scale parameter of the distribution as the minimizer of the sum of squares
of the deviations of these expressions from their values in the data. We will do this in
section 8.d.

       (j) Summary: Baseline Specification
           We present our results by considering variation on one parameter from a baseline
specification. Our baseline estimates involve the following assumptions:
       1. We use GDP data from PWT 6.2
       2. We break up China and India into urban and rural components, and use POVCAL
           surveys for within country inequality. For China, we use the rural and urban
           income surveys only; we exclude the consumption surveys.
       3. We use piecewise cubic splines to interpolate between available survey data, and
           extrapolate by horizontal projection.


9
    For Group 3 countries, we use the distribution that is most frequently optimal among all other countries.


                                                       15
       4. We assume that the distributions in all country units (countries or rural / urban
            subdivisions) are lognormal, and compute scale parameters from quintiles.
These assumptions veer towards avoiding making too many assumptions or comparing
potentially incomparable series. We use quintiles in order to be able to assess the effect of
the survey adjustment procedure. The lognormality assumption and the use of quintiles
are also most consistent with the work of Sala-i-Martin (2006).


(3)         Inequality and Welfare: Theoretical Considerations
            While the headcount ratio is the prevalent measure of poverty, there exists no
parallel focal measure for inequality. We therefore present several indices that we
consider to be particularly well-founded as measures of inequality, as well as several
widely cited indices. Specifically, we consider percentile ratios, the Gini coefficient, the
Atkinson indices, and the generalized entropy indices, which include the Theil index and
the Mean Logarithmic Deviation.
            The Atkinson inequality indices arise as a natural extension of the Atkinson
welfare measures. Since there is no unique basis for making interpersonal comparisons of
welfare, one can argue that these (and all other) welfare measures are arbitrary; however,
the Atkinson welfare measures have a non-arbitrary interpretation that seems compelling.
The Atkinson welfare index (or equally-distributed income) is given by:

                                               (∫ x                   )
                                                                           1

                                          Y=        1− γ
                                                           dF ( x )       1− γ
                                                                                 = E ( X ) (1 − A ( γ ) )

where x is income, F is the distribution of income, and γ is the coefficient of inequality-
aversion of the society.10 The Atkinson welfare measure immediately suggests a measure
of inequality: the ratio between the “risk premium” and the expected value of the income
distribution, which is A ( γ ) in the formula above. The Atkinson inequality index satisfies

the conventional axioms of inequality measures -- anonymity, aversion to mean-
preserving spreads (the principle of transfers) and invariance both to population and
income scale. As is described in Atkinson (1970), the Atkinson welfare index can be
viewed as the certainty equivalent for a person with a CRRA utility with risk aversion


10
                                                                                            (
     The index for γ = 1 is the limit of the general expression, which is exp ∫ ln ( x ) dF ( x )           )

                                                              16
parameter γ of a lottery over payoffs, in which the density is equal to the distribution of
income. Hence, the Atkinson welfare index is the sure income a CRRA individual would
find equivalent to the prospect of being randomly assigned to be a person within the
community with the given distribution of income, and provides a representation of a
CRRA individual’s preferences over joining societies with given distributions of income
“behind the veil of ignorance” of her position within them. This rating presumes that the
good society is one that would be chosen by rational (expected utility-maximizing) agents
under the veil of ignorance, which draws on the ideas of Vickrey (1960) and Harsanyi
(1955). The insight of the Atkinson approach is a recognition that the growth-inequality
tradeoff may be viewed as a risk-return tradeoff (at least if income is the only
desideratum and if the income distribution is regarded as stable), which can be analyzed
using the standard tools of economics. Any individual evaluator can use the Atkinson
welfare index representing her risk aversion to assess her preferences over joining the
given societies under the veil of ignorance.
       The adaptability of the Atkinson index to the preferences of the evaluator may be
seen as a shortcoming because the risk aversion coefficient γ is left undetermined. As an
alternative, we consider the most famous inequality index, the Gini coefficient. The Gini
coefficient has been used since the 1910s (specifically Gini (1912)), but it has been more
recently endorsed by Amartya Sen as a distribution-free inequality index that represents
the views on inequality of a society with very general distributional preferences.
Specifically, the Sen welfare index (Sen, 1976), which is given by
                               S = E ( X )(1 − G )

with G being the Gini coefficient, represents the welfare judgments of a society in which
the Pareto weights of individuals depend on their rank by income, are determined by the
rule that the differences between the weights of successively ranked individuals are the
same (Sen, 1974), which reflects a strong form of inability to make judgments about
income magnitudes. The Gini coefficient is better known than Atkinson’s measures, but
is less tractable mathematically.
       Related to the Atkinson indices are the generalized entropy (GE) indices, defined
by the formula



                                               17
                                                      ⎡      xα dF ⎤ 11
                                 GE (α ) =
                                               1
                                                      ⎢1 − ∫       ⎥ for all real α
                                           α (1 − α ) ⎢      μα ⎥
                                                      ⎣            ⎦
For α < 1 , for each GE (α ) , there exists an ordinally equivalent Atkinson A (1 − α )

index. The GE family includes the Theil index (GE(1)), the mean logarithmic deviation
(GE(0)), and the square of the coefficient of variation (GE(2)). One attractive feature of
the GE family is the additive decomposability of the indices into inequality between and
within subgroups, making it an ideal tool for analyzing changes in between-country
inequality as opposed to within-country inequality. Between-country inequality is the
inequality there would exist if all citizens within each country had the same level of
income; Within-country inequality is the inequality there would exist in the world if all
countries had the same level levels of per capita income but kept their different sizes and
within-country dispersions (and it tends to be a weighted average of each country
inequality measure, where the weights are proportional to the size of the country).The
drawback of GE indices is that their range varies with α , making them more difficult to
interpret than Atkinsons.

                Theoretical Parameter Restrictions
           We begin by noting that while GE and Atkinson indices can be defined for all
parameter values α and γ , we find it sensible to restrict the sensitivity analysis to indices
with parameters in the unit interval. Indices outside the unit interval are statistically
fragile, and have pathological properties that challenge our intuition of inequality
comparisons. These problems are particularly acute when gamma or Weibull
distributions are used, owing to the fact that not all their negative moments exist.
Specifically, it can be shown that if for any ε, the researcher is given the income
distribution on an interval [ a, M ] containing 1 − ε of its mass, and is in addition given

the mean of the entire distribution, the researcher cannot bound from above an inequality



11
     For α = 0,α = 1,and γ = 1 these indices are given by:

                  ⎛x⎞               x ⎛x⎞
GE ( 0 ) = − ∫ ln ⎜ ⎟ dF ,GE (1) = ∫ ln ⎜ ⎟ dF ,and A (1) = 1 −
                                                                exp   ( ∫ ln ( x ) dF )
                  ⎝μ⎠               μ ⎝μ⎠                                 μ


                                                           18
measure with index outside the unit interval.12 The proof of this proposition is presented
in Appendix A. These considerations show that GE and Atkinson indices with the
relevant coefficient outside the unit interval cannot be bounded from above using quintile
shares, and it is obvious that they cannot be bounded from above without knowing the
support of the distribution of income.13 Therefore, without assumptions that F declines
sufficiently rapidly, these indices can vary dramatically on the basis of only a few
observations in a survey. Hence, their estimation without distributional assumptions must
be very difficult. These indices are particularly unsuitable given the available data in the
Deininger-Squire database, as it adequately represents only quintile shares and Ginis.
         Besides the practical problems of estimating such indices, there are theoretical
difficulties with their implications. It is clear from the proof that not only are these
indices extremely sensitive to outliers in the data (which does not contradict the intuitive
notion of inequality), but they are also extremely sensitive to the distribution of income
within these outliers. Graphically, these indices imply either that an unbounded increase
in inequality may be achieved by redistribution within the top ε % for ε arbitrarily
small (think of Warren Buffet donating most of his income to Bill Gates), or that an
unbounded increase in inequality may be achieved by redistribution within the bottom
ε % . While the first implication may be sensible if income is seen as an asset of political
power (consolidation of power in single hands may be dangerous), it does not seem
sensible if inequality is dangerous because of the potential for envy or a stimulant for
crime (as in Sala-i-Martin (1994)). For the Atkinson family of indices, the second
implication is particularly pernicious given the interpretation of the index as an expected
utility rating advanced by Vickrey (1960) as is discussed above. It suggests that
individuals do not tolerate positive probabilities of receiving zero income, which is
inconsistent with individuals taking potentially mortal risks when it is feasible to avoid
them, such as enlisting in a campaigning army.14 Therefore, there exist both theoretical




12
    Except for the trivial bound of 1 or the normalization of the index
13
   It is easy to see that knowledge of the Gini coefficient cannot bound them either, as any Gini value is
compatible with atoms at zero, or with arbitrarily high incomes of a small share of the population.
14
   All CRRA functions with γ ≥ 1 have this undesirable property. While we can often innocuously ignore
this problem when incomes are far away from zero, we cannot do so here.


                                                    19
and practical reasons for restricting the coefficients of GE and Atkinson indices to the
open unit interval.
           We encounter a manifestation of this difficulty when using the gamma and
Weibull distributions to model income inequality. The GE and Atkinson indices of these
distributions with parameters outside the unit interval are undefined for small positive
values of the scale parameters (they involve evaluating the gamma function at negative
arguments), and rapidly approach their maximum values when the scale parameters
approach these thresholds. Figure 45 shows the Atkinson welfare index for the world for
γ = 1.5 , for the Gamma distribution. The bizarre dips in 1975, 1984 and 1992 are
occasioned by very poor years for the Central African Republic, Sierra Leone, and
Zimbabwe, all relatively small African countries. As it is difficult for us to conclude that
these years saw a dramatic decrease in world welfare because of a catastrophe in these
countries, we see that these indices do not correspond to our intuition.



(4) Baseline Distributions
           Figures 1 through 21 graph distributions of income for the world as well as for various
countries, regions, and years. To have a visual anchor, each of the graphs contains two vertical
lines corresponding to annual incomes of $312 and $554. The $312 corresponds to one dollar a
day in 2006.15 The $554 line corresponds to the poverty line referred to by the United Nations in
the definition of the Millenium Development Goals. This line was originally defined by the
World Bank as one dollar a day in 1985 prices. This corresponds to an annual income of $554 in
our data set.
           Figure 1 plots the distribution of income for China in 1970. As mentioned in section 2,
we break the Chinese income distributions into two: rural and urban. These two distributions and
the integral of both (which corresponds to the total Chinese distribution) are depicted in Figure 1.
We note that the total distribution is completely dominated by the rural distribution as rural
population in 1970 was much larger than urban population. The smaller but richer urban citizens
show up as a small “shoulder” to the right of the overall distribution. We note that the
overwhelming majority of the rural (and therefore total) distribution lies to the left of the poverty



15
     $365 in 2006 corresponds to $312 in 2000, the base year used by PWT6.2 used in this paper.


                                                     20
line indicating an extremely poor society. The bulk of the urban distribution, on the other hand,
lies to the right of the poverty line.
        Figure 2 shows that corresponding distributions for 2006. We see that the relative size of
the urban and rural distributions has converged, reflecting the massive migration of population to
urban areas. But mass migration was not the only thing that went on in China during the last 36
years: the large growth rates of per capita income shifted the Chinese distribution to the right.
Figure 2 shows that the overall distribution moved because urban growth, but also because of
rural growth. We note that both the rural and urban distributions have shifted to the right so much
that the area to the left of the $1/day poverty line is almost insignificant.
        Figure 3 displays the total Chinese distributions for 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000 and 2006.
Not only we see how the distribution moves to the right decade after decade, but also that the
upper side of the distribution shifts faster than the lower side, reflecting the well documented
increases in within-China income inequality.
        Figure 4 displays the total distribution as well as the rural and urban decomposition for
1970 India. The figure is quite different from that of China 1970. The rural population is also a lot
larger than the urban in India, but the relative average income is not that different: the urban
distribution lies almost entirely inside the rural distribution. We also note that the fraction of the
total distribution that lies to the left of the poverty lines is a lot smaller than it was for China (so,
in 1970, poverty rates in India were smaller than in China). Figure 5 displays the same breakdown
for 2006. We see that the relative size of the urban and rural distributions is more or less the same
(that is, the massive migration to urban areas that we observe in China is not as apparent for
India). We also see that the distributions have shifted to the right so much that, although there is
still a non-negligible fraction to the left of the poverty line, poverty rates have declined
dramatically. Figure 6 displays the decadal distributions for India. Unlike China, there is no
obvious increase (or decrease) in overall income inequality.
        Figure 7 displays the distribution for the United States, the third largest country in the
world with a 2006 population of approximately 300 million citizens. The axis for this distribution
have been changed to accommodate the much richer U.S. Notice that the US distribution shifts to
the right, decade after decade, and that the distance between rich and poor visually increases.
        Figure 8 shows the decadal distributions for Indonesia. With a population of 244 million
people, it is the fourth largest country in the world today. The interesting aspect of the Indonesian
distribution is that, whereas the upper side of the distribution shifts to the right in every decade,
the left side of the distribution does not seem to gain much in the 1990s. This is probably due to
the East Asian crisis of 1997 and the political turbulence that followed.



                                                   21
         Figure 9 displays the distributions for Brazil (population 190 million). It is interesting to
note how wide the Brazilian distribution is. Figure 10 displays the 1970 distributions for Brazil
and Indonesia, a country of similar size and similar level of development. We see that the
Brazilian distribution is much wider and a little bit richer. The interesting dynamics for Brazil
occur at the bottom of the income scale. In order to analyze these interesting dynamics, Figure 11
blows up that part of the distribution. We note that the bottom part of the distribution shifted
rapidly between 1970 and 1980. Those were the golden days of rapid economic growth in Latin
America and, with growth came a rapid reduction of poverty. Then came the “debt crisis” and the
“lost decade”, and the distribution shifted sharply to the left, leading to an increase in poverty.
The reforms of the 1990s led to some positive but small shift of the distribution to the right, and
to a consequent small but positive reduction in poverty. The acceleration of growth during the
2000s brought another shift to the right and another reduction in Brazilian poverty. We should
note, however, that the small gains of the last 16 years did not compensate the losses of the lost
decade, as the 2006 distribution is now about where the 1980 was.
         Figure 12 displays the decadal distributions for Bangladesh. We note a sizeable increase
in population but not a sizeable decrease in the area below the poverty threshold.
         Figure 13 and 14 analyze Nigeria, the most populous country in Sub-Saharan Africa with
144 million citizens in 2006. Overall, we see that that the upper part of the distribution shifts to
the right, the bottom part of the distribution has shifted to the left between 1970 and 2006. If we
look at the detail of this movement displayed in Figure 14, we see that there is movement of this
part of the distribution to the left between 1970 and 1980, between 1980 and 1990 and between
1990 and 2000. Things, on the other hand, seem to have improved between 2000 and 2006, as the
bottom of the distribution has experienced increases in income.
         The most salient feature of the dynamics of the Japanese distribution (Figure 15) is the
substantial reduction in overall inequality (notice that the left side of the distribution has moved
to the right much faster than the right side).
         The behavior of the Mexican distribution (Figure 16) resembles that of Brazil, whereas
the right side of the distribution has improved continuously every decade, the bottom part has
experienced more uneven success: the substantial gains obtained during the 1970s vanished
during the lost decade of the 1980s. There was virtually no movement during the 1990s and,
despite the improvement experienced during the 2000s, the distribution around the $1/day region,
in 2006 still lies to the left of that of 1980.
         Figure 17 describes the behavior of the USSR and the countries that were created when it
collapsed. The distribution shifted to the right between 1970 and 1980. The rich and the poor



                                                  22
gained just about the same. By 1990, there explosion in inequality was so large that, while the top
part of the distribution moved to the right, the bottom sharply shifted to the left. The crisis
experienced by most of FSU countries (especially the two largest ones, Russia and Ukraine)
during the 1990s forced a downward shift in the entire distribution. The shift was so pronounced
that $1/day poverty became significant for the first time (this poverty arose mainly in some
Central Asian republics of the FSU, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan). The positive growth experienced
during the 2000s has brought the distribution back to the right, although poverty has not yet been
eliminated.
        After we compute the (lognormal) distribution of income for each country and each year
between 1970 and 2006, we integrate all the distributions to estimate the world distribution of
income. Figure 18 shows the WDI for 1970. In order to get some perspective, we also display the
distribution of individual countries, grouped into regions (East Asia (labeled EA), South Asia
(SA), Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), Latin America (Latam), the USSR and Former Soviet Union
(FSU), Eastern Europe (EEU), High Income Non-OECD countries (HNOECD) and OECD
countries). We still also report the one-dollar-a-day lines ($312 and $554 per year).
        In 1970, the WDI was trimodal (Fig. 19). There was a mode between the two $1/day
lines, corresponding to the mode of the East Asian distribution (which, in turn, corresponds to the
mode of the Chinese distribution which, in turn, corresponds to the mode of the Chinese rural
distribution). The second mode is at about $1,000 and corresponds to the mode of South Asia
which, in turn is slightly to the right of the mode of India. Finally, there is a third mode at around
$5,000, which is somewhere between the mode of the USSR and that of the OECD. Note that a
substantial fraction of the distribution lies to the left of the poverty lines, and that substantial
fractions of the East Asia, South Asian, and African distributions lie to the left of the poverty
lines. In 1970, $1/day poverty was large.
        By 2006 things have changed dramatically (Fig. 20). First, note that the three modes
disappeared. Instead, we have one mega-mode at an annual income of around $3,300, which
roughly corresponds to the mode of East Asia and South Asia. To the right of the mode there is
quite a substantial “shoulder” marked by the roughly 1 billion rich citizens of the OECD. At the
other extreme, there is a thick tail at the bottom of the distribution marked by Sub-Saharan Africa.
The fraction of the overall distribution to the left of the poverty lines has been reduced
dramatically relative to 1970. Interestingly, most of the distribution to the left of the poverty line
in 2006 is from Africa.




                                                   23
         Figure 21 puts together the world distributions for 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000 and 2006. We
note that the middle mode starts to disappear by 1980 and is completely gone by 1990, whereas
the rightmost mode starts to vanish in 1990 and it disappears in 2000.
         It is interesting to see how the WDI estimated using lognormal distributions compares to
the one we get using non-parametric kernels in Sala-i-Martin (2006). The result for 2006 is
reported in Figure 22. The two distributions are not identical but the overlap is striking. This
suggests that, the worldwide distribution of income is not too sensitive to the exact methodology
used to estimate individual country distributions. In the next sections we will see that the global
estimates of poverty and inequality are not sensitive to this method either.


(5)      Baseline Estimates of Poverty
         Our discussion of world and regional poverty and inequality will center around
the headcount ratio measure, which is the fraction of individuals earning a lower income
than a given amount, the poverty line. While other measures of poverty exist (the poverty
gap, and the Foster-Green-Thornbecke indicators), we find the headcount ratio the most
intuitive, well-understood, and commonly used measure both in the literature on poverty
and in debates concerning it; therefore, we focus on it. However, although the $1 a day
poverty line in 1987 US dollars remains the official definition of poverty according to the
World Bank,16 any specific poverty line above the lowest income compatible with
survival (below which, by definition, no individuals could subsist, rendering the poverty
rate zero) is arbitrary. Therefore, we present estimates for poverty lines corresponding to
$1, $2, $3, $5, $7.50 and $10 a day in the dollars of the WB poverty line, which in US
2000 dollars (the currency of the Penn World Tables) are $554, $1108, $1662, $2770,
$4155 and $5540 a year. In addition, we consider a poverty line of $365 in 2006 US
dollars, which amounts to $312 a year in the currency of the PWT. We consider such a
multitude of poverty lines not only because of the arbitrariness of setting a single line, but
also in order to provide a better picture of the evolution of income distributions in the
lower tail.
         Figures 23 and 24 and Table 1 present the evolution of poverty rates and poverty
counts for a variety of poverty lines for the world as a whole from 1970 to 2006. Figure


16
  The exact line is closer to $1.08 in 1987 US dollars. Ravallion et. al. (2008) is a paper that considers
revising this line upwards.


                                                      24
23 confirms the findings of Chen-Ravallion (2004) and Sala-i-Martin (2002a and b, 2004,
2006) that the $1-day world poverty rate has fallen since 1970, and has been falling
almost continuously throughout the period, with a particularly sharp decline in the late
1970s and early 1980s. The poverty rate decline then decelerates after 1988, and is
slightly over 5% in 2006. Moreover, and in contrast to Chen-Ravallion (2004), Figure 24
shows that poverty rates have been falling not just for the $1-a-day line, but for all
poverty lines considered. In fact, while the decline in the $1-a-day poverty rate slows
down, the poverty rates corresponding to higher poverty lines decline increase the rate of
their decline. One can see a “tsunami effect” as successive poverty rates remains stagnant
for years or decades from the start of the sample period, and then begin falling rapidly
one after another.
        Figures 25 and 26 and Table 2 show that not only are poverty rates falling, but so
are poverty counts, despite the fact that population has been rising steadily throughout the
sample period. The poverty counts for the $1, $2 and $3 poverty lines, as well as for the
USD-2006 $1-a-day line have all fallen since 1970, and the counts for all the remaining
lines peak during the sample period, and are currently on the decline. We learn that not
only are poverty rates falling, but that they are falling faster than population is rising.


(6)     Baseline Estimates of Inequality and Welfare Analysis
        Figure 27 and Table 3 present the Gini coefficient for the world under the baseline
specification for the period 1970-2006, together with the Atkinson inequality indices for
a variety of risk aversion coefficients in the unit interval. We see that inequality has
declined according to all the Atkinson measures, as well as according to the Gini.
Moreover, the decline in inequality after 1980 has been nearly monotonic for all indices,
with a small rise around 1989, the date at which data on the former Soviet republics
becomes available. This monotonic decline should be contrasted with the much more
erratic behavior of the inequality measures in the early to mid-1970s, which nevertheless
also tend to see a decline in inequality. It is also useful to note that while inequality falls
at a slower pace in the 1990s than in the 1980s, the pace of inequality reduction in the
1990s continues unabated in the 2000s, which indicates that the global growth observed
in the 2000s has not been particularly unequally distributed. In agreement with Bhalla



                                               25
(2002) and Sala-i-Martin (2002a and b, 2006), we find the world following an inverted-U
path, with the inequality peak apparently attained in the early to mid-1970s, and a decline
in inequality thereafter.
         While these observations are crucial in that they document the fact of inequality
reduction and of its persistence into the 2000s, they do not reveal to us some fundamental
characteristics of this reduction. Figure 28 presents baseline GE indices for the world,
broken down into components representing inequality between nations (the GE index
computed by treating all individuals in a country as receiving the mean income), and
inequality within nations (a weighted average of country GE indices). We note that, like
all the Atkinson indices, the GE indices all show a decline in inequality. We also see that
this decline occurs exclusively due to a large fall in between-country inequality. Within-
country inequality follows a U-curve, reaching a minimum in the mid-1980s and then
rising above its early 1970s level; however, the rise in within-country inequality from
minimum to maximum is usually less than half (and sometimes less than a third) of the
fall in between-country inequality. We also see that throughout the entire length of the
period, between-country inequality is by far the larger component of overall inequality, at
least for the indices with α in the unit interval. Hence, we again confirm the conclusion
of Sala-i-Martin (2006) that world inequality is, in a large part, between-country
inequality. We see that, in fact, inequality grew within countries since the mid-1980s
(although much of this growth took place in the late 1980s and early 1990s with the
breakup of the USSR), however, this rise in inequality was not large in comparison with
what was happening on the between-country level. This observation accounts at once for
the widespread feeling that inequality has risen coupled with the greater national diversity
of the middle class: while inequality rose between one’s neighbors in the same country,
large and populous nations (China and India) grew to have sizeable middle classes that
more than replenished the increased polarization in wealthier nations.
         Figure 29 displays the time series of the 75-25 and 90-10 17percentile ratios for
the world as a whole. We again see that both ratios have peaked in the 1970s and vastly
fallen since then. The 75-25 ratio has decreased by more than a factor of two; however, it


17
  These ratios are the ratios of the income of the person at the 75th percentile to the income of the person at
the 25th percentile, and similarly for the 90-10 percentile ratio.


                                                      26
has begun a shallow rise since approximately 1998, whereas the 90-10 ratio has fallen
from over 40 to about 25, and has stagnated in the 2000s. While these recent trends
appear potentially worrisome, they suggest that any recent rise in inequality may be
between the lower and upper segments of the world middle class (the 75th and 25th
percentiles), rather than the richest and poorest (90th and 10th percentiles).
       We conclude our discussion of the baseline estimates by considering the impacts
of growth and inequality on welfare. While inequality may be an important component of
our assessment of a society, it is clearly not the only one; as we have seen, growth may be
a much more important factor. In particular, even if inequality is considered to be
unambiguously bad, a dramatic increase in GDP may offset the welfare loss of increasing
inequality. It is therefore necessary to assess the world distribution of income not just
from the point of view of inequality reduction, but from the point of view of some notion
of aggregate welfare, which allows us to perform a formal growth-inequality tradeoff.
Figure 30 and Table 4 present the Atkinson and Sen welfare indices for the world, and
shows that welfare has been increasing throughout our period of interest, with an
acceleration towards the 2000s. All the welfare indicators more than doubled (and some
indices almost tripled) since the 1970s. There is a slight slowdown in the growth of
welfare around 1990, which can obviously be explained by the fall of the Soviet Union.
Overall, welfare between 1970 and 2006 increased by 146% if we use the Sen index and
by somewhere between 128% and 158% if we use the various Atkinson indexes.


(7)    Regional Analysis
       Figure 31 displays the evolution of GDP per capita for all the regions outside the
OECD. As is well known, East Asia starts at that bottom of the world in 1970 and has
experienced superlative growth rates over the last three decades. Starting at a similar
position, South Asia has also experienced positive (but not as large) growth rates. Latin
America grew during the 1970s, stagnated for about 15 years during the so called “lost
decade” and has resumed its growth path over the last few years. The Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe grew substantially before the fall of the Berlin Wall, then crashed
spectacularly during the transition from communism, and have begun to recover during
the last decade. The Middle East and North Africa grew during the 1970s, shrank



                                              27
between 1980 and 1990 and have been growing very slowly during the last few years.
Africa has basically largely been stagnant with a small but negative decline in GDP per
capita between 1970 and 1995 and a small but positive growth between 1995 and 2006.
The world average, also shown in the picture (and which include the OECD) has grown
substantially over the period.
           What have these GDP per capita trends implied for the evolution of poverty at the
regional level? The panels in Figure 32 and Tables 5 and 6 show the $1/day and the
$2/day poverty rates and counts for each region. East Asia and South Asia start the period
as some of the poorest of the developing regions and end it as having decreased poverty
to the level of the more affluent countries in Latin America and the Middle East. As a
result, East and South Asian $1-a-day poverty rates decline to less than 10%, whereas
other rates decline by a factor of 3 or 2 (for the higher rates). Other regions have not fared
as well. Latin America and the Middle East show progress in the reduction of poverty
rates, but seem to stagnate with respect to poverty counts; poverty reduction there does
not exceed the pace of population growth. Eastern Europe and the former USSR have
very low poverty rates and counts initially, grow poorer during the transition from
communism, but reverse this trend in favor of poverty reduction in the 2000s. Finally,
Africa’s poverty rates increased between 1970 and 1996. However, in 1996, the African
$1-a-day (and to a lesser extent the $2-a-day) poverty rate begins to fall, reaching around
30% in 2006, having started from 40% in 1970.
           This fall in poverty rates must be accounted by some combination of a rise in poor
countries’ growth rates and a fall in poor countries’ inequality through redistribution from
the rich to the poor, or through the poor growing faster than the rich. To assess the
relation of growth and poverty reduction, Figure 33 presents a series of graphs plotting
the $1/day poverty rate in each region considered (excluding the OECD) and the region’s
per capita GDP. It is immediately visible that the series are almost perfect mirror images
of each other: the poverty rate falls when per capita GDP rises and vice versa.18 In
particular, one should note how the poverty rate series replicates the major changes in
regional per capita GDP that characterize the past 30 years: notably, the sustained rise in
GDP in East and South Asia, the crisis of the Soviet Union, and the stagnation of Africa

18
     The actual correlations of the series are approximately -0.8


                                                        28
followed by renaissance. In particular, we see no examples of poverty reduction without
growth (or sustained rises with poverty accompanying growth) on a regional scale.
       To see how inequality evolves at the regional level, figure 34 plots the Gini
coefficient over time for each of the regions. The main message of this figure is that the
Gini coefficients have remained largely constant. The main exception was the Soviet
Union which experienced a surge in inequality from 0.25 to 0.50 during the first years of
the transition from communism. It is interesting to see that inequality in East Asia has not
increased substantially (in fact, it has decreased). This is due to the convergence of China
to the rest of East Asian countries, which has reduced the across-country component of
Asian inequality. In any event, the point is that the growth process experienced by each
of the regions seem to dominate the dynamics of inequality when it comes to explain the
evolution of poverty rates. In other words, inequality did not increase enough to offset
growth in order to generate increasing poverty.
       We conclude by considering welfare measures by region. Figure 35 presents two
welfare indexes by region: the Sen index and Atkinson(1). The regional Atkinson welfare
indices are the relative certainty equivalents of the income distribution in that region;
hence, saying that the Atkinson welfare for South Asia is twice that for Africa (for
example) implies that an imaginary immigrant would be willing to pay twice as much to
be randomly assigned an income position in South Asia as to be randomly assigned an
income position in Africa. We see East Asia, Latin America and the Middle East
converging at the world average welfare level to form a “global middle class”. We again
see that East Asian growth clearly compensated for any rise in inequality, and East Asia
appears to converge fully to the world in terms of welfare by 2006.


(8)    Sensitivity Analysis
       As discussed in Section 2, we analyze departures from the baseline specification
in multiple directions. We first present a general analysis of sensitivity to all these
variations in order to show the robustness of our results, and then assess the differences
between different departures and their implications for what we may state about income
distributions.
        To review, the variations for sensitivity analysis are:



                                              29
           1)         Functional form of the country distribution of income: lognormal,
                      gamma, Weibull.

           2)         Interpolation / Extrapolation method: PCHIP / horizontal, linear,
                      nearest-neighbor / hybrid.

           3)         Computation of parametric distribution parameters from Ginis
                      rather than quintiles.

           4)         Survey misreporting correction using functional form.

           5)         Breaking up China and India into urban and rural components.

           6)         GDP: PWT 6.2, World Bank, Maddison, World Bank after PPP
                      revision (last series is considered separately).

                (a) Sensitivity Analysis against all variations
       We first discuss sensitivity analysis for all variations taken together, and then
discuss in greater detail some specific variations.
       Figures 36 and 37 show the time series for the $1/day poverty rate and for the
Gini coefficient under all the departures discussed. It is clear that both series decline over
time, not only for each specification considered, but also overall; the lowest poverty rate
(or Gini) for any specification in 1970 is higher than the highest poverty rate (Gini) for
any specification in 2006. It is also clear that the greatest departures from the baseline
occur if GDP is varied; in particular, the significantly higher Chinese GDP in 1970
according to Maddison’s dataset significantly decreases the extent of poverty reduction
that has occurred. The effects of alternative survey procedures, distributional
assumptions, and the survey adjustment are smaller, and the effects of interpolation are
negligible. Nevertheless, using gamma or Weibull distributions in place of the lognormal
distribution implies a higher residual poverty rate when poverty reduction slows down in
the 1990s; we will see later that these estimates are inferior to the baseline specification.
       Figure 38 presents upper and lower bounds on the six poverty rates we have
considered for the world, which show 1) that the general levels and trends of poverty
according to all six lines are robust to alternative specifications, and 2) that the “tsunami



                                               30
effect” on poverty, expected if the major source of poverty reduction is East and South
Asian growth, is also evident regardless of the methodological assumptions we employ.
         The robustness of trends to sensitivity analysis holds not only for the poverty rate
and the Gini, but for the vast majority of the series analyzed. Table 7 presents the
correlation coefficients of adjustments along all levels analyzed to the corresponding
baseline series for the major series we consider for the world as a whole.19 We see that
most series are very highly correlated ( ρ > 0.99 ) with their baseline counterparts, and
almost all series are highly correlated ( ρ > 0.9 ) to the baseline. Therefore, the lessons
about worldwide trends – specifically, falling poverty and inequality for all or almost all
indices – are robust to sensitivity analysis.
         From the graphs in Figures 36 and 37, it appears that while all series follow the
same trend as the baseline, some series are virtually identical to it. Table 8 presents for all
series considered in Table 7 a quantitative measure of the extent to which the series are
identical to the baseline. Notice that if two series y and y′ are identical, then in a
regression
         y′ = α + β y + ε
         we expect that α = 0 and β = 1 . We therefore measure the difference between the
two series by a weighted sum of the widths of the confidence intervals of these
parameters. Specifically, we test βˆ − 1 = 0 and compute the 95% confidence interval

( c1L , c1U ) . We also   test (αˆ / y ) + βˆ − 1 = 0 since αˆ = y′ − βˆ y and compute the confidence

interval ( c2 L , c2U ) for the linear combination on the left-hand side. We do the last

procedure to see if the mean of the modification y′ differs by a “significant” fraction
from the mean of the baseline series y . Finally, we aggregate the two confidence
intervals by taking the sum of the largest aggregate departures from the null that are
consistent with the intervals: G = max ( c1L , c1U ) +max ( c2 L , c2U          )
          This statistic has no inferential content since we do not have a theory of the error
term in the sensitivity analyses. Rather, it is meant as an upper bound for the departures

19
  We use the correlation coefficient as a descriptive statistic to capture common linear trends. Since we are
not analyzing survey error, the correlation coefficients in this and subsequent tables should not be seen as
objects of inference.


                                                     31
of the modified series from the baseline in terms of both location and scale. We see in
Table 8 that most series are not in fact identical to the baseline; however, we see that
some series are much closer to it than others. First, we see that of all the variations, using
Maddison GDP appears to produce the greatest and most frequent deviations from the
baseline, most pronounced for the poverty series, which reinforces our observation that
variations in country GDPs explain most of the changes in the world distribution of
income. Second, we see that the optimal distribution modification produces series that
are by far the closest to their baseline counterparts.

       (b) Sensitivity to Functional Forms
       In addition to the difficulties with assessing inequality indicators with indices
outside the unit interval, the gamma and Weibull distributions fit the data noticeably
worse than the lognormal distribution does. In Appendix B, Table 1, we present the
percentages of the cumulative world population over the period 1970-2006 that is
accounted for by countries with lognormal, gamma and Weibull distributions
respectively. We present these percentages with and without using the survey adjustment
for misreporting, as well as for the case in which scale parameters are computed from
survey Ginis. In all cases, over 98% of the cumulative world population is accounted for
by countries with lognormal distributions. As would be expected, the optimal distribution
series is nearly identical to its corresponding lognormal series. Hence, we learn from our
analysis that of the three two-parameter distributions that we consider, the lognormal is
the superior distribution to use if only one functional form were retained.
       It is important to ask whether the lognormal distribution provides reasonable fit to
the data in an absolute sense, rather than relative to some alternatives. One of our
sensitivity analyses is to compute the lognormal scale parameters from Gini coefficients
rather than quintiles. If the true underlying country income distributions are lognormal,
then the series computed from Ginis should be identical to the series computed from
quintiles. Table 8 shows that while these series are not identical, most of the series of our
primary concern – the middle poverty rates, and the inequality and welfare indices in the
unit interval – are close to their baseline series in the sense described above. Hence, we
can be reassured that the true distributions can be taken as lognormal.



                                              32
                   (c) Sensitivity Analysis for Regional Results
       Besides the general trends in poverty and inequality, we can confirm the
robustness of our finer results to alternative specifications. Figure 39 plots the poverty
rates in Asia, Africa and Latin America, to confirm our initial observation that poverty
went from being an Asian phenomenon to an African one – poverty in East and South
Asia declines precipitously in the 1980s, whereas the African poverty rate rises in this
period, and only recently begins a shallow decline. We see that one estimate of East
Asian poverty (the one in which Maddison’s GDP numbers are used) gives a much lower
level for the poverty rate than do all the others; this shows the influence of GDP on
poverty reduction. Figure 40 confirms our understanding of the changes in world
inequality. First, all the GE measures in the unit interval decline uniformly over the
period 1970-2006 (which implies that all the Atkinsons in the unit interval decline
uniformly as well). Second, most world inequality remains between-country inequality,
and total inequality declines because of a fall in between-country inequality that
compensates for a rise in within-country inequality.

                     (d) Sensitivity to Misreporting
       A potential critique of the household surveys used is the presence of potential
biases in the reporting of very high or very low incomes. Potential sources of these biases
are 1) the unwillingness of high-income individuals to divulge their financial information,
or official top-censoring of reported incomes, and 2) the difficulty of converting in-kind
income of the poor (which may be a substantial share of their income) into equivalent
monetary values. It is clear that the first bias serves to increase the reported share of the
income going to poorer individuals in society, and hence, to decrease reported poverty
and inequality. The direction of the second bias is ambiguous, as in-kind income could be
either overvalued or undervalued by the survey designers.
       Assuming that we know the parametric form of the distribution of income, it is
easy to correct for biases of this type under the additional assumption that the survey
ranks each individual into the appropriate quintile (the rich can be identified as rich even
if their precise income is not revealed, whereas the poor can be identified as poor if the
monetization mechanism for in-kind income is not too flawed), and that all incomes are



                                              33
reported correctly (up to scale) with the exception of some incomes in the top and bottom
quintile. Then, it is easy to see that the ratio of the incomes of each of the middle
quintiles to the sum of the incomes of the middle quintiles (hereafter the standardized
middle income shares) is a statistic that does not depend on the misreported data from the
extreme quintiles, and hence, is consistently estimated. Since we need to recover only one
scale parameter, these two statistics (the third is a function of the other two) are more
than enough to do so. We estimate the scale parameter of the distribution by the
minimizer of the sum of squared differences between the population and sample
standardized middle income shares. Since sample quintile shares are consistent estimators
of their population equivalents, this is a consistent estimator of the true scale parameter
(assuming the distributional assumption holds).20
         Figure 41 presents the $1/day poverty rates and counts, as well as the Gini
coefficient series for adjusted vs. unadjusted specifications, for the three parametric
distributions under consideration. We observe that the adjustments do not differ very
much from the unadjusted series21, and the trends of the adjusted and unadjusted series
are very close. This fact is confirmed by Table 7, which presents correlations between the
baseline measures and their adjusted counterparts (for the lognormal specification), most
of which are very close to unity. The similarity is closest for the lognormal series; the
gaps between adjusted and unadjusted series for the gamma and Weibull distributions are
substantially larger. The gaps also appear to increase towards the end of the sample
period. The differences that do exist suggest the unadjusted data gives too pessimistic a
picture of the world: poverty and inequality are lower in 2006 using the adjusted
estimates by all measures, and their decline is steeper over time. Hence, if we are
confident in the lognormal distributional assumption (which seems most plausible of the
three distributional assumptions used), then we can conclude that the net effect of
misreporting in the extreme quintile is practically small, and if it exists, indicates that the
incomes of the poor are underestimated by conventional survey procedures.


20
  We present the motivation for our distributional assumptions in the Introduction.
21
  This claim should be qualified for poverty in the 1990s, since although the difference between the two
series is on the order of several percentage points, the fact that poverty in the 1990s is historically low
makes this a large relative difference. However, this difference is insignificant for the claim that poverty
fell during the sample period.


                                                      34
                        (e) Purchasing Power Parity in the wake of ICP
        Following the conclusion of the International Comparisons Project (ICP) in
November 2007, the World Bank has changed its methodology with respect to
calculating country GDPs at PPP. This change resulted, in among other consequences,
lowering Chinese and Indian GDPs by 40% and 35% respectively, which was highlighted
in the popular press on many occasions (The Economist: Nov. 29, 2007; Dec. 19, 2007).
Several criticisms have been made of this finding; in particular, that it considers prices in
urban China only. In comparing the original and revised World Bank series, we see that
the effect of the revision was largely to multiply each country’s GDP series by a time-
invariant constant, which is the expected effect of applying the PPP adjustments derived
from the ICP to all years from 1980 to 2006,22 which changes world inequality only by
changing the starting positions of countries, but not of their growth paths. Hence, this
revision only postpones convergence if convergence was going on in the original series,
rather than contradicts it.23 We nevertheless compare the poverty and inequality estimates
arising from the new WB series to our baseline estimates, and reach a conclusion that
while the levels of many series have changed dramatically, the trends change very little,
and the lessons we learned from the PWT data continue to apply with our new results.
        Figure 42a shows comparative plots of the $1/day world poverty rate for the
baseline specification and the PPP revision. We see that while the level of poverty is
higher with the revision, the revised series also shows sharply falling poverty. More
importantly, the two series converge over time and become very close by 2006. This is
easily understood; China has grown so much that by 2006 there are very few poor people
in China with or without the revision, so the revision has a very slight impact on poverty
in 2006. However, in 1970, China accounted for a large fraction of the world’s poor, and
had a high poverty rate; decreasing Chinese GDP in 1970 by virtue of the PPP revision
has a large impact on the number of poor in China, and hence, in the world as a whole.
We present China’s poverty rate in the Figure 42b to verify our observation. In fact, with
the PPP revision, poverty reduction is far more extensive than in the baseline case.

22
   Given the World Bank’s methodology in the revision, we naturally extend this series to 1970 by applying
the WB’s growth rates in the original series to the new 1980 GDPs.
23
   Such a revision is liable to generate some extraordinary numbers – Chinese GDP in 1980 is implied to be
$465 in 2000 US dollars ($525 in 2005 US dollars), and by applying the old WB growth rates, it is $308 in
1970, which may be below the lower limit of survival.


                                                   35
         Figure 42c performs the same comparison for the Gini coefficients. Here, the
levels are drastically different and do not converge: the Gini coefficient of the revised
series in 2006 declines only to the level of the Gini coefficient of the baseline series in
1980. However, the revised series declines noticeably, so we continue to observe falling
world inequality and hence, convergence across people even if we accept the revision.24
We conclude by considering the Atkinson welfare series in the unit interval in Figure 43:
all of them rise monotonically during the sample period, and all of them accelerate
towards the end. We summarize these data in Table 9, in which we present correlations
and closeness measures for the PPP adjustment relative to the baseline. It is evident that
the levels are drastically different. However, the correlations are strong (although weaker
than in most of the rest of the data) – they are less than 0.9 only for the poverty counts
and rates corresponding to high poverty lines, and for some inequality indices outside the
unit interval. In particular, the correlations of the welfare indices to the baseline are all
over 0.99

                         (f) Sensitivity of Welfare Measures
         Tables 7 and 8 show, respectively, the correlations and the closeness of fit
between modifications and baseline series of the welfare indices (Atkinson and Sen). We
see that the welfare indices are some of the most robust series considered in terms of
trends (all modifications of the Sen index have over 0.99 correlation with the baseline),
and many of them, particularly the Sen and the Atkinsons with coefficient in the unit
interval, are also very close to the baseline series in location and scale. While this is
serious evidence for the robustness of our conclusion that world welfare rises, we can say
more. First, we see that not only are the welfare indices robust, but they are also very
tightly related to GDP. Table 10.1 shows the correlations between the PWT62 GDP
series and all welfare indices constructed using this series. We see that these correlations
are greater than 0.99 for all indices whose coefficient is in the unit interval. Hence, we
have strong evidence that for all natural measures of welfare, the growth component
24
  A potential argument could be that the baseline (PWT 62) series is closest to the truth in the early part of
the sample, when initial PPP studies on China were performed, whereas the revised series should apply
only in the latest part of the sample. However, even then, we see that if world inequality started out at the
baseline level and ended at the revised level, it must have fallen since 1970 (although by very little). The
World Bank presents the revised series without using the old PPP adjustment procedure for the early part of
the sample.


                                                     36
rather than the inequality component has been the principal source of variation over the
past 37 years. Second, we observe that the growth rate of the welfare indices actually
increases (as does the growth rate of GDP) during several parts of the sample period,
including the 2000s. Figure 44 shows the range of growth rates of welfare indices in the
unit interval associated with the PWT 62 GDP series, and we see several pronounced
growth accelerations, in particular from 1990 to 1996 and from 2000 to the end of the
sample period. Hence, we are justified in asserting that welfare not only rose during the
sample period, but that it did so at an increasing rate of growth. Moreover, we observe
that not only the levels, but the growth rates of welfare and GDP are correlated. Table
10.2 shows that the growth rates of the various welfare indices are tightly or moderately
correlated with the growth rate of GDP. While this correlation falls off as the coefficient
of the index (implied risk aversion of the observer) increases, we see that even for the
unit coefficient, the correlation is high at around 0.7. This observation suggests that a
large fraction of the variation in welfare growth is “explained” by GDP growth; the
evolution of inequality is observed to have little effect not only on the levels of GDP but
also on its growth rate. Finally, welfare has not only grown, but grown very
significantly; Table 11.1 shows, world welfare by any measure has grown by no less than
77%, by most measures over 120%, and by some measures by 160%!
       Since we have observed within-country inequality to have increased, it is of
interest to consider changes in country-level welfare indices. Whether the aggregate or
country-level indices are relevant depends on one’s opinion of the scope of the moral
community (whether it is global or national), and on one’s concern with respect to
inequality (envy or possibility of political disruption). Averaging the country-level
welfare indices could be justified by construing the lottery behind the veil of ignorance as
consisting of two parts: first, the individual is assigned to a country at random, and then,
he is given an income level from the selected country’s distribution. We consider the 187
countries present in 2006, and ask how many of these countries (and what size their total
population) experienced rises in Atkinson and Sen welfare measures. We find that
welfare unambiguously improved (considering all risk aversion parameters in the unit
interval) in over 68% of countries, containing over 87% of the world’s 2006 population.
Welfare unambiguously deteriorated in 23 countries, totaling less than 5% of the world’s



                                             37
2006 population. We present a list of the latter in Appendix B, Table 2. Countries for
which aggregate welfare fell are either ex-Soviet republics mostly in Central Asia, or
African and Asian countries that had experienced protracted wars or periods of dictatorial
rule during the period. Hence, aggregate welfare has risen for an overwhelming
percentage of political units and people. Moreover, the extent of welfare growth in a
given country, on average, has been likewise very high; Table 11.2 shows that the
welfare of a country increased on average by about 110% over the 36 years of the sample
period if one uses PWT 62 or WB series for GDP, by about 100% if one uses the PPP-
revised series for GDP, and by 64% if one uses the Maddison GDP series.25 Variations
other than GDP appear to be of comparatively small significance.
         Since these are welfare growth measurements, and take distributional changes
into account, we are now free to conclude that, at least in terms of income, the world has
experienced significant and relatively evenly distributed growth both from a global
perspective and within most countries. Even taking distributional considerations into
account, the past forty years have witnessed no less than a doubling of welfare.


(9)      Conclusion
         The main empirical results of this paper are: 1) Global poverty rates decline
between 1970 and 2006. This is true for poverty lines ranging from $1/day to $10/day. 2)
Global poverty counts decline between 1970 and 2006 for poverty lines from $1/day to
$3/day. The total number of poor people has declined by more than 617 million if we use
the $1/day line and by more than 780 million if we use the $2/day line. For higher
poverty lines, poverty counts increased during the early years but are all declining by
2006. 3) Global income inequality has fallen between 1970 and 2006. This is true for the
Gini coefficient, for a wide variety of Atkinson indexes and General Entropy indexes as
well as the 90th-to-10th and the 75th-to-25th percentile ratios. 4) We systematically analyze
the normative effects of changes in the world distribution of income using a strongly
microfounded definition of welfare as the certainty equivalent of a lottery over all
incomes in the world. We find that world welfare increases at increasing rates during our

25
  Since we are considering growth numbers rather than levels, this does not indicate that Maddison
estimates GDP to be 2/3 lower than the PPP-revised series; it is the latter series that reports the lowest GDP
estimates we consider.


                                                     38
sample period, and records dramatic increases whether computed across citizens or across
countries, notwithstanding increases in unweighted between-country inequality. Total
growth in world welfare measured is estimated to be between 77% and 160%, with most
estimates over 100%. 5) At the regional level we observe that poverty rates and GDP per
capita behave as “mirror images” of one another: whenever GDP grows, poverty tends to
decline and whenever poverty declines, GDP tends not grow. 6) Poverty has declined
substantially in East and South Asia, and has recently began declining in Africa.
       We show that our conclusions are robust to a general sensitivity analysis, and in
particular, to three key areas of uncertainty: 1) uncertainty over the functional form of the
country income distribution, 2) uncertainty over potential nonresponse biases in
household surveys, and 3) uncertainty over the correct method of computing a PPP-
adjusted GDP series. We show that the robustness extends not only to the global trends
of falling poverty and inequality, but also that finer trends persist under specification
changes. In particular we robustly demonstrate that, 1) poverty exhibits a “tsunami”
effect, in which poverty declines decelerate for lower poverty lines and accelerate at
higher ones, 2) poverty becomes an essentially African phenomenon, and 3) most of the
decline in inequality is a decline in population-weighted between-country inequality.
       Our data allows us to give a progress report on the first Millennium Development
Goal of halving poverty from 1990 to 2015. Table 12 shows that estimates from our
modifications in the sensitivity analysis indicate that so far, poverty has fallen by about
30% in the 16 years since 1990, giving the world ample time to reduce poverty by a
further 20% of 1990 levels. If we accept the World Bank’s recent PPP revision, then
poverty has fallen by about 58%, and the first MDG has been achieved, since the PPP
revision assigns to the 1990s a large part of China’s poverty decline that the Penn World
Tables and Maddison assign to the 1980s. Importantly, a large part of the decline in
poverty has taken place in Africa. Using the Penn World Tables as our source of GDP,
we see that Africa has decreased poverty by 20-25% from 1990 levels, making it likely
that it will come close to, or perhaps even achieve the MDG within its continent.




                                             39
                                                          Appendix: Proofs and Tables

   Appendix A: Proof of Instability of Inequality Indices outside the Unit Interval
Proposition: Suppose that X is a nonnegative random variable, and we know its distribution F on
the interval [ a, M ]. Then, 1) there exist nontrivial upper and lower bounds for
GE (α ) and A ( γ ) for X if α ∈ ( 0,1) or γ ∈ ( 0,1) , and 2) there exist no such nontrivial bounds otherwise.
                                                                                                                                ⎡     xα dF ⎤
                                                                                                                                ⎢1 − ∫ α ⎥ and μ = E ( X )
                                                                                                                         1
Proof: Without loss of generality, we consider only the GE index, where GE (α ) =
                                                                                                                     α (1 − α ) ⎢     μ ⎥
                                                                                                                                ⎣           ⎦
Note that if α ∈ ( 0,1) , then xα is concave, so ∫ xα dF < μ α , and F ∈ arg max GE (α ) ⇔ F ∈ arg min ∫ xα dF .
                                                                                                         F                        F

If α ∉ ( 0,1) , then xα is convex, so ∫ xα dF > μ α , and F ∈ arg max GE (α ) ⇔ F ∈ arg max ∫ xα dF .
                                                                                          F                            F

Suppose we know F on [ a, M ] , so F |[a , M ] = Fˆ for a given Fˆ . We are also given that ∫ xdF = μ , with μ given.
                                                                 ⎡      M
                                                                          xα dFˆ ⎤
Then, ∫ x dF ≥ ∫ x dF , so for α ∈ ( 0,1) , GE (α ) ≤
          α           ˆ        M
                                   α                      1      ⎢ 1−
                                                                      ∫a         ⎥,
                 a                                    α (1 − α ) ⎢        μα ⎥
                                                                 ⎢⎣              ⎥⎦
and GE (α ) is bounded above for any a and M .
                                                                                                    M
However, suppose α > 1 and set a = 0 for convenience. Define ε as                               ∫0
                                                                                                        dFˆ = 1 − ε , so for any F consistent with
                                                              ∞
F |[0, M ] = Fˆ , it must be the case that                ∫   M
                                                                  dF = ε . Moreover, since ∫ xdF = μ , it must be the case that

                      dF = 1 − ε , ∫ xdF = μ .Then, consider distributing the remaining mass ε on the set {M , Z } , where
               M
Suppose    ∫  0

Z > M . Let PM be the fraction of the mass ε assigned to point M , and PZ = 1 − PM , so that PM of
the measure ε remaining people have income M , and the remaining people have income Z .
This is equivalent to considering F , where F ( x ) = Fˆ ( x ) ( x ≤ M ) + Fˆ ( M ) ( x ∈ ( M , Z ) ) + ( x ≥ Z )
                                                          Z              Z


Since μˆ :=
               ε
                  1
                      ∫M
                          ∞
                              xdF =
                                       1
                                       ε   (μ − ∫
                                                0
                                                    M
                                                              )
                                                        xdFˆ is known, we can write that

                                                       Z − μˆ
μˆ = ∫ xdF = ( MPM + Z (1 − PM ) ) ⇒ PM ( Z ) =
      ∞
                                                              , so given Fˆ and M , PM is a function of Z alone
      M                                               Z −M
                     M            ⎡      Z − μˆ        ⎛ μˆ − M ⎞ ⎤
Then, ∫ xα dFZ = ∫ xα dFˆ + ε ⎢ M α               + Zα ⎜         ⎟ ⎥ , and since α > 1, we have
                    0
                                  ⎣      Z −M          ⎝ Z − M ⎠⎦
             ⎛ μˆ − M ⎞
that lim Z α ⎜         ⎟ = ( μˆ − M ) Zlim Z α −1 = ∞, so lim ∫ xα dFZ = ∞, and GE (α ) is not bounded above.
     Z →∞
             ⎝Z −M ⎠                    →∞                 Z →∞


Suppose instead that α < 0, and set M = ∞ for convenience. Then, consider F * = ε + Fˆ ( x )( x ≥ a ) ,
so F ( 0 ) = ε , and there is positive probability that individuals have zero income. Then, ∫ xα dF * = ∞,
so the GE (α ) index is not bounded above.




                                                                                 40
                                Appendix B: Some Tables
         Appendix Table 1: Optimal Distributions (Population Weighted)

                 Optimal |
                  Distr. |      Freq.     Percent        Cum.
             ------------+-----------------------------------
               lognormal | 6,405.5102       98.55       98.55
                   gamma | 50.3753291        0.78       99.32
                 weibull | 44.1144579        0.68      100.00
             ------------+-----------------------------------
                   Total |      6,500      100.00


                 Optimal |
                 Distr., |
                Adjusted |      Freq.     Percent        Cum.
             ------------+-----------------------------------
               lognormal | 6,405.8457       98.55       98.55
                   gamma | 78.4110287        1.21       99.76
                 weibull | 15.743234         0.24      100.00
             ------------+-----------------------------------
                   Total |      6,500      100.00


                 Optimal |
                 Distr., |
                   Ginis |      Freq.     Percent        Cum.
             ------------+-----------------------------------
               lognormal | 6,405.5102       98.55       98.55
                   gamma | 50.3753291        0.78       99.32
                 weibull | 44.1144579        0.68      100.00
             ------------+-----------------------------------
                   Total |      6,500      100.00




Appendix Table 2: Countries for which welfare unambiguously fell:
|                 Angola   ||                Burundi   || Central African Republic   |
|                  Gabon   ||             Madagascar   ||                    Niger   |
|              Nicaragua   ||                   Togo   ||         Congo, Dem. Rep.   |
|                 Zambia   ||               Zimbabwe   ||             Sierra Leone   |
|                Liberia   ||                   Iraq   ||                   Kuwait   |
|                  Qatar   ||               Kiribati   ||                   Brunei   |
|                Somalia   ||            Afghanistan   ||               Tajikistan   |
|           Turkmenistan   ||                Ukraine   |




                                          41
                Appendix C: Consumption Adjustment
To adjust consumption surveys in order to use them in our analysis, we adapt the
procedure of Bhalla (2002). We select all country-years for which both income and
consumption surveys are available, and manually select which income and consumption
surveys of those available for a given country-year to use. We base our selection on 1)
similarity of source, and 2) similarity of income sharing units, units of analysis and
equivalence scales. Altogether, we have 100 pairs of income and consumption surveys.
        We then estimate the system of seemingly unrelated equations:
                      qijI = β j qijC + uij , J = 1,K 5
where q is the quintile share, I and C index income and consumption, i indexes
observations (country-years), and we allow the uij 's to be correlated across j (since
quintile shares must sum to unity, the errors in the above regression are probably
correlated across quintile shares). We exclude a constant from estimation. Our estimates
are as follows:
Seemingly unrelated regression
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Equation          Obs Parms         RMSE    "R-sq"       chi2        P
----------------------------------------------------------------------
q1_I              100      1    1.785765    0.8624    1498.20   0.0000
q2_I              100      1    2.237161    0.9321    3755.21   0.0000
q3_I              100      1    2.337126    0.9662    7431.34   0.0000
q4_I              100      1    2.709944    0.9812    9206.86   0.0000
q5_I              100      1    8.073047    0.9801   10443.53   0.0000
----------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
             |      Coef.   Std. Err.      z    P>|z|     [95% Conf. Interval]
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
q1_I         |
        q1_C |   .8273436   .0213748    38.71   0.000     .7854498    .8692374
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
q2_I         |
        q2_C |   .8973646   .0146437    61.28   0.000     .8686634    .9260658
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
q3_I         |
        q3_C |   .9321035   .0108126    86.21   0.000     .9109111    .9532958
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
q4_I         |
        q4_C |   .9756106   .0101677    95.95   0.000     .9556824    .9955388
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
q5_I         |
        q5_C |   1.072232   .0104922   102.19   0.000     1.051668    1.092797
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Correlation matrix of residuals:

          q1_I      q2_I          q3_I             q4_I         q5_I
q1_I    1.0000
q2_I    0.9217    1.0000
q3_I    0.7526    0.9033     1.0000
q4_I    0.3906    0.5839     0.7973            1.0000
q5_I   -0.7649   -0.8790    -0.9198           -0.7769          1.0000

Breusch-Pagan test of independence: chi2(10) =                      616.843, Pr = 0.0000




                                                          42
Hence we see that the residuals are highly correlated across j, so the SUR procedure
made sense.
        We then multiply all consumption quintile shares for surveys in the WIDER-DS
dataset that we use by these estimates, and renormalize the resulting shares to sum to
unity. (In practice, the shares sum very close to unity even without renormalization).
        Below is the list of countries and regions affected by this (Income indicates
number of income surveys, and Cons. indicates number of consumption surveys).
       +----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
       | ccode                    cname   country   group     region      Income     Cons.|
       |----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
  5.   |     5                  Burundi       BDI       1        ssa         0          2 |
 13.   |    13                 Botswana       BWA       1        ssa         1          1 |
 18.   |    19            Cote d'Ivoire       CIV       1        ssa         1          8 |
 19.   |    20                 Cameroon       CMR       1        ssa         1          1 |
 28.   |    29         Egypt, Arab Rep.       EGY       1       mena         0          4 |
       |----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
 30.   |    31                 Ethiopia       ETH       1        ssa         0          4 |
 36.   |    37                    Ghana       GHA       1        ssa         0          7 |
 37.   |    38                   Guinea       GIN       1        ssa         0          2 |
 38.   |    39              Gambia, The       GMB       1        ssa         2          2 |
 39.   |    40            Guinea-Bissau       GNB       1        ssa         0          2 |
       |----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
 46.   |    47                Indonesia       IDN       1         ea         0          9 |
 48.   |    50       Iran, Islamic Rep.       IRN       1       mena         0          7 |
 52.   |    54                  Jamaica       JAM       1         la         0         11 |
 53.   |    55                   Jordan       JOR       1       mena         0          4 |
 55.   |    57                    Kenya       KEN       1        ssa         3          2 |
       |----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
 60.   |    62                  Morocco       MAR       1       mena         1          4 |
 61.   |    63               Madagascar       MDG       1        ssa         0          5 |
 63.   |    65                     Mali       MLI       1        ssa         0          2 |
 64.   |    66               Mozambique       MOZ       2        ssa         0          1 |
 65.   |    67               Mauritania       MRT       1        ssa         0          7 |
       |----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
 67.   |    69                   Malawi       MWI       1        ssa         4          1 |
 69.   |    71                  Namibia       NAM       2        ssa         0          1 |
 70.   |    72                    Niger       NER       1        ssa         1          3 |
 77.   |    79                 Pakistan       PAK       1         sa         0         12 |
 81.   |    83         Papua New Guinea       PNG       2         ea         0          1 |
       |----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
 85.   |    87                   Rwanda       RWA       1        ssa         0          2 |
 86.   |    88                  Senegal       SEN       1        ssa         1          2 |
 95.   |    97                  Tunisia       TUN       1        ssa         1          3 |
 98.   |   100                 Tanzania       TZA       1        ssa         1          4 |
103.   |   105             South Africa       ZAF       1        ssa         2          2 |
       |----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
106.   |   108                 Zimbabwe       ZWE       1        ssa         1          2 |
116.   |   118             Sierra Leone       SLE       1        ssa         1          1 |
123.   |   125                  Algeria       DZA       1       mena         0          2 |
127.   |   129                 Cambodia       KHM       1         ea         0          3 |
145.   |   147                     Laos       LAO       1         ea         0          2 |
       |----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
149.   |   151                 Mongolia       MNG       1         ea         0          2 |
157.   |   159                 Djibouti       DJI       2       mena         0          1 |
160.   |   162                    Yemen       YEM       1       mena         0          2 |
161.   |   163                  Vietnam       VNM       1         ea         0          3 |
164.   |   166   Bosnia and Herzegovina       BIH       2        eeu         0          1 |
       |----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
165.   |   167                  Croatia       HRV       1        eeu         0          2 |
168.   |   170                  Albania       ALB       1        eeu         0          2 |
184.   |   186               Tajikistan       TJK       1   exsoviet         0          2 |
192.   |   194             India, Urban       INU       1         sa         0         12 |
193.   |   195             India, Rural       INR       1         sa         0         12 |
       +----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+




                                             43
                                               Bibliography
Ahluwalia, Montek S., Nicholas Carter, and Hollis Chenery. (1979) “Growth and Poverty in Developing
Countries,” Journal of Development Economics, VI, 299–341.
Airth, A. (1985): “The Progression of Wage Distributions”, Eurostat News (special issue), 139-161.
Atkinson, Anthony B. (1970) “On the Measurement of Inequality,” Journal of Economic Theory, II, 244–
263.
Atkinson, Anthony B., and Andrea Brandolini. (2001) “Promise and Pitfalls in the Use of ‘Secondary’
Data-Sets: Income Inequality in OECD Countries as a Case Study,” Journal of Economic Literature,
XXXIX, 771–800.
Bandourian, R.; McDonald J.B.; Turley R.S. (2003). “A Comparison of Parametric Models of Income
Distribution across Countries and over Time”. Estadistica 55: 135-152.
Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. (1992). “Convergence,” Journal of Political Economy, C, 223–
251.
Bhalla, Surjit S. (2002). Imagine There is No Country. Washington, DC: Institute for International
Economics,.
Bourguignon, François, and Christian Morrison (2002).“Inequality among World Citizens: 1820–1992,”
American Economic Review, XCII, 727–744.
Chen, Shaoua and Ravallion, Martin (2001). “How Did the World’s Poorest Fare in the 1990s?” Review of
Income and Wealth, XLVII, 283–300.
Chen, Shaoua and Ravallion, Martin. (2004). “How Did the World’s Poorest Fare since the Early 1980s?”
The World Bank’s Research Observer, XIX, 141–170.
Chen, Shaoua and Ravallion, Martin. (2007). “China’s (uneven) progress against poverty,” Journal of
Development Economics 82: 1– 42
Chotikapanich, D. and Griffiths, W.E. (2007). “Estimating Income Distributions Using a Mixture of
Gamma Densities”, unpublished.
Chotikapanich, Duangkamon et. al. (2007). “Global Inequality: Recent Evidence and Trends,” UNU-
WIDER Research Paper No. 2007/01.
Chotikapanich, Duangkamon, Rebbeca Valenzuela, and D. S. Prasada Rao. (1997) “Global and Regional
Inequality in the Distribution of Income: Estimation with Limited and Incomplete Data,” Empirical
Economics, XXII 533–546.
Cowell, F. (1977): Measuring Inequality. Oxford: Phillip Allen.
Deaton, Angus. (2001). "Counting the World's Poor: Problems and Possible Solutions." World Bank
Research Observer 16, no. 2: 125-147.
Deaton, Angus. (2005). “‘Measuring Poverty in a Growing World’ (or ‘Measuring Growth in a Poor
World’),” Review of Economics and Statistics, LXXXVII, 1–19.
Deininger, Klaus, and Lyn Squire. (1996). “A New Data Set Measuring Income Inequality,” World Bank
Economic Review, X, 565–591.
Dikhanov, Yuri, and Michael Ward (2001) “Evolution of the Global Distribution of Income, 1970–99,”
mimeo.
Fisk, P. (1961): “The Graduation of Income Distribution”, Econometrica, 29, 171-185.
Gibrat, R. (1931): Les inégalités économiques, Paris, Sirey.
Gini, Corrado (1912). "Variabilità e mutabilità" Reprinted in Memorie di metodologica statistica (Ed.
Pizetti E, Salvemini, T). Rome: Libreria Eredi Virgilio Veschi (1955).




                                                    44
Harsanyi, John C. (1955), “CardinalWelfare, Individualistic Ethics, and Interpersonal Comparisons of
Utility,” Journal of Political Economy, 63: 309–321
Heston, Allan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten, (2006) Penn World Table Version 6.2, Center for
International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP).
Hill, T. (1959): “An Analysis of the Distribution of Wages and Salaries in Great Britain”, Econometrica,
27, 355-381.
Jenkins, S. (2007). “Inequality and the GB2 Distribution”. IZA Discussion Papers, No.2831.
Jones, Charles. (1997). “On the Evolution of the World Income Distribution,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, XI, 19–36
Kalecki, M. (1945): “On the Gibrat Distribution”, Econometrica, 13, 161-170.
Kremer, Michael, Alexei Onatski, and James Stock. 2001. "Searching for Prosperity." NBER Working
Papers: 8250
Lemieux, Thomas and Card, David. (1998). “Education, Earnings and the ‘Canadian G.I. Bill’,” NBER
Working Paper 6718.
López, J. Humberto and Servén, Luis (2006). “A Normal Relationship? Poverty, Growth and Inequality,”
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3814.
McDonald, J. (1984): “Some Generalized Functions for the Size Distribution of Income”, Econometrica,
52, 647-663.
McDonald, James B. and Xu, Yexiao (1995). “A Generalization of the Beta Distribution with
Applications,” Journal of Econometrics 69(2): 427-28.
Metcalf, C. (1969): “The Size Distribution of Personal Income during the Business Cycle”, The American
Economic Review, 59, 657-668.
Milanovic, Branko. (2002). “True World Income Distribution, 1988 and 1993: First Calculation Based on
Household Surveys Alone,” Economic Journal, CXII, 51–92.
Mincer, Jacob (1974). Schooling, Experience and Earnings. New York, Columbia University Press for the
NBER.
Moore, D.S. (1968) “An Elementary Proof of Asymptotic Normality of Linear Functions of Order
Statistics”, The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 39(1): 263-265.
National Bureau of Statistics, China. http://www.stats.gov.cn/english Website accessed 09/25/2009.
Pareto, W. (1897): “Cours d’Economie Politique 2”, F. Rouge, Lausanne.
Parker, S.C. (1999) “The generalized beta as a model for the distribution of earnings”, Economics Letters
62: 197-200.
Pestieau, P. and U. Possen (1979) : “A model of wealth distribution”, Econometrica 47, 761-772.
Pinkovskiy, Maxim (2008). “Testing Lognormal Mixtures Against the Generalized Beta Distribution as a
Parametric Model for the Distributions of Income and Expenditure,” Columbia mimeo.
Quah, Danny. (1996) “Twin Peaks: Growth and Convergence in Models of Distribution Dynamics,”
Economic Journal, CVI, 1045–1055.
Quah, Danny. (1997). “Empirics for Growth and Distribution: Polarization, Stratification, and Convergence
Clubs,” Journal of Economic Growth, II: 27–59.
Quah, Danny. (2002) “One-Third of the World’s Growth and Inequality,” mimeo, London School of
Economics.
Ravallion, Martin & Chen, Shaohua & Sangraula, Prem, (2008). "Dollar a day revisited," Policy Research
Working Paper Series 4620, The World Bank.




                                                    45
Rutherford, R.S.G. (1955): “Income Distributions: A New Model”. Econometrica, 23, 277-294.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. (1996) “Regional Cohesion: Evidence and Theories of Regional Growth and
Convergence,” European Economic Review, XL 1325–1352.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. (1997). "Transfers, Social Safety Nets, and Growth". IMF Staff Papers, vol. 44, No
1, pp.81-102
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. (2002a). “The Disturbing ‘Rise’ of Global Income Inequality,” NBER Working
Paper 8904.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. (2002b). “The World Distribution of Income (Estimated from Individual Country
Distributions),” NBER Working Paper 8933.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. (2006). “The World Distribution of Income: Falling Poverty and...Convergence,
Period,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 121(2): 351-397.
Salem, A. and T. Mount (1974): “A Convenient Descriptive Model of Income Distribution: The Gamma
Density”, Econometrica, 42, 1115-1128.
Sargan, D. (1957): “The distribution of wealth”, Econometrica 25, 568-590.
Schultz, T. Paul. (1998). “Inequality and the Distribution of Personal Income in the World: How It Is
Changing and Why,” Journal of Population Economics, XI, 307–344.
Sen, Amartya. (1974) ‘Informational Bases of Alternative Welfare Approaches: Aggregation and Income
Distribution,” Journal of Public Economics 3: 387-403.
Sen, Amartya. (1976) “Real National Income,” Review of Economic Studies, 43(1): 19-39
Singh, S. and G. Maddala (1976): “A Function for Size Distribution of Incomes”, Econometrica, 44, 963-
970.
Summers, Robert, and Alan Heston. 1991. "The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An Expanded Set of
International Comparisons, 1950-1988." Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, no. 2: 327-368.
UNU-WIDER World Income Inequality Database, Version 2.0c, May 2008
Vickrey, William (1960). “Utility, Strategy, and Social Decision Rules,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 74(4): 507-535.
World Bank: Poverty Database: PovcalNet. Date Accessed: 09/25/2009.
http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/EXTRESEARCH/EXTPROGRAMS/EXTPO
VRES/EXTPOVCALNET/0,,contentMDK:21867101~pagePK:64168427~piPK:64168435~theSitePK:528
0443,00.html




                                                    46
                        Figure 1: China in 1970
                                                              China
40,000


35,000


30,000


25,000


20,000


15,000


10,000


 5,000


     0
         $50                              $500                           $5,000                        $50,000

                        Total 1970           Urban 1970             Rural 1970           $1/day ($312, $554)




                              Figure 2: China in 2006
                                                              China
40,000


35,000


30,000


25,000


20,000


15,000


10,000


 5,000


     0
         $50                              $500                           $5,000                        $50,000

                        Total 2006           Urban 2006             Rural 2006           $1/day ($312, $554)




 Figure 3: Chinese Income Distribution 1970-2006
                                                              China
40,000


35,000


30,000


25,000


20,000


15,000


10,000


 5,000


    0
         $50                              $500                           $5,000                        $50,000

           Total 1970        Total 1980          Total 1990      Total 2000       Total 2006      $1/day ($312, $554)




                                                              47
                         Figure 4: India in 1970
                                               India
35,000


30,000


25,000


20,000


15,000


10,000


 5,000


        0
            $50                $500                         $5,000                  $50,000

                  Total 1970      Urban 1970           Rural 1970    $1/day ($312 . $554)




                         Figure 5: India in 2006
                                               India
35,000


30,000


25,000


20,000


15,000


10,000


 5,000


        0
            $50                $500                         $5,000                  $50,000

                  Total 2006      Urban 2006           Rural 2006    $1/day ($312 . $554)




                     Figure 6: India 1970-2006
                                                India
80000
60000
40000
20000
0




        50                     500                         5000                     50000
                                                Income

                  1970            1980                 1990            2000                   2006




                                               48
                                                          Figure 7: United States 1970-2006
                                                                                                United States
                                         7,000


                                         6,000


                                         5,000


                                         4,000


                                         3,000


                                         2,000


                                         1,000


                                                0
                                                $500                              $5,000                         $50,000                        $500,000

                                                                  1970         1980         1990      2000             2006      $1/day ($312, $554)




        Figure 8: Indonesia 1970-2006                                                                                          Figure 9: Brazil, 1970-2006
                                    Indonesia                                                                                                                 Brazil
 7,000                                                                                                   4,000


                                                                                                         3,500
 6,000

                                                                                                         3,000
 5,000

                                                                                                         2,500
 4,000
                                                                                                         2,000

 3,000
                                                                                                         1,500

 2,000
                                                                                                         1,000


 1,000                                                                                                    500


    0                                                                                                        0
         $50             $500                          $5,000                         $50,000                    $50                       $500                         $5,000                   $50,000

               1970   1980       1990       2000          2006        $1/day ($312, $554)                                     1970      1980       1990         2000      2006    $1/day ($312, $554)




Figure 10: Brazil vs. Indonesia Figure 11: Poverty Dynamics in Brazil 1970-2006
                         Brazil vs Indonesia 1970                                                                                                             Brazil
4,000                                                                                                     2,000


3,500                                                                                                     1,800

                                                                                                          1,600
3,000
                                                                                                          1,400
2,500
                                                                                                          1,200

2,000                                                                                                     1,000

                                                                                                             800
1,500

                                                                                                             600
1,000
                                                                                                             400

 500
                                                                                                             200

   0                                                                                                             0
        $50             $500                           $5,000                         $50,000                        $50                                                              $500

                        Brazil      Indonesia          $1/day ($312, $554)                                                     1970      1980          1990      2000      2006    $1/day ($312, $554)




                                                                                                    49
Figure 12: Bangladesh 1970-2006                                                                                 Figure 13: Nigeria 1970-2006
                                            Bangladesh                                                                                                   Nigeria
  4,000                                                                                           4,000


  3,500                                                                                           3,500


  3,000                                                                                           3,000


  2,500                                                                                           2,500


  2,000                                                                                           2,000


  1,500                                                                                           1,500


  1,000                                                                                           1,000


   500                                                                                                500


     0                                                                                                  0
          $50                  $500                         $5,000                   $50,000                $50                      $500                           $5,000                    $50,000

                    1970    1980          1990      2000      2006    $1/day ($312, $554)                                 1970    1980           1990       2000      2006     $1/day ($312, $554)




Figure 14: Poverty Dynamics in Nigeria 1970-2006 Figure 15: Japan 1970-2006
                                                  Nigeria                                                                                                 Japan
   4,000                                                                                              6,000


   3,500
                                                                                                      5,000

   3,000

                                                                                                      4,000
   2,500


   2,000                                                                                              3,000


   1,500
                                                                                                      2,000

   1,000

                                                                                                      1,000
    500


          0                                                                                                 0
              $50                                                          $500                                 $50                      $500                        $5,000                    $50,000

                     1970    1980          1990      2000      2006    $1/day ($312, $554)                                 1970    1980           1990       2000      2006     $1/day ($312, $554)




Figure 16: Mexico 1970-2006                                                          Figure 18: The (Former) Soviet Union 1970-2006
                                                  Mexico                                                                                                USSR‐FSU
  2,500                                                                                               12,000



                                                                                                      10,000
  2,000


                                                                                                       8,000
  1,500

                                                                                                       6,000

  1,000
                                                                                                       4,000


    500
                                                                                                       2,000



      0                                                                                                         0
              $50                  $500                      $5,000                    $50,000                      $50                   $500                        $5,000                    $50,000

                    1970    1980           1990      2000      2006    $1/day ($312, $554)                                 1970    1980           1990       2000       2006    $1/day ($312, $554)




                                                                                                 50
           Figure 19: World Distribution of Income by Region, 1970

                                                   1970
    60,000



    50,000



    40,000



    30,000



    20,000



    10,000



            0
                $50                 $500                      $5,000                         $50,000

                         SSA             EA                    SA                        Latam
                         MENA            FSU                   EEU                       HNOECD
                         OECD            World                 $1/day ($312, $554)




           Figure 20: World Distribution of Income by Region, 2006

                                                 2006
120,000



100,000



80,000



60,000



40,000



20,000



     0
          $50                    $500                   $5,000                         $50,000

                  SSA              EA                   SA                           Latam
                  MENA             FSU                  EEU                          HNOECD
                  OECD             World                $1/day ($312. $554)


                          Figure 21: World Distribution of Income, 1970-2006




                                                 51
                                World Distribution of Income



   150000
   100000
   50000
   0




             50                 500                     5000                       50000
                                                   Income

                         1970            1980            1990                2000            2006




                         Figure 22: Comparison of Normals and Kernels

                                WDI Normal vs Kernel 2006
120,000.00



100,000.00



 80,000.00



 60,000.00



 40,000.00



 20,000.00



            0.00
                   $50           $500                    $5,000                    $50,000

                                Normal          Kernel       $1/day ($312, $554)




                                                   52
                    Figure 23: World $1/day Poverty Rate, Baseline

                            Baseline $1/Day Poverty Rate, 1970-2006

               .25



                .2
Poverty Rate




               .15



                .1



               .05
                     1970            1980        1990         2000           2010
                                                 year




                       Figure 24: World Poverty Rates, Baseline

                     World Poverty Rates for Different Poverty Lines, 1970-2006
               .8



               .6
Poverty Rate




               .4



               .2



               0
                    1970             1980       1990          2000           2010
                                                year

                            $1/Day USD 2006    $1/Day       $2/Day        $3/Day
                            $5/Day             $7.5/Day     $10/Day




                                              53
Figure 25: World $1/day Poverty Count, Baseline

                                         Baseline $1/Day Poverty Count, 1970-2006
                          1000




Poverty Count, Millions    800




                           600




                           400


                                  1970             1980            1990    2000         2010
                                                                   year




                                  Figure 26: World Poverty Counts, Baseline

                                 World Poverty Counts for Different Poverty Lines, 1970-2006
                          4000
Poverty Count, Millions




                          3000



                          2000



                          1000



                            0

                                 1970              1980        1990        2000         2010
                                                               year

                                          $1/Day - USD 2006    $1/Day     $2/Day      $3/Day
                                          $5/Day               $7.5/Day   $10/Day




                                                              54
 Figure 27: World Inequality Profile (Gini and Atikinson), Baseline:
                                       Gini Coefficient, Baseline Specification                                                            Atkinson(0.5) Coefficient, Baseline Specification
                  .68
                                                                                                                              .38



                  .66                                                                                                         .36




                                                                                                                     A(0.5)
      Gini        .64                                                                                                         .34



                  .62                                                                                                         .32




                          .6                                                                                                   .3
                               1970         1980            1990           2000             2010                                    1970            1980               1990           2000          2010
                                                            year                                                                                                       year
a)                                                                                                   b)
                                  Atkinson(0.75) Coefficient, Baseline Specification                                                        Atkinson(1) Coefficient, Baseline Specification
                                                                                                                              .65
                 .52


                      .5
                                                                                                                               .6

                 .48
      A(0.75)




                                                                                                                     A(1)
                 .46
                                                                                                                              .55

                 .44


                 .42                                                                                                           .5
                           1970             1980            1990           2000             2010                                    1970            1980               1990          2000          2010
                                                            year                                                                                                       year
c)                                                                                                   d)


Figure 28: World Inequality, Within and Between Countries, Baseline
                                GE(0) Inequality Decomposition, Baseline Specification                                  GE(0.25) Inequality Decomposition, Baseline Specification
                           1                                                                                         .9

                           .9                                                                                        .8
                           .8
                                                                                                                     .7
                           .7
                                                                                                          GE(0.25)




                                                                                                                     .6
                GE(0)




                           .6
                                                                                                                     .5
                           .5
                                                                                                                     .4
                           .4

                           .3                                                                                        .3

                           .2                                                                                        .2
                                1970         1980                1990        2000             2010                            1970               1980                1990          2000           2010
                                                                 year                                                                                                year

                                              Total                     Between Countries                                                         Total                       Between Countries
                                              Within Countries                                                                                    Within Countries
 a)                                                                                                  b)
                               GE(0.5) Inequality Decomposition, Baseline Specification                                       GE(1) Inequality Decomposition, Baseline Specification
                          .9                                                                                         .9

                          .8                                                                                         .8

                          .7                                                                                         .7
                GE(0.5)




                          .6                                                                                         .6
                                                                                                          GE(1)




                          .5                                                                                         .5

                          .4                                                                                         .4

                          .3                                                                                         .3

                          .2                                                                                         .2
                               1970         1980                 1990        2000             2010                            1970               1980                1990          2000           2010
                                                                 year                                                                                                year

                                              Total                     Between Countries                                                         Total                       Between Countries
                                              Within Countries                                                                                    Within Countries
 c)                                                                                                  d)




                                                                                                   55
                                    Figure 29: World Percentile Ratios, Baseline Specification


                                      World 75-25 Percentile Ratio                                                       World 90-10 Percentile Ratio
                                                                                                      45
             10


                  9
                                                                                                      40


                  8
     Ratio




                                                                                              Ratio
                                                                                                      35
                  7


                                                                                                      30
                  6


                  5
                                                                                                      25
                      1970            1980         1990         2000         2010                          1970         1980         1990         2000             2010
                                                   year                                                                              year
a)                                                                                   b)


                                                      Figure 30: World Welfare, Baseline
                                 Sen Welfare Index, Baseline Specification                                    Atkinson(0.5) Welfare Index, Baseline Specification
              3500
                                                                                                   6000



              3000
                                                                                                   5000
                                                                                          Y(0.5)
      Sen




              2500

                                                                                                   4000
              2000



                                                                                                   3000
              1500

                        1970            1980        1990         2000        2010                          1970          1980        1990         2000         2010
                                                    year                                                                             year
a)                                                                                   b)
                             Atkinson(0.75) Welfare Index, Baseline Specification                              Atkinson(1) Welfare Index, Baseline Specification
                  5000
                                                                                                      4000


                                                                                                      3500
                  4000
        Y(0.75)




                                                                                                      3000
                                                                                            Y(1)




                                                                                                      2500
                  3000

                                                                                                      2000


                  2000                                                                                1500
                         1970           1980         1990        2000         2010                           1970        1980        1990         2000        2010
                                                     year                                                                            year
c)                                                                                   d)




                                                                                    56
                                                               Figure 31: GDP per capita by Region

                                                                                 GDP per Capita by Region
                                                    11000
                                                    10000
                                                     9000


                                           GDP per Capita
                                                     8000
                                                     7000
                                                     6000
                                                     5000
                                                     4000
                                                     3000
                                                     2000
                                                     1000
                                                            1970             1980                     1990                                          2000                           2010
                                                                                                      Year
                                                                     East Asia                                                       South Asia                     Latin America
                                                                     Sub-Saharan Africa                                              Eastern Europe                 USSR-FSU
                                                                     Middle East - North Africa                                      World




                                       Figure 32: Poverty Rates and Counts by Region, Baseline
                                 $1/Day Poverty Rate Across Regions: 1970-2006                                                                $1/Day Poverty Count Across Regions: 1970-2006
                     .6                                                                                                              700

                                                                                                                                     600
                                                                                                           Poverty Count, Millions




                     .5
                                                                                                                                     500
      Poverty Rate




                     .4
                                                                                                                                     400
                     .3
                                                                                                                                     300
                     .2
                                                                                                                                     200
                     .1                                                                                                              100


                          1970            1980                1990         2000               2010                                         1970           1980              1990          2000             2010
                                                              year                                                                                                          year

                                       East Asia                         South Asia                                                                   East Asia                           South Asia
                                       Latin America                     Sub-Saharan Africa                                                           Latin America                       Sub-Saharan Africa
                                       Eastern Europe                    USSR-FSU                                                                     Eastern Europe                      USSR-FSU
                                       Middle East - North Africa                                                                                     Middle East - North Africa
a)                                                                                                   b)
                             $2/Day Poverty Rates Across Regions: 1970-2006                                                                   $2/Day Poverty Counts Across Regions: 1970-2006
                     .9                                                                                                              1,000
                     .8
                                                                                                          Poverty Count, Millions




                     .7                                                                                                               800
     Poverty Rate




                     .6
                                                                                                                                      600
                     .5
                     .4
                                                                                                                                      400
                     .3
                     .2                                                                                                               200
                     .1                                                                                                               100


                          1970            1980                1990        2000                2010                                           1970          1980              1990          2000            2010
                                                              year                                                                                                           year

                                       East Asia                         South Asia                                                                   East Asia                           South Asia
                                       Latin America                     Sub-Saharan Africa                                                           Latin America                       Sub-Saharan Africa
                                       Eastern Europe                    USSR-FSU                                                                     Eastern Europe                      USSR-FSU
                                       Middle East - North Africa                                                                                     Middle East - North Africa
c)                                                                                                   d)




                                                                                                 57
                                                                       Figure 33: Mirror Graphs
             $1/Day Poverty and Growth in Sub-Saharan Africa, 1970-2006                                                                                   $1/Day Poverty and Growth in East Asia, 1970-2006
                    .45                                                                       2000                                                  .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6000


                                                                                              1900                                                                                                               5000




                                                                                                        GDP per Capita




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GDP per Capita
                          .4                                                                                                                        .4
     Poverty Rate




                                                                                                                                  Poverty Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4000
                                                                                              1800

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3000
                    .35                                                                                                                             .2
                                                                                              1700
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2000


                                                                                              1600                                                                                                               1000
                          .3                                                                                                                        0
                               1970          1980            1990    2000              2010                                                              1970        1980           1990    2000          2010
                                                             Year                                                                                                                   Year

                                            Poverty Rate, $1/Day      GDP per capita                                                                               Poverty Rate, $1/Day      GDP per capita
a)                                                                                                                           b)
                                   $1/Day Poverty and Growth in South Asia, 1970-2006                                                                    $1/Day Poverty and Growth in Latin America, 1970-2006
                                                                                           3500                                                     .12                                                              8000
                           .2

                                                                                           3000                                                      .1
                          .15                                                                                                                                                                                        7000
                                                                                                     GDP per Capita




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GDP per Capita
       Poverty Rate




                                                                                                                                     Poverty Rate
                                                                                           2500                                                     .08

                           .1
                                                                                           2000                                                     .06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6000

                          .05
                                                                                           1500                                                     .04

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5000
                               0                                                           1000                                                     .02
                                   1970       1980           1990    2000          2010                                                                   1970        1980           1990    2000             2010
                                                             Year                                                                                                                    Year

                                             Poverty Rate, $1/Day     GDP per capita                                                                                Poverty Rate, $1/Day      GDP per capita
c)                                                                                                                           d)
                           $1/Day Poverty and Growth in Eastern Europe, 1970-2006                                                                   $1/Day Poverty and Growth in the USSR-FSU, 1970-2006
                          .04                                                                  9000                                                 .02                                                          12000


                                                                                               8000
                          .03                                                                                                                    .015                                                            10000
                                                                                                            GDP per Capita




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GDP per Capita
           Poverty Rate




                                                                                                                                  Poverty Rate




                                                                                               7000
                          .02                                                                                                                       .01                                                          8000
                                                                                               6000

                          .01                                                                                                                    .005                                                            6000
                                                                                               5000


                               0                                                               4000                                                  0                                                           4000
                                   1970        1980           1990    2000              2010                                                              1970       1980           1990    2000          2010
                                                              Year                                                                                                                  Year

                                             Poverty Rate, $1/Day      GDP per capita                                                                               Poverty Rate, $1/Day     GDP per capita
e)                                                                                                                           f)




                                                                                                                      58
Figure 34: Gini Coefficient by Region, Baseline
                                                                Gini Inequality by Region
                               .7
                    .65
                               .6




     Gini Coefficient
                    .55
                               .5
                    .45
                               .4
                    .35
                               .3
                    .25
                                        1970                1980                    1990                  2000              2010
                                                                                    Year
                                                    East Asia                              South Asia              Latin America
                                                    Sub-Saharan Africa                     Eastern Europe          USSR-FSU
                                                    Middle East - North Africa             World




                                    Figure 35: Welfare by Region, Baseline
                                                                    Sen Welfare by Region
                                 7000

                                 6000
                    Sen Welfare Index




                                 5000

                                 4000

                                 3000

                                 2000

                                 1000

                                         0
                                             1970               1980                  1990                  2000              2010
                                                                                      Year
                                                       East Asia                             South Asia              Latin America
                                                       Sub-Saharan Africa                    Eastern Europe          USSR-FSU
                                                       Middle East - North Africa            World

a)
                                                                Atkinson(1) Welfare by Region
                                 9000
                                 8000
                                 7000
                                 6000
                                 5000
                    Y(2)




                                 4000
                                 3000
                                 2000
                                 1000
                                         0
                                             1970               1980                  1990                  2000              2010
                                                                                      Year
                                                       East Asia                             South Asia              Latin America
                                                       Sub-Saharan Africa                    Eastern Europe          USSR-FSU
                                                       Middle East - North Africa            World

b)




                                                                                 59
                                                                      Sensitivity Analysis:


                   Figure 36: $1/Day Poverty Rate                                                                              Figure 37: Gini Inequality


                               $1/Day Poverty Rate, all specifications                                                             Gini Inequality, all specifications
                  .28                                                                                             .69
                  .26                                                                                             .68
                  .24
                                                                                                                  .67
                  .22
                                                                                                                  .66
   Poverty Rate




                   .2
                  .18                                                                                             .65




                                                                                                   Gini
                  .16
                                                                                                                  .64
                  .14
                  .12                                                                                             .63
                   .1                                                                                             .62
                  .08
                                                                                                                  .61
                  .06
                  .04                                                                                              .6
                        1970         1980             1990           2000               2010                            1970         1980                  1990                2000               2010
                                                      year                                                                                                 year

                               Baseline              GDP                    Surveys                                            Baseline                    GDP                        Surveys
                               Interpolation         Distributions          Adjustment/Gini                                    Interpolation               Distributions              Adjustment/Gini
                               Kernels                                                                                         Kernels




Figure 38: World Poverty Profile                                                                                         Figure 39: Regional $1/Day Poverty

                                 Poverty Rates: Sensitivity Analysis                                                               $1/Day Poverty Rate by Region
                  .8                                                                                              .6
                  .7
                                                                                                                  .5
                  .6
   Poverty Rate




                  .5
                                                                                                   Poverty Rate




                                                                                                                  .4
                  .4
                                                                                                                  .3
                  .3
                  .2                                                                                              .2

                  .1
                                                                                                                  .1
                  0
                       1970         1980              1990           2000               2010                      0
                                                      year                                                             1970         1980                   1990                2000               2010
                                                                                                                                                           year
                                          $1/Day -- USD 2006          $1/Day
                                          $2/Day                      $3/Day                                                               East Asia                   South Asia
                                          $5/Day                      $10/Day                                                              Latin America               Sub-Saharan Africa




                                                                                              60
     Figure 40: World Inequality Between and Within Countries, Sensitivity
                                          GE(0) Inequality Decomposition: Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                 GE(0.25) Inequality Decomposition: Sensitivity Analysis
                               1.1                                                                                                                                        1
                                    1                                                                                                                                     .9
                                .9                                                                                                                                        .8
                                .8
                                                                                                                                                                          .7




                                                                                                                                       GE(0.25)
       GE(0)
                                .7
                                                                                                                                                                          .6
                                .6
                                                                                                                                                                          .5
                                .5
                                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                .4
                                                                                                                                                                          .3
                                .3
                                .2                                                                                                                                        .2

                                        1970         1980                 1990                       2000            2010                                                      1970            1980                 1990           2000         2010
                                                                          year                                                                                                                                      year

                                                                 Total                        Between                                                                                                      Total              Between
                                                                 Within                                                                                                                                    Within
a)                                                                                                                          b)
                                         GE(0.5) Inequality Decomposition: Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                  GE(1) Inequality Decomposition: Sensitivity Analysis
                               .9                                                                                                                                         .9

                               .8                                                                                                                                         .8

                               .7                                                                                                                                         .7
      GE(0.5)




                               .6                                                                                                                                         .6




                                                                                                                                       GE(1)
                               .5                                                                                                                                         .5
                               .4                                                                                                                                         .4
                               .3                                                                                                                                         .3
                               .2
                                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                    1970            1980                 1990                        2000            2010                                                      1970            1980                 1990           2000         2010
                                                                         year                                                                                                                                       year

                                                                Total                     Between                                                                                                          Total              Between
                                                                Within                                                                                                                                     Within
c)                                                                                                                          d)
     Figure 41: Survey Adjustment for Misreporting – Sensitivity Analysis
                                                    Survey Adjustment: Poverty Rate                                                                                                           Survey Adjustment: Poverty Counts
                                    .3                                                                                                                                    1000
                                                                                                                                         $1/Day Poverty Count, Millions




                               .25                                                                                                                                         900
        Poverty Rate, $1/Day




                                                                                                                                                                           800
                                    .2
                                                                                                                                                                           700

                               .15                                                                                                                                         600

                                                                                                                                                                           500
                                    .1
                                                                                                                                                                           400
                               .05                                                                                                                                         300
                                         1970         1980                1990                       2000            2010                                                         1970           1980                1990           2000        2010
                                                                          year                                                                                                                                       year

                                                             Normal                     Normal, Adjusted                                                                                                Normal              Normal, Adjusted
                                                             Gamma                      Gamma, Adjusted                                                                                                 Gamma               Gamma, Adjusted
                                                             Weibull                    Weibull, Adjusted                                                                                               Weibull             Weibull, Adjusted
a)                                                                                                                             b)
                                                                                                            Survey Adjustment: Gini Inequality
                                                                                        .68
                                                                                        .67
                                                                                        .66
                                                                                        .65
                                                                                        .64
                                                                                 Gini




                                                                                        .63
                                                                                        .62
                                                                                        .61
                                                                                         .6
                                                                                        .59
                                                                                              1970            1980              1990                                                  2000            2010
                                                                                                                                year

                                                                                                                     Normal                                               Normal, Adjusted
                                                                                                                     Gamma                                                Gamma, Adjusted
                                                                                                                     Weibull                                              Weibull, Adjusted
                                                                       c)




                                                                                                                        61
                                                                                                                   Figure 42: PPP Revision


                                             PPP Revision: World Poverty                                                                                                                                       PPP Revision: Chinese Poverty
                                 .4
                                                                                                                                                                                         .8




                                                                                                                                                           $1/Day Chinese Poverty Rate
     $1/Day World Poverty Rate




                                 .3
                                                                                                                                                                                         .6


                                 .2
                                                                                                                                                                                         .4


                                 .1                                                                                                                                                      .2



                                 0                                                                                                                                                       0
                                      1970   1980               1990                                                   2000               2010                                                1970              1980              1990          2000       2010
                                                                year                                                                                                                                                              year

                                                    Baseline                                              WB PPP Revision                                                                                              Baseline          WB PPP Revision
a)                                                                                                                                                 b)
                                                                                                                                 PPP Revision: Gini Inequality
                                                                                                          .72


                                                                                                           .7
                                                                                       Gini Coefficient




                                                                                                          .68


                                                                                                          .66


                                                                                                          .64


                                                                                                          .62


                                                                                                                1970             1980               1990                                              2000               2010
                                                                                                                                                    year

                                                                                                                                        Baseline                                         WB PPP Revision
                                                               c)


                                                                                       Figure 43: PPP Revision: Welfare
                                                                                                                                    PPP Revision: Welfare
                                                                                       5000



                                                                                       4000
                                                                    Atkinson Welfare




                                                                                       3000



                                                                                       2000



                                                                                       1000
                                                                                                            1970                1980               1990                                              2000              2010
                                                                                                                                                   year

                                                                                                                              Yede(0.5)              Yede(0.75)                                              Yede(1)




                                                                                                                                             62
                                Figure 44: Growth of World Welfare Indices



                       Growth of World Welfare using PWT 62 GDP: Upper and Lower Bounds
              .06



              .04
Growth rate




              .02



                0



              -.02
                     1970                        1980                 1990                     2000                    2010
                                                                      Year
                                         Growth of World GDP                   Growth of World Baseline Sen Welfare
                                         Sensitivity Bound

                      Bound based on all Sen and Atkinson welfare indices within the unit interval using PWT 62 GDP



                                               Figure 45: Pathologies Outside the Unit Interval

                                                 Atkinson(1.5) Welfare: Gamma Distribution
                                 2000
                                 1500
                              Y(1.5)
                              1000
                                 500
                                 0




                                        1970            1980             1990                2000               2010
                                                                         year




                                                                 63
                              Table 1: World Poverty Rates

                      One 2006
year                  Dollar         $1/day      $2/day      $3/day       $5/day      $10/day
               1970          0.112       0.268       0.452        0.551       0.647       0.772
               1971          0.099       0.256       0.445        0.546       0.643       0.767
               1972          0.098       0.255       0.444        0.544       0.638       0.758
               1973          0.090       0.245       0.437        0.538       0.632       0.748
               1974          0.090       0.246       0.440        0.540       0.632       0.745
               1975          0.081       0.233       0.431        0.535       0.629       0.742
               1976          0.079       0.228       0.425        0.529       0.622       0.733
               1977          0.073       0.218       0.417        0.523       0.619       0.729
               1978          0.061       0.198       0.403        0.515       0.615       0.724
               1979          0.054       0.186       0.398        0.513       0.616       0.723
               1980          0.051       0.175       0.387        0.506       0.613       0.721
               1981          0.044       0.157       0.378        0.503       0.613       0.722
               1982          0.038       0.136       0.364        0.500       0.615       0.723
               1983          0.036       0.124       0.352        0.494       0.614       0.723
               1984          0.034       0.112       0.332        0.481       0.613       0.724
               1985          0.032       0.100       0.313        0.471       0.612       0.723
               1986          0.032       0.093       0.292        0.446       0.602       0.721
               1987          0.033       0.089       0.275        0.429       0.593       0.720
               1988          0.031       0.082       0.258        0.413       0.586       0.719
               1989          0.032       0.086       0.260        0.411       0.583       0.720
               1990          0.031       0.082       0.249        0.395       0.572       0.724
               1991          0.032       0.083       0.248        0.392       0.568       0.727
               1992          0.031       0.081       0.243        0.385       0.560       0.727
               1993          0.032       0.080       0.236        0.378       0.555       0.726
               1994          0.031       0.076       0.220        0.361       0.544       0.723
               1995          0.032       0.077       0.214        0.349       0.531       0.719
               1996          0.032       0.072       0.199        0.330       0.516       0.714
               1997          0.030       0.069       0.187        0.314       0.501       0.706
               1998          0.030       0.067       0.178        0.301       0.491       0.702
               1999          0.029       0.065       0.168        0.286       0.476       0.693
               2000          0.029       0.064       0.162        0.276       0.463       0.682
               2001          0.029       0.063       0.158        0.268       0.453       0.675
               2002          0.028       0.062       0.155        0.262       0.443       0.664
               2003          0.026       0.059       0.150        0.253       0.430       0.652
               2004          0.025       0.058       0.144        0.241       0.412       0.637
               2005          0.024       0.056       0.137        0.228       0.394       0.621
               2006          0.023       0.054       0.130        0.215       0.373       0.603
   Change 1970-2006        -0.088       -0.214      -0.321       -0.336      -0.274      -0.169
   Change 1990-2006        -0.008       -0.028      -0.118       -0.180      -0.198      -0.120
 % Change 1970-2006      -79.00%      -79.88%     -71.13%      -61.05%     -42.32%     -21.90%
 % Change 1990-2006      -25.46%      -34.12%     -47.53%      -45.68%     -34.70%     -16.65%




                                             64
                                    Table 2: World Poverty Counts

                      World         One 2006
Year                  Population    Dollar          $1/day       $2/day      $3/day      $5/day       $10/day
               1970     3,606,646        402,693      967,574    1,629,962   1,987,121   2,334,589    2,785,442
               1971     3,681,281        365,213      942,950    1,637,586   2,009,164   2,366,752    2,822,146
               1972     3,755,533        368,664      955,920    1,666,018   2,042,245   2,396,004    2,845,857
               1973     3,829,299        343,448      937,711    1,673,445   2,061,126   2,419,790    2,865,427
               1974     3,902,750        350,454      958,633    1,715,618   2,108,719   2,465,666    2,907,470
               1975     3,974,246        322,286      927,484    1,713,541   2,127,272   2,500,900    2,949,732
               1976     4,044,943        321,393      924,181    1,717,843   2,139,647   2,517,629    2,964,312
               1977     4,115,778        300,932      898,679    1,714,840   2,153,510   2,547,620    3,000,052
               1978     4,186,440        255,870      830,624    1,686,167   2,154,863   2,574,531    3,030,065
               1979     4,259,927        230,737      791,847    1,694,529   2,186,056   2,622,267    3,078,965
               1980     4,344,659        219,717      761,854    1,680,143   2,196,659   2,661,686    3,131,710
               1981     4,417,978        193,539      695,123    1,668,305   2,222,661   2,709,756    3,188,351
               1982     4,495,734        169,397      612,067    1,635,304   2,245,641   2,764,251    3,252,617
               1983     4,573,769        162,678      568,772    1,609,114   2,260,860   2,808,661    3,307,152
               1984     4,709,259        161,335      527,291    1,561,759   2,265,761   2,889,123    3,409,209
               1985     4,789,305        155,281      478,171    1,498,862   2,256,271   2,929,277    3,464,900
               1986     4,870,966        154,605      453,356    1,420,336   2,171,876   2,932,972    3,513,686
               1987     4,955,597        163,928      441,196    1,362,435   2,123,607   2,940,592    3,569,086
               1988     5,043,809        154,863      414,867    1,303,719   2,084,660   2,957,778    3,624,562
               1989     5,140,046        165,933      440,409    1,337,753   2,111,490   2,996,407    3,700,884
               1990     5,248,768        165,105      430,138    1,305,303   2,073,429   3,000,947    3,798,261
               1991     5,330,760        172,789      442,109    1,321,247   2,089,955   3,025,419    3,874,396
               1992     5,416,449        168,549      440,704    1,314,692   2,084,914   3,032,235    3,939,523
               1993     5,496,619        174,025      442,470    1,298,435   2,078,789   3,048,849    3,990,776
               1994     5,575,946        173,362      423,733    1,228,918   2,015,035   3,032,040    4,030,692
               1995     5,655,997        183,262      433,949    1,211,278   1,973,342   3,003,026    4,067,353
               1996     5,734,735        180,704      414,887    1,142,259   1,893,051   2,960,022    4,093,165
               1997     5,813,939        175,102      398,854    1,089,837   1,825,811   2,914,365    4,103,272
               1998     5,892,413        178,231      395,419    1,049,494   1,775,601   2,892,861    4,136,967
               1999     5,970,596        174,775      387,774    1,002,608   1,707,558   2,842,118    4,139,525
               2000     6,047,573        172,985      385,533      982,557   1,668,508   2,797,302    4,124,598
               2001     6,123,042        175,004      386,309      969,477   1,643,968   2,775,087    4,130,862
               2002     6,195,290        172,520      383,528      959,422   1,621,210   2,743,872    4,112,061
               2003     6,269,549        160,321      372,237      940,728   1,584,984   2,694,438    4,085,329
               2004     6,343,709        158,118      364,958      913,991   1,530,142   2,616,328    4,041,035
               2005     6,419,510        154,110      356,884      881,369   1,464,138   2,526,230    3,986,142
               2006     6,491,236        152,203      350,436      847,011   1,392,962   2,423,597    3,915,190
   Change 1970-2006     2,884,590       -250,490     -617,138     -782,951    -594,159       89,008   1,129,748
   Change 1990-2006     1,242,468         -12,903      -79,702    -458,292    -680,467    -577,350      116,929
 % Change 1970-2006       79.98%         -62.20%      -63.78%      -48.03%     -29.90%       3.81%      40.56%
 % Change 1990-2006       23.67%           -7.81%     -18.53%      -35.11%     -32.82%     -19.24%       3.08%




                                                     65
                                 Table 3: World Inequality Measures

                     (MLD)                                       (Theil)
year        Gini     GE(0)    GE(0.25)   GE(0.5)   GE(0.75)      GE(1)     A(0.5)   A(0.75)   A(1)
1970        0.676     0.987      0.894     0.848      0.841        0.871    0.379     0.520   0.627
1971        0.675     0.978      0.888     0.843      0.836        0.866    0.377     0.517   0.624
1972        0.677     0.992      0.898     0.850      0.841        0.869    0.380     0.522   0.629
1973        0.679     1.001      0.905     0.856      0.846        0.874    0.382     0.525   0.633
1974        0.678     1.002      0.905     0.855      0.844        0.870    0.382     0.525   0.633
1975        0.672     0.977      0.884     0.836      0.825        0.849    0.374     0.516   0.623
1976        0.672     0.985      0.889     0.839      0.826        0.848    0.375     0.518   0.627
1977        0.671     0.980      0.885     0.835      0.822        0.844    0.374     0.516   0.625
1978        0.668     0.965      0.873     0.825      0.814        0.835    0.370     0.511   0.619
1979        0.670     0.966      0.876     0.830      0.820        0.843    0.372     0.512   0.619
1980        0.666     0.949      0.861     0.817      0.807        0.830    0.367     0.506   0.613
1981        0.663     0.930      0.848     0.806      0.799        0.823    0.363     0.500   0.605
1982        0.657     0.900      0.825     0.787      0.782        0.807    0.355     0.489   0.593
1983        0.656     0.891      0.819     0.783      0.779        0.805    0.353     0.487   0.590
1984        0.656     0.884      0.814     0.782      0.780        0.809    0.353     0.485   0.587
1985        0.655     0.875      0.808     0.778      0.779        0.810    0.351     0.482   0.583
1986        0.651     0.860      0.795     0.767      0.768        0.800    0.347     0.476   0.577
1987        0.649     0.854      0.790     0.762      0.764        0.796    0.345     0.473   0.574
1988        0.648     0.849      0.786     0.760      0.763        0.797    0.344     0.472   0.572
1989        0.652     0.863      0.799     0.771      0.774        0.809    0.348     0.477   0.578
1990        0.651     0.858      0.795     0.768      0.772        0.806    0.347     0.476   0.576
1991        0.650     0.854      0.791     0.765      0.770        0.805    0.346     0.474   0.574
1992        0.649     0.847      0.786     0.762      0.768        0.805    0.345     0.472   0.571
1993        0.648     0.841      0.781     0.757      0.764        0.802    0.343     0.469   0.569
1994        0.646     0.832      0.774     0.752      0.761        0.800    0.341     0.466   0.565
1995        0.644     0.830      0.771     0.749      0.758        0.798    0.339     0.465   0.564
1996        0.641     0.818      0.761     0.740      0.750        0.791    0.336     0.460   0.559
1997        0.638     0.811      0.755     0.735      0.746        0.787    0.334     0.457   0.556
1998        0.637     0.806      0.751     0.731      0.743        0.785    0.332     0.455   0.553
1999        0.634     0.798      0.744     0.725      0.736        0.779    0.330     0.452   0.550
2000        0.633     0.799      0.743     0.723      0.733        0.774    0.329     0.451   0.550
2001        0.630     0.791      0.735     0.714      0.723        0.763    0.325     0.447   0.547
2002        0.626     0.784      0.727     0.705      0.713        0.751    0.322     0.444   0.543
2003        0.623     0.775      0.719     0.697      0.704        0.740    0.318     0.440   0.539
2004        0.621     0.772      0.714     0.692      0.698        0.732    0.316     0.437   0.538
2005        0.616     0.763      0.705     0.681      0.686        0.719    0.312     0.433   0.534
2006        0.612     0.755      0.696     0.672      0.675        0.706    0.308     0.429   0.530
Change
1970-2006   -0.064   -0.231     -0.198    -0.177        -0.166   -0.164    -0.071    -0.091   -0.097
Change
1990-2006   -0.039   -0.103     -0.098    -0.096        -0.097   -0.100    -0.039    -0.047   -0.046
% Change
1970-2006   -9.5%    -23.5%    -22.1%     -20.8%        -19.7%   -18.9%    -18.9%   -17.6%    -15.5%
% Change
1990-2006   -6.1%    -12.0%    -12.4%     -12.5%        -12.5%   -12.4%    -11.4%    -9.9%     -8.0%




                                                   66
                 Table 4: World Welfare Indices

year                    Y(0.5)     Y(0.75)       Y(1)        Sen
               1970   $2,708.74   $2,094.24   $1,626.35   $1,411.85
               1971   $2,787.43   $2,160.28   $1,682.41   $1,454.95
               1972   $2,870.59   $2,214.72   $1,716.14   $1,496.46
               1973   $2,995.88   $2,305.36   $1,781.93   $1,559.17
               1974   $3,000.57   $2,307.76   $1,782.24   $1,564.10
               1975   $3,030.66   $2,346.65   $1,823.71   $1,590.41
               1976   $3,143.69   $2,426.97   $1,878.56   $1,651.12
               1977   $3,219.80   $2,489.21   $1,929.45   $1,692.62
               1978   $3,331.60   $2,587.32   $2,015.57   $1,755.64
               1979   $3,395.00   $2,637.09   $2,057.31   $1,783.59
               1980   $3,437.84   $2,683.25   $2,102.28   $1,814.77
               1981   $3,468.89   $2,722.95   $2,147.76   $1,835.11
               1982   $3,482.34   $2,757.55   $2,195.77   $1,852.23
               1983   $3,534.17   $2,806.11   $2,241.32   $1,881.11
               1984   $3,613.59   $2,877.31   $2,306.16   $1,922.44
               1985   $3,694.54   $2,950.75   $2,373.75   $1,966.64
               1986   $3,807.26   $3,053.77   $2,465.06   $2,035.50
               1987   $3,900.93   $3,134.77   $2,533.33   $2,089.93
               1988   $4,018.84   $3,235.17   $2,620.48   $2,153.85
               1989   $4,054.31   $3,251.45   $2,623.84   $2,163.30
               1990   $4,144.12   $3,328.67   $2,690.51   $2,212.73
               1991   $4,125.91   $3,318.51   $2,685.43   $2,205.27
               1992   $4,158.68   $3,352.68   $2,721.14   $2,225.11
               1993   $4,189.43   $3,383.25   $2,749.60   $2,246.64
               1994   $4,297.07   $3,479.99   $2,836.07   $2,310.36
               1995   $4,377.73   $3,547.79   $2,889.97   $2,359.53
               1996   $4,505.96   $3,664.53   $2,994.32   $2,439.12
               1997   $4,658.45   $3,795.89   $3,106.55   $2,528.54
               1998   $4,747.15   $3,875.13   $3,176.38   $2,582.46
               1999   $4,898.14   $4,006.41   $3,288.79   $2,673.38
               2000   $5,070.86   $4,145.70   $3,398.47   $2,770.77
               2001   $5,156.19   $4,222.84   $3,464.23   $2,828.70
               2002   $5,273.84   $4,325.76   $3,550.08   $2,905.27
               2003   $5,439.41   $4,470.14   $3,674.24   $3,007.48
               2004   $5,663.75   $4,657.42   $3,826.24   $3,141.34
               2005   $5,903.66   $4,864.77   $3,999.68   $3,292.25
               2006   $6,187.94   $5,106.91   $4,199.08   $3,468.67
   Change 1970-2006   $3,479.20   $3,012.67   $2,572.73   $2,056.82
   Change 1990-2006   $2,043.82   $1,778.25   $1,508.57   $1,255.94
 % Change 1970-2006     128.4%      143.9%      158.2%      145.7%
 % Change 1990-2006      49.3%       53.4%       56.1%       56.8%




                                  67
                    Table 5: Regional Poverty Rates, $1/day

                         East     South                          Latin
year                     Asia      Asia      Africa (SSA)       America     MENA
                 1970     0.588      0.201              0.399       0.116      0.084
                 1971     0.555      0.193              0.389       0.106      0.082
                 1972     0.547      0.203              0.380       0.095      0.075
                 1973     0.520      0.199              0.380       0.079      0.076
                 1974     0.516      0.211              0.374       0.069      0.072
                 1975     0.489      0.190              0.382       0.062      0.070
                 1976     0.482      0.182              0.379       0.055      0.055
                 1977     0.460      0.166              0.379       0.051      0.055
                 1978     0.413      0.140              0.381       0.048      0.049
                 1979     0.371      0.139              0.393       0.044      0.044
                 1980     0.349      0.122              0.399       0.040      0.042
                 1981     0.297      0.111              0.399       0.042      0.043
                 1982     0.233      0.100              0.408       0.045      0.033
                 1983     0.196      0.093              0.414       0.050      0.024
                 1984     0.155      0.085              0.432       0.048      0.022
                 1985     0.125      0.071              0.431       0.048      0.021
                 1986     0.108      0.065              0.426       0.044      0.022
                 1987     0.095      0.057              0.441       0.045      0.023
                 1988     0.084      0.045              0.424       0.050      0.022
                 1989     0.090      0.043              0.427       0.053      0.042
                 1990     0.080      0.043              0.421       0.052      0.040
                 1991     0.076      0.044              0.424       0.052      0.061
                 1992     0.068      0.048              0.420       0.052      0.053
                 1993     0.066      0.046              0.422       0.051      0.041
                 1994     0.054      0.043              0.421       0.049      0.030
                 1995     0.046      0.051              0.428       0.049      0.033
                 1996     0.037      0.049              0.415       0.049      0.024
                 1997     0.031      0.044              0.401       0.048      0.031
                 1998     0.030      0.037              0.404       0.049      0.018
                 1999     0.029      0.033              0.396       0.048      0.014
                 2000     0.026      0.037              0.383       0.045      0.013
                 2001     0.024      0.036              0.378       0.047      0.011
                 2002     0.023      0.033              0.374       0.047      0.011
                 2003     0.022      0.031              0.355       0.043      0.023
                 2004     0.020      0.031              0.345       0.036      0.028
                 2005     0.018      0.029              0.331       0.033      0.038
                 2006     0.017      0.026              0.318       0.031      0.052
     Change 1970-2006    -0.571     -0.175             -0.081      -0.085     -0.033
     Change 1990-2006    -0.064     -0.016             -0.103      -0.021      0.012
   % Change 1970-2006   -97.2%     -86.9%             -20.3%      -73.2%     -38.6%
   % Change 1990-2006   -79.4%     -38.4%             -24.4%      -40.5%      30.3%




                                       68
               Table 6: Regional Poverty Rates, $2/day

                       East     South     Africa       Latin
year                   Asia      Asia     (SSA)      America    MENA
               1970     0.802     0.587      0.652      0.256      0.253
               1971     0.786     0.577      0.643      0.242      0.249
               1972     0.778     0.590      0.634      0.224      0.233
               1973     0.762     0.584      0.634      0.199      0.236
               1974     0.761     0.601      0.629      0.182      0.232
               1975     0.750     0.573      0.637      0.170      0.232
               1976     0.741     0.563      0.634      0.156      0.194
               1977     0.731     0.539      0.634      0.149      0.190
               1978     0.708     0.507      0.634      0.142      0.179
               1979     0.686     0.513      0.644      0.134      0.166
               1980     0.671     0.485      0.648      0.126      0.160
               1981     0.650     0.466      0.647      0.128      0.174
               1982     0.612     0.450      0.652      0.135      0.154
               1983     0.578     0.437      0.659      0.147      0.130
               1984     0.517     0.415      0.671      0.142      0.121
               1985     0.476     0.386      0.669      0.141      0.119
               1986     0.421     0.368      0.665      0.133      0.118
               1987     0.382     0.342      0.670      0.135      0.116
               1988     0.352     0.306      0.662      0.145      0.113
               1989     0.356     0.296      0.660      0.149      0.152
               1990     0.324     0.288      0.656      0.149      0.143
               1991     0.309     0.293      0.658      0.149      0.171
               1992     0.281     0.299      0.666      0.149      0.157
               1993     0.270     0.283      0.671      0.146      0.141
               1994     0.231     0.263      0.672      0.142      0.126
               1995     0.198     0.267      0.679      0.143      0.134
               1996     0.163     0.252      0.666      0.142      0.119
               1997     0.135     0.235      0.657      0.139      0.144
               1998     0.126     0.207      0.657      0.141      0.118
               1999     0.119     0.170      0.654      0.139      0.107
               2000     0.107     0.165      0.652      0.132      0.102
               2001     0.100     0.154      0.649      0.136      0.097
               2002     0.097     0.144      0.645      0.137      0.094
               2003     0.092     0.134      0.630      0.128      0.119
               2004     0.083     0.127      0.622      0.113      0.122
               2005     0.076     0.112      0.609      0.107      0.129
               2006     0.067     0.099      0.595      0.102      0.136
   Change 1970-2006    -0.734    -0.488     -0.058     -0.155     -0.117
   Change 1990-2006    -0.257    -0.189     -0.062     -0.048     -0.007
 % Change 1970-2006   -91.6%    -83.2%       -8.8%    -60.3%     -46.2%
 % Change 1990-2006   -79.3%    -65.7%       -9.4%    -31.9%       -5.1%




                                  69
                              Table 7: Correlations of Major Variables to Baseline by Type of Sensitivity Analysis

                     WB     Maddison    Single     China   Nearest
                     GDP    GDP        Countries   Cons.   Neighbor   Linear   Gamma    Weibull   Optimal   Gini   Adjusted   Kernels   Key
$1/day count,
USD 2006             0.99       0.00        0.98    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.98   >0.99
$1/day count         0.99       0.94        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      1.00   0.99       0.99      0.99   0.99>x>0.9
$2/day count         0.99       0.95        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.99   <0.9
$3/day count         0.98       0.89        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.95
$5/day count         0.98       0.92        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.98      0.99   0.99       0.98      0.95
$7.5/day count       0.99       0.99        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.99
$10/day count        0.99       0.99        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.99
$1/day rate,
USD 2006             0.99       0.93        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.99
$1/day rate          0.99       0.98        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      1.00   0.99       0.99      0.99
$2/day rate          0.99       0.98        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.99
$3/day rate          0.99       0.98        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.99
$5/day rate          0.99       0.98        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.99
$7.5/day rate        0.99       0.99        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.99
$10/day rate         0.99       0.97        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.99
GE(0)                0.99       0.97        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.99
GE(0.25)             0.99       0.97        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.99
GE(0.5)              0.99       0.95        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.99
GE(0.75)             0.99       0.91        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.98     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.99
GE(1)                0.98       0.80        0.99    0.99       0.98     0.97     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.99
Y(0.5) Welfare       0.99       0.99        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      1.00   0.99       0.99      0.99
Y(0.75) Welfare      0.99       0.99        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      1.00   0.99       0.99      0.99
Y(1) Welfare         0.99       0.99        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      1.00   0.99       0.99      0.99
A(0.5) Inequality    0.99       0.95        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.99
A(0.75) Inequality   0.99       0.97        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.99
A(1) Inequality      0.99       0.97        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.99
Gini                 0.99       0.96        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.99
Sen                  0.99       0.99        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      1.00   0.99       0.99      0.99
P7525                0.99       0.99        0.99    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.99      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.99
P9010                0.99       0.95        0.98    0.99       0.99     0.99     0.99      0.98      0.99   0.99       0.99      0.99

                                                                          70
                                      Table 8: Measures of Identity of Major Variables to Baseline

                         WB     Maddison   Single      China   Nearest
                         GDP    GDP        Countries   Cons.   Neighbor    Linear   Gamma    Weibull   Optimal   Ginis   Adjusted   Kernels   Key
$1/day count, USD 2006   0.08       1.35        0.44    0.00       0.03      0.22     0.64     0.91       0.00   0.18        0.27      0.66   <0.01
$1/day count             0.06       0.89        0.28    0.02       0.03      0.04     0.34     0.50       0.00   0.10        0.15      0.21   0.01<x<0.1
$2/day count             0.08       0.47        0.15    0.06       0.02      0.06     0.22     0.32       0.00   0.12        0.22      0.33   x>0.1
$3/day count             0.13       0.63        0.15    0.09       0.03      0.08     0.14     0.21       0.00   0.15        0.28      0.48
$5/day count             0.14       0.22        0.03    0.03       0.04      0.06     0.07     0.12       0.00   0.03        0.08      0.17
$7.5/day count           0.07       0.10        0.00    0.01       0.02      0.03     0.05     0.07       0.00   0.00        0.03      0.07
$10/day count            0.03       0.08        0.00    0.00       0.02      0.03     0.02     0.02       0.00   0.00        0.01      0.06
$1/day rate, USD 2006    0.05       1.11        0.36    0.00       0.02      0.16     0.47     0.64       0.00   0.20        0.29      0.64
$1/day rate              0.10       0.75        0.23    0.01       0.02      0.04     0.21     0.32       0.00   0.12        0.16      0.22
$2/day rate              0.12       0.28        0.07    0.02       0.01      0.02     0.11     0.15       0.00   0.06        0.12      0.18
$3/day rate              0.09       0.25        0.05    0.03       0.01      0.03     0.05     0.07       0.00   0.06        0.12      0.20
$5/day rate              0.12       0.23        0.03    0.03       0.02      0.04     0.05     0.09       0.00   0.04        0.08      0.15
$7.5/day rate            0.13       0.24        0.01    0.02       0.05      0.07     0.07     0.12       0.00   0.02        0.04      0.07
$10/day rate             0.12       0.31        0.03    0.02       0.07      0.08     0.05     0.06       0.00   0.01        0.02      0.15
GE(0)                    0.11       0.60        0.20    0.05       0.05      0.10     0.10     0.12       0.00   0.06        0.14      0.14
GE(0.25)                 0.10       0.58        0.18    0.05       0.06      0.10     0.05     0.07       0.00   0.05        0.14      0.14
GE(0.5)                  0.09       0.59        0.16    0.05       0.08      0.11     0.01     0.03       0.00   0.04        0.15      0.14
GE(0.75)                 0.10       0.64        0.15    0.05       0.12      0.14     0.00     0.00       0.00   0.03        0.17      0.14
GE(1)                    0.13       0.73        0.14    0.06       0.17      0.19     0.02     0.02       0.00   0.03        0.20      0.16
Y(0.5) Welfare           0.05       0.23        0.02    0.01       0.02      0.03     0.01     0.01       0.00   0.02        0.04      0.06
Y(0.75) Welfare          0.07       0.26        0.04    0.02       0.02      0.04     0.04     0.06       0.00   0.03        0.07      0.10
Y(1) Welfare             0.08       0.29        0.06    0.02       0.02      0.06     0.11     0.13       0.00   0.05        0.10      0.14
A(0.5) Inequality        0.08       0.59        0.16    0.05       0.08      0.12     0.02     0.03       0.00   0.04        0.16      0.14
A(0.75) Inequality       0.07       0.57        0.18    0.05       0.06      0.11     0.06     0.08       0.00   0.05        0.16      0.15
A(1) Inequality          0.07       0.57        0.20    0.05       0.05      0.12     0.12     0.15       0.00   0.07        0.17      0.17
Gini                     0.10       0.55        0.15    0.06       0.09      0.12     0.01     0.02       0.00   0.04        0.16      0.13
Sen                      0.09       0.25        0.04    0.02       0.03      0.04     0.00     0.01       0.00   0.03        0.07      0.08
P7525                    0.09       0.45        0.21    0.03       0.03      0.02     0.10     0.08       0.00   0.08        0.08      0.22
P9010                    0.12       0.85        0.37    0.06       0.03      0.16     0.22     0.39       0.00   0.09        0.14      0.23




                                                                          71
Table 9: Correlation and Identity between Baseline and PPP-Revised Series


                                          WN       WN
                                          Corr     Levels
                 $1/day count, USD
                 2006                     0.9249    3.199659
                 $1/day count             0.9044    1.278127
                 $2/day count             0.7934   0.9550788
                 $3/day count             0.3411    1.267136
                 $5/day count             0.7629   0.8982319
                 $7.5/day count           0.9661   0.5308061
                 $10/day count            0.9880   0.2867584
                 $1/day rate, USD 2006    0.9687    3.068232
                 $1/day rate              0.9581    1.359933
                 $2/day rate              0.9633   0.6073896
                 $3/day rate              0.9643   0.6434812
                 $5/day rate              0.9313   0.7177572
                 $7.5/day rate            0.8368   0.7646995
                 $10/day rate             0.8258   0.7267156
                 GE(0)                    0.9905   0.5678449
                 GE(0.25)                 0.9881   0.3744607
                 GE(0.5)                  0.9824   0.3428783
                 GE(0.75)                 0.9662   0.4845983
                 GE(1)                    0.9152   0.6392682
                 Y(0.5) Welfare           0.9995    0.401631
                 Y(0.75) Welfare          0.9995   0.4614342
                 Y(1) Welfare             0.9994   0.5083473
                 A(0.5) Inequality        0.9822   0.3558683
                 A(0.75) Inequality       0.9874    0.261631
                 A(1) Inequality          0.9889   0.2003507
                 Gini                     0.9634   0.4833855
                 Sen                      0.9984   0.5250562
                 P7525                    0.9932    1.407715
                 P9010                    0.9912    1.620185




                                     72
           Table 10.1: Correlations of Welfare Series to PWT 62 GDP


                                     Median   Sen      Y(0.5)   Y(0.75)    Y(1)
        China and India single        0.994   0.9989   0.9996     0.999     0.9982
        Linear Interpolation         0.9936   0.9993   0.9996    0.9986     0.9968
        Nearest Neighbor
        Interpolation                0.9931   0.9992   0.9996   0.9988     0.9975
        Gamma, adjusted              0.9914   0.9988   0.9995   0.9988     0.9975
        Gamma, ginis                 0.9925   0.9989   0.9996    0.999     0.9983
        Gamma                        0.9926   0.9989   0.9996    0.999     0.9982
        Lognormal, adjusted          0.9927   0.9988   0.9995   0.9988     0.9975
        Logormal, ginis              0.9931   0.9989   0.9996    0.999     0.9981
        Baseline                     0.9932   0.9989   0.9996    0.999     0.9981
        Optimal, adjusted            0.9926   0.9988   0.9995   0.9988     0.9975
        Optimal, ginis               0.9931   0.9989   0.9996    0.999     0.9981
        Optimal                      0.9932   0.9989   0.9996    0.999      0.998
        Weibull, adjusted            0.9911   0.9988   0.9995   0.9988     0.9975
        Weibull, ginis               0.9924   0.9989   0.9996    0.999     0.9982
        Weibull                      0.9925   0.9989   0.9996    0.999     0.9981
        Consumption surveys for
        China                        0.9933   0.9991   0.9996   0.9989     0.9977
        Kernels                      0.9932   0.999        1    0.9989     0.9976


Table 10.2: Correlations of Growth of Welfare Series to Growth of PWT 62 GDP




                                       Sen        Y(0.5)        Y(0.75)      Y(1)
    China and India single             0.881023   0.950633      0.861218      0.72131
    Linear Interpolation               0.898433    0.95923      0.875758     0.725861
    Nearest Neighbor Interpolation     0.880259   0.952982      0.864105     0.714578
    Gamma, Adjusted                    0.880593    0.95445      0.867393       0.7191
    Gamma, Ginis                       0.888486   0.955055      0.873899     0.744737
    Gamma                              0.888716   0.955675      0.876675      0.75305
    Lognormal, Adjusted                0.878588   0.953278      0.865724      0.71813
    Logormal, Ginis                    0.888734    0.95548      0.874766      0.74148
    Baseline                           0.888645   0.955983      0.876678     0.745329
    Optimal, Adjusted                  0.878813   0.953311      0.865766     0.718158
    Optimal, Ginis                     0.888768   0.955478      0.874715     0.741345
    Optimal                            0.888666   0.955978      0.876608     0.745158
    Weibull, Adjusted                   0.87995   0.954341      0.867169     0.719364
    Weibull, Ginis                     0.888544   0.955107      0.873555     0.742533
    Weibull                            0.888776   0.955647      0.876068     0.749189
    Consumption surveys for China      0.889279   0.956359      0.875424     0.739567
    Kernels                            0.892259   0.954296      0.869731      0.72906




                                         73
                                   Table 11: Welfare Growth


11.1: World                                         Y(0.5)    Y(0.75)   Y(1)      Sen
Baseline                                            128.40%   143.90%   158.20%   145.70%
China and India single                              125.60%   138.40%   149.40%   141.20%
Nearest Neighbor Interpolation                      125.80%   139.80%   153.00%   141.20%
Linear Interpolation                                125.70%   139.00%   150.40%   141.40%
Lognormal, Ginis                                    127.90%   142.70%   156.00%   144.50%
Lognormal, Adjusted                                 129.70%   146.00%   161.30%   148.40%
Gamma, Ginis                                        128.00%   142.90%   155.00%   144.70%
Gamma                                               128.60%   144.20%   158.50%   145.80%
Gamma, Adjusted                                     129.10%   145.40%   161.10%   147.20%
Weibull, Ginis                                      127.90%   142.40%   154.30%   144.70%
Weibull                                             128.40%   143.70%   157.00%   145.70%
Weibull, Adjusted                                   129.20%   145.40%   161.00%   147.40%
Consumption surveys for China                       127.30%   141.80%   155.30%   143.50%
World Bank, China and India Single                  120.30%   134.00%   146.20%   135.40%
World Bank                                          124.00%   140.40%   156.00%   140.90%
World Bank, China with Consumption                  122.90%   138.40%   153.00%   138.70%
Maddison, China and India Single                     77.30%    80.60%    82.00%    82.80%
Maddison                                             80.00%    85.60%    89.60%    87.20%
Maddison, China with Consumption                     79.10%    84.10%    87.50%    85.50%
Kernels                                             126.40%   140.40%   152.60%   141.30%
PPP Revision, nearest‐neighbor interpolation        108.10%   127.10%   148.50%   116.80%
PPP Revision, linear interpolation                  108.30%   126.60%   146.20%   117.40%
PPP Revision                                        110.60%   131.00%   153.70%   120.60%
11.2: Average over Countries
Baseline                                            111.30%   111.80%   112.40%   111.80%
China and India single                              110.80%   111.00%   111.50%   110.70%
Nearest Neighbor Interpolation                      108.70%   108.70%   109.30%   108.00%
Linear Interpolation                                109.80%   112.00%   116.30%   112.90%
Lognormal, Ginis                                    110.10%   110.00%   110.00%   109.40%
Lognormal, Adjusted                                 112.90%   114.30%   116.00%   115.40%
Gamma, Ginis                                        110.10%   110.50%   112.90%   109.40%
Gamma                                               111.50%   112.80%   116.20%   111.80%
Gamma, Adjusted                                     112.00%   113.10%   115.10%   113.10%
Weibull, Ginis                                      110.10%   110.10%   111.00%   109.40%
Weibull                                             111.30%   112.20%   114.10%   111.70%
Weibull, Adjusted                                   112.10%   113.20%   115.00%   113.50%
Consumption surveys for China                       111.10%   111.40%   112.00%   111.40%
World Bank, China and India Single                  108.70%   109.10%   109.80%   109.00%
World Bank                                          109.20%   109.80%   110.70%   110.00%
World Bank, China with Consumption                  109.00%   109.50%   110.20%   109.60%
Maddison, China and India Single                     64.80%    65.10%    65.60%    65.20%
Maddison                                             65.10%    65.60%    66.20%    65.80%
Maddison, China with Consumption                     65.00%    65.40%    66.00%    65.60%
Kernels                                             102.70%   102.20%   101.90%   101.10%
PPP Revision, nearest‐neighbor interpolation        106.80%   106.70%   107.30%   106.10%
PPP Revision, linear interpolation                  107.80%   109.90%   114.10%   110.90%
PPP Revision                                        109.70%   110.30%   111.10%   110.50%

                                               74
                       Table 12: Poverty Reduction 1990-2006, all specifications

                                               East       South     Latin     Africa
                                               Asia       Asia      America   (SSA)     MENA      World
Baseline                                        -79.4%     -38.4%    -40.5%    -24.4%     30.3%    -34.1%
China and India single                          -72.9%     -12.9%    -40.5%    -24.4%     30.3%    -29.0%
Nearest Neighbor Interpolation                  -74.5%     -44.5%    -41.4%    -26.4%     41.1%    -35.5%
Linear Interpolation                            -72.7%      -9.3%    -44.9%    -30.3%     12.0%    -29.5%
Lognormal, Ginis                                -77.0%     -51.7%    -39.2%    -22.3%      2.5%    -34.0%
Lognormal, Adjusted                             -79.0%     -12.5%    -53.0%    -26.5%     77.2%    -31.0%
Gamma, Ginis                                    -62.9%     -43.2%    -22.9%    -19.9%    -23.0%    -29.0%
Gamma                                           -66.8%     -41.2%    -23.8%    -21.8%    -14.6%    -30.6%
Gamma, Adjusted                                 -73.2%     -36.7%    -36.1%    -24.1%     32.4%    -32.2%
Weibull, Ginis                                  -60.0%     -39.5%    -22.0%    -19.8%    -19.9%    -28.4%
Weibull                                         -62.8%     -39.3%    -22.5%    -21.1%    -15.6%    -30.1%
Weibull, Adjusted                               -69.1%     -42.5%    -31.9%    -23.2%     17.4%    -33.0%
Optimal, Ginis                                  -77.0%     -51.7%    -39.2%    -22.4%      2.5%    -34.0%
Optimal                                         -79.4%     -38.4%    -40.4%    -24.4%     30.3%    -34.1%
Optimal, Adjusted                               -79.0%     -12.5%    -52.7%    -26.6%     77.2%    -31.1%
Consumption surveys for China                   -73.7%     -38.4%    -40.5%    -24.4%     30.3%    -31.8%
World Bank, China and India Single              -85.7%     -56.0%    -39.3%    -18.7%    -65.2%    -35.5%
World Bank                                      -91.2%     -70.3%    -39.3%    -18.7%    -65.2%    -41.0%
World Bank, China with Consumption              -86.4%     -70.3%    -39.3%    -18.7%    -65.2%    -39.0%
Maddison, China and India Single                -49.0%     -31.6%    -17.1%    -12.3%     48.4%    -13.6%
Maddison                                        -64.8%     -52.8%    -17.1%    -12.3%     48.4%    -22.8%
Maddison, China with Consumption                -51.7%     -52.8%    -17.1%    -12.3%     48.4%    -20.6%
Kernels                                         -83.4%     -60.3%    -55.1%    -15.0%     20.9%    -37.4%
PPP Revision, nearest-neighbor interpolation    -88.0%     -71.5%    -38.4%    -20.2%    -84.6%    -58.2%
PPP Revision, linear interpolation              -87.8%     -63.7%    -42.0%    -21.8%    -88.9%    -54.1%
PPP Revision                                    -89.8%     -71.1%    -37.6%    -18.0%    -85.9%    -57.7%




                                                     75
