                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              NOT INVENTED HERE? INNOVATION IN COMPANY TOWNS

                                          Ajay K. Agrawal
                                          Iain M. Cockburn
                                            Carlos Rosell

                                        Working Paper 15437
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15437


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2009




We thank David Audretsch, Ron Jarmin, Ed Glaeser, Stuart Rosenthal, Will Strange, Peter Thompson,
and participants at the NBER Cities and Entrepreneurship Conference for helpful comments. This
research was partially funded by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada
(Grant No.410-2009-2020) and the Martin Prosperity Institute. Their support is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Ajay K. Agrawal, Iain M. Cockburn, and Carlos Rosell. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Not Invented Here? Innovation in Company Towns
Ajay K. Agrawal, Iain M. Cockburn, and Carlos Rosell
NBER Working Paper No. 15437
October 2009
JEL No. O18,O33,R11

                                              ABSTRACT

We examine variation in the concentration of inventive activity across 72 of North America's most
highly innovative locations. In 12 of these areas, innovation is particularly concentrated in a single,
large firm; we refer to such locations as "company towns.'' We find that inventors employed by large
firms in these locations tend to draw disproportionately from their firm's own prior inventions (as measured
by citations to their own prior patents) relative to what would be expected given the underlying distribution
of innovative activity across all inventing firms in a particular technology field. Furthermore, we find
such inventors are more likely to build upon the same prior inventions year after year. However, smaller
firms in company towns do not exhibit this myopic behavior; they draw upon prior inventions as broadly
as their small-firm counterparts in more diverse locations. In addition, we find that inventions by large
firms in company towns have less impact than those produced elsewhere, although the difference is
modest, and that the impact is disproportionately appropriated by the inventing firms themselves. Finally,
the geographic scope of impact realized by company town inventions is narrower, whether produced
by large or small firms.


Ajay K. Agrawal                                       Carlos Rosell
Rotman School of Management                           Department of Finance Canada
University of Toronto                                 L'Esplanade Laurier, 18th Floor East Tower
105 St. George Street                                 140 O'Connor Street
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E6                              Ottawa, Canada
CANADA                                                K1A 0G5
and NBER                                              carlos.rosell@fin.gc.ca
ajay.agrawal@rotman.utoronto.ca

Iain M. Cockburn
School of Management
Boston University
595 Commonwealth Ave
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
cockburn@bu.edu
1     Introduction

Firms that choose to locate in cities populated with many other companies incur higher
congestion costs. To reconcile this observation economists infer that the agglomeration of
economic activity must confer benefits that oﬀset these costs. One such benefit that is central
to many theories of agglomeration concerns localized knowledge spillovers. To the extent that
firms in economic “hubs” really do enjoy lower cost access to externally generated knowledge
one might expect their inventors to be more creative, drawing from a broader pool of ideas
in the creation of their inventions. After all, such hubs seem to be unusually fertile locations
for entrepreneurial ventures (Acs (2002)), a primary source of so-called creative destruction.
Following the same reasoning, one might expect inventors at firms that are located in less eco-
nomically diverse regions and are thus somewhat isolated from localized knowledge spillovers
to be less creative. Furthermore, spatial isolation might influence some firms diﬀerently than
others. For example, for a variety of reasons we describe below, larger firms in isolated loca-
tions might be more susceptible to the Not Invented Here (NIH) Syndrome whereby inventors
are more likely to reject externally generated knowledge. We examine these ideas here, explor-
ing how variation in regional economic diversity is related to both the creativity of inventors
and the subsequent impact of their inventions.
    Interpreting the knowledge production process is central to this line of inquiry. Knowl-
edge externalities — or “spillovers” — play a critical role in most theories of innovation and
growth. This reflects the widespread recognition that inventions usually incorporate or build
upon ideas or information generated by others and that, in many instances, access to these
knowledge production inputs is not explicitly priced. In Alfred Marshall’s memorable phrase,
ideas are “as it were, in the air.”
    But are these ideas equally accessible to all potential users? Research on the microfounda-
tions of spillovers suggests not. Knowledge externalities appear to be quite strongly localized
(Jaﬀe et al. (1993),Agrawal et al. (2008)), likely due to their tacitness which makes transfer
via face-to-face interactions relatively less costly (Arrow (1962), Polanyi (1966)), hence con-


                                               2
ferring benefits to co-location and resulting in agglomeration (Rosenthal and Strange (2001),
Rosenthal and Strange (2008)). Even in an era of relatively low communication costs and
increasingly systematized, codified, and searchable knowledge, inventors appear to be signif-
icantly less likely to use knowledge generated in physically distant locations. Furthermore,
analysis of the organization and management of corporate R&D has shown that firms invest
significant resources in order to develop “absorptive capacity” to enhance their ability to ex-
ploit externally generated knowledge (Cohen and Levinthal (1989), Cockburn and Henderson
(1998)). In other words, even if not explicitly priced, accessing ideas generated by others is
not costless and may be strongly conditioned by institutions, geography, and the optimizing
responses of firms and inventors.
   However, despite the broad acknowledgement in the literature that localized knowledge
spillovers play an important role in agglomeration, there is less consensus around how spillovers
are mediated by local economic characteristics. For example, Glaeser et al. (1992) contrast
three theories (Marshall-Arrow-Romer, Porter, Jacobs), that emphasize agglomeration ben-
efits due specifically to knowledge spillovers. Yet each of these theories advances a diﬀerent
view on how the importance of spillovers to city growth is influenced by industrial diver-
sity and market structure. The evidence presented in that paper indicates that knowledge
spillovers across, rather than within, industries is most important, supporting the idea that
diverse regional hubs of economic activity enjoy a productivity advantage relative to other
locations. Furthermore, the finding of Feldman and Audretsch (1999) — that regional diver-
sity of economic activity promotes local innovation — provides additional support for Glaeser
et al. (1992) and is particularly provocative in that it links the nature of “local knowledge”
to theories of “recombinant” growth (Weitzman (1998)).
   These ideas are exemplified by the well known success of Silicon Valley — a quintessential
hub characterized by technological diversity and many small, entrepreneurial firms (in ad-
dition to high-performing large firms) that make up a highly competitive market structure.
However, other locations are also innovative but are, relatively, neither technologically diverse



                                               3
nor particularly dispersed in terms of the local market structure. Route 128 in Massachusetts
and Research Triangle Park in North Carolina are locations often contrasted with Northern
California since they are dominated by fewer and larger firms. Of course there are much more
extreme examples, such as Rochester, New York; Boise, Idaho; and Peoria, Illinois, that,
while being innovative locations, are even more concentrated and dominated by a single firm
(Kodak, Micron, and Caterpillar, respectively).
   How might such variety in city types coexist if the advantages conferred upon firms located
in diverse hubs are indeed real and significant? Duranton and Puga (2001) provide a theory
of “nursery cities” that integrates the entrepreneurship literature with urban economics by
emphasizing the diﬀerence in benefits of local market structure and composition across the
life cycle of products. Entrepreneurial firms developing new products benefit from being
located in diverse cities because they can more easily borrow from diﬀerent activities but
once they have settled on their “ideal process” they benefit from being in specialized cities
where production costs are lower.
   Other research such as Audretsch and Feldman (1996) and Rosenthal and Strange (2003)
has also linked spillovers to location and the composition of production activity, but without
an emphasis on diversity. Others have focused on the relationship between knowledge flows
and very particular features of regional market structure. For example, Feldman (2003) and
Agrawal and Cockburn (2003) link the eﬃciency of local knowledge spillovers to the presence
of large “anchor tenant” firms. Klepper and Simons (2000a) and Klepper and Simons (2000b)
also identify the role of industry structure in the sense of incumbents versus entrants driving
localized innovation but emphasize knowledge that is internal rather than external to the
firm.
   Finally, theories focused on factors quite distinct from market structure and technological
diversity, such as labor mobility and culture, have been advanced to explain regional variation
in knowledge flow patterns. For example, Almeida and Kogut (1999) exploit the variation in
intra-regional labor mobility to explain regional diﬀerences in the localization of knowledge



                                              4
spillovers, arguing that the circulation of people within a city drives knowledge flow. On a
related theme, in her comparison of Silicon Valley to Route 128, Saxenian (1994) highlights
regional variation in the culture of sharing knowledge across organizations (as well as diﬀer-
ences in intra-regional mobilitiy) as one of the central explanations for the diﬀerence in the
performance of firms between those two locations.
       In this paper we investigate another factor that might mediate regional knowledge spillover
patterns: the NIH Syndrome. Anecdotal evidence suggests that this phenomenon induces
R&D workers to discount or ignore sources of knowledge external to their team or organization
when insulated from the outside or deprived of diversity in their environment. Katz and Allen
(1982) popularized the so-called NIH Syndrome in their study of the propensity of research
teams with little turnover to become progressively less productive.1 The NIH Syndrome has
since been widely evoked by practicing managers and in managerially oriented scholarship
(Kanter (1983), Leonard-Barton (1995), Chesbrough (2006)), and journalists have identified
colorful instances such as Apple Computer in the early 1990s where managers inhabited a
“reality distortion field” that led them to reject good ideas because they were not generated
in-house.2 However, there is surprisingly little quantitative evidence as to the prevalence
and impact of the NIH Syndrome. A handful of managerial surveys (e.g., de Pay (1989),
Mehrwald (1999)) have identified systematic biases against external knowledge, though Menon
and Pfeﬀer (2003) find the opposite eﬀect — a systematic preference for outsider knowledge.
       Why might such a bias exist? One reason simply may be that the cost of accessing external
knowledge is higher than for accessing internal knowledge. This is likely to be the case when
knowledge is transmitted by person-to-person contact or when an organization raises barriers
to external sources of knowledge (for example, by restricting participation in peer communi-
ties or travel to conferences) in the name of limiting disclosure of trade secrets (Cockburn and
Henderson (1998)). Social psychologists also suggest powerful eﬀects of “in-group favoritism”
   1
    Clagett (1967) is an earlier reference.
   2
    Burrows, P. “Apple; Yes Steve, You fixed it. Congrats, now what’s next?" Business Week, July 31, 2002,
p.102.




                                                    5
and “out-group derogation” as mechanisms supporting social identity (Brewer and Brown
(1998)). Group aﬃliation and social identity may be important contributors to self-esteem,
satisfaction, or intrinsic motivation (Hogg and Abrams (1988)), and private rewards from aﬃl-
iating with or strengthening groups may therefore play a significant role in shaping individual
behavior. Economists also have interpreted group aﬃliation and actions that reinforce group
membership as eﬃcient mechanisms for supporting coordination or developing trust among
group members that facilitate within-group transactions (Glaeser et al. (2000), Eﬀerson et al.
(2008)). In addition, it may be the case that these factors that influence the propensity to
source knowledge externally are mediated by firm size. Indeed, we will see that large firms
seem more susceptible to myopic behavior.
   We test for evidence of a systematic bias against the use of knowledge that is external to
the firm as shown by the propensity to “self-cite” patents. Our analysis focuses on the role of
geography to the extent that location characteristics (i.e., diversity and local market structure)
mediate firm-level tendencies towards myopic behavior. We recognize that self-citation may
occur for many reasons. Individuals or organizations working in highly specialized fields or on
very specific topics are more likely than average to self-cite simply because they constitute a
large fraction of the relevant prior work. Self-citation within an organization may also be more
likely to occur because of the lower cost of accessing knowledge that is familiar or transmitted
by person-to-person contact. We hypothesize that the cultural/behavioral forces driving the
NIH Syndrome may be particularly strong in the social or institutional environment where
the activity of a single firm dominates the local innovation market. Thus, although the NIH
Syndrome may cause elevated levels of self-citation within an organization, laboratory, or
work group, it is likely to be diﬃcult to distinguish it from other factors driving self-citation.
Here, however, we believe that geography may provide a useful source of identification. If
this is the case, then the NIH Syndrome may be visible in the propensity of organizations in
such locations to self-cite at a rate that is above baseline.
   Specifically, we examine innovation in “company towns” — cities within which innovative



                                                6
activity is highly concentrated in a few firms, and which also tend to be relatively small in
terms of absolute size. In contrast to the positive productivity and growth eﬀects associated
with large, diverse, and competitive hubs, in these cities we expect to see a distinct eﬀect
of location on innovation. We conjecture that if in fact company town inventors suﬀer from
reduced access to knowledge, then that would be reflected in the prior inventions upon which
they choose to build. In other words, creativity in these locations would tend to be more
myopic, drawing less upon “outside” knowledge than would be expected given the underlying
distribution of knowledge across the economy. This myopia may in turn have a negative
impact on the productivity of innovative activity.
   We begin our empirical exploration of this issue by examining how myopia in the creative
process of invention is related to the concentration of inventive activity across locations.
We find that creativity in company towns is indeed more myopic on certain dimensions.
In particular, inventors in these locations are more likely than others to build upon prior
inventions developed in their own firm, even after controlling for the underlying distribution
of relevant innovative activity across all firms. Furthermore, firms in these locations are more
likely to draw upon the same set of prior inventions year after year, whether or not it is
their own, compared to firms in more diverse locations that more quickly refresh the pool of
knowledge upon which they build.
   However, perhaps more surprisingly, we find no evidence of this myopic behavior among
small firms in company towns. These firms draw just as broadly from external sources in
terms of the prior inventions they build upon as their small-firm counterparts in more diverse
locations. The NIH Syndrome thus seems to be a feature only of large firms based in company
town locations characterized by a lack of technological diversity and a concentrated local
market structure of invention.
   We then turn to examine whether the observed myopia in company towns matters. Specif-
ically, we examine the relation between creative myopia and the impact on subsequent inno-
vation. We find evidence that innovations from large firms in company towns do in fact have



                                               7
less impact on subsequent innovation, although the diﬀerence is modest, but small firm inno-
vations do not seem to incur a company town discount. In terms of appropriation, a greater
fraction of the impact of large firm company town inventions is realized by the inventing firm
itself. Finally, the impact of company town inventions, whether from large or small firms, is
narrower in geographic scope than those produced in other locations.
        Yet, without data to distinguish between impact that is priced (e.g., through licensing)
versus non-priced (i.e., a genuine externality of the type specified in Romer (1990)), the
implications of our findings for growth are ambiguous. In other words, despite an apparent
reduced access to localized knowledge spillovers from other firms, our results oﬀer no basis
to conclude that company town innovation is inferior in terms of its contribution to welfare
or firm-level productivity relative to that of other locations, even though it appears to be
somewhat more myopic at large firms.



2         Data

We construct our sample using data from the United States Patent and Trademark Oﬃce
(USPTO).3 We collect all utility patents issued between the years 1985 and 1995, inclusive.
This represents 984,888 patents. We limit our focus to the US and Canada and thus drop
all patents that do not have at least one inventor residing in either country. This reduces
our sample to 540,999 patents. Furthermore, we drop all patents that are not assigned to
non-government organizations, including unassigned patents. In other words, we only keep
patents assigned to organizations such as firms, universities, and hospitals. This results in a
sample of 392,830 patents.
        We further refine our sample by focusing only on geographic locations that are reasonably
active in innovation. To achieve this, we use city, state/province, and country data associated
with inventor addresses to assign each inventor to an MSA. We then count the number of
    3
    Specifically, we use USPTO data that Bronwyn Hall and her collaborators cleaned and coded (Hall et al.
(2002)).



                                                    8
patent-inventors per MSA where all inventors are located in the same MSA. For example, if
a patent has two inventors, one in Boston and one in New York, we ignore this patent when
counting the number of patents in these two cities. However, if both inventors are in Boston,
then that patent increases Boston’s patent count by one. We then drop the MSAs that have
fewer than 500 of these patent-inventors. As such, we focus our attention on the 72 most
highly innovative MSAs (down from a total of 408 MSAs). This reduces the total number of
focal patents to 264,078. We use this set of patents as our base sample.



3       Methodology

In this section, we describe the empirical techniques employed to address the following two
questions: 1) Do inventors based in locations characterized by more concentrated inventive
activity exhibit higher levels of creative myopia? 2) Do inventions developed in locations that
are more myopic have less impact on future innovation? We use US patent data to construct
our key measures of innovative activity and in particular utilize citation data to construct
measures of myopia (citations made) and impact (citations received). We begin by defining
our two key measures of MSA-level concentration of inventive activity.


3.1     Concentration of Inventive Activity

We measure the concentration of inventive activity across MSAs on two dimensions: 1) across
firms and 2) across technology fields. In both cases, we use a Herfindahl-type index to
characterize the degree of concentration. We characterize particularly concentrated locations
as company towns. We describe the construction of each measure below.


3.1.1    Concentration Across Firms

We base our measure of the concentration of inventive activity on a Herfindahl-type metric
that characterizes how patents by inventors in a particular MSA are distributed across firms



                                              9
(i.e., assignees). In other words, if Nmsa represents the total number of patents by inventors
located in a given MSA and Nmsa,i represents the number of patents issued to assignee i, then
we define our measure F irmConcentrationmsa as:

                                             £    X ¡ Nmsa,i ¢2 ¤ Nmsa
                      F irmConcentrationmsa = 1 −
                                                  i∈I
                                                      Nmsa       Nmsa − 1


where I is the set of all assignees within the MSA that have been issued a patent.
       This measure is similar to the well-known measures of basicness and generality that Hall
et al. (2002) introduced. However, rather than measuring the concentration of citations made
and received by a patent in a particular technology field, we instead use it to measure the
concentration of firm inventive activity within an MSA. This measure takes values between
zero and one, where MSAs with inventive activity more highly concentrated among assignees
score values closer to zero and those with greater dispersion obtain values closer to one.4


3.1.2      Concentration Across Technology Fields

We construct our technology field concentration measure in a similar fashion. However, rather
than measuring the dispersion of patents across assignees, we measure dispersion across two-
digit technology fields.5 Specifically, if Nmsa,t represents the number of patents developed by
inventors located in a particular MSA and categorized as belonging to technology field t, we
define our technology field concentration measure T echnologyConcentrationmsa as:

                                               £    X ¡ Nmsa,t ¢2 ¤ Nmsa
                  T echnologyConcentrationmsa = 1 −
                                                    t∈T
                                                        Nmsa       Nmsa − 1


where T is the set of all technology fields to which patents can be assigned. This measure
takes values between zero and one, where MSAs that are more diverse in their technological
   4
     We drop patents that are not assigned when we calculate this measure. However, we test the robustness
of our results by treating unassigned patents in an MSA: 1) as if they are all assigned to a single assignee in
that location and 2) as if they are each assigned to a diﬀerent assignee in that location. Our results persist.
   5
     Hall et al. (2002) describe the two-digit classification scheme, which has 36 distinct technology categories
that can be aggregated into six broad one-digit categories.



                                                       10
landscape obtain values closer to one and those that are more narrowly focused take values
closer to zero.6


3.1.3      Company Towns

We classify locations that are particularly concentrated along these two dimensions as com-
pany towns. Specifically, 12 (16.7%) of our 72 MSAs with the highest levels of innovative activ-
ity are measurably more concentrated than the others. We characterize the MSAs with innova-
tion market structure product values (T echnologyConcentrationmsa ∗F irmConcentrationmsa )
of less than 0.7 as company towns. The value of this product index for each of our company
towns is at least 3.5 standard deviations below the mean of the non-company town sample
(or 0.84 standard deviations below the mean of the full sample). Perhaps more intuitively,
they appear as outliers upon visual inspection of the scatter plot presented in Figure 1.
      In descending order according to the overall level of inventive activity as measured by
patents, the MSAs we characterize as company towns include: 1) Rochester, NY (Kodak), 2)
Albany, NY (General Electric), 3) Saginaw, MI (Dow), 4) Baton Rouge, LA (Ethyl Corp.),
5) Harrisburg, PA (AMP), 6) Ottawa, ON (Nortel), 7)Rockford, IL (Sundstrand Corp.),
8) Boise, ID (Micron Technology Inc.), 9) Binghamton, NY (IBM), 10) Johnson City, TN
(Kodak), 11) Melbourne, FL (Harris), and 12) Peoria, IL (Caterpillar).7
      We list these locations and describe their innovative activity in Table 1. We note several
interesting observations about this set of locations. First, they vary considerably in their
levels of innovative activity. The largest MSA, Rochester, has just over 10 times the amount
of patents (10,950) as the smallest, Peoria (976). Second, in every case the role of the
dominant firm is significant. Even in Ottawa, where the dominant firm, Nortel, plays the
least significant role relative to the overall inventive activity in its location, it still accounts
for more than 30% of all patents invented in that MSA during the sample period. At the
other extreme, General Electric accounts for almost 72% of all patents invented in Albany.
  6
      Again, we drop patents that have no specified assignee when we calculate this measure.
  7
      We list the dominant firm associated with each company town in brackets.


                                                     11
       Third, company towns vary significantly in terms of their importance to the overall inven-
tive activity of their dominant firms. For example, Binghamton and Johnson City account for
just under 10% of all inventive activity by IBM and Kodak, respectively. On the other hand,
Baton Rouge and Boise account for, respectively, 86% of Ethyl Corp.’s and 97% of Micron
Technology Inc.’s overall inventive activities.
       Fourth, small firms, which we define simply by their level of inventive activity (less than
400 patents issued over the 11-year study period), account for approximately 20% of inventive
activity in Rochester, Albany, and Saginaw, but over 60% in Baton Rouge and Ottawa. It is
also interesting to note that while Rochester, Albany, and Saginaw have other large firms in
addition to their dominant firm, the other MSAs do not.8
       Finally, we illustrate the geographic distribution of our company towns in Figure 2. Al-
though we base our data on a sample of patents issued reasonably recently (1985-1995), our
company towns are predominantly located in older industrial locations. Specifically, four
are in the Northeast (Rochester, Albany, Binghamton, Harrisburg), three are in the Midwest
(Peoria, Rockford, Saginaw), three are in the South (Johnson City, Melbourne, Baton Rouge),
and only one is in the West (Boise), while one is in Canada (Ottawa).


3.2       Creative Myopia

Creative myopia is a measure of the degree to which inventors are “nearsighted” in drawing
disproportionately from prior inventions that are in some way close to them. We employ
several myopia metrics to capture diﬀerent dimensions of distance. These include: 1) Orga-
nizational Myopia (building disproportionately on the inventing firm’s own prior inventions),
2) Technological Myopia (building disproportionately on prior inventions from the same field
as the focal invention), 3) Locational Myopia (building disproportionately on prior inventions
from the same MSA as the focal invention), and 4) Historical Myopia (building dispropor-
tionately on prior inventions the focal firm has built on before).
   8
    In other words, for most MSAs, the percentage of patents assigned to the dominant firm plus small firms
add up to almost 100%.


                                                    12
3.2.1   Organizational Myopia: Self-citation to Own Prior Inventions

We measure this type of myopia by the extent to which a firm’s patents draw upon its own
prior inventions. We do this by assessing the extent to which citations on a patent refer to
prior patents by the same firm as the patent making the citation. Specifically, for each MSA
we count the total number of citations, Cmsa , made by patents produced in the MSA. Of these
citations we then count those where the assignee of the citing and cited patents is the same.
                                                                      s
These are assignee self-citations and their total number is given by Cmsa . Consequently, the
average rate at which firms within an MSA make self-citations is given by,

                                                        s
                                                       Cmsa
                                 SelfCiteMyopiamsa   =
                                                       Cmsa

3.2.2   Technological Myopia

We construct technological myopia in a similar fashion and with the same citation data as
organizational myopia. Here, we measure the degree to which firms within an MSA make
citations that refer back to patents categorized in the same two-digit technology field as the
patents that make the citations. The greater the share of citations that refer to patents in
the same technology field, the greater the level of technological myopia. Specifically, if Cmsa
                                                                        g
denotes the number of citations made by all patents in a given MSA and Cmsa refers to the
number of these citations where the citing and cited patent share the same technology field,
then technological myopia is defined as:

                                                          g
                                                         Cmsa
                               TechnologyMyopiamsa =
                                                         Cmsa

3.2.3   Locational Myopia

Locational myopia describes the degree to which patents produced in a given MSA cite prior
inventions produced in the same MSA. Although all inventors of each citing patent are lo-
cated in the same MSA by construction, the inventors associated with cited patents may be


                                              13
located in multiple MSAs. Consequently, to construct this measure we examine whether the
inventor(s) of the citing patent are located in the same MSA as at least one of the inventors
of the cited patent. Generally, if the citing patents in an MSA reference a total of Cmsa
                      l
patent-MSA pairs and Cmsa of these refer to pairs originating in the same MSA as the citing
patents then, the locational myopia measure is given by:

                                                                 l
                                                                Cmsa
                                      LocationMyopiamsa =
                                                                Cmsa

3.2.4      Historical Myopia: Use of New Knowledge

Considering all patents issued to a firm in a particular year and a particular two-digit technol-
ogy field, we measure “New Knowledge” as the fraction of the prior art aggregated over this
set of patents that is cited by the firm for the first time.9 Thus, to construct this measure, we
determine the number of unique patents, Ca,s,t , that are cited by assignee a’s set of patents
issued in year s in technology field t. We further determine the number of these citations
                                        f
made for the first time by assignee a, Ca,s,t . Consequently, we define our new knowledge
measure as:
                                                                     f
                                                                    Ca,s,t
                                  NewKnowledgeMyopiaa,s,t =
                                                                    Ca,s,t

Thus, this measure can take values between zero and one. The closer this measure is to zero,
the more myopic the firm’s inventive process. That is to say, lower values of this measure
indicate that the firm tends to build on the same prior art as it did in the past, even if that
prior art was not invented by the firm itself.
       At the MSA level, new knowledge myopia is given as the average value of NewKnowledgeMyopiaa,s,t
across all assignees and technology fields in the MSA during our sample period.
   9
    We are limited to patent data for each assignee back to 1976. Therefore, we drop citations to patents
issued before 1976 from both the numerator and denominator of this fractional count measure. Thus, “first
time” actually means cited for the first time since 1976. We do not consider this data limitation problematic
since our sample includes patents issued between 1985 and 1995.




                                                     14
4       Results

In this section, we report results on our two relationships of interest: 1) concentration of
inventive activity and myopic behavior and 2) creative myopia and impact on subsequent in-
novation. Overall, we find a positive and reasonably strong correlation between concentration
and lab-level myopia but only a modest link between myopia and impact.


4.1      Descriptive Statistics

We begin by reporting descriptive statistics in Table 2 and discussing the particularly in-
teresting characteristics of these data. First, the mean level of inventive activity over the
11-year sample period is 3,668 patents (Row 1). It is evident that the distribution is pos-
itively skewed by very active locations such as New York, San Francisco, and Boston since
the median patent count is only 1,392. These data reveal that on average company towns
have significantly less inventive activity than other locations in the sample (1,917 patents
compared to 4,018), which, it is useful to recall, is conditioned on locations with high levels
of inventive activity. In addition, company towns are, by construction, more concentrated in
terms of the distribution of inventive activity across firms and technology fields (Rows 3 and
4).
      Since we base all of our myopia measures on citations to prior inventions, it is useful to
note that the mean number of citations made by the patents in our sample is approximately
10 (Row 2). In terms of our SelfCiteMyopia variable, on average approximately 9% of the
citations the inventors of a patent in our sample make are to prior art from their own firm
(Row 5). However, this percentage is significantly higher for the subset of patents that are
from company towns (14.4%), foreshadowing the creative myopia of inventors from these
locations.
      Furthermore, in terms our TechnologyMyopia variable, approximately 64% of the prior
art cited by the average patent is in the same technology field as the citing patent (Row 6).
Also, on average, Locational Myopia is approximately 30%; that is, about one third of the

                                                15
prior art cited by the average patent is from the same MSA as the citing patent (Row 7). In
addition, on average 91.7% of citations made by a firm in a given year are to prior art the firm
has never cited before (Row 8). Finally, in terms of impact, the mean patent in our sample
receives a citation from approximately 14 subsequent inventions (Row 10).
      We provide insight into the diﬀerences in citing behavior between inventors from company
towns and those from other locations in Table 3. Although inventors of the average com-
pany town patent self-cite with almost twice the propensity of the average patent from other
locations (19.5% compared to 10.6%; Column (II), Rows 5 and 6), company town inventors
make less than half the proportion of citations to prior art from the local MSA that was
not developed by their own firm (2.8% compared to 7.0%; Column (III)). The inventors of
the average company town patent also base a smaller fraction of their overall prior art on
inventions by other firms that are outside their local MSA (73% compared to 79%; Column
(V)).


4.2      Are Company Towns More Myopic?

4.2.1     Matched Patent Results

A comparison of mean values of assignee self-citation rates by company town patents versus
those from other locations suggests that a larger fraction of the prior art used in company
town inventions is drawn from the inventors’ own firm. Specifically, the mean citation rate
for company town patents is 14.4%, compared to only 8.7% for other locations (Table 2, Row
5).
      However, this simple comparison of means may belie important distributional diﬀerences
between company town patents and those from other locations. For example, company town
firms may be more focused on certain technology fields that lend themselves to higher levels
of appropriation (and thus higher self-citations rates). Or company town firms may have had
relatively higher levels of innovative activity earlier in our sample period when communica-
tion technologies were more costly thus resulting in higher self-citation rates, not because of

                                               16
creative myopia but rather due to higher costs of accessing external knowledge at the time
they were relatively more active.
       We employ a matched sample method similar to that pioneered by Jaﬀe et al. (1993)
in order to control for the underlying distribution of innovative activity across technology
fields and time.10 We begin with the set of company town patents where all inventors on
each patent, in cases of multiple-inventor patents, are based in the same location. There are
23,007 such patents. We then select a “control patent” for each company town patent using
the following algorithm: 1) Construct the control sample from patents originating in the 60
MSAs that are not identified as company towns and that do not have any inventors residing in
any of the 12 company town MSAs; 2) Segment this set of patents to ensure matched patents
are produced by laboratories of similar size in terms of the number of patents received during
the sample period;11 3) Of these, identify patents having the same application year as the focal
patent; 4) Of these, identify the patent(s) having the most USPC classifications in common
with the focal patent. At minimum, eligible control patents will have in common the three-
digit technology field. Otherwise, control patents have the same primary classification or the
same primary and secondary classification and so on, and we choose the patent that exhibits
the greatest degree of similarity with the focal patent. If we are unable to find a control
patent with at least the same 3-digit technology field as the focal patent, then we drop the
focal patent from the sample; and, 5) If more than one control patent remains as the “best”
possible control, then we select the patent closest to the focal patent in terms of issue date
as the control (in the event of a tie, we select randomly).12
  10
     We fully appreciate the critiques of this method presented in Thompson and Fox-Kean (2005) and Thomp-
son (2006). We address this by matching on both more detailed and multiple technology categories; still, we
recognize that the matching process is imperfect. We further address this issue in our conditional logit
analysis.
  11
     Here patents from large company town laboratories (firms in an MSA that receive 400 or more patents
during the sample period) are matched with patents from large labs in more diversified locations. Similarly,
patents from small company town laboratories (firms in an MSA that receive less than 400 patents during
the sample period) are matched with patents from small labs in more diversified locations.
  12
     Given the construction of our matched sample, the potential exists that a given control patent is matched
multiple times to diﬀerent focal patents. In addition, at a broad conceptual level, we note that this method-
ology implicitly assumes that the spatial distribution of patents, technology, and firms are all exogenous and
independent.


                                                     17
       We report the average values of our set of myopia measures at the patent level for inventions
from company towns versus those from other locations in Table 4. We divide our sample into
two, such that patents by large laboratories (with 400 or more patents assigned over the
11-year sample period) are in one subsample and patents assigned to smaller labs are in the
other.13 We base the results presented in the top panel (A) on the large-lab subsample.
       The results in the first row indicate that the assignee self-citation rate for company town
inventions is 1.27 times higher than for similar patents from more diverse locations; on average
28% of all citations made by company town inventors are to prior inventions from their own
firm compared to only 22% in other locations. We interpret this result as suggestive that
company town inventors are more myopic in the innovation process than those from other
locations.
       We also find evidence that company town inventors draw slightly (2%) less widely from
other technology fields (Row 2); on average, 66% of citations of company town patents refer
to patents in the same technology class as the citing patent while in other locations this is
only 63%. This result remains remarkably consistent even when we drop self-citations from
the analysis (Row 9). It is important to recall that we conduct our analysis at the two-digit
NBER classification level of technological similarity. This is a broad-level taxonomy with
category distinctions such as “organic compounds,” “drugs,” and “biotechnology.” So, to the
extent that company town inventions draw upon a technologically narrower set of prior ideas
within this level of classification relative to other locations we miss detecting diﬀerences at
that degree of technological specificity.
       The results reported in Row 3 indicate that company town inventions from large labs
draw 25% more of their prior art from their local area. However, this is primarily the result
of their tendency to build upon their own lab’s prior art (i.e., same firm, same MSA). When
we drop assignee self-citations from the sample (Row 10), we see that these inventors draw
  13
    We use the term “laboratory” to denote the research presence of a firm in a single location. In other
words, we would refer to a firm that patents in three locations as having three labs. Where it is obvious that
we are referring to a firm in a single location context we use the term “firm” and “lab” interchangeably.




                                                     18
less heavily from other local inventors than inventors in industrially dispersed locations. In
other words, company town inventors are not geographically myopic beyond their tendency
to build disproportionately on prior art from their own lab. This is underscored when we
focus only on lab-level self-citations (Row 4). The large lab self-citation rate of company
town inventions is over 40% greater than that of inventions from outside company towns.
       The results reported in Row 5 indicate that 79% of the citations made by company town
inventors are to prior art that their lab has not cited before. This is less than the 83% of
prior art cited by firms in more industrially dispersed locations that is new to the citing firm;
moreover, this diﬀerence is statistically significant. Furthermore, this result persists when we
drop self-citations from the sample (Row 6). In addition, the 4% diﬀerence in the fraction of
prior art utilized that is new to the inventing firm is more important than it may first appear
since this measure is the yearly average. This diﬀerence is compounded year after year as
firms in more diverse locations refresh the pool of knowledge upon which they build more
quickly.
       The results reported in Row 7 suggest that large-lab company town inventors build upon
slightly newer prior art as measured by citation lag in years.14 However, this diﬀerence is
driven by self-citations as this diﬀerence disappears when these citations are excluded (Row
11). We find similar results when we examine the citation lag to the most recent citation on
a patent, rather than the average lag across all citations (Rows 8 and 12).
       In the lower panel (B) of Table 4 we examine the same set of myopia measures, this time
applied to the subsample of small labs. Overall, these results indicate that small labs in
  14
     Our temporal myopia measures include the average and minimum citation lags measured in years. Specif-
ically, we define a lag as the diﬀerence between the grant year of the citing patent i, (gyeari ), and the grant
year of a cited patent x, (gyearx ). Thus, the average citation lag is the average diﬀerence in grant years
between the citing patent and each cited patent. That is, if the citing patent makes C citations, then the
average citation lag is:
                                                           C
                                                        1 X
                                AverageCitationLagi =        (gyeari − gyearx )
                                                        C x=1
This is the variable shown on Rows 7, 11, 19 and 23. In contrast, the minimum citation lag is:

                           LagtoMostRecentPatenti = min{gyeari − gyearx }|C
                                                                          x=1

This is the variable shown on Rows 8, 12, 20 and 24.


                                                       19
company towns exhibit significantly less myopic behavior than their large-lab counterparts.
The diﬀerences across our myopia measures between company towns and other locations are
much smaller in magnitude and in some cases go in the opposite direction. For example, small-
lab inventors are slightly less likely to self-cite than their non-company town counterparts.
       To summarize, company town inventors at large labs are myopic in the sense that they
are more likely to build upon prior art from their own lab and they are also more likely to
build upon prior art their lab has built upon in the past, whether it is their own or invented
by others. However, company town inventors at small labs do not exhibit this type of myopic
behavior. Also, we find no evidence that company town inventors from large or small labs
draw excessively upon older, potentially outdated ideas.


4.2.2      Conditional Logit Results

To confirm the results of the matched pair analysis and to control for other determinants of
self-citation, we estimate a conditional logit model for the probability of each citing-cited pair
of patents in the sample falling into one of the following mutually exclusive categories: (a)
a self-citation within the same “laboratory,” (b) a citation made by the focal laboratory to
another entity within the same MSA, or (c) a citation to prior inventions developed outside the
inventors’ own MSA. In the spirit of the classic citation function (Caballero and Jaﬀe (2002)),
we control for diﬀerences in the number of potentially citable patents in each category by
estimating the McFadden choice model (McFadden (1974)) with the size of the relevant pool of
possible citations as an attribute of each of these alternatives.15 In these regressions, the main
variables of interest are the company town dummy and the large laboratory dummy.16 We
also control for MSA size (total number of patents and population), the number of university
patents in the MSA, the technology class of the citing patent, and the citation lag (diﬀerence
between the grant years of the citing and cited patents).
  15
     Citation functions of the type proposed by Caballero and Jaﬀe (2002) that are estimated from cell counts
prove very diﬃcult to estimate for these data since cells are so sparsely populated.
  16
     We use the term “large” laboratories to denote those labs that are assigned 400 or more patents over the
period under study: 1985-1995.


                                                     20
   The results from our conditional logit regression, presented in Tables 5 and 6, suggest a
significant degree of myopia in company towns. These tables report the marginal eﬀects at
sample means of each explanatory variable on the probability of citations made by a patent
falling into each category. All of the estimated marginal eﬀects are significant at the 1% level
or better, even with robust standard errors.
   In Table 5, the positive and strongly significant eﬀect of the company town dummy on the
self-citation and citation-within-MSA outcomes indicates a significant degree of myopia. The
magnitude of this eﬀect is substantial. In terms of odds ratios, all else equal, compared to a
patent from a less concentrated MSA, a patent generated in a company town is more than
three times more likely to self-cite its own lab, relative to the probability of citing a patent
originating outside its own location. Citation to the same lab or same MSA is slightly more
likely (odds-ratio of 1.04) in larger MSAs (i.e., locations with more overall patents) and less
likely in MSAs with more university patents.
   The negative coeﬃcient on the citation lag indicates that citations made to older patents
are less likely to be a self-citation or a within-MSA citation. There are also significant diﬀer-
ences across technology classes and a very large negative eﬀect of the diversity of technology
on the probability of self- or within-MSA citation. We obtain very similar results when we add
additional controls for the year the citation is made or the year the cited patent is granted.
   Table 6 allows for a diﬀerent eﬀect of being in a company town for small versus large
firms. We interact a large-lab dummy (the lab has over 400 patents assigned during the
period 1985-1995) with a dummy for company town. The large and positive main eﬀect and
interaction eﬀect indicate that myopia is much more significant for larger compared to smaller
firms. Estimated coeﬃcients on the other variables are very similar to those in Table 5.
   After controlling for a variety of other MSA characteristics, we thus find evidence of
significantly higher rates of within-firm and within-MSA citation in company towns. As we
find in the matched-pairs analysis, large labs drive this phenomenon. Even after controlling
for diﬀerences in the size of the pool of self-citable patents, smaller companies are significantly



                                                21
less likely to cite their own patents or patents originating in the same MSA.


4.3       Does Myopia Hinder Innovation Impact?

The findings we report above suggest that innovation in company towns is more myopic
than in other locations. It is tempting to assume that myopia in innovation is undesirable.
However, we have no basis upon which to make such an assumption. In this section, we bring
this question to the data.


4.3.1      Creative Myopia and the Impact on Future Innovation

We employ the count of citations received by a patent as a proxy for the impact it has had
on subsequent innovation. Several studies have shown the number of citations received to be
correlated with various measures of patent value, including patent renewals (Harhoﬀ et al.
(1999)), consumer surplus (Trajtenberg (1990)), expert opinion (Albert et al. (1991)), and
market value of the assignee firm (Hall et al. (2005)).17
       We compare the relative impact of inventions across location types using the matched
sample method. To this end we employ the same sample of matched patents as that described
above to determine whether patents originating in company towns receive fewer citations than
similar patents originating in more industrially diverse locations.
       In Table 7 we report the average number of citations received by inventions from company
towns versus those from other locations. Using the same matched sample as described above,
we present results based on patents by large labs in the top panel and by small labs in the
lower panel.
       We report the main result in the first row of the table. Patents by inventors at large
firms in company towns have less impact on subsequent innovation than other patents in the
  17
     In addition, the interpretation of citations received as a proxy for impact is consistent with that held by
the USPTO: “If a single document is cited in numerous patents, the technology revealed in that document
is apparently involved in many developmental eﬀorts. Thus, the number of times a patent document is cited
may be a measure of its technological significance.” (Oﬃce of Technology Assessment and Forecast, Sixth
Report, 1976, p. 167).



                                                      22
same technology field, although the diﬀerence is modest (8%) . However, this is not true for
the impact of small firms. In this case, patents from company towns receive just as many
citations as those from more diverse locations (Row 10).
   Consistent with our prior results based on citations made, patents by inventors at large
company town firms receive 1.8 times the number of self-citations received by similar patents
from more diverse locations. In other words, given the slightly smaller overall impact of
patents from large firms in company towns, a much larger fraction of the impact is realized
by the (large) inventing firm itself in company towns compared to elsewhere (Row 2). This
is not the case with small firms (Row 11).
   We find no evidence that the impact of company town patents is more technologically
concentrated than patents in more diverse locations. Between 40 and 50% of all citations
received come from outside the focal patent’s own technology field. This applies to both large
and small firms (Rows 3 and 12).
   Consistent with other findings in prior studies concerning the localization of knowledge
flows, such as Jaﬀe et al. (1993), Thompson and Fox-Kean (2005), Agrawal et al. (2006),
and Rosenthal and Strange (2008), we find that firms receive a significant fraction of their
citations from patents produced in their own MSA (Row 4). However, the greater tendency
of large company town firms to receive citations from their own MSA is attributed to the
fact that they internalize more of the benefits of their own research relative to firms in other
locations. The results reported in Row 8, where we drop assignee self-citations, confirm
this intuition; comparing the number of citations received from local inventors, patents in
industrially dispersed locations receive more than twice the number of citations as those
received by company town inventions.
   In terms of the geographic scope of their impact, patents produced in company towns seem
to have less impact regardless of the size of the producing lab. Large lab inventions developed
in company towns are cited in only 4.55 unique MSAs on average compared to inventions
developed in other locations that are cited in 5.11 unique MSAs (Row 6). In other words,



                                              23
inventions from company towns impact subsequent innovation in 10% fewer locations, on
average. Upon excluding self-citations the diﬀerence becomes even more dramatic. Company
town inventions impact subsequent innovation in approximately 17% fewer locations (Row 9).
The company town eﬀect on smaller labs is present, but less pronounced. The company town
discount is approximately 3% and increases to 4% when self-citations are excluded (Rows 15
and 18).



5     Conclusion

Company towns are an interesting feature of the geography of innovation: Inventive activity
in some locations is dominated by a single organization, which may have important implica-
tions for the economics of localized knowledge spillovers. We find that in these locations, large
firms tend to be more myopic than those in locations where the inventive activity is less con-
centrated. However, smaller firms located in company towns do not exhibit myopic behavior,
suggesting that geography need not dictate access to knowledge produced elsewhere. Instead,
geographic isolation may facilitate the development of certain attitudes towards innovation
to which inventors in large-firm environments might be particularly susceptible.
    The causes of this myopia are unclear. One hypothesis is that it reflects the Not Invented
Here Syndrome, the alleged tendency of R&D workers to discount or ignore knowledge from
sources external to their organization or work team. In large firms located in company towns,
this propensity may be particularly strong.
    The NIH Syndrome is generally thought to have a negative impact on the productivity of
R&D; if this is true, then the myopia we observe should have a negative eﬀect on the impact
of these inventions. Interestingly, however, we see only modest evidence of this, at least as
captured by the number of citations received by the patents belonging to the large firms in our
sample. Myopic inventors in large firms tend to produce patents that are less likely to be cited
externally, but this is largely made up for by higher levels of internal citations. Furthermore,
it may be that the economic value of patents that are disproportionately self-cited is lower. In

                                               24
this case, myopia would have an even greater negative impact. But this finding also points to
potential benefits associated with “in group favoritism” as a mechanism supporting eﬃcient
internal exchange and coordination.
   The forward citation patterns we observe, both higher rates of self-citation and a narrower
scope of geographic impact, are also consistent with firms in company towns having a higher
ability to appropriate returns from R&D. Choosing to be geographically isolated may be an
eﬀective way to limit spillovers to competitors. In other words, geographic isolation may
lower the cost of appropriating knowledge developed in-house while at the same time increase
the cost of accessing externally generated knowledge. The fact that some firms choose to
locate in company towns while others do not reveals diﬀerences in the relative costs and
benefits associated with knowledge appropriation and access across firms. As noted above, our
empirical analysis implicitly assumes that the spatial distribution of firms and technology is
exogenous and independent. If instead we allow for endogenous optimizing choices of location
the interpretation of these results may be rather diﬀerent. Identifying firm characteristics that
underlie diﬀerences in the relative costs and benefits associated with knowledge appropriation
and access is the next logical step in this line of inquiry.




                                                25
References

Acs, Z., 2002. Innovation and the Growth of Cities. Edward Elgar Publishing.

Agrawal, A. K., Cockburn, I., McHale, J., 2006. Gone But Not Forgotten: Labor Flows,
  Knowledge Spillovers, and Enduring Social Capital. Journal of Economic Geography 6 (5),
  571—591.

Agrawal, A. K., Cockburn, I. M., 2003. The Anchor Tenant Hypothesis: Examining the Role
  of Large, Local, R&D-Intensive Firms in University Knowledge Transfer. International
  Journal of Industrial Organization 21, 1227—1253.

Agrawal, A. K., Kapur, D., McHale, J., 2008. How Do Spatial and Social Proximity Influence
  Knowledge Flows? Evidence from Patent Data. Journal of Urban Economics 64, 258—269.

Albert, M., Avery, D., Narin, F., McAllister, P., 1991. Direct Validation of Citation Counts
  as Indicators of Industrially Important Patents. Research Policy 20, 251—259.

Almeida, P., Kogut, B., July 1999. Localization of Knowledge and the Mobility of Engineers
  in Regional Networks. Management Science 45 (7), 905—917.

Arrow, K. J., 1962. Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention. In:
  Nelson, R. R. (Ed.), The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social
  Factors. Princeton University Press, pp. 609—625.

Audretsch, D., Feldman, M., June 1996. R&D Spillovers and the Geography of Innovation
  and Production. American Economic Review 86 (3), 630—40.

Brewer, M., Brown, R., 1998. Intergroup Relations. In: Gilbert, D., Fiske, S., Lindzey, G.
  (Eds.), The Handbook of Social Psychology 2. McGraw-Hill, New York, pp. 554—594.

Caballero, R. J., Jaﬀe, A., 2002. How High are the Giants’ Shoulders: An Empirical Assess-
  ment of Knowledge Spillovers and Creative Destruction in a Model of Economic Growth.


                                            26
  In: Jaﬀe, A., Trajtenberg, M. (Eds.), Patents, Citations, & Innovations: A Window on the
  Knowledge Economy. The MIT Press, pp. 89—151.

Chesbrough, H., 2006. Open Business Models: How to Thrive in the New Innovation Land-
  scape. Harvard Business School Press.

Clagett, R. P., 1967. Receptivity to Innovation - Overcoming N.I.H., m.S. Thesis, Alfred P.
  Sloan School of Management, MIT.

Cockburn, I. M., Henderson, R. M., June 1998. Absorptive Capacity, Coauthoring Behavior,
  and the Organization of Research in Drug Discovery. The Journal of Industrial Economics
  XLVI (2), 157—182.

Cohen, W. M., Levinthal, D. A., September 1989. Innovation and Learning: The Two Faces
  of R&D. The Economic Journal 99 (397), 569—596.

de Pay, D., 1989. Kulturspezifische determinanten der organisation von innovationsprozessen.
  Zeitschrift fur Betriebswirtschaft, Erganzungsheft 1, 131—167.

Duranton, G., Puga, D., December 2001. Nursery Cities: Urban Diversity, Process Innovation,
  and the Life Cycle of Products. American Economic Review 91 (5), 1454—1477.

Eﬀerson, C., Lalive, R., Fehr, E., September 2008. The Coevolution of Cultural Groups and
  Ingroup Favoritism. Science 321 (5897), 1844—1849.

Feldman, M., Audretsch, D. B., 1999. Innovation in Cities: Science-Based Diversity, Special-
  ization, and Localized Competition. European Economic Review 43, 409—429.

Feldman, M. P., 2003. The Locational Dynamics of the US Biotech Industry: Knowledge
  Externalities and the Anchor Hypothesis. Industry and Innovation 10, 311—328.

Glaeser, E. L., Kallal, H. D., Scheinkman, J. A., Shleifer, A., 1992. Growth in Cities. Journal
  of Political Economy 100 (6), 1126—1152.


                                              27
Glaeser, E. L., Laibson, D., Scheinkman, J., Soutter, C., 2000. Measuring Trust. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 115, 811—846.

Hall, B., Jaﬀe, A., Trajtenberg, M., 2002. The NBER Patent Citations Data File: Lessons,
  Insights and Methodological Tools. In: Jaﬀe, A., Trajtenberg, M. (Eds.), Patents, Citations,
  & Innovations: A Window on the Knowledge Economy. The MIT Press, pp. 403—59.

Hall, B., Jaﬀe, A., Trajtenberg, M., Spring 2005. Market Value and Patent Citations. The
  Rand Journal of Economics 36 (1), 16—38.

Harhoﬀ, D., Narin, F., Scherer, F., Vopel, K., August 1999. Citation Frequency and the Value
  of Patented Inventions. The Review of Economics and Statistics 81 (3), 511Ű515.

Hogg, M., Abrams, D., 1988. Social Identifications: A Social Psychology Of Intergroup Rela-
  tions and Group Processes. London: Routledge.

Jaﬀe, A., Henderson, R., Trajtenberg, M., August 1993. Geographic Localization of Knowl-
  edge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations. Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (3),
  577—98.

Kanter, R., 1983. The Change Masters. Simon and Schuster: New York.

Katz, R., Allen, T. J., 1982. Investigating the Not Invented Here (NIH) Syndrome: A Look at
  the Performance, Tenure, and Communication Patterns of 50 R&D Project Groups. R&D
  Management 12 (1), 7—19.

Klepper, S., Simons, K. L., 2000a. Dominance by Birthright: Entry of Prior Radio Pro-
  ducers and Competitive Ramifications in the U.S. Television Receiver Industry. Strategic
  Management Journal 21 (10-11), 997—1016.

Klepper, S., Simons, K. L., August 2000b. The Making of an Oligopoly: Firm Survival
  and Technological Change in the Evolution of the U.S. Tire Industry. Journal of Political
  Economy 108 (4), 728—760.

                                             28
Leonard-Barton, D., 1995. Wellsprings of Knowledge. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School
  Press.

McFadden, D., 1974. Conditional logit analysis of qualitiative choice analysis. In: Zarembka,
  P. (Ed.), Frontiers in Econometrics. Academic Press, pp. 105—42.

Mehrwald, H., 1999. Das ‘Not Invented Here’-Syndrom. In: Forschung und Entwicklung.
  Wiesbaden: Dt. Univ.- Verl.

Menon, T., Pfeﬀer, J., 2003. Valuing Internal versus External Knowledge. Management Sci-
  ence 49 (4), 497—513.

Polanyi, M., 1966. The Tacit Dimension. Routledge and Kegan Paul London UK.

Romer, P., October 1990. Endogenous Technological Change. Journal of Political Economy
  98 (5).

Rosenthal, S. S., Strange, W. C., 2001. The Determinants of Agglomeration. Journal of Urban
  Economics 50, 191—229.

Rosenthal, S. S., Strange, W. C., 2003. Geography, Industrial Organization, and Agglomera-
  tion. The Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (2), 377—393.

Rosenthal, S. S., Strange, W. C., 2008. The Attenuation of Human Capital Spillovers. Journal
  of Urban Economics 64, 373Ű389.

Saxenian, A., 1994. Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and
  Route 128. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

Thompson, P., May 2006. Patent Citations and the Geography of Knowledge Spillovers:
  Evidence From Inventor and Examiner Added Citations. The Review of Economics and
  Statistics 88 (2), 383—8.




                                             29
Thompson, P., Fox-Kean, M., March 2005. Patent Citations and the Geography of Knowledge
  Spillovers: A Reassessment. American Economic Review 95 (1), 450—460.

Trajtenberg, M., Spring 1990. A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value of
  Innovations. The RAND Journal of Economics 21 (1), 172—187.

Weitzman, M., May 1998. Recombinant Growth. The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  CXIII (2), 331—360.




                                          30
                                                          Table 1: Company Towns
     MSA                   Dominant      Dominant         Total      No. of        % of MSA’s       Number of           % of        % of MSA’s
                             Firm        Technology     Patents      Patents         Patents         Patents         Dominant        Patents
                                                        in MSA     Assigned to     Assigned to     Assigned to      Firm’s Total    Assigned to
                                                                   Dominant         Dominant      Dominant Firm        Patents        Small
                                                                  Firm in MSA         Firm          Worldwide       in this MSA       Firms1
     Rochester (NY)          Kodak        chemicals     10,950        5,304            48.4            6,793            78.1           20.2
     Albany (NY)               GE         electronics    5,255        3,773            71.8            9,073            41.6           20.6
     Saginaw (MI)             Dow         chemicals      3,441        1,740            50.6            3,916            44.4           22.5
     Baton Rouge (LA)      Ethyl Corp.    chemicals      2,010         718             35.7             836             85.9           64.3
     Harrisburg (PA)          AMP         electronics    1,835        1,096            59.7            1,784            61.4           40.3
     Ottawa (ON)             Nortel       computers      1,637         498             30.4             966             51.6           69.6
     Rockford (IL)         Sundstrand     electronics    1,599         756             47.3            1,063            71.1           52.7
     Boise (ID)              Micron       electronics    1,344         558             41.5             576             96.9           58.5
     Binghamton (NY)          IBM         computers      1,266         814             66.4            8,850             9.2           33.6
     Johnson City (TN)       Kodak        chemicals      1,118         627             56.1            6,793             9.2           43.9
     Melbourne (FL)          Harris       electronics    1,080         467             43.2             706             66.1           56.8
     Peoria (IL)           Caterpillar   mechanical       976          639             65.5             820             77.9           34.5




31
     We base the sample on US patents issued to non-government organizations between 1985-1995, inclusive, where at least one inventor is located in
     the US or Canada. 1 Small …rms receive less than 400 patents during the sample period.
                                    Table 2: Descriptive Statistics

                                              All MSAs              Company Towns              Other Locations
                                            Mean   Median               Mean                       Mean

1. Patent count by MSA                      3,668        1,392             1,917                     4,018
                                           (5,470)                        (2,421)                   (5,845)

2. No. Citations Made by Patent             9.665        9.638             8.568                     9.885
                                           (1.583)                        (1.499)                   (1.517)

Concentration1
  3. Firm                                   0.871        0.935             0.550                     0.935
                                           (0.163)                        (0.149)                   (0.053)
   4. Technology                            0.916        0.931             0.841                     0.931
                                           (0.050)                        (0.086)                   (0.014)

Myopia2
  5. Assignee (Self-Citation)               0.097        0.091             0.144                     0.087
                                           (0.047)                        (0.073)                   (0.034)
   6. Technology                            0.641        0.639             0.652                     0.638
                                           (0.034)                        (0.057)                   (0.028)
   7. Location                              0.301        0.290             0.377                     0.286
                                           (0.117)                        (0.182)                   (0.094)

Percentage of New Citations3
  8. All Citations                          0.917        0.912             0.915                     0.917
                                           (0.020)                        (0.032)                   (0.017)
   9. Excluding Self-Citations              0.919        0.914             0.923                     0.918
                                           (0.019)                        (0.029)                   (0.016)

10. No. Cites Rcvd by Patent               14.422       13.586            14.843                    14.337
                                           (4.591)                        (8.098)                   (3.619)

11. No. of Patents4                        264,078                        23,007                    241,071

Standard deviations in parenthesis. 1 Concentration measures the dispersion of patents within an MSA across
firms (or 2-digit technology classifications) using a Herfindahl type measure where lower values reflect higher levels
of concentration; here, “Firm" is equivalent to Assignee. 2 Myopia measures the rate at which a citing and cited
patent have the same specified characteristic (i.e., same assignee, 2-digit technology classification, or MSA).
3 Percentage of New Citations is the MSA average annual percentage of cited patents that are cited for the first

time; here, “Self-Citations" are citations between citing and cited patents with the same assignee. 4 This is the
total number of patents aggregated over all MSAs in the sample; company towns versus all other MSAs are broken
out in the latter two columns.




                                                         32
                                                                 Table 3: Decomposition of Prior Art


                                      Citations   MSA Self-Cites                        MSA Self-Cites                     MSA Non-Self-Cites     MSA Non-Self-Cites
                                       Made     Assignee Self-Cites1                Assignee Non-Self-Cites2               Assignee Self-Cites3 Assignee Non-Self-Cites4
                                         (I)            (II)                                 (III)                                (IV)                    (V)

     Absolute Number

        1. All Patents                  6.891                   0.684                            0.441                               0.267                              5.498
        2. Company Towns                6.815                   1.246                            0.204                               0.351                              5.014
        3. Other Locations              6.899                   0.631                            0.464                               0.259                              5.545

     Share of Citations

        4. All Patents                  7.323                   0.114                            0.066                               0.036                              0.785




33
        5. Company Towns                7.138                   0.195                            0.028                               0.046                              0.731
        6. Other Locations              7.340                   0.106                            0.070                               0.035                              0.790

     Elements in Columns (II) to (V) may not add up to elements in Column (I) due to rounding.     1 Count   of citations per patent where the citing and cited patents are both
     produced in the same MSA and have the same assignee;    2 Count    of citations per patent where the citing and cited patents are both produced in the same MSA but have
     di¤erent assignees; 3 Count of citations per patent where the citing and cited patents are produced in di¤erent MSAs but have the same assignee; and, 4 Count of citations per
     patent where the citing and cited patents are produced in di¤erent MSAs and have di¤erent assignees.
          Table 4: Creative Myopia: Company Towns versus Other Locations
                                              No. of           Patent Mean by:         Diﬀerence       t-statistic
                                           Matched Pairs     Company     Other         in Means
                                                              Towns    Locations
                                                 (I)           (II)       (III)        (II) - (III)

A. Large Lab 1
   Self-Citation Rate2
      1. Assignee                              14,992           0.28         0.22       0.06***          17.82
      2. Technology                            14,992           0.66         0.63       0.02***           6.14
      3. MSA                                   14,992           0.25         0.20       0.06***          18.26
      4. Lab                                   14,992           0.23         0.16       0.07***          22.56

   Percentage of New Citations3
      5. All Citations                         15,851           0.79         0.83       -0.04***         -25.55
      6. Excluding Self-Citations              15,851           0.83         0.86       -0.03***         -18.26

   Citation Lag (Years)4
      7. Average All Patent Citations          14,992           6.15         6.40        -0.25**          -2.05
      8. To Most Recent Cited Patent           14,992           2.83         3.00       -0.18***          -4.09

   Excluding Assignee Self-Citations
   Self-Citation Rate2
      9. Technology                            13,173           0.65         0.63       0.01***            3.39
      10. MSA                                  13,173           0.03         0.04       -0.01***          -6.12

   Citation Lag (Years)4
      11. Average All Patent Citations         13,173           6.49         6.55         -0.06           -1.10
      12. To Most Recent Cited Patent          13,173           3.51         3.55         -0.05           -1.32

B. Small Lab 5
   Self-Citation Rate2
      13. Assignee                              5,099           0.12         0.12        0.001             0.11
      14. Technology                            5,099           0.69         0.67       0.01**             2.12
      15. MSA                                   5,099           0.13         0.14       -0.01**           -2.15
      16. Lab                                   5,099           0.09         0.07       0.01***            3.14

   Percentage of New Citations3
      17. All Citations                         4,318           0.91         0.89       0.02***           5.16
      18. Excluding Self-Citations              4,318           0.92         0.89       0.02***           5.74

   Citation Lag (Years)4
      19. Average All Patent Citations          5,099           6.37         6.37         0.001           0.02
      20. To Most Recent Cited Patent           5,099           3.22         3.10        0.12**           2.33

   Excluding Assignee Self-Citations
   Self-Citation Rate2
      21. Technology                            4,810           0.68         0.67        0.01**            2.06
      22. MSA                                   4,810           0.05         0.08       -0.03***          -7.78

   Citation Lag (Years)4
      23. Average All Patent Citations          4,810           6.54         6.57        -0.03            -0.42
      24. To Most Recent Cited Patent           4,810           3.57         3.42       0.15***            2.65

*** = significant at 1%, ** = significant at 5%. 1 A Large Lab is an assignee in a particular MSA that obtains 400
or more patents during the sample period. 2 Self-Citation Rate measures, at the patent level, the rate at which a
citing and cited patent have the same assignee (or 2-digit technology classification, or MSA, or Lab). 3 Percentage
of New Citations is the MSA average annual percentage of cited patents that are cited for the first time. 4 Citation
Lag measures, at the level of the citing patent, the time lag between citing and cited patent issue years. 5 A Small
Lab is an assignee in a particular MSA that obtains less than 400 patents during the sample period.



                                                        34
                 Table 5: Conditional Logit Regression: Marginal Eﬀects
                                                        Lab Level           Citation            Citation
                                                      Self-Citation1      within MSA          Outside MSA3
                                                                         (non-self-cite)2
Citing-cited pair specific variables

   Citing Patent MSA:
      Company Town Dummy                                   0.028*             0.042*               -0.070*
                                                           33.41               30.17                -45.59
      No. of Patents in MSA                                0.0004*            0.005*               -0.006*
                                                            21.26              70.83                -74.67
      Number of University Patents                         -0.002*            -0.033*              0.035*
      in MSA (1000s)                                        -4.55              -28.50               28.87
      MSA Population (millions)                            -0.0002*           -0.005*              0.005*
                                                             -6.48             -37.61               38.41
      MSA Technology Dispersion                            -0.033*            -0.044*              0.077*
                                                            -9.89              -4.10                6.91
   Citing-cited Patent Citation Lag                        -0.001*            -0.009*              0.010*
                                                            -52.05            -116.06              128.12
   Citing Patent Technology Class Eﬀects                      x                  x                    x

Choice Specific Variables

   Number of Citable Patents in MSA                      1.4E-10*           -9.00E-09*           8.90E-09*
                                                           8.92                -8.92                8.92
   Number of Citable Patents Outside MSA                 8.3E-10*           8.90E-09*            -9.70E-09*
                                                           8.92                8.92                 -8.92
   Number of Potential Self-cites                       -9.70E-10*          1.40E-10*            8.30E-10*
                                                           -8.92               8.92                 8.92


Robust standard errors. * = significant at 1%. N = 4,923,693. The dependent variable identifies a citation:
1 within the same “laboratory” (where citing and cited patents are produced in the same MSA and issued to the

same assignee); 2 made by the focal laboratory to another entity within the same MSA (where citing and cited
patents are produced in the same MSA but are issued to diﬀerent assignees); and, 3 to prior inventions developed
outside the inventors’ own MSA (where citing and cited patents are produced in diﬀerent MSAs).




                                                      35
Table 6: Conditional Logit Regression: Marginal Eﬀects, Disaggregated by Lab Size
                                                         Lab Level           Citation            Citation
                                                       Self-Citation1      within MSA          Outside MSA3
                                                                          (non-self-cite)2
 Citing-cited pair specific variables

    Citing Patent MSA:
       Company Town Dummy                                   -0.003*            -0.013*              0.015*
                                                             -4.25              -5.74                6.77
       Large Lab Size Dummy                                 0.003*             0.050*               -0.053*
                                                            12.79               66.50                -68.04
       Company Town Dummy                                   0.038*             0.034*               -0.072*
       X Large Lab Size Dummy                               14.87               11.95                -20.82
       No. of Patents in MSA                                0.0003*            0.005*               -0.005*
                                                             17.13              62.95                -65.89
       Number of University Patents                         -0.001*            -0.025*              0.025*
       in MSA (1000s)                                        -1.69              -21.71               21.41
       MSA Population (millions)                            -0.0001*           -0.004*              0.004*
                                                              -3.33             -31.79               31.91
       MSA Technology Dispersion                            -0.049*            -0.093*              0.141*
                                                             -15.02             -8.49                12.34
    Citing-cited Patent Citation Lag                        -0.001*            -0.009*              0.010*
                                                             -51.40            -114.29              126.13
    Citing Patent Technology Class Eﬀects                      x                  x                    x

 Choice specific variables

    Number of Citable Patents in MSA                     1.70E-10*           -1.10E-08*           1.10E-08*
                                                           10.62                -10.62              10.62
    Number of Citable Patents Outside MSA                9.80E-10*           1.10E-08*            -1.20E-08*
                                                           10.62               10.62                 -10.62
    Number of Potential Self-cites                       -1.10E-09*          1.70E-10*            9.80E-10*
                                                            -10.62             10.62                10.62


 Robust standard errors. * = significant at 1%. N = 4,923,693. The dependent variable identifies a citation:
 1 within the same “laboratory” (where citing and cited patents are produced in the same MSA and issued to the

 same assignee); 2 made by the focal laboratory to another entity within the same MSA (where citing and cited
 patents are produced in the same MSA but are issued to diﬀerent assignees); and, 3 to prior inventions developed
 outside the inventors’ own MSA (where citing and cited patents are produced in diﬀerent MSAs).




                                                       36
                           Table 7: Impact Measured by Citations Received1
                                                                No. of           Patent Mean by:          Diﬀerence      t-statistic
                                                             Matched Pairs     Company     Other          in Means
                                                                                Towns    Locations
                                                                   (I)           (II)       (III)         (II) - (III)

A. Large Lab Patents Matched

   Includes Assignee Self-Citations

         1. All Citations                                         16,266          13.24        14.30       -1.07***        -5.08
         2. Citations Received from same Assignee                 16,266           3.73         2.04        1.69***        21.51
         3. Citations Received from same Technology               16,266           7.70         7.51          0.19          1.46

         4. Citations Received from Focal MSA                     16,266          3.86         2.87         0.99***         11.61
         5. Citations Received from Same Lab                      16,266          3.29         1.63         1.66***         23.14
         6. Number of Unique Citing MSAs2                         16,266          4.55         5.11        -0.55***        -12.91

   Excludes Assignee Self-Citations

         7. Citations Received from same Technology               16,266          5.40         6.39        -0.99***         -9.43
         8. Citations Received from Focal MSA                     16,266          0.56         1.24        -0.68***        -19.36
         9. Number of Unique Citing MSAs2                         16,266          3.81         4.59        -0.77***        -18.98


B. Small Lab Patents Matched

   Includes Assignee Self-Citations

         10. All Citations                                        5,757           12.96        13.11         -0.15         -0.44
         11. Self-Citations Received from same Assignee           5,757            0.95         1.17       -0.22***        -2.85
         12. Citations Received from same Technology              5,757            8.03        7.89           0.14          0.60

         13. Citations Received from Focal MSA                    5,757           2.01         2.16          -0.15         -1.08
         14. Citations Received from Same Lab                     5,757           0.68         0.86        -0.18***        -2.81
         15. Number of Unique Citing MSAs2                        5,757           5.33         5.52         -0.19**        -2.46

   Excludes Assignee Self-Citations

         16. Citations Received from same Technology              5,757           7.37         7.12          0.25           1.13
         17. Citations Received from Focal MSA                    5,757           1.33         1.30          0.03           0.29
         18. Number of Unique Citing MSAs2                        5,757           5.02         5.22        -0.20***        -2.66

*** = significant at 1%, ** = significant at 5 %. 1 Citations Received measures, at the patent level, the number of citations a focal
patent receives from patents exhibiting the specified characteristic (e.g. same assignee, 2-digit technology classification, etc.).
2 Measures the number of distinct MSAs that produce patents that cite the focal patent.




                                                             37
Figure 1 – Concentration of Inventive Activity
        Figure 2 – Map of Company Towns




                                              OTTAWA
BOISE
                                           ROCHESTER
                                                              ALBANY
                                 SAGINAW
                             ROCKFORD                    BINGHAMTON
                                                         Binghamton

                               PEORIA                        HARRISBURG




                                              JOHNSON CITY




                      BATON ROUGE
                                                   MELBOURNE
