NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GUN CONTROL AFTER HELLER:
LITIGATING AGAINST REGULATION
Philip J. Cook
Jens Ludwig
Adam Samaha
Working Paper 15431
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15431

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2009

¸˛The research reported on here was supported in part by a grant from the Joyce Foundation. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Philip J. Cook, Jens Ludwig, and Adam Samaha. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Gun Control after Heller: Litigating against Regulation
Philip J. Cook, Jens Ludwig, and Adam Samaha
NBER Working Paper No. 15431
October 2009
JEL No. H21,K14
ABSTRACT
The “core right” established in D.C. vs. Heller (2008) is to keep an operable handgun in the home
for self-defense purposes. If the Court extends this right to cover state and local jurisdictions, the result
is likely to include the elimination of the most stringent existing regulations – such as Chicago’s handgun
ban – and could also possibly ban regulations that place substantial restrictions or costs on handgun
ownership. We find evidence in support of four conclusions: The effect of Heller may be to increase
the prevalence of handgun ownership in jurisdictions that currently have restrictive laws; Given the
best evidence on the consequences of increased prevalence of gun ownership, these jurisdictions will
experience a greater burden of crime due to more lethal violence and an increased burglary rate; Nonetheless,
a regime with greater scope for gun rights is not necessarily inferior – whether restrictive regulations
would pass a cost benefit test may depend on whether we accept the Heller viewpoint that there is
a legal entitlement to possess a handgun; In any event, the core right defined by Heller leaves room
for some regulation that would reduce the negative externalities of gun ownership.

Philip J. Cook
Sanford School of Public Policy
Duke University
Room 215
Durham, NC 27708-0245
and NBER
pcook@duke.edu
Jens Ludwig
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jludwig@uchicago.edu

Adam Samaha
University of Chicago
Law School
asamaha@uchicago.edu

A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right
of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed. (Second Amendment to the
U.S. Constitution)
And whatever else [the Amendment] leaves to future evaluation, it surely elevates
above all other interests the right of law-abiding, responsible citizens to use arms in
defense of hearth and home” (District of Columbia v. Heller, 2008).
1. Introduction
The economic justification for regulating firearms design, ownership or use is the
existence of negative externalities. For many individuals, the freedom to “keep and bear
arms” brings private benefit in the form of the enjoyment of the sporting uses of guns, as
well as a heightened sense of security against intruders and other assailants; there may
also be a public benefit if criminals are deterred by the risk that a victim will defend
himself with lethal force. However, the widespread private ownership of guns comes at
the price of increased availability of guns for criminal use, with a resulting intensification
of criminal violence. The balance between benefit and cost differs widely across states,
and in fact federal firearm regulations explicitly allow for and support such
heterogeneity: The Gun Control Act of 1968 establishes a minimum standard for firearm
regulation, and provides a framework to insulate the states from each other, so that it is
feasible for some to choose a higher standard than the federal minimum. It is also true
that much of the differentiation in the cost-benefit balance occurs within states, where
residents of large cities tend to suffer relatively high rates of violent crime and have little
interest in gun sports, while the reverse is true in rural areas and small towns. As a result,
some of the most extreme regulations have been adopted by cities rather than states.
Approximately 40 states, out of concern for just that outcome of the local political
process, have adopted preemption laws that reserve at least some gun regulation for the
state legislature.
In the 1990s this regulatory system was challenged in court by a number of cities
where gun crime was imposing great costs. Frustrated by their inability to change gun
regulations through the legislative process, they initiated mass tort actions that were
intended to impose higher standards through the “end around” of expanded liability. The
theories in these suits asserted unsafe and hence defective design, or that the industry was
creating a public nuisance through failure to police the supply chain by which guns were
marketed (and often found their way into dangerous hands). As it turned out, this effort
never got much traction in the courts and has been almost entirely unsuccessful. As the
coup de grace, Congress enacted legislation in 2005 that provides immunity to the
firearms industry in both state and federal courts for damages resulting from criminal
misuse of guns (The Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act).
The American system of firearm regulation is again threatened by litigation, but
now the threat comes from the opposite direction. In June 2008 the U.S. Supreme Court
struck down the District of Columbia’s handgun ban (D.C. v. Heller, 118 S.Ct. 2783),
recognizing for the first time an individual constitutional right to own a gun. While the

-1-

immediate effect of this opinion is only to invalidate an unusually stringent regulation in
a city that is also an enclave of the federal government, the domain of this new right has
not yet been clearly defined. It will be subject to numerous tests in litigation during the
years to come. Existing regulations governing firearms commerce and possession will be
challenged by affected parties claiming they violate the new right that the majority of the
Supreme Court has discovered in the Second Amendment. Litigation will seek to curtail,
rather than extend, restrictions on the gun commerce, but this new scenario is once again
an end-around the political process.
The “core right” established by the Heller decision is the right to keep an operable
handgun in the home for self-defense purposes. If the Supreme Court extends this right
to cover state and local jurisdictions through the Fourteenth Amendment, the result of this
new litigation against regulation is likely to include the elimination of the most stringent
existing regulations – such as Chicago’s handgun ban – and could also possibly ban
regulations that place substantial restrictions or costs on handgun ownership.
Our analysis is necessarily speculative, but we find evidence in support of four
conclusions:
 The effect of Heller may be to increase the prevalence of handgun
ownership in jurisdictions that currently have restrictive laws;
 Given the best evidence on the consequences of increased prevalence of
gun ownership, we predict that these jurisdictions will experience a greater
burden of crime due to more lethal violence and an increased burglary
rate;
 Nonetheless, a regime with greater scope for gun rights is not necessarily
inferior – whether the restrictive regulations in places like Chicago, San
Francisco, and New York City would pass a cost benefit test may depend
on whether we accept the Heller viewpoint that there is a legal entitlement
to possess a handgun;
 In any event, the core right defined by Heller leaves room for some
regulation that would reduce the negative externalities of gun ownership.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section we
characterize private gun ownership and uses, together with the existing system of firearm
regulations in the U.S. Section 3 discusses the initial wave of tort litigation against the
gun industry that arose during the 1990s, while Section 4 discusses the recent Heller
decision and what it may, or may not, imply for existing firearm regulations at the
federal, state, and local levels. Section 5 reviews what is at stake in the litigation against
regulation, and provides an analysis from the welfare-economics perspective. Section 6
concludes.
2. Guns, gun violence, and gun regulation in America1
Litigation in this area is motivated by concerns that existing regulations either go
too far or do not go far enough. Assessing these claims requires some understanding of
1

This section draws in part on material from Cook and Ludwig (2006).

-2-

the existing regulatory system. In what follows we first review what is known about guns
and gun violence in America as a backdrop to discussing existing gun regulations.
A. Gun ownership and transactions
America has 200−300 million firearms in private circulation.2 While there are
enough guns for every adult to have one, in fact, gun ownership is concentrated in a
minority of households. Survey data suggests that about 40% of males, 10% of females,
and one-third of all households have one or more guns. Most people who own one gun
own many. The most detailed national survey on the subject (the National Firearms
Survey) found that gun-owning households average 5.2 guns in 2004, up substantially
from the 1970s (Hepburn et al. 2007). The alternative to survey data are the
administrative data on manufacturing and net imports, but these provide no guidance as
to the rate of disposal of existing guns through breakage, confiscation, and off-the-books
imports and exports.
One addition for many gun-owning households has been a handgun. The
significance of this trend toward increased handgun ownership lies in the fact that while
rifles and shotguns are acquired primarily for sporting purposes, handguns are primarily
intended for use against people, either in crime or self-defense. The increase in handgun
prevalence corresponds to a large increase in the relative importance of handguns in retail
sales: In 2007, ATF reported that handguns represented nearly 42 percent of new firearms
manufactured in the United States.3 (Just 23 percent of manufactures were handguns
during the first half of the Twentieth Century (ATF 2000a).
The prevalence of gun ownership differs widely across regions, states, and
localities, and across different demographic groups. For example, while 10% of Boston
households own a gun, 50% of Phoenix households own one. Residents of rural areas
and small towns are far more likely to own a gun than residents of large cities, in part
because of the importance of hunting and sport shooting. For the same reason gun
2

This number can be estimated through two sources of data, from federal tax records on sales and from a
survey. First, the number of new guns added each year is known from data kept by the federal government
on manufactures, imports, and exports. The annual count of net additions can be cumulated over, say, the
last century, with some assumption about the rate of removal through such mechanisms as off-the-books
exports, breakage, and police confiscation (Cook, 1991; Kleck, 1997). The alternative basis for estimating
the stock is the one-time National Survey of the Personal Ownership of Firearms (NSPOF), conducted in
1994; this is the only survey that attempted to determine the number of guns in private hands. (A number of
surveys, including the General Social Survey, provide an estimate of the prevalence of gun ownership
among individuals and households without attempting to determine the average number of guns per gun
owner.) The NSPOF estimate for the number of guns in 1994 was 192 million, a number that is compatible
with the “sales accumulation” method, assuming that just 15 percent of the new guns sold since 1899 had
been thrown out or destroyed (Cook & Ludwig, 1996). Since the survey, the annual rate of net additions to
the gun stock has been about 4−5 million per year (ATF 2001, 2002), or 50−60 million by 2006. Given a
continued removal rate of just one percent, the stock as of 2006 would be around 220 million. Hepburn et
al. (2007) offer a wide range of estimates for the number of guns in circulation based on their 2004 survey
– the answer is substantially higher if based on responses about individual ownership than household
ownership.

3

http://www.atf.gov/firearms/stats/afmer/afmer2007.pdf.
-3-

ownership also tends to be concentrated among middle-aged, middle-income households
(Cook & Ludwig, 1996). These attributes are associated with relatively low involvement
in criminal violence, and it is reasonable to suppose that most guns are in the hands of
people who are unlikely to misuse them. On the other hand, gun owners are more likely
than other adults to have a criminal record (Cook & Ludwig, 1996).
The majority of guns in circulation were obtained by their owners directly from a
federally licensed firearm dealer (FFL). However, the 30 to 40 percent of all gun transfers
that do not involve licensed dealers, the so-called “secondary market” (Cook, Molliconi,
& Cole, 1995), accounts for most guns used in crime (see Wright & Rossi, 1994; Sheley
& Wright, 1995; Cook & Braga, 2001). Despite the prominence of gun shows in current
policy debates, the best available evidence suggests that such shows account for only a
small share of all secondary market sales (Cook & Ludwig, 1996). Another important
source of crime guns is theft  over 500,000 guns are stolen each year (Cook &
Ludwig, 1996; Kleck 1997).
The volume of gun transactions is impressively large, as indicated by the number
of background checks submitted by licensed gun dealers. In 2008 there were 9.9 million
checks, and since 1994 (when they were first required nationwide) there have been 97
million (http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/html/bcft/2008/bcft08st.htm). Note that there
is not a one-to-one correspondence between checks and sales, since a single transaction
can involve several guns. (It is also true that about 1.5 % of background checks are
denied.) Further, a large percentage of transactions do not involve a licensed dealer, as
noted above, and hence are not subjected to a background check or included in the above
statistics.
The relatively active and open firearms market in the United States provides a
source of arms to criminals.4 and also to traffickers who supply weapons to gangs in
Canada and Mexico, where gun transactions and possess are more tightly regulated
(Cook, Cukier and Krause 2009).
B. Gun Violence
A great many Americans die by gunfire. The gun-death counts from suicide,
homicide, and accident have totaled over 28,000 for every year from 1972 to 2006. In
2006, there were approximately 30,900 firearms deaths, a rate of 10.2 per 100,000 U.S.
residents. All but 862 were either suicides or homicides. While homicides make the
headlines, there were actually 4,100 more gun suicides than homicides. The remainder
were classified as accidents, legal interventions, or unknown
(http://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/mortrate.html). Various points of reference help
calibrate these numbers. In terms of Americans killed, a year of gun deaths in the United
States is the equivalent of U.S. casualties during the entire Korean War. Another familiar

4

The open market also is exploited by traffickers who supply gangs and violent individuals in Canada and
Mexico (Cook, Cukier, and Krause 2009). These international spillovers have negative consequences for
American interests, both directly and indirectly through our negotiating position with these countries.

-4-

reference is the highway fatality rate, which is about 50 percent higher nationwide that
the firearms death rate.
It is criminal homicide and other criminal uses of guns that cause the greatest
public concern. There are relatively few fatal gun accidents, and suicide seems more a
private concern than a public risk. Fortunately the homicide rate (both gun and non-gun)
has been dropping rapidly in recent years, but from twentieth century highs in 1980 and
1991 of over 10 per 100,000. The rate was just 6.2 in 2006. Nearly70 percent of
homicides are committed with guns, mostly (80 percent) handguns.
Homicide is not a democratic crime. Both victims and perpetrators are vastly
disproportionately male, black or Hispanic, and quite young. With respect to the victims,
homicide is the leading cause of death for minority youths. The gun homicide rate in2006
for Hispanic men ages 18 to 29 was five times the rate for non-Hispanic white men of the
same age; the gun homicide rate for black men 18 to 29 was 109 per 100,000, 18 times
the rate for white males in that age group . (Most male victims in the high-risk category
are killed by people of the same race, sex, and age group (Cook and Laub 1998).) About
85 percent of the homicide victims in this group were killed with firearms. The disparity
between the demography of gun sports and of gun crime is telling: sportsmen are
disproportionately older white males from small towns and rural areas, while the criminal
misuse of guns is concentrated among young urban males, especially minorities.
The costs of gun violence to society are more evenly distributed across the
population than victimization statistics would suggest. The threat of being shot causes
private citizens and public institutions to undertake a variety of costly measures to reduce
this risk, and all of us must live with the anxiety caused by the lingering chance that we
or a loved one could become a victim. As a result, the threat of gun violence is in some
neighborhoods an important disamenity that depresses property values and puts a drag on
economic development. Gun violence, then, is a multifaceted problem that has notable
effects on public health, crime, and living standards.
While quantifying the magnitude of these social costs is difficult, one contingentvaluation (CV) survey estimate found that the costs of gun violence were on the order of
$100 billion in 1995 (Cook & Ludwig, 2000). Most ($80 billion) of these costs come
from crime-related gun violence. Dividing by the annual number of crime-related gunshot
wounds, including homicides, implies a social cost per crime-related gun injury of around
$1 million (Ludwig & Cook, 2001).5
5

Note that this estimate is intended to capture the costs of gun misuse and so ignores the benefits to society
from widespread gun ownership, in the same way that studies of the social costs of automobile accidents
ignore the benefits from driving. The figure comes, in part, from CV responses about what people say they
would pay to reduce crime-related gun violence by 30%. One potential concern is that these estimates
assume that societal willingness to pay to reduce gun violence is linear with the proportion of gun violence
eliminated, which may not be the case. And in practice there remains some uncertainty about the reliability
of the CV measurement technology. In any case, most of the estimated costs of gun violence to the U.S.
appear to come from crime, since suicide seems more like a private concern, and the estimated costs of gun
crime by Cook and Ludwig (2000) fits comfortably next to more recent CV estimates for the social costs of
crime more generally (Cohen, Rust, Steen, & Tidd, 2004).

-5-

C. Self-Defense uses
The same features of guns that make them valuable to criminals may also make
guns useful in self-defense. Just how often guns are used in defense against criminal
attack has been hotly debated, and remains unclear. Estimates from the National Crime
Victimization Survey (NCVS), a large government-sponsored in-person survey that is
generally considered the most reliable source of information on predatory crime, suggest
that guns are used in defense against criminal predation around 100,000 times per year
(Cook 1991). In contrast are the results of several smaller one-time telephone surveys,
which provide a basis for asserting that there are millions of defensive gun uses per year
(Kleck & Gertz, 1995).
Why do these estimates for the number of defensive gun uses each year differ by
more than an order of magnitude? One explanation is that the NCVS only asks questions
about defensive gun use to those who report a victimization attempt, while the phone
surveys ask such questions of every respondent. As a result the scope for “false positives”
will be much greater with the phone surveys compared to the NCVS (Cook, Ludwig, &
Hemenway, 1997; Hemenway, 1997a,b). Moreover, as an expert panel of the National
Academy of Sciences concluded, “fundamental problems in defining what is meant by
defensive gun use may be a primary impediment to accurate measurement” (Wellford,
Pepper, & Petrie, 2005, p. 103; see also McDowall, Loftin, & Presser, 2000). When
respondents who report a defensive gun use are asked to describe the sequence of events,
many of the cases turn out to have involved something far less threatening than one might
suppose (Hemenway, 2004).
Whatever the actual number of defensive gun uses, the mere threat of
encountering an armed victim may exert a deterrent effect on the behavior of criminals. A
growing body of research within criminology and economics supports the notion that
some criminals are sensitive to the threat of punishment (Cook, 1980; Nagin, 1998;
Levitt, 2001). It is therefore not surprising that the threat of armed victim response may
also figure in criminal decisions: Around 40 percent of prisoners in one survey indicated
that they had decided against committing a crime at least once because they feared that
the potential victim was carrying a gun (Wright & Rossi, 1994). Whether that type of
consideration actually affects crime rates is another matter, to which we return below.
Whether or not it enhance objective security, millions of households choose to
keep a gun for self-defense. Many more keep guns for sporting purposeshunting, target
shooting, and collecting. The goal of gun policy in the U.S. has been to preserve these
traditional uses of guns for most of the adult population, while reducing access and use
by the highest-risk groups. Whether the current system achieves the proper balance
between preserving access and preventing misuse remains, of course, the subject of
considerable debate.

-6-

D. Gun regulations
To see what may be at risk with the new interpretation of the Second Amendment,
it is useful to review current regulations. While far less stringent that those in other
wealthy nations (Hemenway 2004), most aspects of firearms commerce and possession
are subject to federal and state regulations.
The primary objective of federal law in regulating guns is to insulate the states
from one another, so that the stringent regulations on firearms commerce adopted in some
states are not undercut by the relatively lax regulation in other states (Zimring, 1975).
The citizens of rural Montana understandably favor a more permissive system than those
living in Chicago, and both can be accommodated if transfers between them are
effectively limited. The Gun Control Act of 1968 established the framework for the
current system of controls on gun transfers. All shipments of firearms (including mailorder sales) are limited to federally licensed dealers who are required to obey applicable
state and local ordinances, and to observe certain restrictions on sales of guns to out-ofstate residents.6
Federal law also seeks to establish a minimum set of restrictions on acquisition
and possession of guns. The Gun Control Act specifies several categories of people who
are denied the right to receive or possess a gun, including illegal aliens, convicted felons
and those under indictment, people ever convicted of an act of domestic violence, users
of illicit drugs, and those who have at some time been involuntarily committed to a
mental institution. Federally licensed dealers may not sell handguns to people younger
than twenty-one, or long guns to those younger than eighteen. And dealers are required to
ask for identification from all would-be buyers, have them sign a form indicating that
they do not have any of the characteristics (such as a felony conviction) that would place
them in the “proscribed” category, and initiate a criminal-history check. Finally, dealers
are required to keep a record of each completed sale and cooperate with authorities when
they need to access those records for gun-tracing purposes (Vernick and Teret, 2000;
LCAV 2009). On the other hand, sales of guns by people not in the business are not
subject to federal regulation; the seller, whether at a gun show or elsewhere, may transfer
a gun without keeping a record of sale or doing any sort of background check on the
buyer. This “private sale” loophole is more like a gaping barn door for the used-gun
market.
In addition to these federal requirements, states have adopted significant
restrictions on commerce, possession, and use of firearms. Eleven states require that
handgun buyers obtain a permit or license before taking possession of a handgun, a
process that typically entails payment of a fee and some waiting period (LCAV 2009).
All but a few such transfer-control systems are "permissive," in the sense that most
people are legally entitled to obtain a gun. In those few jurisdictions, including
Massachusetts and New York City, it is very difficult to obtain a handgun legally, while
6

The McClure-Volkmer Amendment of 1986 eased the restriction on out-of-state purchases of rifles and
shotguns. Such purchases are now legal as long as they comply with the regulations of both the buyer’s
state of residence and the state in which the sale occurs.

-7-

Chicago and Washington, D.C. have prohibited handgun acquisition since 1982 and 1976
respectively. A variety of more modest restrictions on commerce have been enacted as
well: for example, Virginia, Maryland, California and New Jersey have limited dealers to
selling no more than one handgun a month to any one buyer.
Gun design
Federal law also imposes some restrictions on gun design, and in fact some types
of firearms are effectively prohibited. The National Firearms Act of 1934 (NFA) was
intended to eliminate gangster-era firearms, including sawed-off shotguns, hand
grenades, and automatic weapons that are capable of continuous rapid fire with a single
pull of the trigger. The legal device for accomplishing that purpose was a requirement
that all such weapons be registered with the federal government and that transfers be
subject to a tax of $200, which at the time of enactment was confiscatory. While some of
these weapons have remained in legal circulation, the NFA (now amended to ban the
introduction of new weapons of this sort into circulation) appears to have been quite
effective at reducing the use of automatic weapons in crime (Kleck, 1991).
The Gun Control Act of 1968 included a ban on the import of small, cheap
handguns,7 sometimes known as “Saturday Night Specials.” This ban was made
operational through the development of the factoring criteria that assigned points to a gun
model depending on its size and other qualities (Zimring, 1975, Karlson and Hargarten,
1997). Handguns that fail to achieve a minimum score on the factoring criteria, or do not
meet size and safety criteria, cannot be imported. However, it is legal for domestic
manufacturers to assemble guns, often from imported parts, that fail the factoring criteria,
and that market “niche” has been well supplied. One study found that one-third of new
domestically manufactured handgun models did not meet the size or quality requirements
that are applied to imports through the factoring criteria (Hargarten, 2001; see also
Wintemute, 1994).
In 1994 Congress banned the importation and manufacture of certain "assault"
weapons, which is to say military-style semi-automatic firearms. The Crime Control Act
banned 19 such weapons by name, and others were outlawed if they possess some
combination of design features such as a detachable magazine, barrel shroud, or bayonet
mount (Vernick and Teret, 2000, p. 1197). The Act also banned manufacture and import
of magazines that hold more than 10 rounds. Existing assault weapons and large-capacity
magazines were “grandfathered” (Roth and Koper, 1999). In 2004, this assault weapons
ban was allowed to expire.
Federal law leaves unregulated those types of firearms that are not specifically
banned. Firearms and ammunition are excluded from the purview of the Consumer
Product Safety Commission (Vernick and Teret, 2000). There is no federal agency that
has responsibility for reviewing the design of firearms, and no mechanism in place for
7

An important loophole allowed the import of parts of handguns that could not meet the “sporting
purposes” test of the Gun Control Act. This loophole was closed by the McClure-Volkmer Amendment of
1986.

-8-

identifying unsafe models that could lead to a recall and correction (Bonnie, Fulco and
Liverman, 1999). Some states have acted independently on this matter. For example in
2000 the attorney general of Massachusetts announced that firearms would henceforth be
regulated by the same authority available to his department for other consumer products,
and those deemed unacceptable would be taken off the market.8
Massachusetts is unique in asserting broad state authority to regulate gun design
and gun safety. There are a handful of states in which the legislatures have acted to
restrict the permissible design of new guns in a more limited way. The first important
instance of this sort occurred in Maryland, with its ban on Saturday Night Specials. The
Maryland legislature acted in response to a successful law suit against a manufacturer. In
exchange for relieving manufacturers of small, cheap handguns from liability, the
legislature created a process for reviewing handgun designs and specifying which models
would be ruled out due to size and safety concerns. As of 2008 a total of eight states
have some version of a Saturday Night Special ban in place (LCAV 2009). California
has also been active in recent years, instituting among other measures its own ban on
assault weapons and a number of safety requirements for handguns.
Gun possession and use
States and some localities also specify the rules under which guns may be carried
in public. Every state except Vermont and Alaska places some restriction on carrying a
concealed firearm. The trend over the past several decades has been to ease restrictions
on concealed carry, replacing prohibition with a permit system, and easing the
requirements to obtain a permit. Currently, adults who are entitled to possess a handgun
can obtain a permit to carry after paying a fee in most states (LCAV 2009; Lott, 2000).
There has also been some effort to regulate storage. Federal law beginning in
2005 requires that all handguns sold by licensed dealers come equipped with a secure
storage device. Eleven states and DC have laws concerning firearm locking devices. The
Maryland legislature adopted a pioneering requirement, namely that all handguns
manufactured after 2003 and sold in that state be “personalized” in the sense of having a
built-in locking device that requires a key or combination to release. Massachusetts and
the District of Columbia require that all firearms be stored with a lock in place.
Record keeping
The primary purpose of some gun regulations is to assist law enforcement in
solving crimes. In particular, federal law requires that all licensees in the chain of
commerce (manufacturers, distributors, retail dealers) keep records of transfers and make
them available to law enforcement for tracing purposes. For example, if a police
department has confiscated a firearm that may have been used in a crime, they can submit
8

The effect has been to ban “Saturday night specials” and require that handguns sold in Massachusetts
include childproof locks, tamper-proof serial numbers and safety warnings. The gun-safety regulations
affect manufacturers as well as retailers.

-9-

a trace request through the National Tracing Center of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
Firearms, and Explosives (ATF), which will attempt to trace the chain of commerce using
the serial number and other characteristics of the gun. If all goes well, the retail dealer
that first sold the gun will be identified, and will supply information from the form that
the buyer filled out. This system is inefficient and error prone, and even if successful
usually leaves the investigators far short of the information they really want, which is the
identity of the most recent owner of the firearm (Cook and Braga 2001). A more direct
system of national registration has been politically impossible to implement except in the
case of weapons of mass destruction (National Firearms Act).
A few states have registration requirements. Notably, California requires
registration of handgun transactions, even if they occur between private parties. That
requirement complements a new regulation that all semiautomatic pistols sold in the state
after 2010 be designed with a microstamp capability that will print the serial number,
make and model of the gun on the shell casing when the gun is fired. Shell casings are
ejected from pistols and often left at the scene by the shooter, where they can be collected
by investigators and, under the new law, used to initiate a trace even when the gun itself
is not in custody.
Rulemaking vs. legislation
It should be noted that the regulations on gun commerce and possession are
almost entirely the result of legislation rather than a regulatory rulemaking process. The
latter places greater requirements on the decision makers to solicit alternative viewpoints
and consider costs and benefits. Whether the federal courts will consider social costs and
benefits in reviewing Second Amendment cases remains to be seen.
3. Tort litigation against the gun industry
The wave of mass tort litigation against the gun industry that occurred in the
1990s is now largely of historical interest, since it has accomplished very little except to
confirm the political power of pro-gun groups. However, the academic debate over these
lawsuits may usefully inform our evaluation of the new wave of litigation inspired by the
Heller decision.9
The suits against the firearms industry were inspired by and had strong parallels
with the lawsuits so successfully brought by the state attorneys general against the
tobacco industry. The cigarette manufacturers ultimately settled those suits, agreeing to
some restrictions on their marketing practices and to pay the states over $240 billion in
damages over the course of 25 years. One difference is that most of the plaintiffs in the
case of the gun industry were cities rather than states. Another difference is that the
firearms industry is much smaller and more diffuse than the tobacco industry, so that the
financial stakes were much smaller. Indeed, the primary motivation for the plaintiffs was
not to recover financial damages, but rather to force the industry to take greater
responsibility for reducing the amount of damage done by its products.
9

For a more sanguine perspective of what this litigation accomplished, see Rostron (2006).

- 10 -

The first of the local-government lawsuits against the gun industry was filed by
the city of New Orleans on October 30, 1998 (Morial v. Smith and Wesson Corp.), which
asserted, among other things, that the manufacturers have neglected their duty to
incorporate available safety features into the design of their products. The second lawsuit
was filed by Chicago on November 12, 1998 (City of Chicago and Cook County v.
Beretta U.S.A., Corp). Chicago’s case focused on marketing practices, asserting that the
industry had created a “public nuisance” by neglecting to take feasible measures that
would help prevent the illegal sale of its products to Chicago residents or to traffickers
who supply residents (Siebel, 1999, p. 248-9, Vernick and Teret, 1999). Following these
actions by New Orleans and Chicago, thirty other cities and counties filed against the gun
industry, claiming negligence in either its marketing practices or in the design of its
products or both.10
Various theories of negligence were tried (Lytton, 2005a). Some plaintiffs argued
that the gun industry was responsible for negligent marketing practices, which did not do
enough to keep guns out of the hands of prohibited users, or more failures to adequately
supervise retail gun dealers. The gun industry was also charged with “oversupplying”
gun dealers in states with relatively lax gun laws, with the claim that the industry knew
the “extra” guns would wind up in jurisdictions with more restrictive regulations, or
“overpromoting” weapons that only had legitimate military or law enforcement use.
Chicago’s case claimed that the unregulated secondary gun market is a “public nuisance”
for which the gun industry has responsibility, while Cincinnati argued that the gun
industry engaged in deceptive advertising – keeping a gun in the home was argued to
increase the risk of injury to residents, rather than improve safety as the industry claimed.
Most of these arguments did not fare well in court. The New Orleans case was
dismissed by the Louisiana Supreme Court after the state enacted a law barring such
suits. Chicago’s case was dismissed and then appealed.11 As Lytton (2005a, p. 5) notes,
of the city lawsuits the “great majority have been dismissed or abandoned prior to trial,
and of the few favorable jury verdicts obtained by the plaintiffs, all but one have been
overturned on appeal. A handful of claims have been settled prior to trial.”
Then on October 26, 2005, President Bush signed the Protection of Lawful
Commerce in Arms Act (PLCAA), which to a remarkable degree provided immunity to
the firearms industry. This law did preserve the possibility of traditional tort actions
against the industry – for example, injuries that result from defects in design or
manufacture – but the industry is explicitly exempted from liability for injuries resulting
from criminal misuse of its product. While Lytton (2005b) notes that the PLCAA might
itself be subject to a variety of constitutional challenges, efforts to enhance gun regulation
through litigation have failed for the most part. The Heller decision may add an
additional legal barrier to this type of suit (Denning 2006; Kopel and Gardiner 1995).

10
11

See www.vpc.org/litigate.htm
See www.vpc.org/litigate.htm

- 11 -

4. The Heller decision12
For most of our country’s history, the Second Amendment was absent from the
Supreme Court’s agenda. When the Amendment came up, it was ineffectual. In the late
1800s, the Court confirmed that the Amendment could not be used against state
regulation (Presser v. Illinois, 116 U.S. 252, 264-66). And in 1937, United States v.
Miller concluded that the federal government was free to restrict possession of sawed off
shotguns (U.S. v. Miller, 307 U.S. 174, 178). This opinion seemed to connect Second
Amendment rights to state-organized militias, rather than to individual preferences about
gun ownership. The Court sought evidence that a short-barreled shotgun “has some
reasonable relationship to the preservation or efficiency of a well regulated militia.”
Lower federal courts followed this notion and the Amendment was essentially a dead
letter in litigation. Results involving state constitutions were not dramatically different.
State supreme courts invoked state gun rights to invalidate only a few state regulations
after World War II (Winkler 2007, pp. 716-26).
The Second Amendment gained force in other locations, however. The gun rights
movement made the Amendment a central rhetorical element in its organizing efforts.
Many lawmakers were sympathetic. And by the late twentieth century, scholarship on
the Amendment was booming. Some legal academics supported an understanding of
federal gun rights beyond anachronistic state militias (e.g., Levinson 1989; Cottrol &
Diamond 1991; Barnett & Kates 1996; Volokh 1998; see also Tushnet 2007). There
were also judicial rumblings. In 1997, Justice Thomas suggested in a concurrence that
the Amendment might have provided another basis for invalidating the Brady Act’s
mandate that local officials conduct background checks on handgun purchasers (Printz v.
U.S., 521 U.S. 898, 938-39). In 2001, the Fifth Circuit declared that the Second
Amendment included a personal right to keep and bear arms unrelated to militia service,
although the court upheld the regulation at issue (U.S. v. Emerson, 270 F.3d 203, 26061). The Department of Justice then amended its litigation position and endorsed the
Fifth Circuit’s logic (Memorandum from the Attorney General 2001).13
In 2008, the Supreme Court changed its message, too. District of Columbia v.
Heller became the first successful Second Amendment challenge in the Court’s history.
The case involved a police officer who wanted to keep an operable handgun in his home
and to “carry it about his home in that condition only when necessary for self-defense”
(p. 2788 & n.2). But the District is an urban jurisdiction where the gun rights movement
has little traction. One local law prohibited possession of handguns by private citizens
with only narrow exceptions. A second regulation required firearms to be either
unloaded and disassembled or trigger-locked at all times. Exceptions were made for law
enforcement officers, places of business, and otherwise lawful recreational activities, but
the regulation reached people’s homes. A third regulation involved firearms licensing by
12

This section draws from Cook, Ludwig & Samaha (2009).
When Emerson sought review by the Supreme Court, the Solicitor General abandoned the militia-related
view of the Amendment. Brief for the United States (2002), n.3 (accepting, however, “reasonable
restrictions designed to prevent possession by unfit persons or to restrict the possession of types of firearms
that are particularly suited to criminal misuse”).

13

- 12 -

the chief of police. The Heller majority left unaddressed the issue of firearms licensing
(p. 2819), but it concluded that the first two regulations infringed this plaintiff’s right to
have a handgun in his home for self-defense.14
It is quite possible to read the majority opinion for very little. The justices did not
commit themselves to restraining state or local firearms laws under the Fourteenth
Amendment (pp. 2812-13 & n.23). That is where much of the regulatory action takes
place. Furthermore, the plaintiff’s position in Heller was relatively strong. The
regulations under attack were fairly broad, the argument came down to a qualified right
to handgun possession in the home, and the dissenting justices thought the Amendment
not even implicated without a militia connection (pp. 2823, 2847). Even under these
circumstances, the gun rights position narrowly prevailed on a 5-4 vote. Perhaps a
slightly different case would fracture the majority coalition. After all, it does not take
special courage to oppose handgun bans. Opinion polls show large national majorities
opposing such bans. Equally telling, a majority of Senators and House members signed
an amicus brief arguing that the District’s regulations were unconstitutional (Saad 2007
(reporting on Gallup polls); Brief for Amici Curiae 2008).15 One can imagine the 5-4
vote going the other way had the District permitted a law-abiding citizen to store one
handgun in the home, but required handgun training, registration, and a trigger lock at all
times—except when and if self-defense became necessary.
Nevertheless, more significant lessons might be drawn from the decision. Its first
notable feature is the virtual irrelevance of organized militias to the majority’s view of
gun rights. The text of the Second Amendment begins with the preface, “A well
regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, . . . .” Whether or not
this assertion is factually accurate, it could be made important to understanding the words
that follow: “the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed.” But
for the majority, the Amendment’s preface cannot be used to limit or expand the meaning
of the subsequent words (pp. 2792-97 & nn. 3-4). Instead, the militia reference is taken
to indicate the purpose for codifying a pre-existing right of “the people” to keep and bear
arms (pp. 2800-02). Although the Amendment followed a debate over standing armies
and state militias checking centralized tyranny, the majority contended that the codified
right also was valued for self-defense. This self-defense function, not the prerequisites of
a robust citizen militia, defines the scope of the right recognized in Heller.

14

Justice Scalia wrote the majority opinion, which was joined by Chief Justice Roberts and Justices
Kennedy, Thomas, and Alito. The four dissenters joined two opinions: Justice Stevens’ dissent focused on
Miller and the history surrounding the Second Amendment’s adoption (pp. 2823-46), while Justice
Breyer’s dissent rejected the plaintiff’s claims even on the assumption that the Amendment includes a selfdefense purpose (pp. 2847-48). Added together, the three opinions total approximately 50,000 words. Our
discussion simplifies many nuances of the legal arguments.
15
There is a large literature on judicial behavior (Friedman 2005). Some scholars emphasize the role of
formal law and institutional norms, but empirical studies often suggest other factors. For the argument that
justices vote their ideology, see Segal & Spaeth (2002). For an inquiry into strategic behavior, see Epstein
& Knight (1998). The classic view of the Court as sticking close to national governing coalitions is Dahl
(1957).

- 13 -

Fencing off the Amendment’s enforceable right from its militia-oriented preface
is revealing. Some of the implications point toward judicial intervention. Private parties
are now allowed to raise Second Amendment arguments in court without any relationship
to a militia, state-run or otherwise. The content of the right is personal and nonmilitary.
As well, incorporation into the Fourteenth Amendment might seem easier once the right
is separated from any arguable connection to state militias. If the right is not about
federal-state relations, it fits better with the individual rights the Court has been willing to
enforce against state and local governments.16 But another implication involves restraint.
The Court’s majority is not about to enforce a citizen’s right to frighten the United States
Armed Forces with overwhelming firepower. The majority’s portrayal of the Second
Amendment right seems, at most, tangentially related to people protecting themselves
from the risks of centralized tyranny (p. 2817). Instead the majority’s conception of the
right is demilitarized and mainstreamed.
What, then, is the right recognized in Heller? Countless observers are struggling
with this question. To make progress here, however, we can describe Heller’s minimum
plausible content—the core right to which a majority of justices seem committed.
Whenever else it might include, this core right involves self-defense with a typical
handgun in one’s own home. The majority was not interested in a right to carry arms “for
any sort of confrontation” (p. 2799), and declared that “self-defense . . . was the central
component of the right” codified in the Amendment (p. 2801). In attempting to explain
why the District’s handgun ban was defective, the majority asserted that an inherent right
of self-defense has been central to the understanding of the Second Amendment in
American history, that handguns are now commonly chosen by Americans to provide
lawful self-defense, and that “the need for defense of self, family, and property is most
acute” in the home (p. 2817). For similar reasons, the majority immunized the plaintiff’s
handgun from the District’s requirement that firearms in the home be kept inoperable at
all times. If the plaintiff’s handgun could never be made operable in his home, he would
not be able to use it there for “the core lawful purpose” of self-defense (p. 2818). Hence
the majority’s core conception of the right is a law-abiding citizen with a functioning
handgun in his own home for the purpose of defending it—perhaps only at the time of
attack (pp. 2788, 2822). This conception matches the situation of the actual plaintiff in
Heller.
In fact, limits were an important theme in the decision. The justices in the
majority went out of their way to insulate certain forms of gun control not at issue in the
case. They conceded that the Second Amendment right is “not unlimited” (p. 2816), and
offered a list of “presumptively lawful regulatory measures” (p. 2817 & n. 26). To put it
crudely, this non-exhaustive list includes regulation aimed at:
(1) atypical weapons,
(2) abnormal people,
(3) sensitive locations,
(4) sales conditions,
16

On the Court’s selective incorporation of the Bill of Rights, see Chemerinsky (2006), pp. 499-507.

- 14 -

(5) safe storage, and, perhaps,
(6) concealed carry.
Thus the majority sought to protect weapons “typically possessed by law-abiding
citizens” for self-defense in the home (pp. 2815-18), asserting that a limitation to
weapons in common use is consistent with a tradition of restricting “dangerous and
unusual weapons” (p. 2817). Handguns are thereby covered in view of their current
popularity in the market (p. 2818), while the majority strongly suggested that machine
guns, M-16s, and sawed off shotguns are not (pp. 2815, 2817). We do not know the
extent to which regulation may validly influence which weapons become common. But
this kind of limit fits with the majority’s demilitarized vision of the Amendment.
The discussion of other regulation was even more brief: “nothing in our opinion
should be taken to cast doubt on longstanding prohibitions on the possession of firearms
by felons and the mentally ill, or laws forbidding the carrying of firearms in sensitive
places such as schools and government buildings, or laws imposing conditions and
qualifications on the commercial sale of arms” (pp. 2816-17). Later, in distinguishing
founding era regulation of gun powder storage, the majority said that its logic does not
suggest problems with “laws regulating the storage of firearms to prevent accidents” (p.
2820). Finally, the majority observed that most nineteenth-century cases had upheld
prohibitions on concealed weapons (p. 2816).
Nevertheless, Heller has generated much litigation. So far, the lower federal
courts have declined to strike down state or local gun laws based on Heller (Winkler
2009, pp. 1565-66), in part because the Supreme Court has not yet ruled on the
incorporation issue. Among the cases that may find their way to Supreme Court are
challenges to Chicago’s handgun ban and to New York City’s stringent handgun permit
system (Wise 2008). Some defendants are making long-shot objections to the federal
machine gun ban and felon in possession convictions (e.g., U.S. v. Whisnant, No. 3:07CR-32, E.D. Tenn. Sept. 30, 2008). And some jurisdictions are avoiding the costs and
risks of litigation – which include paying the attorneys fees of prevailing plaintiffs (Lewis
& Norman 2001, pp. 442-64) – by repealing firearms regulation without a fight over
incorporation. Chicago suburbs have repealed handgun bans after Heller (Horan 2008).
In early 2009, San Francisco followed this course. It settled a gun rights lawsuit by
agreeing to eliminate a lease provision for public housing tenants that prohibited storage
of firearms and ammunition (Stipulation 2009). The question is how the legal uncertainty
will shake out.
One potentially important issue involves incorporation. If Second Amendment
norms restrain only the federal government and not state or local regulation, the policy
space will be far less influenced by judicial review. The federal government has not been
the principal source of the most stringent gun control measures, and state courts have not
been especially aggressive in state constitutional challenges to such regulation. On the
other hand, if the Supreme Court interprets the Fourteenth Amendment to include a
Second Amendment right, the litigation threat becomes more important.

- 15 -

A fair guess is that the Heller majority is poised to incorporate.17 The majority
reserved the issue while noting that its nineteenth century precedents had not employed
the Court’s more recent approach to incorporation (p. 2813 n.23). In addition, the
majority’s understanding of the right is emphatically personal. This makes it difficult to
resist application against the states with an argument that the Second Amendment was
written to protect the militias of those same states. Moreover, the majority’s discussion
of Reconstruction Era sources indicates concern during that time for gun rights of freed
slaves (pp. 2809-11). And if the question is whether the right is sufficiently
“fundamental” to warrant enforcement against all levels of government, the Heller
opinion intimates an affirmative answer (p. 2798). Finally, the Court would not have to
totally repudiate a key precedent here, Presser v. Illinois. That case involved state
restrictions on unauthorized military organizations parading as such, which is far from
the demilitarized vision of gun rights endorsed in Heller. Still, it has been years since the
Supreme Court seriously confronted an incorporation issue. The question involves high
stakes and deep jurisprudential controversies, it is being litigated now, and the Court is
likely to address it within the next few years.
5. What’s at stake
The immediate effect of Heller is to ensure that most residents of the District of
Columbia will have the legal right to keep a handgun in their home and have it ready to
defend against intruders – a right that they have not had since 1976. Assuming that the
courts extend this new “core” Second Amendment right to state and local jurisdictions,
then handgun bans in Chicago and elsewhere will almost certainly be swept away, quite
possibly along with other highly restrictive policies that stop just short of a ban, such as
handgun regulation in Massachusetts and New York City. The elimination of legal
barriers invites an increase in the prevalence of handgun ownership. Furthermore, it is
possible that regulations that have the effect, if not the intent, of making handguns more
expensive to acquire and possess will be subject to constitutional challenge. Included
here could be such measures as the long-standing federal excise tax on firearms, federal
and state design requirements intended to improve safety, licensing and registration fees
required in some states, and a potential requirement that owners carry liability insurance.
A constitutional limit on such regulations would reduce the effective price of guns in
affected jurisdictions and thus provide a further impetus to handgun ownership.
There has been considerable research on the effects of gun prevalence on crime
and public health. To understand the potential social costs of the Heller decision, we
begin with a review of that evidence, and then discuss its application in the framework of
welfare economics.
A. Effect of gun prevalence on crime and public health
For some people, the ready availability of a firearm provides a sense of security
against intruders, including the nightmare scenario of home invasion by violent criminals.
17

This is written in October. 2009, just as the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to hear the suit against Chicago’s
handgun ban, McDonald vs. Chicago.

- 16 -

That sense of security may be worth a great deal, whether or not it is based on a rational
assessment of the chances that a handgun will be needed for this purpose, or if needed
will actually be successfully deployed. One analysis of National Crime Victimization
Survey data found that guns are sometimes used to defend against home invasions, but
rarely: in only 3% of home invasions was a gun used in self-defense (32,000 instances
per year during the period 1979-1987), despite the fact that about 20% of homes
possessed a handgun (Cook 1991). It is also true that handguns kept in the home are
sometimes used to threaten other family members or to act on a suicidal impulse.
Further, other family members, including adolescents and children, may misappropriate
them and do great harm. Someone deciding whether to keep a handgun in the home thus
faces a situation of competing risks (Graham and Wiener 1995) – without a gun, there is
a risk of being unable to defend against a criminal intrusion, while with a gun, there are
multiple risks of accident and misuse. The magnitudes of these competing risks will
differ widely depending on how the handgun is stored, as well as other factors – such as
the crime rate in the community and household characteristics such as the presence of
children in the home, and whether household members abuse alcohol and drugs, are
inclined to violence, or suffer from depression or other mental illness.
Keeping guns in the home may also generate externalities for the community.
Whether such externalities tend to be positive or negative is not clear a priori. There are
several reasonable mechanisms, which depend in part on how would-be intruders
evaluate potential targets. A burglar who knows that a particular residence has guns in it
may avoid that residence for fear of encountering armed resistance. (Householders who
post signs with a message like “this home is protected by Smith and Wesson” are
counting on that mechanism.) If the burglars target nearby residences instead, then gun
ownership displaces rather than prevents burglary, a negative externality of keeping a gun
in the home. On the other hand, since guns are profitable loot, the incentive to burglars
may go in the other direction; if the gun-owning household is specifically targeted, the
displacement may be a positive externality to gun-less neighbors. In the more likely case
that the burglar does not know which households possess guns, but has an impression of
the likelihood that residents in the neighborhood are armed, then these same two
mechanisms may operate at the neighborhood level rather than the level of the individual
residence. In that case, the decision to keep a gun in the home, if it contributes to
perceived gun prevalence in the neighborhood, will have a positive externality within the
neighborhood (if guns deter burglary) or a negative externality (if guns induce burglary).
Burglars decide not only which neighborhoods and which homes in those
neighborhoods to target, but also how careful to be in avoiding locations where someone
is in the house. Burglaries of occupied dwellings may be safer if there are few guns,
other things (such as alarms, dogs, and the vigilance of neighbors) held equal.
A variety of evidence has been cited in discussions of how gun prevalence affects
residential burglary rates. Interviews with burglars or former burglars provide direct
evidence on the deterrent effect, and also on the inducement to burglary of guns in the
home. International comparisons are offered, usually comparing the percentage of
residential burglaries that are Ahot@ in the United States with one or more other countries

- 17 -

that have lower gun prevalence. And there have been several econometric studies of
these relationships.
Interviews with Burglars Evidence directly relevant for judging the Adeterrence@
and Ainducement@ hypotheses comes from surveys of felons. For example, in one 1982
convenience sample of 1,823 state prisoners, 35 percent of respondents Astrongly agreed@
and 39 percent Aagreed@ that Aone reason burglars avoid houses when people are at home
is that they fear being shot.@ The fear of meeting armed householders also induced some
burglars to carry a gun themselves: Of the respondents who used a gun to commit the
crime for which they were incarcerated, 50 percent reported that the possibility of
encountering an armed victim was Avery important@ in their decision to employ a gun,
while another 12 percent reported that this motivation was Asomewhat important (Wright
and Rossi 1994).@
At the same time guns are of considerable value to burglars, who typically prefer
items that are easy to carry, easily concealed, and have high Apound for pound value
(Shover 1991).” As one St. Louis burglar reported, AA gun is money with a trigger
(Wright and Decker 1994).@ Another respondent in the same study expressed a
preference for working in neighborhoods with high proportions of white residents since
households in these areas are likely to have Athe basics,@ include guns: AWhite people
hunt a lot more so than blacks.@18
Nearly half of the respondents to the prison survey mentioned above report that
they have stolen a gun during their lifetimes; of this group, seventy percent usually steal
guns to sell or trade rather than to keep for themselves.19
International Comparisons Since the prevalence of household gun possession is
substantially higher in the United States than Canada, Britain, and other wealthy nations,
it seems reasonable to test the Adeterrence@ hypothesis by comparing residential burglary
rates and patterns across these nations. As it turns out, relevant data are hard to come by.
The Uniform Crime Reports do not provide a basis for estimating the number of Ahot@
burglaries, nor do the police-recorded data systems of other countries. Relevant surveybased estimates can be generated for the U.S. from the NCVS, but no other country has

18

See Wright and Decker, (1994), p. 90. On the other hand, a burglar interviewed
by Rengert and Wasilchick (1985) said that he shunned burglaries in neighborhoods in
which the residents were of a different race because AYou=ll get shot if you=re caught
there (p. 62).@
19

See Wright and Rossi (1994). The prevalence of gun theft in the Wright and
Rossi convenience sample of prisoners is higher than in the nationally representative
sample of prisoners interviewed as part of the 1991 Survey of Inmates of State
Correctional Facilities, in which only 10 percent of respondents report ever having stolen
a gun.

- 18 -

an annual crime survey of comparable quality.20 There have been occasional crime
surveys in other nations, which suggest that some other countries may have a higher
percentage of residential burglaries involving occupied dwellings than for the United
States. But there are severe comparability problems in the data, such as differences
between the NCVS and the British Crime Survey in how burglaries are coded when it is
not clear whether someone was home at the time of the breakin – that is, the respondent
was not aware of the burglary, but believed in retrospect that he or she had been home at
the time (Cook and Ludwig 2003).
More importantly, even if we had comparable data there would remain the fact
that a variety of potential explanations are plausible for an observed difference in the
percentage of residential burglaries that involve occupied dwellings. For example, when
burglars are arrested the punishment is more certain and severe in the U.S. than in
England and Wales. The difference in penalties provides an alternative explanation for
why American burglars take extra care to avoid contact with victims. American and
British households differ in a variety of other ways as well that are likely to affect the
cost-benefit calculus facing burglars, including substantial differences in the proportion
of households that have dogs or lack men. Without controlling for the other differences
that may be important, attributing the disparity in hot burglary rates to one particular
difference B gun prevalence B is entirely unpersuasive.
Econometric evidence. Cook and Ludwig (2003) analyzed two sorts of data, in
both cases finding strong evidence that gun prevalence tended to induce burglary (on
balance) rather than deter it. While the prevalence of gun ownership cannot be measured
from administrative datasets, and surveys of gun ownership are unusual for subnational
units, it turns out that there is an excellent well-validated proxy for prevalence – the
percentage of suicides involving guns (Azrael, Cook and Miller 2004; Kleck 2004).
Burglary rates can be obtained from the Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) or from the
National Crime Victimization Survey. We analyzed both types of data.
We first utilized a 22-year panel of state-level UCR burglary data, finding that
changes in burglary rates were positively related to lagged changes in the prevalence of
gun ownership (confirming the results of a similar analysis by Duggan, 2001). The gunprevalence elasticity of burglary rates is about 0.4 or 0.5. The lag was introduced in part
to avoid problems of reverse causation. The positive association survived a number of
specification checks. Our second analysis, of NCVS data, is unique in that we had access
to the geo-coded micro-data and could analyze the effect of county-level gun prevalence
on the probability that a household would be burglarized, controlling for its
socioeconomic characteristics and features of its location. Our analysis of data from
330,000 individual household interviews found that an increase in gun prevalence
20

One attempt to generate internationally comparable survey-based results is the
United Nations-sponsored International Crime Survey. This survey includes the United
States, but is far smaller and in other ways inferior to the NCVS. More to the point, it
does not include items that would permit the estimate of a hot burglary rate. For more
details see ict-law.leidenuniv.nl/group/jfcr/www/icvs/Index.htm.

- 19 -

resulted in an increase in the probability of victimization (other things equal) and an
increase in the chance that the respondent reported that guns were stolen as part of the
burglary. (The basic result held up well through a variety of specification checks,
including an instrumental variables analysis.) The likelihood that the home was occupied
at the time of the burglary was not affected by the prevalence of guns.
Violent crime
Firearms are the most lethal of the widely available weapons that are deployed in
assaults, robberies, and self-defense. They are the great equalizer – with a gun, most
anyone can threaten or actually inflict grave injury on another, even someone with greater
skill, strength and determination. With a gun, unlike a knife or club, one individual can
kill another quickly, at a distance, on impulse. The logical and well documented result is
that when a gun is present in an assault or robbery, it is more likely that the victim will
die. In other words, it is not just the intent of the assailant that determines the outcome,
but also the means of attack. That conclusion about “instrumentality” has been
demonstrated in a variety of ways, and is no longer controversial (Zimring 1972, 1968;
Cook 1991; Wells and Horney 2002). Thus widespread gun use in violent crime
intensifies violence, increasing the case-fatality rate. American “exceptionalism” in
violent crime is not that we have so much of it, but that, because of widespread gun
availability and use, it is so much more deadly than in other Western nations (Zimring
and Hawkins 1997).
The likelihood that a gun will be used in crime is closely linked to the general
availability of guns, and especially handguns. In jurisdictions where handgun ownership
is common, the various types of transactions by which youths and criminals become
armed are facilitated. The list of transactions includes thefts from homes and vehicles,
loans to family members and friends, and off-the-books sales. In a high-prevalence area,
then, transactions in the secondary market are subject to less friction and may well be
cheaper than in markets where gun ownership is rare (Cook et al. 2008).
Cook and Ludwig (2006) analyzed the association between gun prevalence and
homicide rates, both for a panel of the 200 largest counties, and a panel of the states. Our
approach was similar to the analysis of UCR burglary rates described above, and found
strong evidence that an increase in gun prevalence has a positive effect on the homicide
rate. A conservative estimate of the prevalence elasticity of homicide is 0.1. A back-ofthe envelop calculation suggests that the annual external cost of keeping a gun in the
home amounts to at least $100 (differing widely according to the amount of violence in
the community). We found that assault and rape were not affected by gun prevalence,
confirming other evidence that gun prevalence has little or no effect on the volume of
violence, but a considerable effect on the intensity of violence, and in particular the death
rate in assault and robbery.

- 20 -

B. Drawing the line in gun rights
In our view, the best evidence, reviewed above, indicates that private ownership
of firearms creates negative externalities, in the form of increased residential burglary
and homicide rates, with no discernible effect on other types of crime.21 On the other
hand, the private benefits of gun ownership, revealed by the choice of a large minority of
people (mostly men) to possess a gun, indicate that the perceived private benefits may
outweigh any private risks and other costs. The exercise of that preference is protected
by Heller, at least to an extent. In future Second Amendment decisions, the Court will
begin to resolve the current uncertainty about what regulations of private ownership and
transactions are acceptable. The Heller opinion states a presumption that a variety of
common regulations are acceptable, but does not establish any principle for evaluating
specific cases.
It is reasonable to suppose that regulations targeted on the negative externalities
of handgun ownership shall be allowed if they do not impose too much of a burden on the
core right of home defense.
The federal regulatory system is intended to limit gun sales by licensed dealers to
adults who are legal residents and who are not disqualified by fact of a felony conviction,
mental illness, conviction for domestic violence, and so forth. If the system were more
successful in limiting access to this group, the problem of gun violence would be greatly
reduced. For example, one study found that 43% of adults arrested for homicide in
Illinois during the 1990s had at least one prior felony conviction, compared with just 4%
of the general public (Cook, Ludwig and Braga 2005). In fact there is a great deal of
leakage of guns from the entitled sector of the population, to the proscribed sector. That
leakage is the result of a variety of transactions, some legal under current laws, some not
– private sales and loans, theft, straw purchases from dealers by qualified people under
contract with a disqualified person, and so forth. An underground market for
redistributing guns exists in some cities (Cook et al. 2008), and gun shows are ubiquitous.
Additional regulations that may help curtail this diversion of guns to the
proscribed sector include those that would place limits on how owners could dispose of
their guns, and create a record of transfers that did occur. For example, all licit transfers
could be channeled through licensed dealers, with the usual requirement that the dealer
conduct a background check of the intended recipient and keep a record of the
transaction. Safe storage requirements could reduce theft (as well as creating a safer
home for children), and owners could be required to report thefts. Straw purchases could
be discouraged by limiting sales to one per month (as three states have done for
handguns). The principle of holding the owner responsible for his gun could be furthered
by requiring liability insurance, and by instituting some version of registration. (Note
that there would be some utility in tracking gun transactions by requiring that dealers
report all sales to a central location, even if the identity of the buyer were not reported but
21

Just to be clear, we are referring here to the externalities associated with prevalence of gun ownership,
rather than the much-debated topic of the consequences of liberal permit laws for gun carrying (Lott 2000;
Donohue 2003).

- 21 -

kept, as it currently is, in the dealer’s records.) Gun shows could be regulated to limit
illicit transactions, as they are in California.
Given that some diversion of guns will occur regardless of the regulations in
place, there are additional measures that could limit criminal misuse by making guns a
liability to criminals. The notion here is that if there were programs in place that had the
effect of ensuring that gun use in robbery or assault increased the chance of arrest or the
severity of punishment, then some violent criminals would substitute other weapons for
guns or desist entirely – with the result that fewer victims would be killed, and fewer
neighborhoods terrorized by gunfire. A case in point is a California requirement,
scheduled for implementation in 2010. The law requires that new pistols be designed to
micro-stamp a serial number on shell casings. Any casings left at the scene of a crime
could then be traced to a specific gun, facilitating the identification of the shooter. Cash
award programs for providing authorities with information on proscribed people who are
involved with guns may also make guns a greater liability.
We do not necessarily endorse any of these regulations, but simply point them
out as among the plausible possibilities for reducing the diversion of guns and of the
incentive to misuse guns, and thereby reduce the negative externality of private
ownership. None of these place much burden on the individual who wishes to keep a
handgun for defense of the home, and hence all are in the spirit of the Heller-defined core
right. Note that if the Court had chosen to develop the Second Amendment right as
defense against government tyranny, rather than against crime, then regulations of this
sort might be challenged as providing government authorities the means to confiscate
guns. But the concern for tyranny, which many commentators have found reflected in
the Second Amendment’s text, did not figure in the decision of the Heller majority.
C. Heller meets Coase
Despite the increase in social cost of gun violence that we anticipate may follow
from Heller litigation, this new regime is not necessarily inferior to the status quo. The
freedom to keep a handgun has value. In fact, this value might be greater if the premise
of Heller is accepted – namely, that individuals have a legal entitlement to possess a
handgun. Given Heller, that entitlement is not transferrable at a wholesale level through
ordinary democratic politics, but it is interesting to speculate about the “bargain” that
would result if exchange were allowed.
Imagine that the population consists of two groups, “gun lovers” and “safety
lovers.” The two groups bargain in a Coasian fashion, free of the usual impediments of
scarce information and transactions costs. It is possible that the gun lovers would
relinquish their Heller right – that is, that their willingness to accept payment would in
total be less than the willingness of the safety lovers to pay for a handgun-free
community. We have no basis for predicting without having detailed information about
preferences. What we can say with confidence is that the gun-free bargain is less likely if
there is a legal entitlement to keep a gun, than if the property rights are shifted to
potential victims.

- 22 -

Indeed, one could imagine a quite different legal entitlement, awarded to those
who wished to be free of the threat of gun violence -- as suggested by the first right of the
trilogy “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.” Under this alternative assignment of
rights, the Coasian bargaining would be reversed, and a gun ban would prevail unless the
gun lovers’ willingness to pay for a gun exceeded other residents’ willingness to accept
payment for giving up a gun-free environment.
While the famous Coase “invariance” result suggests that the equilibrium
allocation following costless bargaining will be unaffected by the initial assignment of
property rights, that is not the case here (Hovenkamp 1990). The valuations are
subjective and likely to vary with wealth. In particular, for a gun lover, the willingness to
pay for the right to possess a gun is likely to be a good deal less than the willingness to
accept payment for relinquishing a gun. The same can be said for the valuation of a gunfree community by the safety lovers. Thus the initial entitlement matters, and the safetyrights regime is more likely to produce a ban than a gun-rights regime.
There is some evidence available on the individual valuation of gun violence.
Ludwig and Cook (2001) inserted referendum-type questions on gun violence into a
national survey conducted by NORC, finding that two-thirds of respondents were willing
to pay at least $200 for a 30% reduction in gun violence in their community. Most
interesting for the current purpose is that estimated willingness to pay increased with
household income, despite the fact that those with higher incomes typically face a lower
objective risk of victimization. Based on that and a vast array of related evidence
(Viscusi and Aldy 2003), we believe that safety from gun violence is a normal
commodity, implying that the willingness to accept compensation for a unit increase in
risk will exceed willingness to pay for avoiding a unit increase (Cook and Graham 1977).
We know of no direct evidence on the valuation of the right to possess a handgun, but
casual observation suggests that there is an intense minority of the population that feel
strongly about this right as evidenced by their political behavior – letter writing,
attendance a meetings, financial contributions to candidates and advocacy organizations,
and single-issue voting patterns (Schuman and Presser 1981; Spitzer 1998). It is
plausible that this intensity of preference would be reflected in a very high willingness to
accept payment for giving up gun rights – higher than their income-constrained
willingness to pay.
A numerical example serves to illustrate the conceptual point. Suppose that the
community consists of 20 gun lovers and 80 safety lovers. Under the “gun rights”
scenario, gun lovers would voluntarily give up their guns only if their combined
willingness to accept (WTA) were less than the combined willingness to pay (WTP) of
the safety lovers for a gun-free community. Alternatively, under the “safety rights”
scenario, gun lovers would voluntarily give up their guns unless their combined WTP for
a gun exceeded the combined WTA by the safety lovers to tolerate guns in the
community. As explained about, for gun lovers the WTA to give up the gun (under the
gun rights scenario) is far higher than the WTP to acquire a gun (under the “safety rights”
scenario). For safety lovers the situation is reversed. If under the gun rights scenario, for

- 23 -

example, the 20 gun lovers’ WTA to give up the gun is 1,000, while the 80 safety lovers’
WTP is 200, the ban fails a cost-benefit test against free exercise of the right. But a ban
prevails under the safety rights scenario if (again for the sake of illustration) the gun
lovers’WTP is 300 while the safety lovers’ WTA is 400.

Gun lovers (n=20)
Safety lovers (n=80)
Total surplus for ban over
no ban

Scenario I
Gun rights
WTA = 1000
WTP = 200
-4,000

Scenario II
Safety rights
WTP = 300
WTA = 400
+32,000

In this analysis, then, the Heller ruling may be justified (though this is by no
means how the majority did justify it) on the basis of two linked claims: (1) the Second
Amendment provides a legal entitlement for individuals to keep a handgun in their home
and (2) given that entitlement, it is most likely the case that a ban would not pass a costbenefit test – that is, it would not be possible to compensate the losers from the resulting
gains. If we accept the first claim, then the second becomes plausible, and suggests that
the Heller decision is not obviously inefficient.
The Heller decision overturns regulations put in place by the democratically
elected City Council of the District of Columbia and kept in place for over three
decades.22 While anti-democratic, this decision places the Second Amendment on the
same footing with other Constitutional rights which limit the scope for legislative and
regulatory action, including the rights spelled out in the First Amendment. These rights
are generally not subject to transfer through ordinary politics, which blocks potential
bargains at the community-wide level. Indeed, many people believe that the freedom of
speech must receive some insulation from government regulation in order for ordinary
politics to function well. In the real world, where bargaining in the political or economic
arena is vulnerable to various distortions, perhaps the Supreme Court may reasonably
impose its judgment about the shape of the equilibrium allocation rather than open the
door to a far-from-perfect bargaining process.
While this discussion is entirely speculative, it does suggest an interesting
possibility: that the ban on bans in the Heller decision would be characteristic of the
efficient allocation starting from the award of the entitlement to gun lovers – and quite at
odds with the efficient allocation starting from the alternative entitlement to be free of
gun violence.
Of course, one might believe that the Supreme Court’s interpretation of the
Second Amendment was flawed. One might also believe that other institutions are better
22

For a history of this legislation, see Rostron (2008).

- 24 -

situated to decide which competing group ought to receive legal entitlements regarding
firearms. As we have emphasized, the balance of costs and benefits for gun control is
different for different communities across the United States. But the politics of gun
regulation today is hardly ideal. Many local governments are already unable to regulate
as the majority sees fit given preemption by state law; and gun policy is often the product
of legislative jousting and not careful analysis by experienced agency officials. Nor are
handgun bans obviously efficacious in the large cities where useful data are available.
And so the Court’s rejection of the District of Columbia’s handgun ban might turn out to
be sound policy, depending, in part, on which side is entitled to the initial entitlement.
6. Conclusions
The much-discussed conundrum of gun control in America has been the evident
disparity between majority opinion (which has had strong majorities in favor of an array
of moderate gun control measures) and the actual enactments of Congress and state
legislatures (Goss 2006; Teret et al., 1998). Much has been written about the ability of
the minority in this arena to dominate policy choice, noting that there is a subset of those
who oppose regulations tend to politically mobilized single-issue voters (Schuman and
Presser 1981; Spitzer 1998). The mass tort litigation by the cities can then be interpreted
as an effort to help redress this apparent failure of the political process to represent the
public interest as defined by majority opinion (Lytton 2005a, Cook and Ludwig 2002).
In this essay we consider the reverse possibility, that the Heller decision serves to
correct the failure of the democratic process to give appropriate weight to the minority
interest of D.C. residents in keeping handguns.23 Our argument rests on the reasonable
possibility that the public interest is likely to be closely tied to the initial entitlement. If
D.C. residents are entitled to keep a handgun in the home, then it is conceivable that even
in D.C. the “no ban” allocation would pass a cost-benefit test vis-à-vis the handgun ban
adopted in 1976. The argument is simply that the majority of residents who favor this
ban would not have been willing to pay enough to fully compensate all those residents
who wish to keep a handgun legally. That is, we speculate that there is no potential
bargain that makes the ban Pareto-preferred to no ban, if bargaining begins with an
entitlement to possess. The same conclusion may apply to Chicago, New York City, and
some other jurisdictions where stringent handgun regulations are being litigated.
Note that this conclusion hinges on a particular assignment of rights. An
alternative regime, in which residents are entitled to live free of the threat of handgun
violence, may lead to quite a different conclusion, since it seems unlikely that in the
District of Columbia the gun lovers would be able to compensate those who favored a
handgun-free environment. Of course neither of these entitlements characterizes the
status quo ante-Heller, where the political process sorted things out for better or worse
without an explicit cost-benefit test and with no entitlements either way.

23

Note that while a strong majority of the American public supports moderate gun control, that is not true
for a handgun ban, which a majority opposes (Teret et al. 1998). It is only in particular urban jurisdictions
that a ban receives majority support.

- 25 -

Our other conclusion is that incorporation through the 14th Amendment would
lead to easing of gun restrictions in several jurisdictions in which gun ownership has been
low, and the result is quite likely to be an expansion of gun ownership.24 Based on our
assessment of the literature, an intensification of violence with higher homicide and
suicide rates will follow. The private decision to keep a handgun, however precious,
comes at a cost.

24

We offer this judgment with some uncertainty, simply because the jurisdictions that have stringent
measures tend to have porous borders that make the existing measures hard to enforce. If the Supreme
Court went further and broadened the Second Amendment right so as to ban the special federal excise tax,
for example, that may make more of a difference.

- 26 -

REFERENCES

(ATF) Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms. (2000a). Commerce in
firearms in the United States. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Treasury.
(ATF) Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms. (2000b). ATF regulatory
actions: Report to the secretary on firearms initiatives. Washington, DC: U.S. Department
of the Treasury.
(ATF) Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (2001, 2002). Firearms
commerce in the United States. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Treasury.
Azrael, D., Cook, P. J., & Miller, M. (2004). State and local prevalence of
firearms ownership: Measurement, structure, and trends” Journal of Quantitative
Criminology 20(1), 43-62.
Barnett, Randy E., and Don B. Kates. 1996. “Under Fire: The New Consensus
on the Second Amendment.” Emory Law Journal 45: 1139.
Bonnie, Richard J., Carolyn E. Fulco, and Catharyn T. Liverman, Eds. 1999.
Reducing the Burden of Injury: Advnacing Prevention and Treatment. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press.
Brief for Amici Curiae 55 Members of United States Senate, the President of the
United States Senate, and 250 Members of United States House of Representatives in
Support of Respondent, in District of Columbia v. Heller, 128 S.Ct. 2783 (2008).
supreme.lp.findlaw.com/supreme_court/briefs/07-290/07-290.mer.ami.resp.cong.pdf.
Chemerinsky, Erwin. 2006. Constitutional Law: Principles and Premises, 3d
ed. New York: Aspen Publishers.
Cohen, M. A., Rust, R. T., Steen, S., & Tidd, S. T. (2004). Willingness-to-pay for
crime control programs. Criminology, 42(1), 89–109.
Cook, P. J. (1980). Reducing injury and death rates in robbery. Policy Analysis
6(1), pp. 21–45.
Cook, P. J. (1991). The technology of personal violence. In M. Tonry (Ed.),
Crime and justice: An annual review of research (pp. 1–71). Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Cook, P. J., & Braga, A. A. (2001). Comprehensive firearms tracing: Strategic
and investigative uses of new data on firearms markets. Arizona Law Review, 43(2),
277–309.
Cook, P.J., W. Cukier, and K. Krause 2009. “The Illicit Firearms Trade in North
America” Criminology and Criminal Justice 9(3): 265-286.
Cook, Philip J. and Daniel A. Graham 1977. The Demand for Insurance and Protection:
The Case of Irreplaceable Commodities. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 91(1) Feb: 143156

Cook, P.J., & J. Laub (1998). "The Unprecedented Epidemic in Youth Violence"
in Michael Tonry and Mark H. Moore eds., Youth Violence University of Chicago Press,
1998, 101-138.
Cook, P. J., & Leitzel, J. A. (1996). Perversity, futility, jeopardy: An economic
analysis of the attack on gun control. Law and Contemporary Problems, 59(1), 91–118.
Cook, P. J., & Leitzel, J. A. (2002). “Smart” guns: A technological fix for
regulating the secondary gun market. Contemporary Economic Problems, 20(1), 38–49.

- 27 -

Cook, P. J., & Ludwig, J. (1996). Guns in America: Results of a comprehensive
survey of gun ownership and use. Washington, DC: Police Foundation.
Cook, P. J., & Ludwig, J. (2000). Gun violence: The real costs. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Cook, P. J., & Ludwig, J. (2002). Litigation as regulation: The case of firearms. In
W. K. Viscusi (Ed.), Regulation through litigation. Washington, DC: Brookings
Institution.
Cook, P. J., & Ludwig, J. (2003b). Guns and burglary. In J. Ludwig & P. J. Cook
(Eds.), Evaluating gun policy (pp. 74–120). Washington, DC: Brookings Institution
Press.
Cook, P. J., & Ludwig, J. (2006). The social costs of gun ownership. Journal of
Public Economics, 90(1–2), 379–391.
Cook, P. J., Ludwig, J., & Braga, A. A. (2005). Criminal records of homicide
offenders. Journal of the American Medical Association, 294(5), 598–601.
Cook, P. J., Ludwig, J., & Hemenway, D. (1997). The Gun debate’s new mythical
number: How many defensive gun uses per year? Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management, 16, 463–469.
Cook, P. J., Ludwig, J., Venkatesh, S. A., & Braga, A. A. (2008). Underground
gun markets. Economic Journal.
Cook, P. J., Ludwig, J. & Samaha, A. (2009). Gun Control After Heller: Threats
and Sideshows from a Social Welfare Perspective. UCLA Law Review, 56, 1041–1093.
Cook, P. J., Molliconi, S., & Cole, T. (1995). Regulating gun markets. Journal of
Criminal Law & Criminology, 86, 59–92.
Cottrol, Robert J., and Raymond T. Diamond. 1991. “The Second Amendment:
Toward an Afro-Americanist Reconsideration.” Georgetown Law Journal 80:309.
Dahl, Robert A. 1957. “Decision-Making in a Democracy: The Supreme Court
as a National Policy-Maker.” Journal of Public Law 6:279.
Denning, Brannon P. 2005. Gun litigation and the Constitution. In Timothy D
Lytton (ed) Suing the Gun Industry Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 315-338.
Donohue, John J. III 2003. “The Final Bullet in the Body of the More Guns, Less
Crime Hypothesis,” Criminology & Public Policy 2(3)397-410.
Duggan, Mark (2001). More guns, more crime. Journal of Political Economy,
109(5), 1086–1114.
Epstein, Lee & Jack Knight. 1998. The Choices Justices Make. Washington,
D.C.: Congressional Quarterly, Inc.
Friedman, Barry. 2005. “The Politics of Judicial Review.” Texas Law Review
84: 257.
Goss, Kristin A. 2006. Disarmed: The Missing Movement for Gun Control in
America. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Graham, John D. and Jonathan B. Wiener (eds.) 1995. Risk vs. Risk: Tradeoffs in
Protecting Health and thhe Environment. Cambridge: Harvard University Press
Hargarten, Stephen 2001
Hemenway, D. (1997a). The myth of millions of self-defense gun uses: An
explanation of extreme overestimates. Chance, 10, 6–10.

- 28 -

Hemenway, D. (1997b). Survey research and self-defense gun use: An
explanation of extreme overestimates. Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, 87,
1430–1445.
Hemenway, D. (2004). Private guns, public health. Ann Arbor, MI: University of
Michigan Press.
Hepburn, L. M. Miller, D. Azrael and D. Hemenway. 2007. “The US Gun Stock:
Results from the 2004 National Firearms Survey.” Injury Prevention 13: 15-19.
Horan, Deborah. Aug. 12, 2008. “Evanston latest suburb to repeal handgun ban
in wake of high court ruling.” Chicago Tribune.
www.chicagotribune.com/news/local/chi-gun-ban_13aug13,0,1421061.story.
Hovenkamp, Herbert J. 1990. Marginal Utility and the Coase Theorem. Cornell
Law Review 75, 783.
Karlson, Trudy A. and Stephen W. Hargarten (1997) Reducing Firearms Injury
and Death: A Public Health Sourcebook on Guns, New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press.
Kates, D. B., Jr., & Polsby, D. D. (2000, November). The myth of the “virgin
killer”: Law-abiding persons who kill in fit of rage. Paper presented at the American
Society of Criminology Annual Meeting, San Francisco: American Society of
Criminology.
Kellermann, A. L., Rivara, F. P., Rushforth, N. B., Banton, J. G., Reay, D. T.,
Francisco, J. T., et al. (1993). Gun ownership as a risk factor for homicide in the home.
New England Journal of Medicine, 329, 1084–1091.
Kennedy, D. M., Piehl, A. M., & Braga, A. A. (1996). Youth violence in Boston:
Gun markets, serious youth offenders, and a use-reduction strategy. Law and
Contemporary Problems, 59(1), 147–198.
Kleck, G. (1991). Point blank: Guns and violence in America. New York: Aldine
de Gruyter.
Kleck, G. (1997). Targeting guns: Firearms and their control. New York: Aldine
de Gruyter.
Kleck, G. (2004). Measures of gun ownership levels for macrolevel crime and
violence research. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 41(1), 3–36.
Kleck, G., & Gertz, M. (1995). Armed resistance to crime: The prevalence and
nature of self-defense with a gun. Journal of Criminal Law & Criminology, 86, 150–187.
Kopel, David and Richard Gardiner 1995 The Sullivan Principles: Protecting the
Second Amendment from Civil Abuse. 19 Seton Hall Legislative Journal 737.
Legal Community Against Violence (LCAV) 2009. Regulating Guns in America
An Evaluation and Comparative Analysis of Federal, State and Selected Local Gun Laws
http://www.lcav.org/library/reports_analyses/regulating_guns.asp
Levinson, Sanford. 1989. “The Embarrassing Second Amendment.” Yale Law
Journal 99: 637.
Levitt, S. D. (2001). Deterrence. In J. Q. Wilson & J. Pertersilia (Eds.), Crime:
Public policies for crime control (pp. 435–450). Oakland: Institute for Contemporary
Studies.
Lewis, Harold S. Jr., and Elizabeth Norman. 2001. Civil Rights Law and
Practice. St. Paul, Minn.: West Group.

- 29 -

Lott, J. (2000). More guns, less crime (2nd Ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Lott, J. R., & Mustard, D. B. (1997). Crime, deterrence and right-to-carry
concealed handguns. Journal of Legal Studies, 16(1), 1–68.
Ludwig, J., & Cook, P. J. (2001). The benefits of reducing gun violence: Evidence
from Contingent-Valuation Survey data. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 22(3), 207–
226.
Lytton, Timothy D. (2005a) “Introduction: An overview of lawsuits against the
gun industry.” In T.D. Lytton, Ed. Suing the Gun Industry. Ann Arbor, MI: University
of Michigan Press. pp. 1-35.
Lytton, Timothy D. (2005b) “Afterward: Federal gun industry immunity
legislation.” In T.D. Lytton, Ed. Suing the Gun Industry. Ann Arbor, MI: University of
Michigan Press. pp. 339-354.
McDowall, David, Colin Loftin, and Stanley Presser. 2000. "Measuring Civilian
Defensive Firearm Use: A Methodological Experiment." Journal of Quantitative
Criminology 16:1–19.
McGonigal, M. D., Cole, J., Schwab, C. W., Kauder, D. R., Rotondo, M. F., &
Angood, P. B. (1993). Urban firearm deaths: A five-year perspective. Journal of Trauma,
35(4), 532–536.
Nagin, D. S. (1998). Criminal deterrence research at the outset of the twenty-first
century. In M. Tonry (Ed.), Crime and justice: A review of research, Volume 23 (pp. 1–
42). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rengert, George J. and J. Wasilchick (1985). Suburban Burglary: A Time and A
Place for Everything. Springfield, IL: Charles Thomas.
Rostron, Allen (2006) “Book Review (of Lawyers, Guns & Money). Santa Clara
Law Review, 46(2) 481-511.
Rostron, Allen (2008) “Incrementalism, Comprehensive Rationality, and the
Future of Gun Control” Maryland Law Review 67(3), 511-569.
Roth, Jeffrey A. and Christopher S. Koper. 1999. Impacts of the 1994 Assault
Weapons Ban:
1994-1996. Research-in-Brief. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice.
Saad, Lydia. October 11, 2007. “Shrunken Majority Now Favors Stricter Gun
Laws.” Gallup News Service. http://www.gallup.com/poll/101731/Shrunken-MajorityNow-Favors-Stricter-Gun-Laws.aspx.
Schuman, Howard and Stanley Presser. 1981. The attitude-action connection and
the issue of gun control. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social
Science. 455 May: 40-47.
Segal, Jeffrey A., and Harold J. Spaeth. 2002. The Supreme Court and the
Attitudinal Model Revisited. Cambridge University Press.
Sheley, J.F., & Wright, J.D.(1995). In the line of fire: Youth, guns, and violence
in urban America. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Shover, Neal. 1991. Burglary. In Michael Tonry, ed., Crime and Justice: A
Review of Research Vol 14. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 73-113.
Siebel, Brian J. (1999) “City Lawsuits Against the Gun Industry: A Roadmap for
Reforming Gun Industry Misconduct.” St. Louis University Public Law Review. 18(1):
247-290.

- 30 -

Smith, T.W. (2007) Public Attitudes towards the Regulation of Firearms.
NORC/University of Chicago, March.
Spitzer, Robert J. 1998. The Politics of Gun Control, 2nd ed. New York:
Chatham House.
Stipulation Regarding Settlement and Dismissal of Defendants San Francisco
Housing Authority and Henry Alvarez III Without Prejudice, Doe v. San Francisco
Housing Authority, No. CV-08-03112 TEH (N.D. Cal. Jan. 12, 2009), available at
http://volokh.com/files/sfpublichousingguns.pdf.
Teret, Stephen P., Daniel W. Webster, Jon S. Vernick, Tom W. Smith, Doborah
Leff, Garen J. Wintemute, Philip J. Cook, Darnell F. Hawkins, Arthur L. Kellermann,
Susan B. Sorenson, and Susan DeFrancesco. 1998. Support for new policies to regulate
firearms: results of two national surveys. New England Journal of Medicine 339(12): 17
Sept.: 813-818.
Tushnet, Mark V. 2007. Out of Range: Why the Constitution Can’t End the
Battle Over Guns. New York: Oxford University Press.
Vernick, Jon S. and Stephen P. Teret (1999) "New Courtroom Strategies
Regarding Firearms: Tort Litigation Against Firearm Manufacturers and Constitutional
Challenges to Gun Laws," Houston Law Review, 36(5), 1713-1754.
Vernick, Jan S., & Teret, S. P. (2000). A public health approach to regulating
firearms as consumer products. University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 148(4), 1193–
2111.
Viscusi, W.K. and J.E. Aldy. 2003. The value of a statistical life: A critical
review of market estimates throughout the world. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 27(1):
5-76.
Volokh, Eugene. 1998. “The Commonplace Second Amendment.” New York
University Law Review 73:793.
Wellford, Charles F., Pepper, John V., & Petrie, Carol V. (2005). Firearms and
violence: A critical review. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.
Winkler, Adam. 2007. “Scrutinizing the Second Amendment.” Michigan Law
Review 105: 683.
Winkler, Adam. 2009. “Heller’s Catch-22.” UCLA Law Review 56:1551.
Wintemute, Garen J. (1994) Ring of Fire: The Handgun Makers of Southern
California Sacramento: Violence Prevention Research Program, University of
California, Davis.
Wells, W., & Horney, J. (2002). Weapon effects and individual intent to do harm:
Influences on the escalation of violence. Criminology, 40, 265-296.
Wise, Daniel (2008) Defense Lawyers Fire First Shot in Challenge to State Gun
Law, New York Law Journal, July 16, 2008, at 1.
Wright, Richard and S. Decker (1994), Burglars on the Job: Streetlife and Residential
Break-Ins, Boston: Northeastern University Press.
Wright, J. D., & Rossi, P. H. (1994). Armed and considered dangerous: A survey
of felons and their firearms (Expanded Edition). New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Zimring, F. E. (1968). Is gun control likely to reduce violent killings? University
of Chicago Law Review, 35, 21–37.
Zimring, F. E. (1972). The medium is the message: Firearm calibre as a
determinant of death from assault. Journal of Legal Studies, 1, 97–124.

- 31 -

Zimring, F.E. (1975) Firearms and Federal Law: The Gun Control Act of 1968.
The Journal of Legal Studies, 4(1), January.
Zimring, F. E., & Hawkins, G. (1997). Crime is not the Problem: Lethal violence
in America. New York: Oxford University Press.

- 32 -

