                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE CHANGING SELECTIVITY OF AMERICAN COLLEGES

                                         Caroline M. Hoxby

                                        Working Paper 15446
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15446


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2009




The author thanks David Autor, Christopher Avery, William Bowen, Charles Clotfelter, James Hines,
and Harriet Zuckerman for comments that greatly improved this paper and the larger project on which
it is based. Much of the work and data-gathering for this paper was supported by a generous grant
from the Mellon Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Caroline M. Hoxby. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Changing Selectivity of American Colleges
Caroline M. Hoxby
NBER Working Paper No. 15446
October 2009
JEL No. H75,I2,J24

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper shows that although the top ten percent of colleges are substantially more selective now
than they were 5 decades ago, most colleges are not more selective. Moreover, at least 50 percent
of colleges are substantially less selective now than they were then. This paper demonstrates that competition
for space--the number of students who wish to attend college growing faster than the number of spaces
available--does not explain changing selectivity. The explanation is, instead, that the elasticity of a
student's preference for a college with respect to its proximity to his home has fallen substantially
over time and there has been a corresponding increase in the elasticity of his preference for a college
with respect to its resources and peers. In other words, students used to attend a local college regardless
of their abilities and its characteristics. Now, their choices are driven far less by distance and far more
by a college's resources and student body. It is the consequent re-sorting of students among colleges
that has, at once, caused selectivity to rise in a small number of colleges while simultaneously causing
it to fall in other colleges. I show that the integration of the market for college education has had profound
implications on the peers whom college students experience, the resources invested in their education,
the tuition they pay, and the subsidies they enjoy. An important finding is that, even though tuition
has been rising rapidly at the most selective schools, the deal students get there has arguably improved
greatly. The result is that the "stakes" associated with admission to these colleges are much higher
now than in the past.


Caroline M. Hoxby
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Landau Building, 579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
choxby@stanford.edu
The Changing Selectivity of American Colleges
Caroline M. Hoxby

If one spends time at certain colleges' events, one is likely to hear alumni
exclaim that their college is so selective today that they would not be
admitted were they to reapply. Similarly, one might hear parents worry
that their children are forced into excessive resume polishing because
American colleges are increasingly selective. These alumni and parents
often assume that rising selectivity is a pervasive phenomenon, and they
often also assume that it is caused by colleges' not having expanded
sufficiently to accommodate the ever growing population of U.S. students
with post-secondary ambitions. The latter assumption--that the supply of
college places has been relatively inelastic despite a growing population of
prospective students--would seem to explain rising tuition. Thus, rising
selectivity and rising tuition would seem to be part of the same logical
phenomenon affecting higher education.
    It turns out that the above thinking is a consequence of people
extrapolating from the experience of a small number of colleges such as
members of the Ivy League, Stanford, Duke, and so on. These colleges have
experienced rising selectivity, but their experience turns out to be the
exception rather than the rule. Rising selectivity is by no means a
pervasive phenomenon.         Only the top ten percent of colleges are
substantially more selective now than they were in 1962. Moreover, at least
50 percent of colleges are substantially less selective now than they were in
1962. Typical college-going students in the U.S. should be unconcerned
about rising selectivity. If anything, they should be concerned about falling
selectivity, the phenomenon they will actually experience.
    Although some of the decreasing selectivity of most colleges is due to the
number of places growing faster than the number of college-ready students,
another explanation is also important. This other explanation--moreover--
explains all of the increasing selectivity of the top ten percent of colleges,
where the number of places has grown at approximately the same rate as
(just slightly faster than, in fact) the number of highly qualified students.
What is this "other" explanation? It is that the elasticity of a student's
preference for a college with respect to its proximity to his home has fallen
substantially over time and there has been a corresponding increase in the
elasticity of his preference for a college with respect to its resources and
peers. Put more bluntly, students used to attend a local college regardless
of their abilities and its characteristics. Now, their choices are driven far
less by distance and far more by a college's resources and student body. The



                                      1
change in elasticities has been especially pronounced among students who
are very well qualified for college. It is the consequent re-sorting of
students among colleges that has, at once, caused selectivity to rise in a
small number of colleges while simultaneously causing it to fall in other
colleges.
    What has happened and what is happening to the market for college
education is a species of globalization that has so far manifested itself
mainly in the nationalization of local markets that were largely autarkic as
recently as the end of World War II. (Since the process continues and has
not halted at U.S. borders, "globalization" and "integration" are more apt
terms than "nationalization.") The causes of integration, I will argue, are
great decreases in the costs of information about students and colleges and
substantial decreases in the costs of long-distance communication and
transportation. Falling long-distance costs are routinely cited as causes of
globalization, but the dramatically decreasing costs of information are
somewhat unique to the market for college education.
    The integration of the market for college education has had profound
implications on which students attend which college and, thus, on
selectivity. I show this in the next section of the paper. Integration has
also had profound implications for colleges' resources, tuition, and subsidies
for students. These implications are somewhat more complex, and I trace
them in the later sections of the paper, after reviewing a few models that
help us understand what to expect. For instance, I will show that, even
though tuition has been rising rapidly at the most selective schools, the deal
students get there has arguably improved greatly. The result is that the
"stakes" associated with admission to these colleges are much higher now
than in the past.
    This topic relates to many issues in the economics of higher education.
In this article, I attempt to provide the key evidence and key economic logic.
However, a reader who is curious to see some piece of the puzzle worked out
in greater detail may wish to consult Hoxby, Competitive New World: How
American Colleges Learned to Compete and How They Will Change the
World (forthcoming). This work also contains additional details on the data
and a formal version of some theory that I summarize here. 1


1   Construction of the dataset used for this paper was, in principle,
straightforward but, in practice, required approximately 15 years of work.
Thus, it is not surprising that previous commentators have often relied
upon more anecdotal evidence.          The dataset includes virtually all
quantitative information on colleges' students and finances that is available
for the post World War II period. Every existing college guide from 1940


                                      2
The Changing Selectivity of American Colleges
    Before considering why things changed or what the implications are, let
us look simply at what happened to the selectivity of American colleges.
The hard evidence starts with 1960s because that is when the the SAT® and
ACT® (the college entrance examinations that remain dominant today)
came into widespread use. However, available measures--like students'
grades, class rank, and scores on less ubiquitous exams--suggest that the
1960s were a continuation of dramatic changes that began in the 1950s.
    In the figures that follow, colleges are grouped according to their
selectivity in 1962. The mean SAT score or ACT score of each college (math
and verbal is translated into today's national percentiles of entrance exam
takers. 2 That is, we are looking at absolute exam performance on a stable
metric. Combined math and verbal (or comprehensive ACT) scores are
used. It is important to compute statistics over scores expressed in
percentile points, rather than--say--points on the SAT's 200-800 scale or the
ACT's 1-36 scale. This is a because the distance between points on either
exam does not correspond to a stable difference in percentiles. For instance,
100 points on the SAT between 700 and 800 is a few percentiles but 100
points between 450 and 550 is 33 percentiles! Thus, if we used points rather


onwards was scoured for data, which were generally hand-entered,
combined, and reconciled. Guides include Marsh (1940), College Entrance
Examination Board (1941 to 1975), Brumbaugh (1948), Irwin (1952 and
1956), Hawes (1962 and 1966), Orchard House (1962 to 2005), College
Entrance Examination Board (1962 and 1967), Barron's (1964 and 1968 to
2007), Cass and Birnbaum (1964 to 1971), and Peterson's (1971 to 2000).
College guides now mainly rely on the Common Data Set, based on College
Board (1986 to 2007), which was also used. In addition, annual reports of
the American College Testing Service (Annual Report, ACT High School
Profile Report), the College Entrance Examination Board (Annual Report,
College-Bound Seniors, College-Bound Juniors and Sophomores), and the
National Merit Scholarship Corporation (Annual Report, The Merit
Scholars, Certificate of Merit Winners) were scoured for data. All years of
available administrative survey data from the Higher Education General
Information System (1966 to 1986), the Integrated Postsecondary Education
Data System (2008), and CASPAR (1995 and 2008) were also used. Other
sources are described as they arise.
2   One converts ACT scores into SAT scores using College Entrance
Examination Board (2008a), Dorans (1999), and Dorans and Schneider
(1999). One converts pre-1995 SAT scores into recentered (today's) SAT
scores using College Entrance Examination Board (2008).


                                     3
than percentiles, a dramatically reallocation of students among mid-
selectivity schools that was quite important in percentile terms might be
almost invisible in terms of mean scores. Similarly, much smaller
reallocations of students among high-selectivity schools in percentile terms
would appear to be far more important if measured in points.
    Colleges are assigned to selectivity groups such as the 1st through 5th
percentiles, the 6th through 10th percentiles, the second decile, the third
decile, and so on up to 96th through 98th percentiles, and the 99th
percentile. The ends of the distribution are broken down finely because
they are especially interesting. Once assigned to a group based on its 1962
selectivity, a college stays there. Thus, if the selectivity of a group of
colleges is rising, it is because the (given) set of colleges is becoming more
selective. 3
    Figure 1 shows that, in 1962, the average student enrolled in one of the
most selective 5 percent of colleges had an entrance exam score at the 90th
percentile. The least selective 5 percent of four-year colleges enrolled an
average student who scored at about the 50th percentile. Of course, one
might ask where the rest of college entrance exam takers went. Some did
not go to college at all. Some went to "no-exam colleges" that have never
required students to take entrance exams, even for diagnostic purposes.
Finally, some went to two-year colleges. Using surveys that include
achievement and aptitude tests, I can show that two-year colleges and no-
exam four-year colleges were considerably less selective than the observably
least selective four-year colleges.     Figure 1 shows an estimated line for
two-year colleges, but the samples are small and these estimates are
correspondingly imprecise. 4
    The key fact illustrated by Figure 1 is that the market for college


3  The groups are not weighted by colleges' enrollment.
4  To get estimates for the two-year college line shown in Figure 1, I took
data from Project Talent (Flanagan et al, 2001), the National Longitudinal
Study of the Class of 1972 (National Center for Education Statistics, 1994),
High School and Beyond (National Center for Education Statistics, 1995),
the National Education Longitudinal Study 1988 (National Center for
Education Statistics, 2002), and the Education Longitudinal Study 2002/06
(National Center for Education Statistics, 2007). These surveys test the
achievement of their respondents and record where they enroll in college.
By mapping the achievement tests onto the stable SAT percentile scores, I
obtain estimates of how two-year college students would perform on the
SAT or ACT, were they to take those exams. The estimates, being based on
fairly small samples, are not precise.


                                      4
education became more stratified or, in more colloquial terms, "fanned-out."
In the early 1960s, the most and observably least selective four-year
colleges were about 40 percentiles apart. The trends at the time, if
extrapolated back, suggest that the gap was a much tighter 20 percentiles a
decade previously. This is consistent with the spotty 1950s data that are
available. By 1985, the gap had risen to 66 percentiles. By 2007, the gap
had risen to at least 76 percentiles, more if we consider two-year and no-
exam four-year colleges. Only colleges above the 80th percentile are as
selective as they were in 1962, and only colleges above the 90th percentile
are substantially more selective than they were in 1962. Strikingly, by
2007, the most selective colleges were up against the ceiling of selectivity.
Their average student was scoring at the 98th percentile. This number can
rise to the 99th percentile, but, once it is there, further increases in these
colleges' selectivity (choosing students carefully from within the 99th
percentile on grounds on other than test scores) will not be visible to us.
     Of course, this fanning-out pattern does not capture all the changes in
colleges during this time. For example, certain schools--such as single-sex
colleges and Catholic colleges--lost popularity and became less selective for
essentially exogenous social reasons. But the overall pattern is that
colleges that were the most selective coming out of World War II and the
1950s became more selective in the years that followed. Colleges that were
initially the least selective become less selective.          Between-college
differences in student aptitude rose, within-college differences in aptitude
fell, and each college became more homogeneous. (For evidence on within-
college differences in student aptitude, see Hoxby, 1997 or Hoxby,
forthcoming).
     Although in Figure 1 and figures that follow, colleges are grouped
according to their 1962 selectivity, the figures would look very similar if
colleges had been grouped according to the fixed standard of their
selectivity today. This is because, as is now clear, initially more selective
colleges became more selective and initially less selective colleges became
less selective. Thus, only a small share of colleges' ordinal positions shifted
much between 1962 and 2007, even though their absolute selectivity shifted
substantially.
     Because many people are confused by it, it is worth noting the "dip" in
nearly all college groups' trends lines that appears from the mid 1970s
through the early 1980s in Figure 1. During this period, there was a real,
pronounced negative shift in the entire distribution of U.S. students'
achievement. It was followed by a roughly equivalent rightward shift so
that the distribution is now much the same as it was in 1970. The dip
shows up not just in SAT and ACT scores but in all achievement data:



                                      5
scores on the NAEP, scores on nationally popular standardized tests
(Stanford 9, Iowa Test of Basic Skills, and so on). The dip has been
extensively analyzed and, while it is still not fully explained, analysts have
been able to show that the whole distribution shifted left and back: it was
not merely that marginal students first selected into taking the exams and
then selected out of taking them.
    The point of this digression is that it is best, when interpreting Figure
1, to ignore the dip. This is because the dip does not represent meaningful
changes in the behavior of colleges or students--for instance, a college that
kept admitting students at the same contemporary aptitude percentile
would have seen a dip in absolute scores. Neither the college nor its
students would have perceived this dip as a change in selectivity. (Recall
that Figure 1 shows exam performance in absolute terms.) Since the
distribution of U.S. students' achievement was fully out of the dip by 1990
(that is, the percentiles of the distribution had fully recovered), it may be
helpful to draw a mental line connecting 1972 to 1990 on Figure 1. That
mental line will show the trend without the distracting dip, and the
selectivity trends will be clearer. 5

Falling College Selectivity Overall
     So far, I have emphasized how colleges that were initially very selective
became more selective while colleges that were initially less selective
experienced the opposite trend. Such a focus leads us to think about
students' re-sorting themselves, and I will maintain this focus for the most
of the paper. However, it is important to realize that the stratification we
have seen played out against a background of declining college selectivity
overall. This overall decline was caused by the number of college places
growing faster over time than the population of qualified students.
     Column 1 of Table 1 shows the number of high school graduates in the
U.S., from 1955 to today. This number rose by 131 percent, a substantial
increase. However, column 2 shows that, over the same period, the number
of freshman seats in the U.S. rose by 297 percent. This suggests that the
absolute standard of achievement required of a freshman who successfully
competed for a seat was falling.
     Of course, the standard of achievement required of a freshman could

         5  See National Center for Education Statistics (2005) for evidence
on the percentiles of the math and verbal achievement distributions for a
nationally representative sample of 17 year olds from 1971 to 2004. The dip
is visible, as is the fact that since the dip ended, the distribution has not
changed much for students in the college-going achievement range.


                                      6
have been rising, despite the growth in the number of seats, if achievement
of high school graduates rose fast enough between 1955 and today. We
cannot know exactly how secondary school achievement changed between
1955 and 1970 because there was no national testing. However, beginning
in 1970, the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) has
measured the long-term trend in 12th graders' achievement on a consistent
basis. Students who score Proficient on the NAEP are moderately well
prepared for college. Students who score at the Basic level on the NAEP are
minimally prepared for college--that is, they may have to undergo
remediation even at a non-selective college because their mathematics and
reading comprehension skills are limited. 6
    If we look at the number of freshman seats per moderately-prepared
twelfth grader (column 3) or minimally-prepared twelfth grader (column 4),
we see that the number of seats per prepared student has been rising
steadily. Moreover, since 1975, there has been more than one seat per
minimally prepared student. In short, the achievement standard for
obtaining a freshman seat in the U.S. is minimal and is falling.
    The number of prepared college students does not explain even the
rising selectivity of the most selective colleges (categorized according to
their 1962 selectivity). In 1965, there were 0.47 freshman seats in the most
selective colleges for each student with a verbal SAT score of 700 (pre-1995
scale). 7  In 2007, there were 0.58 freshman seats in the most selective
colleges for each such student. This is because, although the most selective
colleges have not expanded greatly, they have expanded more than enough
to keep up with the modest growth in the number of students scoring in the
very top range.
    In short, re-sorting accounts for more than 100 percent of the observed


6 For descriptions of the NAEP long-term trend achievement levels, see the
"Reading Performance-Level Descriptions" and "Mathematics Performance-
Level Descriptions" sections of National Center for Education Statistics
(2005).
7 I chose a verbal score of 700 on the pre-1995 SAT scale because it is an

absolute level of achievement that cuts off approximately the top 5 percent
of SAT scorers in 1960. The math test has always been considerably less
discriminating in the top end of the score range, so that published
distributions of the math score cannot be used to find the top few percent.
The re-centered (today's) SAT is also fairly non-discriminating at the top
end of the score range. For instance, a score of 700 on the pre-1995 verbal
SAT corresponds to a score of 760 on the recentered SAT. See College
Entrance Examination Board (2008b).


                                     7
increase in selectivity at the most selective colleges. These colleges'
selectivity would fallen slightly had re-sorting not taken place. In contrast,
the decreasing selectivity of most colleges was caused both by re-sorting
(which did not operate in their favor) and the number of seats growing
faster than the number of qualified students.
    The main purpose of this section was to demonstrate the importance of
re-sorting as the explanation for rising selectivity in initially selective
colleges. The competing explanation--the number of places rising too
slowly--turns out to be a non-starter. Also, the reader will also see that
policy makers should take care not to enact policies based on the experience
of a subset of colleges without considering their ramifications for colleges
which have a very different experience. For instance, expanding the
number of seats available in very selective colleges might reverse their
rising selectivity but would likely steepen the decline in other colleges'
selectivity.

The Causes of Changing College Selectivity
    What could have caused students to make such different college choices
that we see the fanning-out of selectivity that we observe? What could have
caused initially selective colleges to become more selective in an
environment where most colleges' selectivity was falling?
    One important explanation for resorting is the increased willingness of
students to attend college far from the homes of their parents. Anything
that decreases the disutility generated by distance may cause students to
match themselves to colleges on other bases, such as the resources or peers
a college offers. Thanks to a combination of technological advances and
increased competition, the cost of communicating and traveling over a long
distance fell tremendously during this time. The cost of a 10-minute cross-
county telephone call in 2007 dollars (converted from Federal
Communications Commission data using the Personal Consumption
Expenditures price index with food and energy excluded) fell from $48.32 in
1960 to $25.91 in 1970, $9.96 in 1980, $3.97 in 1990, and $2.61 by 2005.
Similarly, the costs of long-distance travel as measured by airline revenue
per 100 passenger air miles in 2007 dollars (converted from Federal
Aviation Authority data as before) fell from $42.65 in 1960 to $32.06 in
1970, $28.91 in 1980, $20.75 in 1990, and $13.05 by 2005.
    However, a far more dramatic fall in costs occurred in the cost of
information: colleges' information about students and, to a lesser extent,
students' information about colleges. In 1955, there was no early national
college aptitude test. Students and colleges simply did not know where
students stood in the national distribution of high school graduates'



                                      8
achievement or aptitude. Colleges were highly dependent on feeder high
schools whose standards they understood. Although 23 percent of students
took the SAT in 1955, nearly all of these students took the exam between
April and June of their senior year, too late to change their college-going
plans.
    In 1956, the National Merit Scholarship Qualifying Test (NMSQT),
later renamed the Preliminary SAT or PSAT, was introduced and
administered to 10th graders. This test and its associated scholarships not
only generated dramatic integration in the distribution of U.S. merit aid,
the test also provided information to students and colleges about each
student's achievement, relative to the nation. Amazingly, the test went
from informing 0 percent of future freshmen in 1955 to 60 percent in 1956!
The introduction of the NMSQT also fueled a massive increase in SAT-
taking, so that the number of SAT takers per freshmen seat went from 23
percent to 94 percent in 10 years. See Table 2. (The 94 percent number is a
bit hard to interpret because taking the exam once as a junior and once as a
senior became popular during this period. For several years, the College
Board double-counted such students, but then it stopped doing so. This is
why the series looks non-monotonic when the, in fact, it probably rose
monotonically.) In any case, all the indicators suggest that students were
extremely hungry for information about their achievement.
    On the colleges' side, there was an equal recognition that the cost of
identifying qualified students had plunged. Table 2 shows that the number
of colleges that required the SAT or ACT was a mere 143 in 1955. By 1965,
the number had more than quintupled. The number doubled again between
1965 and 1980, and by 1990 it was 1839 colleges. 8            This number


        8 Table 2 shows indicators of colleges' demanding aptitude

information on distant students and students' demanding the ability to
broadcast their aptitude to distant colleges. Requiring the SAT or ACT is a
sign that a college draws its students from a large number of high schools,
most of which are so unfamiliar that a standardized test score is a better
indicator of achievement than a high school transcript. Similarly, taking
the SAT is an indication that a student wants to attend one or more colleges
that do not have deep familiarity with his high school. That is, it is an
expression of interest in distant colleges.
        A high school transcript contains much more information than a
standardized test score. Unfortunately, the information is relative to a
standard that a college will not understand unless it draws very often from
the high school. Thus, a college with a very local draw can be selective
without requiring the SAT or ACT because it can use high school


                                     9
understates the true demand for entrance exams since even colleges that do
not officially require the SAT or ACT may in fact be reluctant to admit
students who do not provide one of them. Today, the number of colleges
that obtain SAT or ACT scores from the majority of their applicants is about
20 percent larger than the number who require the tests (Annual Survey of
Colleges, 2007). A school might prefer not to require the tests in order to
defuse the anger of critics who believe there are racial or ethnic biases in
the tests.
    Although it is somewhat harder to quantify the decrease in students'
costs of obtaining information about colleges, these costs also fell rapidly
from the 1950s through today. Because my research is highly dependent on
gathering information from college guides, no one could be more aware than
I am of how much easier it was to become informed about colleges in the
1960s (when guides began routinely to include "hard" information on
students' test scores and grades) versus the 1950s; how much easier it was
again in the 1970s (when each guide sought to have nearly universal
coverage) versus the 1960s; how much easier it was again in the 1980s
(when the guides began to gather information in a uniform way) versus the
1970s; and so on. Today, the web contains an incredible volume of
information about colleges, and the sites are set up so that students can
easily find and compare the colleges that match their criteria.
    In addition, the reporting required for financial aid became much more
standardized starting in 1954, when the College Scholarship Service was
founded. Standardization of financial reporting continued through the
1970s, when the modern financial aid form was introduced.               Such
standardization makes it significantly easier for students to apply to
multiple colleges and compare them.
    It is fairly intuitive that the falling costs of distance and information
were the causes of integration, but can one show this? A demonstration
has to be based on timing and which colleges and areas of the country re-
sorted students earlier.        For instance, the colleges that adopted
standardized entrance exams earlier saw earlier increases in the
homogeneity of their students' aptitude and earlier dispersion in the
geography of their students' homes. Similarly, when a state switched policy


information well. Indeed, this is what every selective college did prior to
the integration of the market for college education. In short, Table 2 should
not be read as showing the number of colleges in the U.S. that are selective.
        Similarly, Table 2 should not be read as showing the number of
students in the U.S. interested in college. Many students attend local
colleges without taking the SAT or ACT.


                                     10
so that standardized testing was required of most of its college-going
students, it typically saw a jump in the percentage of students who
attended college outside the state and the region. See Hoxby, 2005.

A Note on Measures of College Selectivity
    The astute reader will now be able to see why I use test scores, rather
than admissions rates, as a measure of colleges' selectivity.          Since
admissions rates are data that are much easier to obtain than test scores
(see footnote 1), the choice is not one that I made lightly.
    A college's admissions rate is, obviously, a function of the number of
students who apply to it. In an environment where students' college choices
are changing--as they have been shown to be changing--the meaning of an
application is shifting and the admissions rate is therefore unreliable as a
measure of selectivity. To give a simple example, suppose that, in the
1950s, each college-going student applied only to a single local college
because his choice was constrained greatly by proximity. Suppose that, in
recent years, each student applied to a "portfolio" of four colleges whose
characteristics spanned those he wanted to consider. In this case, each
college's admissions rate would have fallen four-fold even though some
colleges' selectivity would have actually been rising and other colleges'
selectivity would have actually been falling! This example differs from the
truth only in so far as round numbers were used for simplicity. In 1967, The
American Freshman survey reported that 43 percent of college freshman
had applied to only one college and only 20 percent had applied to four or
more (Pryor et al, 2007). In 2006, the same survey reported that only 18
percent of freshman had applied to only one college and 57 percent had
applied to four or more. (The survey understates the share of students who
apply to only one college because it samples no non-selective colleges and
very few less selective ones.)
    Admissions rates can also fall when selectivity is not rising because
students apply to colleges for which they are not qualified and would never
have been qualified. Suppose that every illiterate person in the U.S.
applied to every college and that they were all summarily rejected. Would
we say that selectivity had increased? Surely not. Rising selectivity means,
by definition, that the threshold (on the basis of aptitude or some other
attribute) has risen. Merely adding unqualified people to the pool does not
change the threshold. To make the scenario less stark and more realistic,
suppose that school counselors now encourage all students to apply to
college, regardless of whether they have prepared themselves or whether
they have a real interest in enrolling. (Counselors might feel that it was
now socially "correct" to say that everyone should attend college even if it



                                    11
would actually be a bad investment for some. Since college is costly, both in
terms of direct and opportunity costs, and since poorly prepared students
usually drop out after having paid some of these costs, college is predictably
a bad investment for some students.) If counselors induce many students to
apply who then realize that they do not want to attend (or--more precisely-
attend the colleges that will admit them since non-selective colleges will
admit anyone with a high school degree or a GED), the admissions rate will
fall even though no college has raised its selectivity.
     In short, it is a logical fallacy that the admissions rate has a necessary
equivalence with or even a monotonic relationship with selectivity. It has
neither and should therefore not be used as an indicator of selectivity.


Modeling the Market for College Education
At this point, we have discussed the causes of college market integration
and seen that a great deal of re-sorting of students took place. But, why
need integration lead to a more stratified sorting, as opposed to some other
form of sorting? Theory is useful not only for answering this question but
for understanding implications of integration that go beyond student
sorting.
     The market for college education is usually modeled as a two-sided
matching problem in which the efficient outcome allocates students to
colleges based on students' ability to benefit from the type and magnitude of
the human capital investment that the college offers. (If we pose the
problem as one for the social planner, the planner maximizes the total
output of society minus the total cost of the inputs invested in students.)
Reducing the cost of distance increases the number of students and colleges
in the match, and is--thereby--likely to increase the efficiency of each match.
Reducing the cost of the information that each side has about the other has
an even greater effect on match efficiency. This is because information
directly increases the likelihood that potential matches are that actually
efficient are known to both the student and college in question.
     Allowing, then, that college market integration is likely to make
matching more efficient, when would we expect more efficient matches to
exhibit the re-sorting we actually see? It turns out that we need to have
some form of complementarity between a student's own ability and a
college's characteristics.
     In Rothschild and White's (1993, 1995) seminal model, students vary on
an ascending scale of aptitude and colleges vary in curricular type. A
college with a higher curricular type employs increasingly expensive
teaching methods that are disproportionately useful to high aptitude



                                      12
students. This disproportionately usefulness is the key complementarity
assumption: more able students can invest in a more expensive type of
college education (faculty, libraries, laboratories, etc.) before their marginal
return to human capital falls to equal their discount rate. The model
generates a student-college matching that is stratified--that is, vertically
differentiated both on student aptitude and on college inputs.
    Alternatively. a vertically differentiated matching can be generated by a
complementarity in peer effects (more able students benefit more from
interacting with high ability peers) or any of several other plausible sources
of complementarity (Epple, Romano, and Seig, 2006; Courant, Resch, and
Sallee, 2008). The key takeaway is that some such complementarity is
produce a stable, stratified outcome. The complementarity guarantees that
(in the absence of credit constraints) the lowest aptitude student admitted
to a college would, if forced to bid against other students to keep his seat,
outbid even the highest aptitude student who was denied admission.
    The aforementioned models assume that there is a single dimension of
aptitude on which students differ. But, of course, there may be multiple
forms of aptitude: some students may have high aptitude in math, others
may have high aptitude in language arts, and so on. To the extent that
students have a similar overall level of aptitude but differ in the form it
takes, the aforementioned models generate horizontally differentiated
matching. (Horizontal differentiation means that colleges specialize in
subjects.     Vertical differentiation means that colleges specialize in
educating students of a specific level of aptitude, a concept that only makes
sense if there is such a thing as general aptitude.) In horizontally
differentiated matching, colleges that specialize in science admit students
based on their science aptitude, colleges that specialize in the humanities
admit students based on their aptitude in the arts, and so on. Although
integration of the college market has increased horizontal differentiation
somewhat, the most obvious effect of integration has been vertical
differentiation of undergraduate education.
    A Rothschild-White type of model implies that high aptitude students
are clustered together in colleges that offer high inputs and that charge
correspondingly high tuition. In fact, the key result of their second paper is
that a frictionless (costless distance and costless information), decentralized
market in which colleges maximize profits would produce the same student-
college matching as a social planner who was maximizing the net output of
the economy. This efficiency result obtains because, in their model, students
are paying for their own education; they have no reason to under- or




                                      13
overinvest; and prices ration colleges effectively. 9 (In the Rothschild-White
model, colleges, though profit-maximizing, always earn zero profits.)
     The aforementioned models do not explain certain features of the
market for college education: institutional tuition subsidies (the positive
difference between the cost of the inputs a student receives and the tuition
he pays), the role of endowments, and the fact that colleges need to ration
their places through admission (not just price).
     To explain these features, Hoxby (forthcoming) extends a Rothchild and
White-type model and makes it intergenerational. In her model, each
college has a "dynasty"--the dynasty being all of the alumni of the college. In
the intergenerational model, each generation of students pays less than the
full cost of their education at the time they attend college. This is the
institutional subsidy. Although students in each generation graduate
having received more inputs that they paid for, they later donate to the
college and fund part of the education of later generations of the dynasty--
just as previous generations did for them. This use of endowments is, in
fact, characteristic of American colleges. Colleges need to admit students
on aptitude--they cannot depend on price as a rationing mechanism--since
the tuition that a student pays when enrolled is not great enough to justify
the investment that the college makes in him. The college needs later gifts
to "close the books" on a cohort, and the later gifts depend on aptitude.
     Interestingly, an intergenerational model with endowments can also
explain why market integration fuels a right skewness of the human capital
investments offered by colleges. In the next section, I trace this and other
implications of integration for colleges' resources, tuition subsidies, and
tuition.
     Before moving ahead, it is worth noting that it is harder to claim an
efficiency result in an intergenerational model with endowments than in
the static Rothschild-White model where student tuition covers the cost of
inputs. This is because we have a solid understanding of how much tuition
students should be willing to pay (we can invoke a standard model of
human capital investment) but only a limited understanding of how many
dollars alumni should be willing to donate. For now, let us set this
efficiency question aside, noting that the intergenerational model predicts
the main financial consequences that we actually observe. We will return to
the question of efficiency at the end of the paper.



9  Of course, there are other reasons why college investments might be
inefficient: failures in the market for financing college education, spillovers
from the college education of some people onto others, and so on.


                                      14
Consequences of the Changing Selectivity of American
Colleges: the Resources Students Experience
The resorting of students among colleges clearly caused high aptitude
students to experience peers who were themselves increasingly of high
aptitude. The reverse is true of students with low college aptitude. In
addition, the resorting of students among colleges substantially increased
the correlation between a student's aptitude and the resources invested in
his college education, regardless of whether those resources are measured
by instructional resources, faculty qualifications, college facilities, or other
indicators.
    Figure 2 shows colleges' real student-oriented resources per student
over time. Colleges are grouped exactly as they were in Figure 1, from most
to least selective in 1962. Student-oriented resources include spending on
instruction, student services, academic support, and operation and
maintenance of facilities.      Student-oriented resources do not include
spending on research, public services, hospitals, or other functions. 10
    Student-oriented resources were initially more similar among low and
high selectivity colleges than they are today. In 1967, the lowest selectivity
schools spent about $3900 per student and the highest selectivity schools
spent about $17,400 per student. Resources per student thereafter fanned
out, with the low selectivity schools' resources eventually reaching about
$12,000 per student and the highest selectivity schools' resources reaching
about $92,000. (Note that 2-year and no-exam four year colleges have much
lower resources per student than the observably least selective four-year
colleges.) Much of the fanning-out occurs because resources per student
develop a notable right skew--that is, they rise faster at institutions that
were initially most selective. Some of the apparent skew is due to the fact
the same percentage growth rate will generate more absolute growth if a
college starts with a higher base. However, the average annual growth rate
of real resources per student was about 7 percent at the least selective
colleges and about 13 percent at the most selective colleges. At the colleges
in between, the growth rate rises monotonically from 7 to 13.
    In Figure 2, I show resources measured in dollars, but I could have
shown figures that displayed very similar patterns for many sub-indices of

10  Some fraction of research and public service expenditures do benefit
students, but--on the other hand--some fraction of administrative and
facilities expenditures do not benefit students. There is no perfect way to
divide expenditures. However, instructional expenditures greatly dominate
student-oriented expenditures, and the figure would look similar if only
they were included.


                                      15
resources, measured in non-monetary metrics: faculty-student ratios, the
percentage of faculty with Ph.D.s, volumes in the library, square feet of
student-oriented buildings (not including hospitals and other such
buildings), and indices of the average faculty member's capacity (authorship
of highly used textbooks, highly cited research, awards, and so on). All such
resource indices fan out and develop a right skew.
    Students' re-sorting themselves led to substantial increases in the
aptitude-resource correlation for two reasons. First, because, at the
beginning of the period of rapid integration, more selective colleges had
greater resources per student, resorting led mechanically to an increased
aptitude-resource correlation.       Second, colleges' resources changed
endogenously with their student bodies.
    The mechanical effect (resorting of students, holding colleges' resources
fixed) accounts for only about a quarter of the increase in the correlation
between a student's measured aptitude and the resources devoted to his
college education. The correlation between average aptitude (the absolute
value of math and verbal SAT scores) and resources per student rose from
0.14 in 1967 to 0.57 in 2007. About a quarter of this change in correlation is
due purely to resorting.
    Thus, the endogenous effect (colleges' resources depend on their student
bodies) accounts for three-quarters of the increase in the aptitude-resource
correlation. Theory predicts that dependence occurs for several reasons.
First, if higher aptitude students can earn the market rate of return on a
larger human capital investment, then colleges that were initially selective
will have found that their students, as they increased in aptitude, will have
demanded (and been willing to pay for) better qualified faculty, better
facilities, and otherwise improved quality of instruction. Second, when
higher aptitude students make human capital investments, their returns
are greater in absolute terms. Thus, if they donate some share of their
returns to their colleges, their donations as alumni will be larger and will
buy more resources for the next generation of students. Thus, higher
aptitude students will benefit from greater gifts and will thus be able to
finance larger investments in their human capital than they could probably
finance on their own (with family money, loans, and so on). Third (and this
is outside the models discussed above), external donors' dollars may flow
toward institutions that enroll high aptitude students, most likely because
donors think that their money will be more productive if directed toward an
institution where an agglomeration of high quality faculty are working with
smart students and state-of-the art resources.
    The main take-away from the evidence in this section is that market
integration and the consequent re-matching of students to colleges has



                                     16
generated tremendous differentiation in the size of the human capital
investments that students make. While all four-year colleges offer greater
human capital investments today than they did four decades ago, the
magnitude of the investments for high aptitude students is striking. (Of
course there is not a one-to-one equivalence between expenditures and
human capital investments, but the vast increase in expenditures is due
primarily to increases in instructional spending, not to spending on
amenities such as recreational sports facilities.) Figure 2 shows us why so
many people pay attention to the small number of colleges whose selectivity
has risen over time: the "stakes" associated with being a very high aptitude
student have risen tremendously.
    A few caveats are in order.
    Because investment differentials are increasingly correlated with
students' aptitude, they are less correlated with other characteristics of
students, such as their parental background. This can be shown explicitly
but should be fairly evident because it is an almost automatic side-effect,
given the imperfect correlation between aptitude and parental background.
For instance, Hoxby and Long (1999) show falling correlation between 1960
and today between college investments and parents' income, parents'
education, race, and Hispanic ethnicity.
    When people speak of colleges' having rapidly rising per-student
spending, they may be extrapolating from the most selective schools, whose
annual rate of growth in resources was twice that of the least selective
schools. One might still ask, however, why is per-student spending in less
selective colleges' rising at all--albeit more modestly--when such colleges are
no more selective today and often less selective than in the past? Here,
there are a number of possible answers, but one part of the explanation may
be the rise in the return to college education that appears to have stated in
the 1980s. If the return is rising, the same aptitude student will want to
invest more now than in the past. Another explanation is Baumol's (1967):
college education is a non-traded service so that its cost rises with labor
productivity in traded sectors, with which it must compete for workers.
Baumol's argument has special force in higher education, which depends
heavily on high aptitude, highly educated workers whose returns in traded
sectors have grown especially rapidly over recent decades.

Further Consequences of Changing Selectivity:                  the Amount
Students Pay and Do Not Pay for College
    In the U.S. system of higher education, students (and their families) pay
for only a share of their college education through tuition. The remaining
payments are made by students later in life when, as alumni who earn



                                      17
returns on their human capital, they donate to private colleges and pay
taxes that support public colleges. While the accounting is obviously not
strict--a person can attend one college and later donate to or pay taxes that
support another college--the entire system would collapse if, in the
aggregate, people did not later repay the subsidies they received at the time
they were enrolled. Subsidies are defined as the difference between the
resources that a student experiences when enrolled (shown in the last
section) and the tuition he pays.
    Figure 3 shows the annual subsidy per student, in real terms, for
colleges from 1967 to 2007. Colleges are again grouped by their selectivity
in 1962.
    What strikes the eye in Figure 3 is the tremendous increase in real
subsidies per student for colleges that were in the top three selectivity
groups in 1962. In 1967, colleges with selectivity in the 91st through 95th
percentiles had about the same real subsidies per student as the least
selective colleges. By 2007, these very selective colleges had subsidies of
$14,118, twice as large as those in the least selective colleges. In 1967,
colleges with selectivity in the 96th through 98th percentiles had real
subsidies per student of $2509, only modestly higher than the subsidies in
the least selective colleges. By 2007, these extremely selective colleges had
subsidies that were four times as large as those of the least selective
colleges. Finally, the most selective colleges began with real subsidies that
were about four times those of the least selective colleges and ended with
subsidies about 10 times those of the least selective colleges. It is
interesting to note that the annual real growth rate in subsidies averaged
about 25 percent for all of the top three selectivity groups. They just started
from different bases. Other selectivity groups had annual real growth rates
in subsidies that averaged between 7 and 10 percent.
    Even without seeing the calculations, the reader may be able to discern
that tuition revenue has been falling as a share of student-oriented
resources for the most selective colleges. Figure 4 makes this statement
precise. The same groups of colleges are shown in the figure, but some
groups are left out so that patterns are discernable. (Otherwise, the fairly
similar patterns of colleges in the middling selectivity groups would obscure
everything else.)
    Average tuition paid as a share of student-oriented resources falls for
every selectivity group, but the patterns differ. The least selective colleges
start out with average tuition paid being about 60 percent of resources, and
this statistic vacillates, ending up at about 44 percent. Most of these
colleges are public colleges whose students have modest incomes. Thus,
tuition paid is not a large share of resources because tax dollars make up



                                      18
the difference. Colleges at 51st through 60th percentile of selectivity have
tuition paid fall from 88 percent of resources to about 65 percent of
resources. This is a substantial decrease but students at such colleges (and
other middling selectivity colleges) continue to finance most of their own
investments in human capital through the tuition they pay.
    In contrast, students at the most selective colleges paid tuition equal to
only 46 percent of their human capital investment even in 1967. By 2007,
they were financing only 21 percent of their investment through tuition!
The remaining colleges in the top decile of selectivity have students who
finance more of their human capital investment (45 to 55 percent in 2007)
but who also experienced a massive decrease in tuition paid as a share of
resources, which was 75 to 100 percent in 1967.
    The bottom line is that society is helping nearly all students make
larger human capital investments by allowing them to pay for less up front
and more in the future through donations or taxes. Nevertheless, most
students still finance most of their human capital investment through
tuition. It is only very high aptitude students who pay tuition that covers
only a small share of the resources devoted to their education. The small
share paid by these high aptitude students is particularly striking since the
vast majority attend private colleges that have no ability to enforce
repayment, through donations, of the massive subsidies they offer.
    Are any students getting a windfall? On average and in equilibrium,
the answer is probably no. The very high aptitude students experience
massive subsidies but, on average, they pay them back. However, if a
student whose true aptitude would not earn him admission to a very
selective college can succeed in gaining admission by manipulating the
information on his application, that student will get a windfall. It is no
wonder, then, that students attempt various forms of manipulation. It is
also no wonder that very selective colleges ration their seats on aptitude
(not price) and try to ensure that students report accurate aptitude
information on their applications.
    Although very high aptitude students are not getting a windfall on
average, they are much better off than they were under autarky. In
autarky, they were the captives of their local college and routinely under-
invested in human capital. With integration, they experience massive
investments in their human capital, and it is colleges, not they or their
families, that face most of the risk and difficulty associated with financing
such vast investments. If high aptitude students do not actually earn much
after attending a very selective college, they just do not donate much. It is
up to the college to ensure that the books eventually balance for every
cohort of students.      Put another way, for high aptitude students,



                                     19
globalization represents a great release from market power. As they have
become increasingly footloose, they have gained systemically.

    A note on tuition growth, the subject of much policy debate, is in order.
Studying time trends in tuition really only makes sense if (a) tuition
generally pays for the resources students receive in college and (b) those
resources have remained relatively constant over time. Neither of these
conditions hold. We have seen that the average student pays tuition that
covers only some of the resources he receives. Moreover, the resources he
experiences have grown at a faster rate, in some cases a much faster rate,
than tuition.
    For instance, over the 1967 to 2007 period, the average annual growth
rate of tuition paid was 5 percent at the least selective colleges, but the
growth rate in their resources was 8 percent and the growth rate in their
subsidies was 10 percent. Over the 1967 to 2007 period, the average annual
growth rate of tuition paid was 6 percent at the most selective colleges, but
the growth rate in their resources was 13 percent and the growth rate in
their subsidies was 25 percent!

On the Return to Attending a More Selective College
    All along, the discussion has assumed that students earn more if they
invest in more human capital (for which they expect to have to pay, in one
form or another). Is this the case? Do students actually earn a reasonable
rate of return when they invest in a college with richer resources? This
question is the subject of an empirical literature on the return to attending
a more selective college.
    The most credible studies are based on regression discontinuity or
quasi-experimental designs. See, for instance Hoekstra (forthcoming) and
Saavedra (2008). To illustrate these designs, consider Hoekstra's study of a
state's flagship university that has a sharp admissions cut-off based on
admissions exam scores. Because they are admitted if they apply, students
who are just above the cut-off are much more likely to attend the flagship
university than students who just below the cut-off. The latter group of
students are not admitted (just!) and therefore attend less selective
universities. Hoekstra uses administrative records to follow the earnings of
people just above and just below the sharp cut-off. He finds an earnings
difference that is so high that, even if we assume that the flagship students
will have to pay back 100 percent of the larger subsidy they enjoy in college,
their rate of return is a bit higher than the long-term return on equities. Of
course, such regression discontinuity designs, though highly credible, have
limitations: they produce estimated returns local to the set of people near



                                     20
the admissions cut-off and they cannot be applied to colleges that do not use
sharp cut-offs but instead use holistic assessment for admissions. (Holistic
assessment is the consideration of many student characteristics, including
ones that can only be measured very subjectively, in a fashion that cannot
be readily summarized by a formula. All of the most selective colleges in the
U.S. use holistic assessment.)
    Numerous moderately well-identified studies use straightforward
regressions of earnings on college selectivity with a wide array of controls
for students' high school preparation, aptitude, and parental background.
See, for instance, Brewer et al (1996) or Monks (2000). Black and Smith
(2006) stands out as the most sophisticated analysis in this vein. All of
these studies tend to find rates of return that are around the long-term
return on equities, even if we assume that students pay back 100 percent of
the subsidy they receive. (Few of these studies directly account for what
students pay in tuition and for the subsidies they receive. Thus, the reader
must typically compute the rate of return for himself.) However, economists
worry that such analyses may overestimate the return to attending a more
selective college if they control insufficiently for characteristics, like
motivation, that are hard to observe.
    Finally, Dale and Krueger (2002) compute lower rates of return but
their estimates are based on an identification strategy that is much less
credible. They compare students who gained admission to approximately
the same menu of colleges. They compare the earnings of those who, from
within the same menu, chose a much more selective college and a much less
selective college. However, since at least 90 percent of students who have
the same menu similarly choose the more selective college(s) within it, the
strategy generates estimates that rely entirely on the small share of
students who make what is a very odd choice. These are students who
know that they could choose a much more selective college and who have
already expressed interest in a much more selective college (they applied).
Yet, they choose differently than 9 out of 10 students. Almost certainly,
these odd students are characterized by omitted variables that affect both
their college decision and their later life outcomes.
    The long and the short of it is that studies with moderate to strongly
credible identification strategies suggest that the returns are such that the
typical student is sensible when he applies to selective colleges and when he
enrolls in one of the more selective colleges among those that offer him
admission.

Discussion and Conclusions
   Over the past few decades, the average college has not become more



                                     21
selective: the reverse is true, though not dramatically. The reason that
initially selective colleges are much more selective today is not that they
have failed to expand to absorb greater numbers of extremely high aptitude
students. In fact, they have expanded modestly, keeping up with the
modest growth in the population of such students.
     To understand changing selectivity, we must focus how the market for
college education has re-sorted students among schools as the costs of
distance and information have fallen. The reason that initially selective
colleges are much more selective today is that, in the past, students' choices
were very sensitive to the distance of a college from their home but, today,
students, especially high aptitude students, are far more sensitive to a
college's resources and student body.
     Because colleges' resources have responded endogenously to their
changing student populations, the stakes associated with choosing a college
are greater today than they were four decades ago. For very high aptitude
students, the stakes are much greater. The very large per-student
resources and per-student subsidies at very selective colleges enable such
students to make massive human capital investments if they are admitted.
Of course, these students do, on average, pay back the subsidies so that the
next generation has the same or better opportunities. Nevertheless, a
person who earns a solid rate of return on a massive investment is a person
who is quite affluent.
     Has the integration of the college market made students' human capital
investments more efficient? In a static world in which each student paid in
tuition for the inputs he received in college, the answer would almost
certainly be yes. Integration would have increased efficiency by reducing
the share of highly able students who made only modest investments in
higher education simply because that is what their local college offered.
     Of course, students' investments might be privately inefficient if they
routinely miscalculate their own expected rates of returns, if there are
failures in the capital market for financing higher education, or if they
suffer from behavioral anomalies (like hyperbolic time preferences). Their
investments might also be socially inefficient if one person's college
education generates externalities for others. In other words, we can trot out
all the usual reasons for private and social inefficiencies in education
investments, but it would be such reasons--not integration of the college
market--that would be responsible for the inefficiencies.
     In an intergenerational world with college endowments, we can make
parallel statements about efficiency if alumni and other donors give money
to colleges based on assessments of the rates of return that the students
will earn who are beneficiencies of their donations. For instance, in the



                                     22
interests of efficiency, we would like to see an alumnus stop giving money to
his college if he realized that it was so overendowed that its students were
earning low rates of return on the investment made in them. Similarly, in
the interests of efficiency, we would like to see outside donors move their
gifts toward the colleges that were generating the highest private and/or
social returns on investment. To the extent that alumni and other donors
make gifts without assessing returns, we can generate scenarios in which
some students receive inefficiently large investments in their college
education.


References

American College Testing (ACT) Service. Annual Report. 1968 through
  2008. Iowa City, IA: ACT, 1968 through 2008.

American College Testing (ACT) Service. ACT High School Profile Report:
  The Graduating Class of [various years] National. 1966 through 2008
  editions. Iowa City, IA: ACT, 1966 through 2008.

Barron's. Barron's Profiles of American Colleges. 1964 and 1968 to 2007
   editions. Great Neck and Woodbury, NY: Barron's Educational Series,
   Inc., 1964 and 1968 to 2007.

Baumol, William J. "Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: the Anatomy
   of Urban Crisis," American Economic Review, 57 (1967), pp. 415-426.

Black, Dan A. and Jeffrey A. Smith, "Estimating the Returns to College
   Quality with Multiple Proxies for Quality," Journal of Labor Economics,
   24.3 (2006), pp. 701-728.

Brewer, Dominic J., Eric Raymond Eide, and Ronald G. Ehrenberg, "Does It
   Pay To Attend An Elite Private College? Cross Cohort Evidence on the
   Effects of College Quality on Earnings," NBER Working Paper 5613,
   1996

Brumbaugh, Aaron J. American Colleges and Universities. 1948 edition.
   Washington, DC: American Council on Education, 1948.

Cass, James, and Max Birnbaum. Comparative Guide to American
   Colleges. 1964 through 1971 editions. New York: Harper and Row,



                                     23
   1964 to 1971.

Clotfelter, Charles T. Buying the Best: Cost Escalation in Elite Higher
    Education. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1996.

College Entrance Examination Board. Annual Report. 1946 through 2007
    editions. Princeton, NJ: College Entrance Examination Board, 1946 to
    2007.

College Entrance Examination Board. 2008a. Annual Survey of Colleges.
    1986 through 2007 editions. Electronic data. Princeton, NJ: College
    Entrance Examination Board, 1986 to 2007.

College Entrance Examination Board. 2008b. College-Bound Juniors and
    Sophomores. 2000 to 2008 editions. Princeton, NJ: College Entrance
    Examination Board, 2000 to 2008.

College Entrance Examination Board. College-Bound Seniors. 1971 to 2008
    editions. Princeton, NJ: College Entrance Examination Board, 1971 to
    2008.

College Entrance Examination Board. The College Handbook. 1941 to 1975
    editions. Princeton, NJ: College Entrance Examination Board, 1941 to
    1975.

College Entrance Examination Board. Manual of Freshman Class Profiles.
    1962 and 1967 editions. Princeton, NJ: College Entrance Examination
    Board, 1962 and 1967.

College Entrance Examination Board. On Further Examination: Report of
   the Advisory Panel on the Scholastic Aptitude Test Score Decline and
   Appendices. Princeton, NJ: College Board Publication Orders, 1977.

                                 SAT-ACT Concordance Tables:
College Entrance Examination Board.
   Concordance Study by ACT and the College Board. Webpage:
   http://professionals.collegeboard.com/profdownload/act-sat-concordance-
   tables.pdf Retrieved August 2008.

College Entrance Examination Board. SAT Equivalence Tables: Convert
   Individual and Mean Scores from the Original Scale to the Recentered
   Scale. Webpage: http://professionals.collegeboard.com/data-reports -



                                   24
   research/sat/equivalence-tables. Retrieved August 2008.

Courant, Paul N., Alexandra M. Resch, James M. Sallee. "On the Optimal
   Allocation of Students and Resources in a System of Higher Education,"
   The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy: Vol. 8 : Issue 1
   (Advances), Article 11, 2008.

Dale, Stacy Berg and Alan B. Krueger, "Estimating the Payoff to Attending
   A More Selective College: An Application of Selection on Observables
   and Unobservables," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117.4 (November
   2002), pp. 1491-1527.

Dorans, Neil J., and Dianne Schneider. Concordance Between SAT I and
   ACT Scores for Individual Students. Princeton, NJ: College Entrance
   Examination Board, 1999.

Dorans, Neil J. Correspondences Between ACT and SAT I Scores.
   Princeton, NJ: College Entrance Examination Board, 1999.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. Tuition Rising: Why College Costs So Much.
   Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2000.

Epple, Dennis, Richard Romano, and Holger Sieg. "Admission, Tuition, and
   Financial Aid Policies in the Market for Higher Education,"
   Econometrica, 74.4 (2006), pp. 885–928.

Federal Communications Commission. Monitoring Report. 1990 to 2008
   editions. Washington, DC: Federal Communications Commission, 1990
   to 2008.

Flanagan, John C., David Tiedeman, et al. Project Talent Public Use File
   1960-1976 and College Codes Crosswalk (restricted). Electronic data.
   ICPSR version. Palo Alto, CA: American Institutes for Research
   [producer], 1979. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for
   Political and Social Research [distributor], 2001.

Hawes, Gene R. The New American Guide to Colleges. 1962 and 1966
   editions. New York: Columbia University Press, 1962 and 1966.

Hoekstra, Mark. "The Effect of Attending the Flagship State University on
   Earnings: A Discontinuity-Based Approach," The Review of Economics



                                   25
   and Statistics, forthcoming.

Hoxby, Caroline M.  Competitive New World: How American Colleges
   Learned to Compete and How They are Changing the World. Princeton,
   NJ: Princeton University Press, forthcoming.

Hoxby, Caroline M. "The Changing Market Structure of U.S. Higher
   Education," Harvard University manuscript, 2005.

Hoxby, Caroline M. "How the Changing Market Structure of U.S. Higher
   Education Explains College Tuition," NBER Working Paper 6323, 1997.

Hoxby, Caroline M. and Bridget Terry Long. "Explaining Rising Income
   and Wage Inequality Among the College-Educated," Harvard University
   manuscript, 1999.

Irwin, Mary. American Colleges and Universities. 1952 and 1956 editions.
    Washington, DC: American Council on Education, 1952 and 1956.

Marsh, Clarence S. American Colleges and Universities.       1940 edition.
   New York: Walter de Gruyter, 1940.

Monks, James. "The Returns to Individual and College Characteristics
   Evidence from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth," Economics
   of Education Review, 19.3 (2000), pp. 279-289.

National Center for Education Statistics, Institute for Education Sciences,
   U.S. Department of Education. Digest of Education Statistics. 1995
   through 2007 editions.     Washington, DC:         U.S. Department of
   Education, 1995 to 2007.

National Center for Education Statistics, Institute for Education Sciences,
   U.S. Department of Education. Education Longitudinal Study of
   2002/06: Restricted Use Second Follow-up Data Files, Data File
   Documentation, and Electronic Codebook System. Electronic data.
   Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, 2007.

National Center for Education Statistics, Institute for Education Sciences,
   U.S. Department of Education.        High School and Beyond: 1992
   (Restricted) Data File. Electronic data. Washington, DC: U.S.
   Department of Education, 1995.



                                    26
National Center for Education Statistics, Institute for Education Sciences,
   U.S. Department of Education. Integrated Postsecondary Education
   Data System. Enrollment, Finance, Residence and Migration, and
   Institutional Characteristics files.    1980 and 1984 through 2008
   editions. Electronic data. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
   Education, retrieved August 2008 (except for 2008 data, which were
   retrieved January 2009).

National Center for Education Statistics, Institute for Education Sciences,
   U.S. Department of Education. NAEP 2004 Trends in Academic
   Progress: Three Decades of Student Performance in Reading and
   Mathematics. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, 2005.

National Center for Education Statistics, Institute for Education Sciences,
   U.S. Department of Education. NAEP 2008 Long Term Trend. Online
   electronic data: http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/ltt/. Washington,
   DC: U.S. Department of Education, 2009.

National Center for Education Statistics, Institute for Education Sciences,
   U.S. Department of Education. NELS:88/2000 Restricted Use Data
   Files and Electronic Codebook - Base Year through Fourth Follow-up.
   Electronic data. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, 2002.

National Center for Education Statistics, Institute for Education Sciences,
   U.S. Department of Education. National Longitudinal Study of the
   High School Class of 1972. Electronic data. Washington, DC: U.S.
   Department of Education, 1994.

National Merit Scholarship Corporation.     Annual Report. 1956 through
   2007-08 editions.     Evanston, IL:       National Merit Scholarship
   Corporation, 1956 to 2008.

National Merit Scholarship Corporation. The Merit Scholars of 1956.
   Evanston, IL: National Merit Scholarship Corporation, 1956.

National Merit Scholarship Corporation. Certificate of Merit Winners 1957.
   Evanston, IL: National Merit Scholarship Corporation, 1957.

Orchard House. College Admissions Data Service. 1962 through 2004
   editions (name of annual publication varies slightly). Concord, MA:



                                    27
   Orchard House, 1962 to 2005.

Peterson's Guides. Peterson's Guide to Undergraduate Study. 1971
   through 2000 editions. Princeton, NJ: Peterson's Guides, 1971 to 2000.

Pryor, John, Sylvia Hurtado, Victor B. Saenz, Jose Luis Santos, and
   William S. Korn. The American Freshman: Forty Year Trends. Los
   Angeles: Higher Education Research Institute, UCLA, 2007.

Rothschild, Michael and Lawrence J. White, "The Analytics of the Pricing of
   Higher Education and Other Services in Which the Customers Are
   Inputs, The Journal of Political Economy, 10.3 (1995), pp. 573-586

Rothschild, Michael and Lawrence J. White, "The University in the
   Marketplace:     Some Insights and Some Puzzles," in Charles T.
   Clotfelter, ed. Studies of Supply and Demand in Higher Education.
   Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993.

Saavedra, Juan.     "The Returns to College Quality: a Regression
   Discontinuity Analysis." Harvard University manuscript, 2008.

U.S. Department of Education. Higher Education General Information
   System. Enrollment, Finance Statistics, Student Charges, Residence
   and Migration, and Institutional Characteristics files. 1966 through
   1986 editions. Electronic data. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
   Education, 1966 to 1986 (retrieved on various dates).

U.S. Federal Aviation Agency. FAA Statistical Handbook of Aviation. 1940
   through 2007 editions. Washington, DC: U.S. Federal Aviation Agency.

Winston, Gordon C., "Subsidies, Hierarchy and Peers: The Awkward
   Economics of Higher Education, The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
   13.1 (1999), pp. 13-36.




                                    28
                                                                                    Mean SAT/ACT Percentile Score of Colleges,
                                                                                          by Colleges' Selectivity in 1962
                                                                                                                                      most selective in 1962: 4‐year colleges with
                                                            100                                                                       selectivity in the 99th %ile in 1962
                                                                                                                                      96th‐98th %ile in 1962
Mean SAT or ACT Percentile Score of Colleges in the Group




                                                            90
                                                                                                                                      91st‐95th %ile in 1962

                                                            80                                                                        81st‐90th %ile in 1962


                                                            70                                                                        71st‐80th %ile in 1962

                                                                                                                                      61st‐70th %ile in 1962
                                                            60
                                                                                                                                      51st‐60th %ile in 1962

                                                            50
                                                                                                                                      41st‐50th %ile in 1962

                                                            40                                                                        31st‐40th %ile in 1962

                                                                                                                                      21st‐30th %ile in 1962
                                                            30
                                                                                                                                      11th‐20th %ile in 1962
                                                            20
                                                                                                                                      6th‐10th %ile in 1962

                                                            10                                                                        least selective in 1962: 4‐year colleges with
                                                                                                                                      selectivity in the 1st‐5th %iles in 1962

                                                             0                                                                        2 year colleges (estimated)
                                                              1962   1967   1972   1977   1982     1987   1992   1997   2002   2007


                                                                                                 Year




                                                                                                            Figure 1




                                                                                                                 29
                                                                                  Student‐Oriented Resources Per Student (in $2007)*
                                                                                            by Colleges' Selectivity in 1962
                                                           100000                                                                    most selective in 1962: colleges with selectivity in
                                                                                                                                     the 99th %ile in 1962
                                                                                                                                     96th‐99th %ile in 1962
Student‐Oriented Resources Per Student ($2007), see note




                                                            90000

                                                                                                                                     91st‐95th %ile in 1962
                                                            80000
                                                                                                                                     81st‐90th %ile in 1962

                                                            70000                                                                    71st‐80th %ile in 1962


                                                            60000                                                                    61st‐70th %ile in 1962

                                                                                                                                     51st‐60th %ile in 1962
                                                            50000
                                                                                                                                     41st‐50th %ile in 1962

                                                            40000
                                                                                                                                     31st‐40th %ile in 1962

                                                            30000                                                                    21st‐30th %ile in 1962

                                                                                                                                     11th‐20th %ile in 1962
                                                            20000
                                                                                                                                     6th‐10th %ile in 1962
                                                            10000
                                                                                                                                     least selective in 1962: colleges with selectivity in
                                                                                                                                     the 1st‐5th %iles in 1962
                                                                0
                                                                                                                                     *Student‐ori ented res ources i ncl ude s pendi ng
                                                                    1966   1971   1976   1981   1986   1991     1996   2001   2006   on i ns tructi on, s tudent s ervi ces , a ca demi c
                                                                                                                                     s upport, operati on & mai ntena nce of fa ci l i ti es .
                                                                                                Year                                 NOT i ncl uded a re s pendi ng on res ea rch, publ i c
                                                                                                                                     s ervi ce, hos pi ta l s , a nd va rious other categori es .



                                                                                                              Figure 2




                                                                                                                 30
                                                                     Average Subsidy Per Student (in $2007)*,
                                                                         by Colleges' Selectivity in 1962
                                        80000                                                                            most selective in 1962: 4‐year colleges with
                                                                                                                         selectivity in the 99th %ile in 1962
                                                                                                                         96th‐98th %ile in 1962

                                        70000                                                                            91st‐95th %ile in 1962

                                                                                                                         81st‐90th %ile in 1962
Subsidy Per Student, $2007 (see note)




                                        60000                                                                            71st‐80th %ile in 1962

                                                                                                                         61st‐70th %ile in 1962
                                        50000
                                                                                                                         51st‐60th %ile in 1962

                                                                                                                         41st‐50th %ile in 1962
                                        40000
                                                                                                                         31st‐40th %ile in 1962

                                                                                                                         21st‐30th %ile in 1962
                                        30000
                                                                                                                         11th‐20th %ile in 1962

                                                                                                                         6th‐10th %ile in 1962
                                        20000
                                                                                                                         least selective in 1962: 4‐year colleges with
                                                                                                                         selectivity in 1st‐5th %iles in 1962
                                        10000                                                                    *Subs i dy per s tudent =
                                                                                                                 s tudent‐ori ented expendi tures per s tudent ‐
                                                                                                                  tui ti on pa i d per s tudent

                                            0                                                                    Student‐ori ented expendi tures a re i ns tructi on,
                                                1967   1972   1977    1982   1987   1992    1997   2002   2007 s tudent s ervi ces , a ca demi c & i ns tituti ona l
                                                                                                                 s upport, operati on & ma i ntena nce of pl a nt. NOT
                                                                                                                 i ncl uded a re expenditures on res ea rch, publ i c
                                                                             Year                                s ervi ce, hos pi ta l s , a nd va ri ous other ca tegori es .




                                                                                       Figure 3




                                                                                           31
                                                                    Average Tuition Paid as a Share of Student‐Oriented Resources *
                                                                                     by Colleges' Selectivity in 1962
                                                  1.200
                                                                                                                             most selective in 1962: colleges with selectivity in
                                                                                                                             the 99th %ile in 1962
Tuition paid as a share of student‐oriented resources, see




                                                                                                                             96th‐99th %ile in 1962
                                                  1.000
                                                                                                                             91st‐95th %ile in 1962


                                                                                                                             51st‐60th %ile in 1962
                                                  0.800
                                                                                                                             least selective in 1962: colleges with selectivity in
                                                                                                                             the 1st‐5th %iles in 1962
                            note




                                                  0.600




                                                  0.400




                                                  0.200                                                                      * Student‐ori ented res ources i ncl ude s pendi ng
                                                                                                                             on i ns tructi on, s tudent s ervi ces , a ca demi c &
                                                                                                                             i ns ti tuti ona l s upport, operati on & mai ntenance
                                                                                                                             of faci l i tes . NOT i ncl uded are s pendi ng on
                                                                                                                             res earch, publ i c s ervi ce, hos pi ta l s , and va ri ous
                                                  0.000                                                                      other ca tegori es .
                                                             1966   1971   1976   1981   1986   1991    1996   2001   2006


                                                                                         Year


                                                                                                       Figure 4




                                                                                                         32
                                             Table 1
                 high school    number of     freshmen        number of      number of
                 graduating    high school        seats        freshmen       freshmen
                 cohort         graduates                       seats per      seats per
                                                             moderately      minimally
                                                                  college-       college-
                                                                qualified      qualified
                                                                graduate       graduate
                                                               (see note)     (see note)
                                       (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)
                 1955               1346e            670                .              .
                 1960                1858            923                .              .
                 1965                2658           1442                .              .
                 1970                2889           2063             1.83           0.90
                 1975                3133           2515             2.06           1.01
                 1980                3043           2588             2.23           1.05
                 1985                2677           2292             2.14           1.03
                 1990                2589           2257             2.13           1.03
                 1995                2520           2169             2.10           1.06
                 2000                2833           2428             2.14           1.05
                 2005                3103           2657             2.25           1.07

e   estimated.

Notes: The "baby boom" and "baby bust", not high school graduate rates, account for the dip
and subsequent recovery in the number of high school graduates. The apparently anomolous
numbers for 1980 in columns (3) and (4) are due to the dip in all U.S. students' achievement
that occurred in the late 1970s and early 1980s. See the text for more on this dip and why it is
best to ignore it if one is interested in selectivity. Moderately and minimally college-prepared
twelfth graders score at or above, respectively, the Proficient and Basic levels on the National
Assessment of Education Progress. See National Center for Education Statistics (2005).

Sources: National Center for Education Statistics, Digest of Education Statistics, various
years; National Center for Education Statistics, NAEP Long Term Trend, 2009.




                                               33
                                            Table 2
                      high school       number of                    SAT
                      graduating          colleges            test-takers
                      cohort          that require                    per
                                       the SAT or      freshman seat (see
                                              ACT                   note)
                                                (5)                    (6)
                      1955                    143                     0.23
                      1960                    299                     0.61
                      1965                    783                     0.94
                      1970                   1112                    0.75e
                      1975                   1208                     0.60
                      1980                   1451                     0.58
                      1985                   1787                     0.65
                      1990                   1839                     0.69
                      1995                   1831                     0.75
                      2000                   1476                     0.81
                      2005                   1429                     0.87

e   estimated.

Notes: Table 2 shows indicators of colleges' demanding aptitude information on distant
students and students' demanding the ability to broadcast their aptitude to distant colleges.
Table 2 should not be read as showing the number of colleges in the U.S. that are selective or
the number of students in the U.S. interested in college. See footnote 8 for an explanation of
this point.
        The data in column (2) are somewhat problematic in 1960, 1965, and 1970, where
apparent trends occur that are not actually meaningful. The problem is that students can take
the SAT multiple times. Until 1975, the College Board double counted students who took the
multiple times. Thus, SAT test-takers per freshman seat exaggerates the share of college-going
students who took the SAT (since the numerator double counts students who took the SAT
twice). The exaggeration is very small in 1955 and 1960, when very few students took the test
before their senior year. The exaggeration was highest in 1965 and affects the 1970 number to a
smaller degree. From 1975 onwards, the College Board eliminated double-counting by counting
onlyunique students who took the SAT in their senior year.

Sources: National Center for Education Statistics, Digest of Education Statistics, various
years; College Entrance Examination Board annual reports, various years.




                                               34
