NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INDIA TRANSFORMED? INSIGHTS FROM THE FIRM LEVEL 1988-2005
Laura Alfaro
Anusha Chari
Working Paper 15448
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15448

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2009

We thank our discussant Robert Lawrence, Arvind Panagariya, participants at the Brookings India
Policy Forum conference in New Delhi, Rawi Abdelal, Lakshmi Iyer and Richard Vietor for helpful
comments. We thank T.C.A. Madhav Raghavan for excellent research assistance. We are also grateful
to Jens Arnold, Beata Javorcik, Molly Lipscomb, Aaditya Mattoo, and Petia Topolova for sharing
with us their data on services and trade liberalization. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Laura Alfaro and Anusha Chari. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

India Transformed? Insights from the Firm Level 1988-2005
Laura Alfaro and Anusha Chari
NBER Working Paper No. 15448
October 2009
JEL No. F4,O12
ABSTRACT
Using firm-level data this paper analyzes the transformation of India’s economic structure following
the implementation of economic reforms. The focus of the study is on publicly-listed and unlisted
firms in manufacturing and services industries. Detailed balance sheet and ownership information
permit an investigation of a range of variables. We analyze firm characteristics shown by industry
before and after liberalization and investigate how industrial concentration, number, and size of firms
evolved between 1988 and 2005. We find great dynamism displayed by foreign and private firms as
reflected in the growth in their numbers, assets, sales and profits. Yet, closer scrutiny reveals no dramatic
transformation in the wake of liberalization. The story rather is one of an economy still dominated
by the incumbents (state-owned firms) and to a lesser extent, traditional private firms (firms incorporated
before 1985). Sectors dominated by state-owned and traditional private firms before 1988-1990, with
assets, sales and profits representing shares higher than 50%, generally remained so in 2005. The exception
to this broad pattern is the growing importance of new private firms in the services sector. Rates of
return also have remained stable over time and show low dispersion across sectors and across ownership
groups within sectors.

Laura Alfaro
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 263
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lalfaro@hbs.edu
Anusha Chari
301 Gardner Hall
CB#3305, Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
and NBER
achari@unc.edu

1. Introduction
“Is there some action a government of India could take that would lead the Indian economy to grow like
Indonesia’s or Egypt’s? If so, what exactly? If not, what is it about the ‘nature of India’ that makes it so?”
R. E. Lucas Jr. (Marshall Lecture, Cambridge University, 1985).
According to World Bank estimates, between 1960 and 1980, India’s growth rate remained at an
unspectacular average of 3.5% per annum. It was in the mid-1980s that it began accelerating, culminating
in a rate of over 9% per annum by 2005. In fact, India’s average growth rate over the entire period
between 1986 and 2005 surpassed those of both Indonesia and Egypt (see Table A).
Numerous views are put forth about the driving forces behind the transformation of India’s
growth landscape.1 While Rodrik and Subramanian (2005) point out that growth initially accelerated
during the 1980s, and attribute it to the role of “pro-business” reforms that began in the early 1980s,
Bosworth, Collins, and Virmani (2007) argue that the emphasis on the services sector as the driving force
behind the expansion of the Indian economy is perhaps exaggerated as it represents only a small share of
the country’s overall employment level. Panagariya (2004) argues that piecemeal external liberalization,
along with small spurts of domestic deregulation on a variety of margins and expansionary policies,
combined to produce a small shift in the growth rate in the 1980s.2 He also contends that the systemic
reforms in the 1990s and 2000s were essential to both sustaining and accelerating the growth rate.
Srinivasan and Tendulkar (2003), on the other hand, view fiscal expansion and excessive foreign
borrowing that precipitated the balance of payments crisis in 1991 as the primary cause of the shift in the
growth rate in the 1980s but also note that this growth rate would have been unsustainable without the
subsequent reforms.
The debate is far from settled. Thus far the extensive empirical literature has focused on
characterizing India’s aggregate economic performance. However, aggregate data do not shed light on the
channels through which policy reform can transform the economy at the micro-level. Data at the firm-orplant level would offer an opportunity to do so. This paper takes a step in this direction by documenting
detailed stylized facts about the evolution of India’s micro-economic industrial structure against the
backdrop of the reforms that began in the mid-1980s.3

1

See Bosworth, Collins and Virmani (2007), Kochar et al. (2006), Panagariya (2008), Rodrik and Subramanian
(2005) and references therein.
2
At 1999-2000 prices, the annual growth rate shifted from 3.2 percent between 1965-66 and 1980-81 to 4.6 percent
between 1981-82 and 1987-88 with end-point years included in the calculations (Panagariya, 2004).
3
The reform process, albeit piecemeal in nature, began in the mid-eighties. Data limitations prevent us from
describing changes in firm-activity for the period before 1988.

2

The end of the license Raj and implementation of pro-market reforms had far-reaching
implications for changes in India’s industrial structure. Significant sectors of the economy were opened
up for private participation. India began to integrate into the world economy: import licensing was
abolished in many sectors, import duties were sharply reduced, and many restrictions on FDI were lifted.4
Investment increased from 23% of gross domestic product (GDP) in 1985 to 38% in 2005. During the
eighties, total foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows barely reached one billion dollars. In contrast, India
attracted more than $70 billion in FDI between 2000 and 2005, the bulk of which was concentrated in the
services, computer software and hardware, construction, and telecommunications sectors. New firms
emerged and many Indian firms established an international presence. The economy transitioned from
being mainly dependent on agriculture and manufacturing to a services-oriented one over the 1990s.5
Liberalizations, broadly defined to include trade and entry liberalization, regulatory reform, and
privatization, are believed to transform economies via more competition (domestic and foreign), the
removal of distortions in relative prices and access to finance. The effects of liberalization processes,
however, may not be uniform.6 Some industries may be better equipped to change than others. Within
industries, new entrants may gain market share, while incumbents go bankrupt. Restrictions may linger in
some sectors, and for some firms.
Until recently, studies about firm-activity in the context of policy reform have predominantly
focused on developed rather than developing economies—data availability being an obvious constraint
(see Tybout, 2000).7 Firms in developing countries often face a variety of constraints such as overregulation and the underdevelopment of financial markets. These are glaring constraints affecting the ease
with which resources can be reallocated across sectors and within firms. Liberalization policies in many
developing countries have relaxed some of these constraints and changed the environment in which firms
operate. These reforms provide an ideal backdrop against which to investigate the firm-level response to a
changing economic environment.
4

Section 3 describes the main industrial reforms which include privatization, trade and FDI deregulation, and delicensing or domestic deregulation; financial reforms include banking sector deregulation allowing foreign bank
entry, stock market liberalization, exchange rate deregulation, and capital account liberalization; corporate
governance reforms including setting up of a regulatory body (SEBI), regulations concerning listing requirements,
insider trading laws, protection of minority shareholders, board membership rules, executive compensation rules,
etc.
5
Manufacturing as a share of GDP had increased only marginally over the past three decades, from 22% in 1980 to
27% in 2006. Restrictive labor laws, and moderate corporate investment hampered this sector.
6
As Alesina et al. (2005) note, the theoretical effects of regulatory reform (entry liberalization and privatization) are
ambiguous. Reforms that imply reduction in entry barriers and in the markup are likely to lead to an increase in
investment; aspects of deregulation that remove binding constraints on rates of return may determine a reduction of
investment. Similarly, the effects of privatization are also ambiguous.
7
Bertrand and Kamarz (2002), for example, study the expansion decisions of French retailers following new zoning
regulations in France. Black and Strahan (2002), and Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2004) find that competition in
the banking sector and financial development fosters firm-entry in the U.S. and Italy.

3

The aim of this paper is to describe the evolution of India’s sectoral composition by focusing on
the micro-foundations of its productive structure. How has India’s industrial structure evolved at the firm
level as a result of the reforms? What was the industrial composition by ownership before and after
reforms? Has the influence of traditional incumbents such as state-owned firms changed? If so, what is
the emerging role of private, domestic and foreign firms? What has happened to firm size and industry
concentration following liberalization?
We present a series of detailed stylized facts about the characteristics of firms evidenced by
industry before and after the reforms of 1991.8 We use firm-level data from the Prowess database
collected by the Centre for Monitoring the Indian Economy from company balance sheets and income
statements. Prowess covers both publicly-listed and unlisted firms from a wide cross-section of
manufacturing, services, utilities, and financial industries from 1988 until 2005. About one-third of the
firms in Prowess are publicly-listed firms. The companies covered account for more than 70% of
industrial output, 75% of corporate taxes, and more than 95% of excise taxes collected by the
Government of India (Centre for Monitoring the Indian Economy). Prowess covers firms in the organized
sector, which refers to registered companies that submit financial statements.9
The main advantage of firm-level data is that detailed balance sheet and ownership information
permit an investigation of a range of variables such as sales, profitability, and assets for an average of
more than 15,500 firms across our sample period. Firms are classified across 109 3-digit industries
covering agriculture, manufacturing and services, which is an additional advantage of our data over
existing work focusing only on the manufacturing sector.10 The data are also classified by ownership
categories such as state-owned, private business-group-affiliated firms, private stand-alone firms and
foreign firms. Note that private refers to firms in the private as opposed to the public sector, and many
firms in the private sector are publicly traded. We study five sub-periods 1988-1990; 1991-1994; 19951998; 1999-2002 and 2003-2005.11 These periods broadly match the different liberalization waves
explained in detail in the text.
We present, specifically, information in detail about the average number of firms, firm size
(assets, sale) and profitability (profit before interest depreciation and taxes and return on assets) for all
firms in our sample by sector as well as by category of firm: state-owned enterprises, private firms

8

Formal econometric analysis establishing causal linkages is left to future work.
Section 4 describes in detail the advantages and shortcomings of the dataset.
10
As Goldberg et al. (2009) note, unlike the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI), the Prowess data is a panel of firms,
rather than a repeated cross-section, and therefore, particularly well suited for understanding how firms adjust over
time and how their responses may be related to policy changes.
11
Although the liberalization process has been gradual, and the pattern of foreign-entry liberalizations (and more
general reforms) driven by private interests (see Chari and Gupta 2008), this does not preclude the analysis of the
effects of reducing these constraints on the evolution of the firm-size distribution.
9

4

incorporated before 1985 (old private firms), private firms incorporated after 1985 (new private firms),
and foreign firms for the five sub-periods. Sales, size, entry, profitability, and overall firm-activity are
disaggregated measures of economic growth and proxies of efficiency, and thus provide an understanding
of the effectiveness of reforms. We also look at market dynamics with regard to promotion of competition
in order to understand the efficient allocation of resources. We measure the degree of competition
(consolidation) as a measure of competitive efficiency to examine how industrial concentration has
evolved over time.
The data show great dynamism on the part of foreign and new private firms (incorporated after
1985) as reflected in their growth, that is, in numbers, assets, sales and profits. However, on closer
examination, what emerges is not a story of dramatic transformation in India’s micro-economic structure
following liberalization. Rather, the data suggest an economy still dominated by the incumbents, stateowned firms, and to a lesser extent, the traditional private firms, that is, those firms that existed before the
first wave of reforms. We find evidence of continuing incumbent control in terms of shares of assets,
sales and profits accounted for by state-owned and traditional private firms. In sectors dominated by stateowned and traditional firms before liberalization (with shares higher than 50%), these incumbents remain
the dominant ownership group following liberalization. Interestingly, rates of return remain remarkably
stable over time and show low dispersion across sectors and across ownership groups within sectors.
The exception to the pattern of incumbent firm dominance is seen in the growth of private firms
in the services industries. In particular, the assets and sales shares of private new firms in business and IT
services, communications services and media, health and other services show a substantial increase in
growth and in shares over this period. This fact coincides with the reform measures that took place in the
services sectors after the mid-1990s and is also consistent with the growth in services documented in the
aggregate data.12
Schumpeter (1942) argued that creative destruction, the replacement of old firms by new firms
and of old capital by new capita, happens in waves. A system-wide reform or deregulation, such as the
one implemented in India, may be the shock that prompts the creative destruction wave. Creation in India
seems to have been driven by new entrants in the private sector and foreign firms. The sectoral
transformation in India does not, however, seem to have gone through an industrial shake-out phase in
which incumbent firms are replaced by new ones.13 Sectors in which state-owned enterprises and older

12

In the case of information technology, pharmaceuticals and telecom, some new and very large players have
emerged. Khanna and Palepu (2005) document the dynamism in the software industry.
13
Interestingly, many of the older firms (pre-independence) have by and large remained untouched by the reforms
(not considering sectoral composition effects); see Table 8.

5

private firms dominated activity prior to liberalization continue to do so even twenty years after the
reforms began.
Our findings are consistent with the observation in Topalova (2007), that there seems to be very
little exit at the firm level in India’s industry, with Goldberg et al.’s (2008) finding that net product
creation following trade liberalization was almost exclusively driven by product addition as opposed to
discontinuation of product lines, and with arguments in Panagariya (2008) about the slow transformation
of the country following reforms.14 Different explanations may account for these findings such as
lingering restrictions and regulation constraining firm flexibility to adjust and inefficiencies in the
financial sector among others.15 However, one additional explanation, perhaps not sufficiently stressed in
the debate, may be the important remaining role of incumbent (such as state-owned firms and firms
incorporated before the reforms began). As emphasized in the political economy literature, entrenched
incumbents firms may have incentives to oppose the liberalization efforts (Rajan and Zingales 2003a,
2003b). In fact, we find both industry concentration and state-ownership to be inversely correlated with
the probability of liberalization. These results are consistent with the findings in Chari and Gupta (2008)
focusing on FDI liberalization. Our conclusions suggest that trade liberalization in India was also
inversely correlated with industry concentration.
Our work contributes to the literature that focuses on the study of different aspects of the recent
evolution of the Indian economy, by analyzing in detail the evolution of firm activity by ownership,
sector, and industry.16 In addition, it relates, more generally, to literature that emphasizes the effects of
policy in the allocation of resources across establishments, by studying the effects of liberalization,
particularly those that use firm-level data.17
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a review of the related literature. Section 3
describes the liberalization process in India. Section 4 describes the data while Section 5 presents the
main empirical results. Section 6 carries the conclusion.
14

Goldberg et al. (2008) find little evidence of “creative destruction” and no link between declines in tariffs on final
goods induced by India's 1991 trade reform and product dropping.
15
Banerjee (2006) notes that the banking sector in India, dominated by public sector-managed banks, fails to pull
the plug on firms that ought to have been long shut down, and refers to practices of “ever-greening” of loans in the
Indian banking system. Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) and Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen (2007) find that
decision-making in Indian firms is highly centralized and management practices do not provide strong incentives for
good performance. See also Khanna and Palepu (1999) for explanations put forth for the lack of product dropping
in case studies on the product scope of Indian conglomerates.
16
Other recent work examines the effects of India’s nineties liberalization with an emphasis on employment (see for
example Besley and Burgess, 2004 and Aghion, Burgess, Redding, Zilibotti, 2008), bank lending (Cole, 2008),
product-mix and imported intermediate inputs (Goldberg et al. 2008, 2009). These papers shed light on some of the
impediments to the transformation of the economy (labor regulation, bank regulation, tariffs, and so on).
17
See Goldberg and Pavcnik (2004), Alfaro and Rodríguez-Clare, Harrison and Rodríguez-Clare (2009) for recent
overviews of the studies on the effects of trade and FDI and Kose, Prasad, Rogoff, and Wei (2006) and Henry
(2007) for the effects of liberalization on foreign capital.

6

2. The Lens of Firm-Level Data—Theory and Evidence from Related Literature
This study is related to different strands of research analyzing the recent performance of the
Indian economy as well as the broad literature analyzing the impact of liberalization on investment,
changes in the allocation of resources and economic growth. A thorough review of these large and diverse
studies is clearly beyond the scope of this paper. We limit our attention to a few examples that
particularly motivate our work.
2.1 Reforms and Firm-Activity
Theories emphasizing the role of “creative destruction” emphasize rapid output and input
reallocation, product obsolescence and changes in productivity levels as necessary ingredients for the
pace of reallocation playing an important role in aggregate productivity growth. Schumpeter (p. 83, 1942)
describes “creative destruction” thus: “The fundamental impulse that keeps the capital engine in motion
comes from the new consumers’ goods, the new methods of production and transportation, the new
markets...[The process] incessantly revolutionizes from within, incessantly destroying the old one,
incessantly creating a new one. This process of Creative Destruction is the essential fact of capitalism. It
is what capitalism consists in and what every capitalist concern has got to live in…” In addition to
technological change, a system-wide reform or deregulation may prompt the creative destruction wave.
Industries then go through a shake-out phase during which the number of producers decline in the
industry, as incumbents and new entrants replace the firms that exit (Caballero and Hammour, 1996).
Restructuring is one manifestation of creative destruction, by which the production structure weeds out
unproductive segments, upgrades its technology, processes and output mix, and adjusts to the evolving
regulatory and global environment.
In the case of India, theory suggests that the number of firms operating within industries can
change through entry and exit in the face of deregulation. Therefore we expect that the ownership
composition between incumbents and new entrants may change especially if unproductive incumbents are
weeded out during an industrial shake-out phase and efficient new players enter the market. Theory also
suggests a greater variability in observed rates of return and a decline in importance of unproductive
incumbents (for example, declining market shares, assets, sales and profits).
2.1.1 Trade Liberalization and Firm-Activity
Recent work in trade using dynamic models with heterogeneous firms highlights the point that
opening up trade leads to reallocations of resources across firms within an industry. Melitz (2003)
provides a framework of monopolistic competition with heterogeneous firms that have become the
7

cornerstone of a growing literature, as the model yields rich predictions that can be confronted with the
data. With exogenously determined levels of firm-productivity, the model predicts that opening up trade
leads to changes in firm-composition within industries along with improvements in aggregate industry
productivity: that low productivity firms exit; that intermediate productivity firms which survive contract;
and that high productivity firms enter export markets and expand.18
Additionally, in a world of variable markets, import competition could have differential effects on
firms of different productivities and pro-competitive effects through endogenous changes in mark-ups
(Melitz and Ottaviano, 2003).19 More generally, changes in tariff and non-tariff barriers may affect the
availability of foreign products on domestic markets and, hence, the elasticity of demand for domestic
goods. Therefore we expect that in sectors liberalized to trade, incumbent firms may contract or exit the
market. Moreover, only those new firms that are able to withstand competition from imports will enter
and/or remain in the market. Examining concentration ratios and coefficients of variation in firm-size in
industries that were liberalized to trade will allow us to examine this hypothesis.
Several studies have also focused on the effects of trade liberalization on indigenous firms and
have uncovered substantial heterogeneity in firm performance within narrowly defined industries in both
developed and developing countries (see Goldberg and Pavcnik, 2004). Trade liberalization has been
found to have a positive effect in terms of efficient allocation of resources, i.e., higher output and
productivity in manufacturing industries. In the case of India, Krishna and Mitra (1998) find that lowproductivity plants contract and industry-level productivity increases following liberalization. Similar
results are shown in Sivadasan (2006) and Topalova (2007) following trade liberalization, while Arnold et
al. (2008) find positive productivity effects from India’s policy reform in services.
2.1.2 Industrial De-licensing, Domestic Deregulation and Firm-Activity
Theoretical predictions about firm activity from macro models of entry liberalization and
deregulation are ambiguous (see Blanchard and Giavazzi, 2003; Alesina et al. 2009).20 Reducing entry
barriers and reforms that imply a reduction in price mark-ups in excess of marginal cost are likely to lead

18

In the standard version of the model, there is firm selection into export markets but no feedback from exporting to
firm productivity. See Bustos (2009) and Lileeva and Trefler (2007) for work in this direction.
19
Trade liberalization is widely believed to have pro-competitive effects that are ruled out by assumption in most
models (constant elasticity of substitution preferences implying constant mark-ups). In contrast, in a world of
variable markets, import competition could have differential effects on firms of different productivities through
endogenous changes in mark-ups.
20
Blanchard and Giavazzi (2003) develop a model of both labor market and product market regulation and their
interconnection. Alesina et al. (2009) analyze a monopolistic competition model and show that that deregulation of
product markets has a positive effect on capital accumulation if it generates a reduction in the mark-up of prices over
marginal costs (for instance through a reduction in entry barriers) or if it lowers costs of adjusting the capital stock.

8

to an increase in the number of firms and investment. Regulatory reform can also influence the desired
capital stock and number of firms via, for example, reduction in the red tape. On the other hand, for
certain firms, removing constraints on rates of returns (especially removing ceilings restrictions) could
lead to a reduction in investment.21
Most theoretical models, however, assume that firms are able to efficiently allocate resources
within the firm and that factor markets are frictionless. Goldberg et al. (2009) argue that remnants of
industrial regulation still affect the operation of Indian firms and may constrain their flexibility to adjust
to new economic conditions.22 In India, there is evidence to suggest this, despite the extensive industrial
deregulation in the early 1990s. Along with lengthy, cumbersome liquidation procedures, this factor often
hinders firms from eliminating unprofitable product lines.23 As noted by Panagariya (2008), “India
operates in a world with virtually no exit doors.” India’s bankruptcy rate was, according to the World
Bank (2005), of 4 per 10,000 firms, compared with 15 in Thailand and 350 in the United States. If the
pattern in firm-entry and exit is consistent with these observations, we expect industrial de-licensing to be
accompanied by dynamism in firm-entry but little incumbent firm-exit.
2.1.3 Privatization and Firm-Activity
Similarly, the effects of privatization stemming from agency problems and political mandates are
ambiguous. For example, deregulation, through a reduction in mark-ups and in the availability of internal
funds, may have a negative effect on investment if there is imperfect substitutability between internal and
external sources of finance. This effect may be more relevant for firms severely affected by informational
asymmetries and with limited collateral, such as small and young firms. On the other hand, if
privatization reduces the influence of state-owned firms in the economy allowing new firms to enter, it
can lead to an increase in investment.24 While the theoretical predictions about the impact of privatization
on firm-activity are ambiguous, we are particularly interested in examining the role of state-owned firms

21

In some network industries such as utilities and telecommunications, reforms entailing service liberalization and
price rules for accessing networks can have conflicting influences on investment.
22
Some of their results also suggest that declines in tariffs are associated with somewhat bigger changes in the
product scope of firms in industries, which are no longer subject to licenses at the onset of the 1991 reform as
compared to regulated industries.
23
For example, an all-India amendment to Industrial Disputes Act (1947) in 1982 required firms with more than 100
employees to seek government approval to dismiss workers (Kochhar et al., 2006).
24
Alesina et al. (2009) find that regulatory reforms in the OECD have been associated with increases in investment.
The authors find both entry liberalization and privatization to have had substantial effect on investment. There is
also evidence to show that the marginal effect of deregulation on investment is greater when the policy reform is
large and when changes occur, starting from already lower levels of regulation. In other words, small changes in a
heavy regulated environment are not likely to produce any noteworthy effect.

9

in the Indian economy—the most influential incumbents before the reforms began. The next sub-section
elaborates on this subject.
2.2 Reforms and the Role of Incumbent Firms
Somewhat missing from, or perhaps not emphasized in, many papers in this literature, are
political economy considerations and in particular the role of incumbent-firm ownership. As emphasized
by Stigler (1971), incumbent firms in profitable, concentrated sectors have a greater incentive to prevent
entry.25 Theory predicts that successful reforms will lead to a decline in industry concentration in
liberalized industries and greater competition as signaled by greater variation in rates of return and
coefficients of variation in firm-size.
The widespread privatizations of the 1980s and 1990s around the world generated a large
empirical literature focused on understanding the effects of ownership on firm performance.26 As reported
by Chong and Lopez de Silanes (2004), between 1984 and 1996, the participation of state-owned
enterprises in industrial countries declined from 8.5% of GDP to 5% (see Figure 1).27 In middle-income
countries it fell from 11% of GDP in 1980 to 5% in 1997 and from 15% to 3% in low-income economies.
Employment dropped from 13% to 2% in middle income and 20% to 9% in low-income countries.28 For
India, our data suggest that between 2001 and 2005 state-owned firms accounted for 59%, 42%, and 50%
of total assets, sales and profits.
Gupta (2005) studies the effects of partial privatization of state-owned enterprises in India and
finds a positive impact on profitability, productivity, and investment. Her results also suggest that partial
privatization does not cause the government to abandon the political objective of maintaining
employment. This paper finds that the fractions of sales, assets and profits accounted for by state-owned
firms have remained substantial in India for nearly two decades since liberalization and are substantially
higher than in other countries, including the transition economies of Eastern Europe.

25

Chari and Gupta (2008) find that reforms may be captured by powerful interests, particularly firms in profitable,
concentrated industries and in industries with substantial state-owned firm presence. Given the deadweight loss
associated with industry concentration, selective liberalization may inhibit economic growth.
26
Megginson and Netter (2001), surveying the literature, find that most studies reveal a positive impact of
privatization on profitability and efficiency of firms.
27
Reviewing the evidence in Latin America, Chong and Lopez-de-Silanes (2004), note that most privatization led to
higher profitability, output and productivity growth, fiscal benefits and quality improvements. The authors also
highlight many instances of failure, which may be understood within the political framework (state participation in
opaque processes, poor contract design, inadequate regulation or deregulation.
28
These averages, however, mask huge variations. In Africa, state ownership remains higher than 15% of the GDP;
in China the government still has control over important sectors of the economy.

10

3. Liberalization in India: The Reforms
Liberalization in India encompassed a series of reforms including foreign entry and trade
liberalization, industrial de-licensing and de-reservation measures and services liberalization. In this
section, we provide a broad overview of the reforms and refer the reader to studies that provide in-depth
detail about specific reform measures.
Topalova (2004) provides a detailed overview of trade policy reform following the
conditionalities imposed by the 1991 IMF Program. Benchmarks set forth under these conditions included
a reduction in the level and dispersion of tariffs, a removal of quantitative restrictions on imported inputs
and capital goods for export production, and elimination of public-sector monopoly on imports of almost
all items.
It is important to note that the most significant initial trade reform was the removal of import
licensing for capital and intermediate goods. However, tariff rates remained extremely high in the initial
reform period. For example, the top tariff (while reduced) was brought down from 350 percent to 150
percent. Moreover, the 22 percent devaluation of the rupee further shielded the domestic industry from
import competition, at least temporarily (Panagariya, 2008).
The government’s export-import policy plan (1992–97), however, dramatically reduced the use of
quantitative restrictions. The share of products subject to quantitative restrictions decreased from 87
percent in 1987-88 to 45 percent in 1994-95; all 26 import-licensing lists were eliminated and a
“negative” list was established. Restrictions on exports were also relaxed, with the number of restricted
items falling from 439 in 1990 to 210 in 1994 (Topalova, 2004).
Tariff reductions took place in 77 industrial categories and tariffs across a wide range of
industries fell from a simple average of about 85% in 1990 to a value of approximately 12% in 2007
(Panagariya, 2008).29 Topalova (2004) also notes that the standard deviation of tariffs dropped by
approximately 63 percent during the period between 1987-2001 (Figure 2, Panel A).30 At the industry
level, although there was variation across industries, the sharpest drop in tariffs took place between 1991
and 1992.
We note that the trend towards de-licensing and de-reservation began with the industrial policy
statements in 1985 that outlined many liberalization measures including not restricting business houses to
Appendix 1 industries as long as they moved to industrially backward regions and raised the minimum

29

The top tariff dropped from 50% in 1995-96 to 40% in 1997-98, 35% in 2000-01, 30% in 2002-03, 25% in 200304, 20% in 2004-05, 15% in 2005-06, 12.5% in 2006-07 and 10% in 2007-08. Some tariff peaks being outside the
top rate, the simple average of tariffs on industrial goods in 2007 was approximately 12%. Custom duty collection
in 2005-06 as a proportion of merchandise imports was just 4.9 % (Panagariya, 2008).
30
Data for Figure 2 were generously provided by Petia Topalova.

11

asset limit defining business houses. The pace of these policy trends accelerated with the New Industrial
Policy outlined in the Industrial Policy Resolution of 1991.
Compulsory industrial licensing was abolished for all except 18 industries. Large companies no
longer needed MRTP approval for capacity expansions. The number of industries reserved for the public
sector in Schedule A (IPR1951) was cut from 17 to 8,31 Schedule B, which listed industries open to the
private sector but with increasing involvement from the state particularly for new establishments, was
abolished altogether.32 Importantly, limits on foreign equity holdings were raised from 40 to 51% (for
industries listed in Annexure III of the Statement of Industrial Policy in 1991) under the “automatic
approval route.” The Industrial Policy Resolution of 1991 (Office of the Economic Advisor, 2001)
provides information about the list of manufacturing industries in which the state liberalized foreign entry
and also a list of industries where domestic entry restrictions continued to be in effect.
Services reforms while rapid in the 1990s varied across sectors. Appendix A in Arnold, Javorcik,
Lipscombe and Mattoo (2008) provides an excellent and detailed survey of the services liberalization
reforms by sector between 1991 and 2005. Their paper carefully examines major policy changes enacted
between 1991 and 2003. The first significant changes in financial services (banking and insurance),
telecommunications and transport are recorded as early as the 1993-94 fiscal year. The authors highlight
some of the major policy changes they recorded for four services sectors, and then describe a strategy for
quantifying this information into a services reform index. In order to make the services policy information
amenable to quantitative analysis, we translated the policy changes into a sector-specific reform index,
taking values from 0 to 5. We reproduce Figure 1 from their paper that provides a graphic illustration of
the variation contained in the services reform index across four services sectors (see Figure 3).33
Following the description in Section 2, we would expect a transformation of India’s microeconomic structure following this broad and wide-ranging reform process: new firms entering and
expanding production, increased competition from new entry as well as imports, and exit by unproductive
incumbents that are unable to adapt to the changing economic environment. Most theoretical work on the

31

According to the Industrial Policy Resolution (1948), Schedule A comprised among others (i) industries
exclusively reserved for the State (atomic energy, arms and ammunition and railways), and (ii) basic industries
where the State would have the exclusive right to undertake new investments (iron and steel, mineral oils, coal,
shipbuilding, aircraft production and telecommunications equipment). Other categories included eighteen industries
of national importance regulated and licensed in cooperation with state governments and industries open to privatesector participation. The Industrial Policy Resolution (1956) included the nine industries in categories (i) and (ii) of
IPR 1948 and added eight additional industries including mining sectors, air transportation and some heavy
industries.
32
These industries included minerals, aluminum and other non-ferrous metals not listed in schedule A, machine
tools, basic intermediate products required by the chemicals industries, antibiotics and other essential drugs,
synthetic rubber, fertilizers, and road and sea transport.
33
We are grateful to the authors for permission to use their figures.

12

effects of liberalization analyzes static effects. India experienced high growth during our period of
analysis, in particular, towards the end, suggesting additional effects on entry, exit and expansion in
addition to those implied by the standard models (confounding further the overall effects at the macro
level). Alternatively, as mentioned earlier, the reform process has been slow, and piecemeal in nature.
Moreover, while we might expect to see dynamism in firm-entry, particularly by private and foreign firms
following liberalization, lingering restrictions may imply little incumbent firm-exit.
4. The Prowess Data
We use firm-level data from the Prowess database. The sample period is from the year of
inception of dataset, 1988 to 2005.34 The data are collected by the Centre for Monitoring the Indian
Economy (CMIE) from company balance-sheets and income statements and covers both publicly-listed
and unlisted firms from a wide cross-section of manufacturing, services, utilities, and financial industries.
About one-third of the firms in Prowess are publicly listed firms. The companies covered account for
more than 70% of industrial output, 75% of corporate taxes, and more than 95% of excise taxes collected
by the Government of India (Centre for Monitoring the Indian Economy).
Prowess covers firms in the organized sector, which refers to registered companies that submit
financial statements. According to the Government, “The organized sector comprises enterprises for
which the statistics are available from the budget documents or reports etc. On the other hand the
unorganized sector refers to those enterprises whose activities or collection of data is not regulated under
any legal provision or do not maintain any regular accounts” (Informal Sector in India: Approaches for
Social Security, Government of India, page 2, 2000). Indian firms are required by the 1956 Companies
Act to disclose information on capacities, production and sales in their annual reports. All listed
companies are included in the database regardless of whether financials are available or not.35
The Indian National Industrial Classification (NIC) (1998) system is used to classify firms in the
Prowess dataset into industries. The data include firms from a wide range of industries including mining,
basic manufacturing, financial and real estate services, and energy distribution.
The main advantage of firm-level data is that detailed balance sheet and ownership information
permit an investigation of whether the presence of certain types of incumbent firms in an industry affects
the evolution of industry and firm characteristics, as also the responses to policy changes such as

34

The Prowess database has now been used in several studies including Bertrand et al. (2002), Khanna and Palepu
(1999), Fisman and Khanna (2004), Khanna and Palepu (2005), Topalova (2007), Dinc and Gupta (2007), Chari and
Gupta (2007), and Goldberg et al. (2008, 2009).
35
Unlisted companies are not required to disclose its financials. CMIE asks their permission, but if they refuse, it
cannot include these companies in Prowess.

13

liberalization. In contrast, industry-level databases usually do not provide information about sales, assets,
profits and employment under different ownership categories.36 The firms in the data belong to three main
ownership categories: state-owned firms, private firms and foreign firms. Private firms include familyowned business groups and unaffiliated private firms. Appendix Table 1 provides a description of
variables used in the data analysis.
One concern with the data may be related to new entrants versus improvements in the data
coverage by CMIE. However, for all firms that Prowess decides to cover, regardless of when the decision
is made, financial data from 1989 onwards, wherever available, is added to the database. That is, even if
coverage for a firm begins only in 1995, CMIE goes back and gets data from at least 1989, if not earlier.
Hence, for the sample that we consider, the entry numbers are not distorted by changing coverage (except,
of course, from firms that are actually incorporated in that period). Nevertheless, we are cautious when
interpreting the results.
A point regarding data coverage of foreign firms is worth highlighting. Firms are classified as
domestic or foreign depending on the incorporation location. For example, in the case of Jet Airways, the
holding company is incorporated overseas and therefore classified as a foreign firm. Also, as in the case
of unlisted domestic firms, data on unlisted foreign firms is available only if the firm chooses to disclose
its financial information. CMIE requests unlisted foreign firms for permission, but if they refuse (as for
example, McDonald’s and Coca Cola have done) then the firms are not included in Prowess.
Chari and Gupta (2007) compare the Prowess data with the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI)
conducted by the Government of India. The ASI is a survey collected on a sampling basis of factories
employing 100 or more workers.37 Although the overlap in the list of industries covered by the two
datasets is not perfect, the ASI data nevertheless provide a useful cross-industry benchmark for the
coverage in Prowess. For instance, the ASI data focus exclusively on the manufacturing sector, whereas
Prowess covers several additional service sectors including defense, restaurants, hotels, and IT services.
The authors find that in 41 of the 51 three-digit industries covered by both databases, total industry sales
in Prowess is an average of 77% of the value of total sales for the same industry in the ASI.
Goldberg et al. (2009) argue that the Prowess dataset is not a manufacturing census, and therefore
may not be ideal for studying firm-entry and exit, given that it includes only larger firms for which entry
and exit are not important margins of adjustment. However, it is pertinent to note that unlike the Annual
Survey of Industries (ASI) which is a survey of manufacturing, the Prowess data is a panel of firms, rather

36

Since firms are not required to report employment in their annual reports, we observe employment data for only a
more restricted sample of firms. Financial services are the only industry that is mandated by law to disclose
employment information. Since the sample of firms that report employment is small, we do not focus on these
numbers.
37
The sampling design is outlined in detail in items #9-#11 at http://www.mospi.nic.in/stat_act_t3.htm.

14

than a repeated cross-section. Prowess is therefore particularly well suited to examining how firmcharacteristics including entry and exit evolve over time and may respond to policy changes. (For
instance, Goldberg et al. (2009) use the Prowess dataset to examine how firms adjust their product-mix
over time). Firms that no longer report sales or assets are assumed to have exited. We also classify firms
that do not report data because of mergers and acquisitions as firms that exit the data due to consolidation.
Finally, the predominant emphasis of the extant literature using firm-level data on India has been
on the manufacturing sector. An important advantage of Prowess is its coverage of firms in the services
sector widely credited for India’s growth miracle. The next section documents stylized facts about the
evolution of India’s industrial composition and firm activity against the backdrop of these broadsweeping reforms.
5. The Evidence
We study five sub-periods: 1988-1990; 1991-1994; 1994-1998; 1999-2002 and 2003-2005. These
periods broadly match the different waves of liberalization. Our objective is to provide the reader with an
overview of the evolution of India’s industrial composition in the last twenty years. We present deflated
data using the GDP deflator from World Bank, World Development Indicators. For expositional
purposes, the tables collapse the sectors in ten: agricultural, mining & extraction; food, textile and paper
manufacturing; chemical and plastics manufacturing; metals and industrial manufacturing; utilities,
construction and retail; transport; hospitality, tourism, media, health and other services; financial services
and real estate; business, computer and communication services and miscellaneous diversified. Appendix
Table 2 presents detailed information on the industries included in each sector and the number of firms by
sector.
Tables 1 to 5 present detailed information on the number of firms, firm size (assets, sale) and
profitability (profit before interest depreciation and taxes and return on assets) for all firms in our sample
by sector as well as by category of firm: state-owned enterprises, foreign firms, private firms incorporated
before 1985 (also referred to as traditional firms) and private firms incorporated after 1985 (also referred
to as new private firms). Table 6 presents information on the dispersion of returns. Table 7 describes the
composition of number of firms, firm size and profitability as a percentage of the total (by ownership
group and sector). Table 8 presents additional information by year of incorporation, and Tables 9 and 10
describe the evolution of firm size and concentration.

15

5.1 Reforms and Dynamism?
The columns in Table 1 present data on the average number of firms by type of ownership and
sector. The table shows information for the full sample across all sectors by type of ownership, followed
by information for each of the different sectors by type of ownership and finally, data consolidated by
sector.
Consistent with the rapid growth observed in India after the mid-eighties (as documented in Table
A) overall firm activity as proxied by the number of firms grew substantially relative to the beginning of
the sample period. There is, however, heterogeneity in ownership type. The average number of stateowned firms increased from 645 in the 1988-1990 to 693 in 1995-1998 ending in 617 by 2003-2005. The
number of firms incorporated before 1985 decreased in this period from 7,551 in 1988-1990 to 5,685 in
2003-2005. These numbers are in contrast to the growth rates in the average number of new private firms:
up from 3,031 in 1988-1990 to close to 8,864 at the end of the period. The number of foreign firms
increased from an average of 533 in 1988-1990 to 748 by 2003-2005.
While one cannot infer causality from our results, following the different wave of reforms in the
mid-1980s and early 1990s, the increasing number not just of private but also of foreign firms suggests
that the liberalization measures enacted to allow domestic entry through de-licensing and de-reservation,
combined with the liberalization of foreign direct investment, promoted greater dynamism in new entry
by firms other than the incumbents of the pre-reform period (state-owned and traditional private firms
incorporated before 1985). Indeed, the doubling of the average number of foreign firms in this period is
suggestive of substantial foreign entry albeit from very low levels in the pre-reform period.
These patterns are broadly mimicked within sectors. Agriculture, for example, is characterized by
a relatively stable average number of state-owned firms and increasing activity by private and foreign
firms (again the former from a relatively low base). The average number of traditional private firms in
this sector decreased from 145 in 1988-1990 to 112 by 2003-2005.
In food, textiles and paper manufacturing, chemicals and plastic manufacturing, and metals and
industrial manufacturing, the average number of state-owned firms decreased from 83, 56, and 97
respectively in 1988-1990 to a corresponding 56, 46, and 73 in 2003-2005. The number of traditional
private firms shows somewhat similar patterns: the average numbers went from 1,328, 1,150 and 1,450
respectively in 1988-1990 to a corresponding 907, 816, and 995 by 2003-2005. In contrast, the number of
private and foreign firms has increased substantially between 1988 and 2005.
Similarly, we observe high growth in the number of private and foreign firms in sectors such as
utilities, construction and retail; hospitality, tourism and media; financial services and real estate; and
business, computer and computer communications and others. In these same sectors, there was an
16

increase in the number of state-owned firms while there were slight reductions in the number of
traditional private firms.
Business, computer and communication services and financial service and real state by far show
the highest growth rates for all type of firms, but again, private and foreign firms show substantial activity
in terms of number of firms. Panagariya (2008) hails the success story in the telecommunication sector as
the triumph of reforms. As the last panel in Table 1 shows, there was an overwhelming increase in the
number of firms in this sector.38
Overall, Table 1 presents a picture of a dynamic economy driven by private and foreign firms and
the transformation of the Indian economy. In fact the data suggests that 1988-1990 was already a period
of great activity in terms of the number of firms. We examined within-period growth in the number of
firms for this period and found it to be substantial ranging from 35% for foreign firms and 115% for new
private firms. As mentioned, while our data precludes comparisons with the pre-1985 period, the evidence
is consistent with arguments in Panagariya (2008, pp. 18-19) that the reforms of the 1980s opened the
door to wider entry by new firms. Consistent with previous evidence, the data also suggest that the
regime shift in India’s growth path began in the mid-1980s.
We note that there was acceleration in entry in the period following 1991 that continued through
the rest of the decade. Further, our findings corroborate observation of lingering exit restrictions. While
the data presents clear evidence on dynamism in firm-entry particularly by private and foreign firms, we
observe little incumbent firm-exit (notwithstanding methodological issues in the collection of the data).
Table 2 presents information on average assets of ownership type and sector (in constant rupees
crore). Average assets have also grown in the last two decades particularly for new private firms and
firms in the foreign sector, although the initial values of assets under foreign ownership and private firms
incorporated after 1985 were very low (the latter by construction). The table shows high accumulation of
assets in private and foreign firms in all sectors of the economy but particularly in agriculture, mining and
extraction, food, textile and paper manufacturing, transports, utilities, construction and retail, business and
IT services, financial services, and other services (hospitality, tourism, media, health and others). Foreign
firms also show increased participation in recent periods and in particular in sectors such as
transportation, and media, health and other services. While one cannot infer causality, greater foreign firm
access did not seem to come at the expense of the overall significance of private domestic firms (see
Alfaro and Charlton (2007) for similar results for a broad sample of countries).
The lower panel in Table 2 shows asset accumulation across sectors suggesting an increasing role
in service-related activities. The growth of assets is far more dramatic in financial services and real estate,

38

See Appendix Table 2 for activities included in each classification.

17

business, computer and communication services, utilities, construction and retail, transport, construction
and media.
Table 3 presents similar detailed information on sales (in constant rupees crore), where much the
same pattern emerges. Although there is substantial growth across all forms of ownerships and sectors,
the data suggest higher activity in terms of sales growth by foreign and new private firms and in growth in
the services sectors. Sales by new private firms, growth was particularly strong in transport, hospitality,
tourism media and health, while foreign firm growth was high in transport, business, computer and
communication services. As in previous patterns, there was noticeably high growth in sales of new private
firms in agriculture in the period 1991-1994 versus 1988-1990.
Table 4 shows profits (profits before depreciation, interest payments and rents of firms in
constant terms) by ownership and sector. New private firms stand out in terms of the growth rate in their
average profits. However, all type of firms, state-owned, traditional and new private firms and foreign
firms also show high rates of growth in the average level of their profits. For foreign firms, financial
services and business and computer-related activities witnessed the highest rates of growth in average
profits. It is also worth noting that across economic activities, sectors in the services (such as utilities,
construction and retail, hospitality, tourism, media and health and financial services) dominated those
activities in the manufacturing sector (such as food, textile and paper manufacturing and chemicals and
plastics) for profit growth. It is also worth highlighting the high growth in profits in agriculture and
mining by traditional private firms in the period 1991-1994 versus 1988-1990.
Table 5 shows a more subtle picture emerging, which reflects the return on assets. In the early
period of 1988-1990, for the full sample, traditional private businesses display the highest average rate of
return (13.53%) followed by new private firms (12.93%) and then foreign firms (12.36%). State-owned
firms come last with an average rate of return of 8.90% during this period. After 1991 the picture
changes. Traditional private firms and new private firms experience a decline in the return of assets
reaching 10.66% and 8.11%, respectively, in 1999-2002 to increase to 12.39% and 8.54%, respectively,
during 2003-2005. State-owned firms in contrast experienced an increase in the return on assets with a
figure of 10.61% in 2003-2005 from 8.90% in 1988-1990.39 Foreign firms also experience an increase in
the return on assets with a 14.94% return for the 2003-2005 period compared to 12.36% in 1988-1990. It
is interesting to note that the dispersion in rates of return remained almost the same from 1988-1990 (at
4.63%) until 1999-2002 (at 4.38%) to increase to 6.39% in 2003-2005 across ownership group. The

39

Bai et al. (2006) estimate the aggregate marginal product of capital in China to be around 20%, down from 25% in
the pre-reform period.

18

coefficient of variation in returns across ownership increased from 0.17 in 1988-1990 to 0.23 in 20032005.
For state-owned firms, the highest rate of return was in agriculture, mining and extraction,
(21.27%) followed by business, computer, and communication services (15.85%); metals and industrial
manufacturing (15.74%); and food, textile and paper management (15.63%) in 2003-2005. The sectors
with the highest rates of return for traditional private firms were business, computer, and communication
services (23.65%) and agriculture, mining and extraction (22.91%). For new private firms, the highest
rate of return was agriculture, mining and extraction (12.38%), transport (11.09%), and business,
computer, and communication services (11.09%). It is important to highlight that in agriculture, mining
and extraction, food, textile, and paper manufacturing, chemicals and plastics manufacturing, transport,
hospitality, tourism, media, health, and other service and miscellaneous diversified activities, foreign
firms earned the highest rates of return across ownership groups. For the full sample, the highest rate of
return was in agriculture, mining and extraction (17.31%) and the lowest in hospitality, tourism, media
and health (8.15%) in 1988-1990. In 2003-2005, the highest rate of return was in transport (13.54%) and
the lowest in financial services (6.73%).
Table 6 presents data on the sectoral variance of return on assets measured by dispersion in the
top panel and by the coefficient of variation40 in the second one. As seen in Table 6, in 1988-1990, the
dispersion in returns across ownership groups within a sector was the highest in transport (20.49%) and
the lowest in metals and industrial manufacturing (5.97%) and financial services (7.22%). In the period
2003-2005, the dispersion in returns ranged from 22.76% in miscellaneous to 1.55% in utilities,
construction and retail. Interestingly, the dispersion in returns across sectors fell from 11.62% in the early
period to 9.41% in the most recent period.
The coefficient of variation within sectors across ownership groups was 0.19 in food, textile and
paper manufacturing and 0.77 in transport in 1988-1990 and ranged from 0.07 in utilities, construction
and retail to 0.80 in miscellaneous diversified production in 2003-2005. The coefficient of variation in
returns across sectors went from 0.24 in 1988-1990 to 0.28 in 2003-2005.
In sum the panels in Table 5 and 6, tell an analogous story. The rate of return is remarkably stable
for the full sample across time with an average return on assets of 11.93% in 1988-1990 to 11.62% in
2003-2005. While there is cross-sectional variation in rates of return across ownership groups and sectors,
there is relatively little dispersion in the rates of return as seen in the tight range of returns and the low
coefficient of variation within sectors by ownership groups and across sectors (see Figure 4). The patterns

40

The coefficient of variation is a normalized measure of the dispersion of a probability distribution. It is defined as
the ratio of the standard deviation to the mean. For examples, distributions with coefficient of variation less than one
are considered low variance and higher than one high variance.

19

in the return on assets are striking when compared to the large variations we see in terms of new firmentry by foreign and private firms and in the growth of their assets, sales and profits in comparison to the
lower rates of entry by state-owned and business-group affiliated firms.
A growing literature argues that the differential effects of policies and institutions on the
investment climate broadly defined might significantly influence the allocation of resources across
establishments. The working hypothesis in this literature is that not only the level of factor accumulation,
but also how these factors are allocated across heterogeneous production units, matters in trying to
understand income differences (see Hsieh and Klenow, 2009; Restruccia and Rogerson, 2008; Alfaro,
Charlton and Kanczuk 2008). That is, the great divide between rich and poor countries may not just be
explained by lack of capital and skilled labor but also by the consequence of the misallocation or misuse
of available resources.
For India, Hsieh and Klenow (2007) use plant-level information from the Indian manufacturing
census data to measure dispersion in the marginal products of capital and labor within 4-digit
manufacturing sectors. When capital and labor are hypothetically reallocated to equalize marginal
products to the extent observed in the United States, the authors find efficiency gains of 50%-60% in
India.41 As noted by Klenow (2008), the importance of allocative efficiency has been motivated by the
fact that the growth took off in India in the wake of a series of policy reforms. In this paper, we show that
the coefficient of variation in the rate of return on assets is relatively low across both industries and
owners. A further point to observe is that state-owned firms earn substantial profits. It is not clear whether
these returns stem from monopoly power in concentrated industries or because they are efficient. If it is
the former, further privatization may serve to raise returns even higher, notwithstanding the caveat that
private monopolies do not replace state-owned monopolies.
5.2 Or, Is It Continuing Incumbent Control?
Table 7 presents information about the shares of the number of firms, assets, sales and profits by
ownership groups and sectors. Although the table carries substantial information, some clear, interesting
but conflicting, patterns emerge. Overall, what appears is not a story of dramatic transformation in India’s
micro-economic structure following liberalization. Rather, it is one of an economy still dominated by the
incumbents (state-owned firms and traditional private firms) and the sectors of the pre-reform period (see
Figure 5). The evidence corroborates the arguments in Panagariya (2008).42

41

Hsieh and Klenow (2009) use manufacturing data from India’s Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) from 19871988 through 1994-1995.
42
The evidence is consistent with a slow and gradual reform process.

20

Despite low shares in the number of firms, India’s formal sector continues to be dominated by
state-owned enterprises and to a lesser extent by traditional private firms in terms of shares of assets, sales
and profits. Between 1988-1990, on average, new private and foreign firms accounted for 26% and 5% of
the total number of firms, respectively, while state-owned firms and traditional private firms accounted
for 5% and 64% of the total number of firms, respectively. Between 2003-2005, on average, the number
of new private firms accounted for 56% of all firms, while the number of traditional private firms was
36% of the total number of firms. The share of the number of state-owned firms and foreign firms
remained virtually unchanged at 4% and 5% respectively. The 60-40 split in the number of firms between
the shares of private and foreign firms and the shares of state-owned and traditional private firms is
replicated across sectors. The exceptions are, business, computer and communication, where the split is
80-20, which reflects the even higher number of new private firms.
In striking contrast, state-owned and traditional private firms overshadow the shares of assets,
sales and profits. Between 1988 and 1990, state-owned and traditional firms accounted for 94%, 87% and
91% of total assets, sales and profits. Between 2003 and 2005, these fractions stood at 77%, 73% and
78%, respectively. While the rising importance of foreign and private firm activity is evident from the
data, it appears that the incumbents from the pre-reform period control nearly three-quarters of the
economy in broad terms: state-owned firms and traditional private firms. It is worth pointing out,
however, that although the shares of assets, sales and profits appear largely under the control of
incumbent firms, given that the number of private and foreign firms has been increasing across sectors,
competition at the margins is probably intensifying alongside of competition from imports in sectors that
were liberalized to trade.
The importance of the state-owned firms has remained extraordinarily high suggesting perhaps
insufficient reform. Privatization efforts were abandoned after a short spell in the early 2000s and sectors
such as manufacturing and financial services remain largely under state control. For example, average
total assets of state-owned firms represented close to 70% of total assets in 1988-1990, and stood at over
60% by 2005. Given virtually no privatization, however, we note that while this is not an inconsequential
shift, the extent of state control makes India an outlier in the world economy (with the exception of China,
of course).43 Average share of total assets owned by traditional private firms remained relatively constant
at 25% between 1988 and 1998 while falling to 17% by 2005. New private firms’ average share of assets
in contrast rose from of 1% in 1988-1990 reaching 15% at the end of the period. The share of assets under
foreign firms has remained relatively constant throughout the period moving from 5% in 1988-1990 to a
mere 7% in 2003-2005.

43

See Chong and Lopez-de-Silanes (2004).

21

Average sales by state-owned firms remained at close to 40% of total sales throughout the sample
period, while the average share of traditional firms dipped from 45% to 31% and that of new private firms
rose from 2% to 17%. Foreign firms represent close to 10% of total sales on average remaining relatively
stable throughout the period. Profit shares also remained relatively stable throughout the period for stateowned firms, representing close to 55%, and for foreign firms at 9%. Traditional private firms and new
private firms marked a shift from 36% and 1% respectively at the beginning of the sample period to 22%
and 13% respectively in 2003-2005.
Although there is considerable variation in assets, sales and profit shares across sectors, an
interesting pattern emerges. Sectors dominated by state-owned firms before liberalization (with fractions
higher than 50% to 60%) remain the dominant ownership groups following liberalization. For example, in
agriculture, state-owned firms represented close to 95% of all assets, sales and profits in the period 19881990. By 2003-2005, state-owned firms still represented close to 90% of assets, sales and profits.
Similarly, in utilities, construction and retail and transport state-owned firms accounted for more than
70% and 50% of assets respectively in the period 1988-1990 and in 2003-2005, with similar shares for
sales and profits. Traditional private firms led chemicals and plastic manufacturing, metals and industrial
manufacturing, and activities in the miscellaneous diversified groups.
Interestingly, while in all sectors the share of new private and foreign firms has remained low,
they have gained importance in recent years. In particular, an important exception to state and traditional
private-firm dominance is seen in business and business, computer, and communication where new
private firms accounted for close to 40% of asset shares in 2003-2005. Shares of total sales and profits
display a similar pattern. These activities therefore represent not only growth in terms of numbers of firms
but also in terms of importance in assets, sales and profit shares. The firm-level evidence in these
industries mirrors the services growth in the aggregate data, especially after 2000.
Activities in manufacturing such as food and textile and paper manufacturing, chemical and
plastics manufacturing and metals and industrial manufacturing still dominate sales. While these sectors
still represent a high share of assets, it is the financial service and real estate activities that dominate
assets. In food and textile and paper manufacturing, and metals and industrial manufacturing, state-owned
firms account for 38% and 24% of assets; 58% and 16% of sales and 43% and 25% of profits in the
current period down from 50% and 51% of assets; 60% and 33% of sales and 47% and 38% of profits.
Chemicals and plastics manufacturing, however, remains dominated by traditional private firms which
still account for more than 50% of assets, sales and profits. The combined role of private and foreign
firms in assets, sales and even profits peaked at close to 40% in recent years in chemicals and metals and
close to 20% in food and textile. Overall, for activities in the manufacturing sector, the picture remains
one of a sector dominated by incumbents (state-owned firms and traditional private firms).
22

In the financial services sector, state-owned and traditional private firms accounted for 97% of
total assets, sales and profits in 1988-1990. These shares stood at 80%, 83% and 81%, respectively, in
2001-2005.
Table 8 presents information by year of incorporation (between 1947-1977, 1977-1990 and 19912005) for number of firms, firm size, assets, sales, employment, profitability, and rate of return and their
evolution in the different periods of study.44 The oldest firm in the sample (Howrah Mills Company Ltd.)
was incorporated in 1825, and the sample begins with over 1,200 firms that were incorporated before
independence. From this group 91 firms exit the sample through mergers. Many of these older firms (preindependence), however, remain in operation following the reforms.45 An industrial shake-out perhaps
characteristic of a creative destructive wave following widespread reform is not manifest in the data.
Overall the evidence presented in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, the low number of state-owned and
business group affiliated firms combined with their dominant shares of assets, sales and profits, is
suggestive of high industry concentration by incumbents.
Using data on product lines, Goldberg et al. (2009) find the contribution of the net product margin
to total output growth, following liberalization in India, to be driven almost exclusively by product
additions, and not by discontinuation of product lines that have become obsolete.46 The authors argue that
product churning or “creative destruction” along the product dimension did not happen in India in the
1990s, despite the fact that firms were undergoing major trade and other structural reforms during this
period.47 In relation to these findings, our results suggest that creative destruction in firm-entry and exit,
where new entrants replace incumbent firms, does not appear to characterize firm-activity in the Indian
context following liberalization. Consistent with the addition of product lines in Goldberg et al. (2009),
there was substantial firm-entry across all sectors and in particular in the services sectors. However, it

44

A point about firm-exit is worth noting. The dataset contains a code for firms that exited the data via mergers and
acquisitions. However, the data do not contain a flag for firms shutting down versus discontinued coverage.
Therefore, when we no longer observe data for a firm, we assume firm-exit. But again, this may also reflect
discontinued coverage by Prowess or the failure of unlisted firms to provide data about their operations. Results
should, hence, be interpreted with caution.
45
The data also suggest that the profitability of older firms (incorporated before 1985) surpasses that of newer firms
(incorporated after 1985). This finding may in part reflect survivorship bias (surviving older firms) and the fact that
young firms may have lower returns in their early years.
46
Recent theoretical models that focus on the relationship between trade costs and product-mix predict that firms
adjust to a decline in trade costs through product dropping, see Bernard, Redding and Schott (2006, 2009).
47
Goldberg et al. (2008, 2009) examine whether Indian firms change their extensive product margin in response to
India’s large-scale tariff liberalization during the 1990s. Their analysis suggests that despite the regulatory
constraints, changes in firms’ product-mix made a noticeable contribution to growth; on net, they account for
approximately 25% of the increase in Indian manufacturing output during our sample period. However, in contrast
to the U.S., only 30% of Indian firms show a change in their product-mix over a 5-year period. Firms in India
infrequently drop a product or simultaneously add and drop a product. See Bernard, Redding and Schott (2006,
2009) for evidence in U.S.

23

does not appear that firm-entry was also accompanied by a decline in the importance of incumbent firms.
This may simply be because the incumbent firms restructured and became competitive. In industries such
as airlines, banking, and telecommunications, incumbent firms have restructured with a significant rise in
their productivity. Alternatively, incumbent firms, especially state-owned firms, may continue to operate
because they remain heavily subsidized by the state.
The next section examines the evolution of industry concentration and firm size across industries
and ownership shares and the impact of various liberalization measures enacted in 1991.
5.3 Maintaining Control: Market Share and Concentration
In order to understand the efficient allocation of resources, we look at market dynamics with
regard to promotion of competition. We measure the degree of competition (consolidation) as a measure
of competitive efficiency to examine how industrial concentration has evolved over time.
Table 9 includes information on industry concentration (the Herfindahl index48) and dispersion
measures (coefficient of variation calculated by assets and sales). Underlying average market share values
are calculated for a given firm across the years in a sub-period and then the Herfindahl index is calculated
by industry for a given sub-period. It may be noted that the Prowess database provides four-and-five-digit
industry classifications for most firms. However, because the liberalization policies were enacted at the
three-digit level, industry concentration accordingly is computed at the three-digit level. We present data
for the full sample first and then by the different forms of ownership.
For the overall economy, Table 9 shows a reduction in market concentration for the average firm
throughout the sample period. The Herfindahl indices suggest an increased degree of competition among
firms in India. This finding is consistent with the earlier evidence on increased firm-activity and overall
higher dynamism in the economy. However, despite the evidence about increased levels of competition,
even for 2001-2005, the concentration measures remain high. Chari and Gupta (2008) compare the
industrial structure in India with that of the United States (taken as a benchmark of a country with fewer
regulations and more developed financial markets). They find that in 1990, a year before the reforms, the
average Herfindahl index in India was significantly higher (40% ) than in the United States (24%) for the
same three-digit SIC industries, while concentration in Industries that remained protected was
significantly higher than their U.S. counterparts (54% versus 22%).

48

The Herfindahl index is an indicator of the degree of competition among firms in an industry. It is defined as the
square of the market shares of each firm in an industry. The value of the Herfindahl index can range from zero in
perfectly competitive industries to one in single-producer monopolies). All data are first expressed in constant
rupees crore.

24

The coefficient of variation (for both sales and assets) indicates increased dispersion. Overall,
consistent with theory, what emerges is a picture of the average firm in India growing bigger, in terms of
assets, sales and profits, perhaps with some gaining more than others as heterogeneity increased
substantially in the period. The finding also suggests a decline in the traditional dominance of small firms
in India.
In terms of the different ownership groups, for the average state-owned firm, dispersion has also
increased. Overall, the average state-owned firm has grown bigger, more profitable and somewhat more
dissimilar. This may largely reflect greater involvement of the state in the commanding heights of the
industry and its monopoly in certain sectors. The share here refers to the fraction of assets (sales) owned
by state-owned firms relative to the total assets (sales) in a particular industry. For traditional private
firms, dispersion also increased during the period. In sum, the average traditional private firm has become
more profitable, bigger, and more disperse (particularly during the last sub-periods of the data). For new
private firms, there is a substantial increase in heterogeneity in this group, which characterize a great
many firms. As for foreign firms, they too show increased dispersion.
The previous discussion portrays the evolution of firms in India from 1988-2005, a period
characterized by substantial reforms. These reforms took many forms (liberalization of FDI, trade,
domestic markets, etc) at different times as different sectors were liberalized each at a difference pace.
Although a formal causal analysis of the effect of these policies is beyond the scope of this paper, Tables
10a-c describe how firms evolved before and after in industries that enacted specific reforms:
liberalization of foreign direct investment, trade liberalization and domestic market deregulation.49
Table 10a shows measures of industry concentration, and dispersion averaged across sectors that
were for the period before FDI liberalization in the first column and after FDI liberalization in the second
one. The FDI reforms in 1991 reduced barriers to foreign entry in a subset of industries. Specifically,
according to the Industrial Policy Resolution of 1991, automatic approval was granted for foreign direct
investment of up to 51% in 46 of 96 three-digit industrial categories (Office of the Economic Advisor,
2001). In the remaining 50 industries, the state continued to require that foreign investors obtain approval
for entry. The top panel of the table shows the results for the whole sample and the lower ones by
ownership group. The sample is restricted to industries that deregulated foreign investment, to two years
before (1989-1990) and to five years after (1991-1995) the policy was implemented in 1991.
For the average firm, industry concentration declined significantly following the policy change
from 0.26 to 0.20 in liberalized industries. Dispersion (both in terms of assets and sales) also increased

49

Variations in the number of industries in Tables10a before and after liberalization reflect entry or exit by different
owner categories into industries that were liberalized. The number of industries in the results for the full sample
gives the maximum number of liberalized industries.

25

following the reforms. Industries that were liberalized had lower concentration ratios before liberalization
than non-liberalized economies. Concentration falls below the Herfindahl index for the full sample after
liberalization suggesting that non-liberalizing industries had and continue to have substantially higher
levels of concentration. These results are consistent with findings in Chari and Gupta (2008).
Closer examination reveals substantial heterogeneity across groups. The data shows a significant
increase in dispersion across state-owned firms. In the case of traditional private firms as well, dispersion
seems to have increased considerably. FDI liberalization (of up to 51% ownership stake) in many
instances necessitated a local partner. As such, many local business groups stood to gain by the
liberalization process (as they were the obvious partner to take in many instances). Similarly, the results
show that for new private firms and foreign firms, increase in dispersion was substantial.
Table 10b presents similar results for trade liberalization. First, it is important to note that trade
liberalization in 1991 was inversely related to industry concentration before 1991. Second, following
trade liberalization, the industry concentration of the average firm in the economy declined significantly
five years following the policy change. Third, dispersion also increased following trade liberalization.
Looking across ownership types, we find substantial heterogeneity.
Finally, 10c shows similar summary statistics for pre- and post-domestic market deregulation.
The trends also display substantial heterogeneity across groups. One interesting pattern is that market
concentration seems to have diminished for the liberalizing industries more dramatically, following
domestic market regulation, than FDI deregulation and in particular trade liberalization (perhaps not very
surprising, given the extent of regulation and lingering restrictions).
Overall, preliminary findings suggest that industry concentration and average market shares
decline in industries that experienced either de-licensing or FDI and/or trade liberalization. The
coefficient of variation in average firm sales and assets increased suggesting that there is greater
dispersion in firm size within liberalized industries. Our future endeavor will be to disentangle the precise
mechanisms through which specific reforms affect firm activity in liberalized industries.
6. Conclusion
Between 1986 and 2005, Indian growth put to rest the concern that there was something about the
‘nature of India’ that made rapid growth difficult. Following broad-ranging reforms in the mid-1980s and
early 1990s, the state deregulated entry, both domestic and foreign, in many industries and also hugely
reduced barriers to trade. While liberalizations are believed to transform economies through competition
and the removal of distortions, the effects of liberalization may not be uniform. Some industries may be
better equipped for change while others are not. Within industries, new entrants may gain market share,
while incumbents go bankrupt. Restrictions may linger in some sectors, and for some firms.
26

In this paper we analyze the evolution of India’s industrial composition by focusing on the microfoundations of its productive structure: we examine the evolution of India’s industrial structure at the firm
level following reforms. In addition to changes in the industrial composition, we examine whether entry
took place and if so, whether at the expense of traditional incumbents such as state-owned and traditional
private firms. Finally, we examine the evolution of firm size, market share and industry concentration
over time and in industries that were liberalized to either domestic or foreign entry or trade.
Using firm-level data, we document dynamism and change in the productive structure following
the implementation of economic reforms. Substantial new entry by foreign and private firms went along
with high growth in their assets, sales and profits. In recent years, for example, some new and important
private players have emerged in sectors such as information technology services (IT), pharmaceuticals
and telecom. However, despite the substantial increase in the number of private and foreign firms, the
overall pattern that emerges after close to two decades of reforms is one of continued incumbent
dominance in terms of assets, sales and profits: state-owned firms and traditional private firms. In sectors
dominated by state-owned and traditional private firms before liberalization (with assets, sales and profits
representing 50% or higher shares), these firms remain the dominant ownership group following
liberalization. Further, rates of return remain stable over time and show low dispersion across sectors and
across ownership groups within sectors.
Certainly, the welfare implications of our findings are not clear-cut especially in the light of the
current international financial crisis and the increased role of the state in private enterprise in the U.S. and
other developed countries. It may, however, be hard to justify the extent of state-owned presence that we
continue to see in India. Of course it is not clear whether ownership per se matters or whether exposure to
competition through liberalization is a sufficient condition for improvements in efficiency.50
Recent literature highlights the idea that economic growth may be impeded not simply because of
a lack of resources such as capital, skilled labor and entrepreneurship but also because available resources
are misallocated. The high levels of state ownership and ownership by traditional private firms in India
raise the question of whether existing resources could be allocated more efficiently and whether
remaining barriers to competition jeopardize the effectiveness of reform measures that have been put in
place. While rates of return across ownership groups do not display significant dispersion, it is not clear

50

One might well argue that the slow/uneven reform process and the small private sector could still be setting
“marginal incentives”. As Schumpeter (1942) notes, “[monopolistic] competition of the kind we now have in mind
acts not only when in being but also when it is merely an ever-present threat. It disciplines before it attacks. The
businessman feels himself to be in a competitive situation even if he is alone in his field or if, though not alone, he
holds a position such that investigating government experts fail to see any effective competition between him and
any other firms in the same or a neighboring field and in consequence conclude that his talk, under examination,
about his competitive sorrows is all make-believe.”

27

whether the rates of return for the incumbent groups are being driven by monopoly power that comes with
high industry concentration, or through inherent efficiency. A related issue that also arises is whether
privatization in the context of high industry concentration may simply replace state-owned monopolies
with private ones as it has done in the case of many countries in Latin America.
As discussed in the paper, the macro-economic effects of deregulation are theoretically
ambiguous. Further empirical work is needed before we can reach definitive conclusions on the impact of
deregulation on the overall dynamic efficiency of the economy.51 An assessment of the optimality of
market reforms requires a full welfare analysis that goes beyond the scope of this paper and will be the
subject of our future research.

51

It is also worth emphasizing that this work does not speak to other welfare and efficiency-improving effects of
liberalization linked to improved quality and variety of products, or international risk-sharing.

28

References
Aghion, P., R. Burgess, S. Redding, and F. Zilibotti, 2008. “The Unequal Effects of Liberalization:
Evidence from Dismantling the License Raj in India,” American Economic Review 94, 13971412.
Alesina, A., S. Ardagna, G. Nicoletti and F. Schiantarelli, “Regulation and Investment,” Journal of the
European Economic Association 3, 791-825.
Alfaro, L., A. Charlton, and F. Kanczuk, 2008. “Plant-Size Distribution and Cross-Country Income
Differences.” NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics.
Alfaro, L. and A. Rodríguez-Clare, 2004. “Multinationals and Linkages: Evidence from Latin America,”
Economia 4, 113-170.
Ahluwalia, M. S., 2002. “Economic Reforms in India Since 1991: Has Gradualism Worked?” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 16, 67-88.
Arnold J., B. Javorcik, M. Lipscomb, A. Mattoo, 2008. “Services Reform and Manufacturing
Performance: Evidence from India”, University of Oxford, mimeo.
Bai, C., C.-T. Hsieh and Y. Qin, 2006. “The Return to Capital in China,” Brookings Papers in Economic
Activity.
Banerjee, A., 2006. “The Paradox of Indian Growth: A comment on Kochar et al.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 53, 1021-1026
Bernard, A., S. Redding, and P. Schott, 2009. “Multi-product Firms and Product Switching,” American
Economic Review, forthcoming.
Bernard, A., S. Redding, and P. Schott, 2006. “Multi-product Firms and Trade Liberalization,” NBER
Working Paper 12782.
Bertrand, M, P. Mehta and S. Mullainathan, 2002. “Ferreting out Tunneling: An Application to Indian
Business groups,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121-148.
Bertrand, M. and Francis K., 2002. “Does Entry Regulation Hinder Job Creation? Evidence from the
French Retail Industry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1369-1413.
Black, S. E. and P. E. Strahan, 2002. “Entrepreneurship and Bank Credit Availability,” Journal of
Finance 57, 2807-2833.
Blanchard, Olivier J. and Francesco Giavazzi, 2003. “Macroeconomic Effects of Regulation and
Deregulation in Goods and Labor Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 879–908.
Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen, 2007. “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices across Firms
and Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics CXXII, 1341-1408.
Bloom, N., R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen, 2007. “The Organization of Firms across Countries,” Stanford,
mimeo.
29

Bosworth, B., S. Collins and A. Virmani, 2007, “Sources of Growth in the Indian Economy,” in Suman
Bery, Barry Bosworth and Arvind Panagariya (eds.) India Policy Forum 3, NCAER & The
Brookings Institution.
Bustos, P, 2009. “Trade Liberalization, Exports and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on the Impact of
MERCOSUR on Argentinean Firms,” mimeo.
Caballero, R. and M. Hammour, 1996. “On the Timing and Efficiency of Creative Destruction,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 446, 805-852.
Chari, A. and N. Gupta, 2008. “Incumbents and Protectionism: The Political Economy of Foreign Entry
Liberalization.” Journal of Financial Economics 88, 33-656.
Chong S. and L. Lopez-de-Silanes, 2004. “Privatization in Latin America: What Does the Evidence Say?”
Economia 4, 37-111.
Cole, S. A., 2008. “Financial Development, Bank Ownership, and Growth. Or, Does Quantity Imply
Quality?” The Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Dinc, I. S. and N. Gupta, 2007. “The Decision to Privatize: Finance, Politics and Patronage,” mimeo.
Fisman, R. and T. Khanna, 2004. “Facilitating Development: The Role of Business Groups,” World
Development 32, 609-28.
Goldberg, P., A. Khandelwal, N. Pavcnik and P. Topalova, 2009. “Trade Liberalization and New
Imported Inputs,” mimeo.
Goldberg, P., A. Khandelwal, N. Pavcnik and P. Topalova, 2008. “Imported Intermediate Inputs and
Domestic Product Growth: Evidence from India,” NBER Working Paper 14416.
Goldberg, P. and N. Pavcnik, 2004. “Trade, Inequality, and Poverty: What Do We Know? Evidence from
Recent Trade Liberalization Episodes in Developing Countries,” Brookings Trade Forum, 2004.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza and L. Zingales, 2004. “Does Local Financial Development Matter?” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 119, 929-969.
Gupta, N., 2005. “Partial Privatization and Firm Performance,” The Journal of Finance, Vol. LX, No. 2,
987-1015.
Hsieh, C.-T. and Klenow, P. J., 2008. “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Henry, P., 2007. “Capital Account Liberalization: Theory, Evidence, and Speculation,” Journal of
Economic Literature 45, 887-935.
Harrison, A. and A. Rodriguez-Clare, 2008. “Trade, Foreign Investment, and Industrial Policy,”
Handbook of Development Economics, forthcoming.

30

Khanna, T. and K. Palepu, 1999. “Policy Shocks, Market Intermediaries and Corporate Strategy: the
Evolution of Business Groups in Chile and India,” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy
8, 271-310.
Khanna, T. and K. Palepu, 2005. “The Evolution of Concentrated Ownership in India: Broad Patterns and
a History of the Indian Software Industry,” in Randall Morck, eds., A History of Corporate
Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional Managers, University of
Chicago Press.
Klenow, P., 2008. “Discussion On Big Answers for Big Questions: The Presumption of Macro”, May
2008, The Brookings Institution Conference on What Works in Development? Thinking Big and
Thinking Small.
Kochhar, K., U. Kumar, R. Rajan, A. Subramanian, and I. Tokatlidis, 2006. “India's Pattern of
Development: What Happened, What Follows,” Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 981-1019.
Kose, A. M., E. Prasad, K. Rogoff, S.-J. Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose, 2006. “Financial Globalization: A
Reappraisal,” NBER Working Paper 12484..
Krishna, P. and D. Mitra, 1998. “Trade Liberalization, Market Discipline and Productivity Growth: New
Evidence from India.” Journal of Development Economics 56, 447-462.
Kroszner, R. and P. E. Strahan, 1999. “What Drives Deregulation? Economics and Politics of the
Relaxation of Bank Branching Restrictions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1437-67.
Lileeva, A. and D. Trefler, 2007. “Improved Access to Foreign Markets Raises Plant-Level
Productivity… for Some Plants,” mimeo.
Lucas, R. Jr., 1988. “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics 22,
3-42.
Megginson, W. L. and J. M. Netter, 2001. “From State to Market: A Survey of Empirical Studies on
Privatization,” Journal of Economic Literature 39, 321-389.
Megginson, W. L., 2005. The Financial Economics of Privatization, Oxford University Press: New York,
NY.
Melitz, M. J., 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
Productivity,” Econometrica 71, 1695-1725.
Melitz, M. and G. Ottaviano, 2008. “Market Size, Trade, and Productivity,” Review of Economic Studies
75, 295-316.
Panagariya, A., 2004. “India in the 1980s and 1990s: A Triumph of Reforms,” IMF Staff Country
Reports, 1-37.
Panagariya, A., 2008. India, the Emerging Giant, Oxford University Press: New York, NY.

31

Rajan, R., Zingales, L., 2003a. “The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial Development in the
Twentieth Century.” Journal of Financial Economics 69, 5-50.
Rajan, R., Zingales, L., 2003b. Saving Capitalism from Capitalists. Random House: New York.
Rodrik, D. and A. Subramanian, 2005. “From Hindu Growth to Productivity Surge: The Mystery of the
Indian Growth Transition,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 52, No. 2.
Schumpeter, J. A., 1942. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, Unwin University Books, London.
Sivadasan, J., 2006. “Productivity Consequences of Product Market Liberalization: Microevidence from
Indian Manufacturing Sector Reforms.” October 2006.
Srinivasan, T.N. and S.D. Tendulkar, 2003. Reintegrating India with the World Economy. Peterson
Institute of International Economics.
Stigler, G. J. 1971. “The Theory of Economy Regulation,” Bell Journal of Economics 2(1), 3-21.
Topalova, P., 2007. “Trade Liberalization and Firm Productivity: The Case of India,” IMF Working
Paper, WP/04/28.
Tybout, J., 2000. “Manufacturing Firms in Developing Countries: How Well Do They Do and Why?”
Journal of Economic Literature 38, 11-44.
World Bank, 2005. “Improving the Investment Climate in India”, South Asia Region and Investment
Climate Unit, Washington DC: World Bank.

32

Appendix Table 1 - Description of Variables
Variables

Definition

State-Owned (SOE)

Firms majority-owned by the federal and state governments.

Traditional Private Firms

Includes firms majority-owned by a business group and private firms not affiliated to a group incorporated
before 1985. Indian business groups or family-owned firms are groups of companies that are controlled by the
same shareholders, usually all members of a family.
Includes firms majority-owned by a business group and private firms not affiliated to a group incorporated
after 1985.

New Private Firms
Foreign Firms
Sales

Firms incorporated overseas.
Sales generated by a firm from its main business activity measured by charges to customers for goods
supplied and services rendered. Excludes income from activities not related to main business, such as
dividends, interest, and rents in the case of industrial firms, as well as non-recurring income. Data in constant
Rs. Crore (deflated by GDP deflator from World Bank, WDI).

Assets

Gross fixed assets of a firm, which includes movable and immovable assets as well as assets which are in the
process of being installed. Data in constant Rs. Crore (deflated by GDP deflator from World Bank, WDI).

PBITDA

Excess of income over all expenditures except tax, depreciation, interest payments, and rents in a firm. Data
in constant Rs. Crore (deflated by GDP deflator from World Bank, WDI).

Return on Assets

Ratio of PBITDA to Assets in a firm, averaged across firms in that industry.

Firm Size (Assets & Sales) and Profits

Average firm assets, sales, and profits in an industry. For the full sample, the industry-level averages are
averaged across industries. Data in constant Rs. Crore (deflated by GDP deflator from World Bank, WDI).

SOE Share

The ratio of total sales, assets, profits produced by state-owned firms in an industry to Industry Sales ,
Industry Assets, Industry Profits in that industry.

Traditional Firms Share

The ratio of total sales, assets, profits produced by private firms incoporated before 1985 in an industry to
Industry Sales , Industry Assets, Industry Profits in that industry.

New Private Firms Share

The ratio of total sales, assets, profits produced by private firms incorporated after 1985 in an industry to
Industry Sales , Industry Assets, Industry Profits in that industry.

Foreign Share

The ratio of total sales, assets, profits produced by foreign firms in an industry to Industry Sales , Industry
Assets, Industry Profits in that industry.

Herfindahl Index

Sum of the squares of the Market Share of all firms in an industry in each 3-digit industrial category.

Coefficient of Variation

Ratio of standard deviation to mean of assets, sales, return on assets at the industry level

Tade liberalization measure

Percentage decrease in tariffs at the three-digit industry level between 1986-1990 and 1991-1995.

NIC Code

Three-digit industry code includes manufacturing, financial, and service sectors.

Appendix Table 2: Industry Classifications
Industry Name
1. Agriculture, mining, extraction
Coal & lignite
Cotton & blended yarn
Crude oil & natural gas
Floriculture
Granite
Minerals

3 digit NIC code

# Firms

101, 102
11, 14
111
11
141

16
6
9
27
46
81

101, 103, 120,
131, 132, 141, 142
11, 12, 14, 20, 142
Other agricultural products
112
Other construction & allied activities
11
Other textiles
11, 12
Poultry & meat products
11
Processed/packaged foods
11
Rubber & rubber products
11
Tobacco products
11
Vegetable oils & products
20
Wood
2. Food, textile, and paper manufacturing
154
Bakery products
155
Beer & alcohol
210, 221, 222
Books & cards
171
Cloth
231
Coal & lignite
154
Cocoa products & confectionery
154
Coffee
221
Comp., & storage devices
171
Cotton & blended yarn
152, 154
Dairy products
192
Footwear
232
Lubricants, etc.
151
Marine foods
221
Media-print
153, 155
Milling products
232
Misc. manufactured articles
155
Other agricultural products
172
Other industrial machinery
191
Other leather products
223
Other recreational services
232
Other storage & distribution
171, 172, 173, 181
Other textiles
210
Paper
210
Paper products
151,
154
Poultry & meat products
151,
153,
154,
155
Processed/packaged foods
181
Readymade garments
232
Refinery
153
Starches
154
Sugar
171, 172
Synthetic textiles
154
Tea
171
Textile processing
155, 160
Tobacco products
151, 152, 153
Vegetable oils & products
201, 202
Wood

149
12
2
16
22
11
5
0
6
21
95
60
148
11
9
19
1
336
46
47
46
71
35
59
1
2
1
36
2
5
189
154
46
14
81
120
12
9
99
19
173
68
20
224
41

Industry Name
3 digit NIC code
3. Chemicals and plastics manufacturing
269
Abrasives
241
Alkalies
269
Cement
269
Ceramic tiles
252
Comp., & storage devices
Cosm., toiletries, soaps & detergents
242

# Firms

242
Drugs & pharmaceuticals
241,
242
Dyes & pigments
241
Fertilisers
261
Glass & glassware
241, 242
Inorganic chemicals
269
Misc. electrical machinery
241
Organic chemicals
241, 242
Other chemicals
269
Other non-metallic mineral products
252
Other recreational services
252
Other textiles
242
Paints & varnishes
241, 242
Pesticides
252
Plastic films
252
Plastic packaging goods
252
Plastic tubes & sheets, other
241
Polymers
242
Prod., distribution & exhib. of films
269
Refractories
241,
251
Rubber & rubber products
243
Synthetic textiles
243
Textile processing
251
Tyres & tubes
4. Metals and industrial manufacturing
291, 293
Air-conditioners & refrigerators
272
Aluminium & aluminium products
343
Automobile ancillaries
273, 289
Castings & forgings
341
Commercial vehicles
319, 322, 331
Communication equipment
300
Computers & peripherals
291, 292
Construction equipment
300, 321, 323
Consumer electronics
272
Copper & copper products
289,
292,
293, 315
Domestic electrical appliances
314
Dry cells
369
Gems & jewellery
291
General purpose machinery
319
Generators, transf. & switchgears
291, 292, 300
Industrial machinery
292
Machine tools
271, 281, 289, 361
Metal products
291, 292, 312, 319
Misc. electrical machinery
369
Misc. manufactured articles
314, 319, 321, 322,
Other electronics
291, 292
Other industrial machinery

442
73
60
48
86
3
134
124
29
4
1
34
86
40
105
162
55
0
32
82
100
57
34

11
13
113
44
2
86

16
53
307
123
5
45
46
39
34
30
52
5
84
84
111
137
60
218
44
68
194
24

Appendix Table A2 (cont.): Industry Classifications
Industry Name
3 digit NIC code # Firms
4. Metals and industrial manufacturing (cont.)
272
Other non-ferrous metals
30
351, 352, 353, 359
Other transports equipment
38
341
Passenger cars & multi utility vehicles
8
271
Pig iron
10
281, 291
Prime movers
24
271
Sponge iron
21
271
Steel
327
271
Steel tubes & pipes
85
314
Storage batteries
8
369
Tobacco products
4
292
Tractors
9
293
Trading
1
359
Two & three wheelers
16
313
Wires & cables
80
5. Utilities, construction, retail
511
Copper & copper products
1
401
Electricity distribution
21
401
Electricity generation
116
452
Housing construction
118
452
Industrial construction
105
452
Infrastructural construction
56
410
Irrigation
3
402
LNG storage & distribution
4
452, 453
Other construction & allied activities
83
502, 519, 521, 526
Other misc services
180
402
Other storage & distribution
7
521,
523
Retail trading
15
514, 515, 519
Trading
1293
6. Transport
630
Air transport infrastructure services
3
621
Air transport services
19
603, 630
Other storage & distribution
30
601
Railway transport services
4
630
Road transport infrastructure services
10
602
Road transport services
48
Shipping transport infrastructure service 611, 612, 630
10
611, 612
Shipping transport services
63
630
Tourism
19
602, 630
Transport logistics services
63
7. Hospitality, tourism, media, health, and other services
924
Animation content provider
4
924
Exhibition of films
12
851
Health services
74
551,
552
Hotels & restaurants
203
922
Media-broadcasting
28
924
Media-content
23
753
Other financial services
1
809, 851, 911, 919
Other misc services
91
921, 924
Other recreational services
46
921
Production, distribution & exhibition of
22
552
Tourism
9

Industry Name
3 digit NIC code
8. Financial services, real estate
651
Banking services
659, 671
Brokers
671
Business consultancy
701, 702
Commercial complexes
701
Computer software
701
Drugs & pharmaceuticals
659
Financial institutions
659
Housing finance services
659
Non-banking financial cos. (NBFCs)
659, 660
Other financial services
701
Readymade garments
659
Securities and stock traders
9. Business, computer, and communication services
742, 743, 749
Business consultancy
722
Computer software
641
Courier services
722
ITES
742
Other const. & allied activities
731, 741
Other misc services
642
Telecommunication services
10. Misc. diversified
970
Diversified
970
Misc. manufactured articles

# Firms
164
72
21
167
5
0
44
49
374
1697
1
1395
342
451
10
50
5
9
74
52
382

Table A: Egypt, India and Indonesia--Economic Growth (1975-2005)
1975-1985

1986-2007
Real GDP Growth Rates
6.0%
4.2%
4.9%

1996-2005

India
Egypt
Indonesia

4.1%
8.3%
6.8%

6.3%
4.3%
2.8%

India
Egypt
Indonesia

Real Per Capita Growth Rates
1.9%
4.3%
4.6%
5.8%
2.3%
2.4%
4.6%
3.4%
0.8%

Notes: Average growth rate of GDP and GDP per capita (constant 2000 US$), from World
Bank Development Indicators.

Table 1: Industrial Composition--Average Number of Firms, 1988-2005
I
19881990

Owner/Period

State
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
Private (Inc. post-1985)
Foreign

II
19911994

III
19951998

IV
19992002

V
20032005

Full Sample
645
665
7,551 7,413
3,031 6,381
533
678

693
6,903
9,233
856

684
6,317
9,616
850

617
5,685
8,864
748

41
126
279
14

39
112
255
13

Agriculture, mining, extraction
State
42
44
43
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
145
143
134
Private (Inc. post-1985)
99
221
289
Foreign
6
8
13
Food, Textile, & Paper Mfg.
State
83
77
73
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 1,328 1,284 1,171
Private (Inc. post-1985) 504
1,048 1,293
Foreign
68
85
101

66
1,049
1,269
89

56
907
1,109
73

Chemicals & Plastics Mfg.
State
56
57
56
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 1,150 1,121 1,025
Private (Inc. post-1985) 527
929
1,081
Foreign
120
135
147

49
910
1,030
139

46
816
916
123

Metals and Industrial Mfg.
State
97
97
94
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 1,450 1,406 1,264
Private (Inc. post-1985) 521
916
1,198
Foreign
135
159
191

83
1,115
1,166
181

73
995
1,045
160

135

124

828
1,279
92

775
1,415
97

702
1,293
89

40
99
138

42
95
171

34
87
174

State

Utilities, construction, retail
103
105
116

Private (Inc. pre-1985)
Private (Inc. post-1985)
Foreign

892
370
55

882
796
75

State
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
Private (Inc. post-1985)

Transport
33
36
104
104
40
80

Owner/Period

I
19881990

II
19911994

III
19951998

IV
19992002

V
20032005

Hospitality, Tourism, Media, Health, & Other services
State
16
17
17
17
16
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
198
198
194
186
173
Private (Inc. post-1985) 104
206
341
411
404
Foreign
18
20
25
28
26
Financial services, real estate
State
185
202
220
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 1,861 1,858 1,779
Private (Inc. post-1985) 656 1,652 2,566
Foreign
80
117
157

212
1,669
2,561
148

197
1,538
2,404
129

Business, Computer, & Communication services
State
24
28
30
32
28
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
266
265
260
248
225
Private (Inc. post-1985) 133
360
711
923
875
Foreign
34
56
93
117
98

State
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
Private (Inc. post-1985)
Foreign

Industry/Period
Agri., mining, extrac.
Food, Text., Pap. Mfg
Chem., Plastics Mfg.
Metals, Ind. Mfg
Util., Construct., Retail
Transport

Misc. diversified
5
4
4
156
153
150
78
173
338
7
9
15
Full Sample
I
II
292
416
1,983 2,494
1,853 2,242
2,204 2,578
1,421 1,857
186
236

Hosp, Tour. , & other
336
Financ., real estate
2,782
Bus., Comp., & Comm. 456
Misc. diversified
246

Foreign
9
16
21
21
22
Source: Prowess Data Set. See Appendix Tables A1 and A2 for detailed explanation of variables.

441
3,828
709
338

6
145
391
17

6
134
392
16

III
479
2,637
2,309
2,747
2,315
298

IV
460
2,473
2,128
2,545
2,422
329

V
419
2,144
1,901
2,272
2,207
316

578
4,722
1,094
506

642
4,590
1,321
559

618
4,267
1,225
547

Table 2: Industrial Composition--Average Total Assets, 1988-2005 (Constant Rs. Crore)

Owner/Period

I
19881990

II
19911994

III
19951998

IV
19992002

Full Sample
State
198,288 384,355 551,184 808,408
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 73,013 134,655 224,185 246,071
Private (Inc. post-1985) 3,079 24,090 82,517 167,759
Foreign
14,547 36,319 68,390 99,833

V
20032005

969,039
269,427
244,100
117,171

Owner/Period

I
19881990

II
19911994

III
19951998

IV
19992002

Hospitality, Tourism, Media, Health, & Other services
State
40
153
246
257
341
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
730
1,258 3,133 6,129
5,672
Private (Inc. post-1985)
18
250
1,084 2,878
4,526
Foreign
32
120
305
527
510

Agriculture, mining, extraction
State
8,523 24,821 29,117 36,988 49,479
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
297
644
1,053 1,176 1,571
Private (Inc. post-1985)
36
600
1,567 2,684 2,874
Foreign
46
231
288
352
452

Financial services, real estate
State
115,481 239,529 376,073
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 5,963 25,834 59,802
Private (Inc. post-1985) 380
5,295 23,429
Foreign
2,546 18,287 34,660

Food, Textile, & Paper Mfg.
State
15,080 17,540 30,602 43,080 47,737
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 12,512 21,842 34,255 43,580 50,666
Private (Inc. post-1985) 372
4,444 15,980 18,749 20,381
Foreign
2,259 3,816 5,203 6,258 7,644

Business, Computer, & Communication services
State
3,329 5,717 6,847 38,517
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
460
796
1,866 4,490
Private (Inc. post-1985) 333
1,308 7,204 19,674
Foreign
53
197
1,285 4,337

Chemicals & Plastics Mfg.
State
7,119 7,197 8,166 7,310 6,479
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 20,127 30,528 43,591 44,016 45,664
Private (Inc. post-1985) 806
4,832 11,033 14,251 18,938
Foreign
4,336 5,473 9,357 12,733 13,795

State
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
Private (Inc. post-1985)
Foreign

Metals and Industrial Mfg.
State
27,872 32,737 31,148
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 21,130 33,715 51,047
Private (Inc. post-1985) 692
4,747 12,556
Foreign
4,770 7,490 14,461

27,140
50,570
20,358
17,893

32,028
56,805
23,987
19,694

Utilities, construction, retail
State
19,047 48,894 59,622 107,182 143,278
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 7,256 13,227 21,425 21,926 23,496
Private (Inc. post-1985) 241
1,704 7,560 14,900 28,475
Foreign
305
454
1,980 3,574 2,331

State
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
Private (Inc. post-1985)

Transport
1,265 7,420
1,146 2,224
48
273

8,960
2,800
863

V
20032005

Industry/Period
Agri., mining, extrac.
Food, Text., Pap. Mfg
Chem., Plastics Mfg.
Metals, Ind. Mfg
Util., Construct., Retail
Transport
Hosp, Tour. , & other
Financ., real estate
Bus., Comp., & Comm.
Misc. diversified

12,118 12,710
2,946 3,702
3,296 4,156

Foreign
10
86
698
2,190 2,570
Source: Prowess Data Set. See Appendix Tables A1 and A2 for detailed explanation of variables.

Misc. diversified
532
348
404
3,392 4,588 5,212
152
638
1,242
189
165
154
Full Sample
I
II
8,903 26,296
30,223 47,641
32,388 48,031
54,464 78,688
26,849 64,279
2,469 10,003
820
1,781
124,370 288,944
4,176 8,017
4,264 5,739

III
32,025
86,040
72,148
109,212
90,586
13,320
4,768
493,963
17,202
7,012

535,430
66,747
69,535
51,801

633,167
70,690
110,035
63,953

43,438
6,555
28,885
5,987

386
4,491
1,436
167

382
4,608
1,842
235

IV
41,200
111,666
78,310
115,961
147,582
20,550
9,791
723,513
67,018
6,480

V
54,375
126,429
84,876
132,514
197,580
23,138
11,049
877,845
84,865
7,067

Table 3: Industrial Composition--Average Gross Sales, 1988-2005 (Constant Rs. Crore)
IV
19992002

V
20032005

203,605
150,568
72,986
47,240

256,972
187,815
103,229
59,091

Agriculture, mining, extraction
State
5,486 10,462 16,098
20,974
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
253
477
830
857
Private (Inc. post-1985)
22
276
955
1,869
Foreign
81
173
181
209

26,712
1,307
2,470

Owner/Period

State
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
Private (Inc. post-1985)
Foreign

I
19881990

II
19911994

III
19951998

Full Sample
67,121 90,617 129,745
72,047 96,737 128,494
2,566 13,094 38,155
17,748 22,774 35,473

465

Owner/Period

I
II
1988- 19911990 1994

III
19951998

IV
19992002

Hospitality, Tourism, Media, Health, & Other services
State
29
123
226
181
185
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
367
616
1,175 1,405
1,678
Private (Inc. post-1985)
3
64
280
941
1,495
Foreign
17
58
147
205
297
Financial services, real estate
State
195
364
538
407
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 2,280 2,568 3,597 4,797
Private (Inc. post-1985)
42
179
390
466
Foreign
40
44
56
22

414
4,429
898
76

12,739
5,576
12,958
4,029

Food, Textile, & Paper Mfg.
State
29,059 31,898 52,401
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 14,795 20,236 26,214
Private (Inc. post-1985)
483
3,182
9,124
Foreign
4,086 5,669
7,149

88,011
39,253
18,631
8,518

103,620
46,606
18,808
9,003

Business, Computer, & Communication services
State
996 1,526 2,180 9,987
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
565
813
1,683 3,639
Private (Inc. post-1985) 185 1,287 4,046 7,822
Foreign
29
140
566
2,405

Chemicals & Plastics Mfg.
State
4,729 5,104
5,405
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 19,989 26,667 34,097
Private (Inc. post-1985)
629
2,815
7,041
Foreign
6,647 7,834 11,753

6,056
35,660
11,082
14,474

6,208
41,531
15,295
14,804

State
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
Private (Inc. post-1985)
Foreign

Misc. diversified
680
341
372
3,253 3,902 3,936
288
619
1,031
582
427
291

Metals and Industrial Mfg.
State
14,492 15,981 16,046
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 23,583 30,563 41,587
Private (Inc. post-1985)
639
3,230
9,172
Foreign
5,499 7,406 13,128

16,407
43,286
17,908
16,890

21,394
59,202
26,992
25,225

54,346
16,243
12,080
2,893

77,522
20,770
21,236
3,006

Industry/Period
Agri., mining, extrac.
Food, Text., Pap. Mfg
Chem., Plastics Mfg.
Metals, Ind. Mfg
Util., Construct., Retail
Transport
Hosp, Tour. , & other
Financ., real estate
Bus., Comp., & Comm.
Misc. diversified

Full Sample
I
II
5,842 11,387
48,423 60,984
31,994 42,419
44,212 57,181
17,942 34,095
1,518 4,082
416
862
2,558 3,155
1,774 3,767
4,803 5,289

6,892
1,974
1,130

7,798
2,540
1,675

Utilities, construction, retail
State
10,615 21,984 31,645
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
6,313 9,846 13,980
Private (Inc. post-1985)
262
1,281
5,637
Foreign
751
984
1,642
cont.
Transport
State
840
2,834
4,835
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
649
1,049
1,397
Private (Inc. post-1985)
13
159
480

V
20032005

Foreign
15
39
561
1,230
1,699
Source: Prowess Data Set. See Appendix Tables A1 and A2 for detailed explanation of variables.

III
18,064
94,887
58,296
79,932
52,904
7,273
1,829
4,580
8,474
5,630

343
3,454
1,058
394

381
4,176
1,401
486

IV
V
23,908 30,954
154,413 178,038
67,272 77,837
94,491 132,813
85,562 122,535
11,226 13,713
2,732
3,656
5,693
5,817
23,852 35,302
5,250
6,444

Table 4: Industrial Composition-- Average Profits (PBDIT), 1988-2005 (Constant Rs. Crore)
IV
19992002

V
20032005

Full Sample
State
15,421 32,029 50,140 72,050
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 10,032 17,326 25,484 25,893
Private (Inc. post-1985) 402
2,552 6,693 13,213
2,130 4,196 7,783 10,371
Foreign

82,753
33,252
19,562
12,886

Owner/Period

I
19881990

II
19911994

III
19951998

Owner/Period

I
19881990

II
19911994

III
19951998

IV
19992002

V
20032005

Hospitality, Tourism, Media, Health, & Other services
State
3
21
36
11
12
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
95
197
459
448
506
Private (Inc. post-1985)
1
23
72
178
283
Foreign
6
23
42
45
62

Agriculture, mining, extraction
State
767
3,731 4,905 7,031 10,571
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
38
88
110
111
369
Private (Inc. post-1985)
7
67
143
254
356
Foreign
9
33
30
26
143

Financial services, real estate
State
7,709 16,874 29,855
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
714
2,935 6,724
Private (Inc. post-1985) 49
565
2,026
Foreign
210
1,338 3,224

Food, Textile, & Paper Mfg.
State
2,089 2,123 3,406
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 1,847 2,959 3,841
Private (Inc. post-1985) 49
401
948
Foreign
442
720
923

5,376
5,341
1,666
1,195

7,395
6,848
1,557
1,504

Business, Computer, & Communication services
State
436
819
1,347 5,160
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
67
127
332
1,022
Private (Inc. post-1985) 81
276
914
2,113
Foreign
3
34
115
594

Chemicals & Plastics Mfg.
State
608
824
707
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 2,909 4,343 5,269
Private (Inc. post-1985) 76
472
934
Foreign
754
1,029 1,573

390
5,090
1,441
2,313

580
6,120
1,968
2,584

State
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
Private (Inc. post-1985)
Foreign

Misc. diversified
57
34
365
555
23
84
40
41

33
521
112
28

11
350
114
51

8
569
161
58

Metals and Industrial Mfg.
State
2,204 2,508 2,598
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 2,955 4,277 5,847
Private (Inc. post-1985) 77
480
981
Foreign
640
914
1,570

1,944
5,265
1,707
1,576

5,118
8,535
2,771
3,005

Industry/Period
Agri., mining, extrac.
Food, Text., Pap. Mfg
Chem., Plastics Mfg.
Metals, Ind. Mfg
Util., Construct., Retail
Transport
Hosp, Tour. , & other
Financ., real estate
Bus., Comp., & Comm.
Misc. diversified

Full Sample
I
II
820
3,920
4,428 6,204
4,347 6,668
5,876 8,179
2,247 6,118
408
1,067
105
264
8,682 21,712
587
1,256
485
713

III
5,188
9,118
8,484
10,996
9,162
1,311
609
41,829
2,708
695

IV
7,422
13,578
9,235
10,493
13,998
2,318
682
54,388
8,888
526

V
11,440
17,304
11,252
19,430
17,580
3,184
862
53,741
12,865
796

Utilities, construction, retail
State
1,374 4,446 6,440 10,661 12,796
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
812
1,462 2,037 1,944 2,271
Private (Inc. post-1985) 35
156
482
1,061 2,297
Foreign
26
54
204
332
216

Transport
State
172
649
814
1,341 1,596
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
231
382
344
412
684
Private (Inc. post-1985)
5
27
80
384
461
Foreign
0
9
73
180
442
Source: Prowess Data Set. See Appendix Tables A1 and A2 for detailed explanation of variables.

40,125
5,909
4,295
4,059

37,802
5,791
6,480
3,669

6,876
1,559
3,228
1,202

Table 5: Industrial Composition--Average Return on Assets, 1988-2005
II
19911994

III
19951998

IV
19992002

V
20032005

Full Sample
State
8.90
9.54
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 13.53 12.78
Private (Inc. post-1985) 12.93 11.81
Foreign
12.36 14.18

10.26
11.54
8.35
12.44

9.21
10.66
8.11
12.50

10.61
12.39
8.54
14.94

Hospitality, Tourism, Media, Health, & Other services
State
2.82 13.32 14.29 0.70
3.42
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 13.16 15.59 16.06 7.33
8.90
Private (Inc. post-1985) 2.06
8.51
6.65
6.22
6.23
Foreign
17.95 19.45 14.22 8.50 12.09

Agriculture, mining, extraction
State
8.81 15.29 16.82
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 13.39 13.48 10.51
Private (Inc. post-1985) 19.77 11.02 9.27
Foreign
18.93 15.21 10.39

18.75
9.40
9.48
7.60

21.27
22.91
12.38
30.04

Financial services, real estate
State
6.55
7.08
7.93
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 12.77 11.30 11.30
Private (Inc. post-1985) 12.77 12.04 9.00
Foreign
8.37
7.60
9.37

Food, Textile, & Paper Mfg.
State
13.97 12.14 11.16
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 14.68 13.58 11.23
Private (Inc. post-1985) 12.62 9.69
6.23
Foreign
19.41 19.06 17.70

12.41
12.28
8.67
19.11

15.63
13.50
7.64
19.69

Business, Computer, & Communication services
State
13.27 14.18 19.67 13.23 15.85
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 14.59 16.00 17.33 23.01 23.65
Private (Inc. post-1985) 16.29 22.13 13.15 11.42 11.07
Foreign
5.28 16.42 9.74 13.79 20.09

Chemicals & Plastics Mfg.
State
8.54 11.46 8.67
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 14.44 14.19 12.15
Private (Inc. post-1985) 9.39
9.98
8.49
Foreign
17.36 18.95 16.88

5.47
11.57
10.05
18.14

8.96
13.40
10.40
18.73

State
Private (Inc. pre-1985)
Private (Inc. post-1985)
Foreign

Owner/Period

I
19881990

Metals and Industrial Mfg.
State
7.99
7.66
8.36
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 13.97 12.73 11.51
Private (Inc. post-1985) 11.14 10.41 7.87
Foreign
13.40 12.24 11.24

7.10
10.39
8.37
8.81

15.74
14.97
11.48
15.22

Utilities, construction, retail
State
6.97
9.05 10.77
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 11.21 11.11 9.54
Private (Inc. post-1985) 14.92 10.34 6.36
Foreign
8.35 11.73 9.38

10.07
8.88
7.05
9.51

8.95
9.66
8.11
9.24

Owner/Period

I
II
III
IV
V
1988- 1991- 1995- 1999- 20031990 1994 1998 2002 2005

Misc. diversified
11.02 9.83
10.69 12.05
14.34 13.70
22.48 25.16

Full Sample
Industry/Period
I
II
Agri., mining, extrac.
17.31 12.07
Food, Text., Pap. Mfg 13.78 11.75
Chem., Plastics Mfg.
12.02 12.37
Metals, Ind. Mfg
12.45 11.48
Util., Construct., Retail 13.07 10.56
Transport
13.16 11.82
Hosp, Tour. , & other
5.69 10.93
Financ., real estate
12.35 11.42
Bus., Comp., & Comm. 16.39 20.36
Misc. diversified
13.70 13.58

Transport
State
15.20 8.94
9.08 11.07 12.56
Private (Inc. pre-1985) 19.79 17.14 12.38 14.00 18.30
Private (Inc. post-1985) 11.19 10.44 9.14 11.60 11.09
Foreign
-0.70 7.96 11.53 8.56 17.04
Source: Prowess Data Set. See Appendix Tables A1 and A2 for detailed explanation of variables.

7.50
8.88
6.30
7.84

6.00
8.19
5.92
5.76

8.19
9.82
9.30
18.18

2.83
7.76
7.89
30.67

2.03
12.33
8.73
24.79

III
10.20
8.92
10.58
9.73
7.71
10.13
9.64
9.78
13.80
9.64

IV
10.14
10.69
11.10
9.26
7.88
11.96
6.43
7.32
13.71
8.39

V
16.14
10.80
12.16
13.42
8.68
13.54
7.07
6.73
14.15
9.81

Table 6: Return on Assets--Cross-Sectional Variance, 1988-2005
Return on Assets (%): Dispersion
I
II
III
1988-1990
1991-1994
1995-1998

Industry/ Period
FullSample (across owners)
Agriculture, mining, extraction
Food, Textile, & Paper Mfg.
Chemicals & Plastics Mfg.
Metals & Industrial Mfg
Utilities, Construction, Retail
Transport
Hospitality, Tourism, Media, Health, &
Financial services, real estate
Business, Computer, & Communication
Misc. diversified
Full Sample (Across Industries)

Industry/ Period

4.63
10.96
6.79
8.83
5.97
7.95
20.49
15.89
6.22
11.01
11.79
11.62

4.64
4.27
9.37
8.97
5.06
2.68
9.18
10.94
4.96
7.95
15.32
9.80

4.09
7.55
11.46
8.38
3.64
4.41
3.30
9.41
3.37
9.92
9.99
6.09

Return on Asset: Coefficient of Variation
I
II
III
1988-1990
1991-1994
1995-1998

IV
1999-2002
4.38
11.15
10.44
12.67
3.28
3.02
5.44
7.80
2.58
11.59
27.84
7.27

IV
1999-2002

FullSample (across owners)
0.17
0.16
0.17
0.19
Agriculture, mining, extraction
0.34
0.15
0.29
0.45
Food, Textile, & Paper Mfg.
0.19
0.29
0.41
0.33
Chemicals & Plastics Mfg.
0.34
0.29
0.34
0.46
Metals & Industrial Mfg
0.23
0.21
0.19
0.16
Utilities, Construction, Retail
0.34
0.11
0.21
0.15
Transport
0.77
0.37
0.16
0.20
Hospitality, Tourism, Media, Health, &
0.87
0.32
0.33
0.61
Financial services, real estate
0.31
0.27
0.15
0.14
Business, Computer, & Communication
0.39
0.20
0.29
0.34
Misc. diversified
0.37
0.45
0.40
1.02
Full Sample (Across Industries)
0.24
0.22
0.15
0.23
Source: Prowess Data Set. See Appendix Tables A1 and A2 for detailed explanation of variables.

V
2003-2005
6.39
17.66
12.05
9.78
4.26
1.55
7.21
8.66
2.44
12.58
22.76
9.41

V
2003-2005
0.23
0.34
0.36
0.34
0.14
0.07
0.24
0.48
0.18
0.31
0.80
0.28

Table 7: Industrial Composition--Fraction of Average Number of Firms, Assets, Sales and Profits, 1998-2005
Number of Firm
I
II
III
IV
V
1988- 1991- 1995- 1999- 20031990 1994 1998 2002 2005

Owner
/Period

Total Assets
I
II
III
IV
V
1988- 1991- 1995- 1999- 20031990 1994 1998 2002 2005

Owner
/Period

Full Sample

Total Sales
I
II
III
IV
V
1988- 1991- 1995- 1999- 20031990 1994 1998 2002 2005

Owner
/Period

Full Sample

Profits (PBDIT)
I
II
III
IV
V
1988- 1991- 1995- 1999- 20031990 1994 1998 2002 2005

Owner
/Period

Full Sample

Full Sample

State

5%

4%

4%

4%

4%

State

69%

66%

60%

61%

61%

State

42%

41%

39%

43%

42%

State

55%

57%

56%

59% 56%

Pr. Pre-85

64%

49%

39%

36%

36%

Pr. Pre-85

25%

23%

24%

19%

17%

Pr. Pre-85

45%

43%

39%

32%

31%

Pr. Pre-85

36%

31%

28%

21% 22%

Pr. Post-85

26%

42%

52%

55%

56%

Pr. Post-85

1%

4%

9%

13%

15%

Pr. Post-85

2%

6%

11%

15%

17%

Pr. Post-85

1%

5%

7%

11% 13%

Foreign

5%

4%

5%

5%

5%

Foreign

5%

6%

7%

8%

7%

Foreign

11%

10%

11%

10%

10%

Foreign

8%

7%

9%

Agric., mining, extraction

Agric., mining, extraction

Agric., mining, extraction

90% 91%

State

14%

10%

9%

9%

9%

State

96%

94%

91%

Pr. Pre-85

50%

34%

28%

27%

27%

Pr. Pre-85

3%

2%

3%

3%

Pr. Post-85

34%

53%

60%

61%

61%

Pr. Post-85

0%

2%

5%

Foreign

2%

2%

3%

3%

3%

Foreign

1%

1%

1%

3%

State

Food, Textile, & Paper Mfg.
State

4%

3%

3%

3%

37% 36%

9%

Agric., mining, extraction

State

94%

92%

89%

88%

86%

State

94%

95%

95%

3%

Pr. Pre-85

4%

4%

5%

4%

4%

Pr. Pre-85

5%

2%

2%

2%

3%

7%

5%

Pr. Post-85

0%

2%

5%

8%

8%

Pr. Post-85

1%

2%

3%

3%

3%

1%

1%

Foreign

1%

2%

1%

1%

2%

Foreign

1%

1%

1%

0%

1%

58%

State

47%

34%

Food, Textile, & Paper Mfg.
50%

9%

Food, Textile, & Paper Mfg.

39% 38%

State

60%

52%

55%

57%

95% 92%

Food, Textile, & Paper Mfg.
37%

40% 43%

Pr. Pre-85

67%

51%

44%

42%

42%

Pr. Pre-85

41%

46%

40%

39% 40%

Pr. Pre-85

31%

33%

28%

25%

26%

Pr. Pre-85

42%

48%

42%

39% 40%

Pr. Post-85

25%

42%

49%

51%

52%

Pr. Post-85

1%

9%

19%

17% 16%

Pr. Post-85

1%

5%

10%

12%

11%

Pr. Post-85

1%

6%

10%

12%

9%

Foreign

3%

3%

4%

4%

3%

Foreign

7%

8%

6%

Foreign

8%

9%

8%

6%

5%

Foreign

10%

12%

10%

9%

9%

Chemicals & Plastics Mfg.
3%
3%
2%
2%
62% 50% 44% 43%
28% 41% 47% 48%
6%
6%
6%
7%

2%
43%
48%
6%

Chemicals & Plastics Mfg.
State
22% 15% 11%
9% 8%
Pr. Pre-85
62% 64% 60%
56% 54%
Pr. Post-85 2% 10% 15%
18% 22%
Foreign
13% 11% 13%
16% 16%

Chemicals & Plastics Mfg.
State
15% 12% 9%
9%
Pr. Pre-85
62% 63% 58% 53%
Pr. Post-85 2%
7% 12% 16%
Foreign
21% 18% 20% 22%

8%
53%
20%
19%

Chemicals & Plastics Mfg.
State
14%
12%
8%
4% 5%
Pr. Pre-85
67%
65% 62% 55% 54%
Pr. Post-85
2%
7% 11% 16% 17%
Foreign
17%
15% 19% 25% 23%

Metals and Industrial Mfg.
State
4%
4%
3%
3%
Pr. Pre-85
66% 55% 46% 44%
Pr. Post-85
24% 36% 44% 46%
Foreign
6%
6%
7%
7%

3%
44%
46%
7%

Metals and Industrial Mfg.
State
51% 42% 29% 23%
Pr. Pre-85
39% 43% 47%
44%
Pr. Post-85 1%
6% 11%
18%
Foreign
9% 10% 13%
15%

Metals and Industrial Mfg.
State
33% 28% 20% 17%
Pr. Pre-85
53% 53% 52% 46%
Pr. Post-85 1%
6% 11% 19%
Foreign
12% 13% 16% 18%

16%
45%
20%
19%

Metals and Industrial Mfg.
State
38%
31% 24% 19%
Pr. Pre-85
50%
52% 53% 50%
Pr. Post-85
1%
6%
9% 16%
Foreign
11%
11% 14% 15%

Utilities, construc., retail
7%
6%
5%
6%
63% 47% 36% 32%
26% 43% 55% 58%
4%
4%
4%
4%

6%
32%
59%
4%

State
Pr. Pre-85
Pr. Post-85
Foreign

Utilities, construc., retail
59% 64% 60% 64%
35% 29% 26% 19%
1%
4% 11% 14%
4%
3%
3%
3%

63%
17%
17%
2%

State
Pr. Pre-85
Pr. Post-85
Foreign

State
Pr. Pre-85
Pr. Post-85
Foreign

State
Pr. Pre-85
Pr. Post-85
Foreign

6%

6%

24%
43%
18%
15%

Utilities, construc., retail
71% 76% 66%
73% 73%
27% 21% 24%
15% 12%
1%
3%
8%
10% 14%
1%
1%
2%
2%
1%

State
Pr. Pre-85
Pr. Post-85
Foreign

26%
44%
14%
15%

Utilities, construc., retail
61%
73% 70% 76% 73%
36%
24% 22% 14% 13%
2%
3%
5%
8% 13%
1%
1%
2%
2% 1%

Number of Firm
I
II
III
IV
V
1988- 1991- 1995- 1999- 20031990 1994 1998 2002 2007

Owner
/Period
State
Pr. Pre-85
Pr. Post-85
Foreign

18%
56%
21%
5%

Transport
15% 14%
44% 33%
34% 46%
7%
7%

13%
29%
52%
6%

11%
27%
55%
7%

Owner
/Period

Table 7 contd.
Total Assets
I
II
III
IV
V
1988- 1991- 1995- 1999- 2003Owner
1990 1994 1998 2002 2007
/Period

Total Sales
I
II
III
IV
V
1988- 1991- 1995- 1999- 20031990 1994 1998 2002 2007

State
Bus. G.
Private
Foreign

Transport
51% 74% 67%
46% 22% 21%
2%
3%
6%
0%
1%
5%

55%
43%
1%
1%

59%
14%
16%
11%

55%
16%
18%
11%

Hospitality, Tour., Media, Health, & Other
State
5%
4%
3%
3%
3%
Pr. Pre-85
59% 45% 34% 29% 28%
Pr. Post-85
31% 47% 59% 64% 65%
Foreign
5%
4%
4%
4%
4%

Hospitality, Tour., Media, Health, & Other
State
5%
9%
5%
3% 3%
Bus. G.
89% 71% 66%
63% 51%
Private
2% 14% 23%
29% 41%
Foreign
4%
7%
6%
5% 5%

Financial services, real estate
State
7%
5%
5%
5%
Pr. Pre-85
67% 49% 38% 36%
Pr. Post-85
24% 43% 54% 56%
Foreign
3%
3%
3%
3%

State
Bus. G.
Private
Foreign

5%
36%
56%
3%

Business, Comp., & Comm. services
State
5%
4%
3%
2%
2%
Pr. Pre-85
58% 37% 24% 19% 18%
Pr. Post-85
29% 51% 65% 70% 71%
Foreign
7%
8%
9%
9%
8%
State
Pr. Pre-85
Pr. Post-85
Foreign

Misc. diversified
2%
1%
1%
63% 45% 30%
32% 51% 67%
3%
3%
3%

1%
26%
70%
3%

Full Sample: All Industries

1%
24%
72%
3%

Financial services, real estate
93% 83% 76% 74% 72%
5%
9% 12%
9% 8%
0%
2%
5%
10% 13%
2%
6%
7%
7% 7%

Business, Comp., & Comm. services
State
80% 71% 40% 57% 51%
Bus. G.
11% 10% 11%
7% 8%
Private
8% 16% 42%
29% 34%
Foreign
1%
2%
7%
6% 7%
State
Bus. G.
Private
Foreign

Misc. diversified
6%
6%
80% 80% 74%
4% 11% 18%
4%
3%
2%

6% 5%
69% 65%
22% 26%
3% 3%

Full Sample: All Industries

State
Bus. G.
Private
Foreign

Transport
69% 66%
26% 19%
4%
7%
1%
8%

61%
18%
10%
11%

57%
19%
12%
12%

Hospitality, Tour., Media, Health, & Other
State
7% 14% 12% 7%
5%
Bus. G.
88% 71% 64% 51% 46%
Private
1%
7% 15% 34% 41%
Foreign
4%
7%
8%
7%
8%
State
Bus. G.
Private
Foreign

Financial services, real estate
8% 12% 12% 7%
89% 81% 79% 84%
2%
6%
9%
8%
2%
1%
1%
0%

7%
76%
15%
1%

Business, Comp., & Comm. services
State
56% 41% 26% 42% 36%
Bus. G.
32% 22% 20% 15% 16%
Private
10% 34% 48% 33% 37%
Foreign
2%
4%
7% 10% 11%
Misc. diversified
14% 6%
7%
68% 74% 70%
6% 12% 18%
12% 8%
5%

State
Bus. G.
Private
Foreign

Owner
/Period

Profits (PBDIT)
I
II
III
IV
V
1988- 1991- 1995- 1999- 20031990 1994 1998 2002 2007

State
Bus. G.
Private
Foreign

42%
57%
1%
0%

58%
18%
17%
8%

50%
21%
14%
14%

Hospitality, Tour., Media, Health, & Other
State
3%
8%
6%
2% 1%
Bus. G.
90%
75% 75% 66% 59%
Private
1%
9% 12% 26% 33%
Foreign
6%
9%
7%
7% 7%
State
Bus. G.
Private
Foreign

Financial services, real estate
89%
78% 71% 74% 70%
8%
14% 16% 11% 11%
1%
3%
5%
8% 12%
2%
6%
8%
7% 7%

Business, Comp., & Comm. services
State
74%
65% 50% 58% 53%
Bus. G.
11%
10% 12% 11% 12%
Private
14%
22% 34% 24% 25%
Foreign
0%
3%
4%
7% 9%
Misc. diversified
12% 5%
5%
75% 78% 75%
5% 12% 16%
8%
6%
4%

7%
66%
20%
8%

6%
65%
22%
8%

State
Bus. G.
Private
Foreign

Full Sample: All Industries
4%
5%
5%
5%
30% 27% 29% 33%
20% 19% 18% 14%
28% 26% 24% 20%
11% 15% 16% 18%
1%
2%
2%
2%
0%
0%
1%
1%
2%
1%
1%
1%
1%
2%
3%
5%
3%
2%
2%
1%

5%
29%
13%
22%
20%
2%
1%
1%
6%
1%

Agri., Min.
Food,Text.
Chem.r
Metals.
Util., Cons.
Trans.
Hosp.
Finan.
Bus. Comp.
Misc.

Agri., Min.
2%
3%
3%
3%
3% Agri., Min. 3%
5%
3%
3%
3%
Agri., Min.
Food,Text. 17% 16% 15% 14% 13% Food,Text. 10% 8%
9%
8%
8%
Food,Text.
Chem.r
16% 15% 13% 12% 12% Chem.r
11% 8%
8%
6%
5%
Chem.r
Metals.
19% 17% 16% 15% 14% Metals.
19% 14% 12% 9%
8%
Metals.
Util., Cons. 12% 12% 13% 14% 14% Util., Cons. 9% 11% 10% 11% 12%
Util., Cons.
Trans.
2%
2%
2%
2%
2% Trans.
1%
2%
1%
2%
1%
Trans.
Hosp.
3%
3%
3%
4%
4% Hosp.
0%
0%
1%
1%
1%
Hosp.
Finan.
24% 25% 27% 26% 27% Finan.
43% 50% 53% 55% 55%
Finan.
Bus. Comp. 4%
5%
6%
8%
8% Bus. Comp 1%
1%
2%
5%
5%
Bus. Comp
Misc.
2%
2%
3%
3%
3% Misc.
1%
1%
1% 0.5% 0.4%
Misc.
Source: Prowess Data Set. See Appendix Tables A1 and A2 for detailed explanation of variables.

Transport
61% 62%
36% 26%
3%
6%
1%
6%

2%
67%
22%
10%

1%
71%
20%
7%

Full Sample: All Industries
3%
7%
6%
6%
16% 11% 10% 11%
16% 12% 9%
8%
21% 15% 12% 9%
8% 11% 10% 12%
1%
2%
1%
2%
0%
0%
1%
1%
31% 39% 46% 45%
2%
2%
3%
7%
2%
1%
1%
0%

8%
12%
8%
13%
12%
2%
1%
36%
9%
1%

Table 8: Year of Incorporation

Incorporation/Period
Pre-independence
Number of firms
Assets (Rs. Crore)
Sales (Rs. Crore)
PBDIT (Rs. Crore)
ROA
c1947-1985
Number of firms
Assets (Rs. Crore)
Sales (Rs. Crore)
PBDITA (Rs. Crore)
ROA

I
1988-1990

II
1991-1995

III
1996-1998

IV
1999-2002

V
2003-2007

1,018
162
91
15
11

1,002
285
67
23
11

950
367
79
32
10

883
436
73
36
5

785
445
67
33
-1

1,177
135
80
13
13

1,159
102
48
10
12

1,098
120
58
13
9

1,022
126
61
12
5

912
122
65
13
6

c1985-2007
365
827
1,293
1,357
Number of firms
101
27
34
52
Assets (Rs. Crore)
25
7
11
19
Sales (Rs. Crore)
10
3
3
5
PBDIT (Rs. Crore)
10
8
6
2
ROA
Source: Prowess Data Set. See Appendix Tables A1 and A2 for detailed explanation of variables.

1,268
48
18
4
-1

Table 9: The Evolution of Firm Size and Market Concentration (Constant Rs. Crore)
1989-1990

1991-1995

1996-1998

1999-2002

Full Sample
Herfindahl Index
0.43
0.38
0.33
0.32
Firm Profits
13.39
12.21
11.88
12.21
Firm Size (Assets Rs. Crore)
137.66
126.20
118.23
132.55
Firm Size (Sales Rs. Crore)
85.62
49.79
43.41
47.10
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size
2.09
2.77
3.71
4.17
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size
1.99
3.55
5.51
6.24
Number of Firms
11394
14608
17544
17767
Number of Industries
115
116
119
122
State-Owned Firms
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size
2.02
2.63
3.39
3.78
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size
1.89
3.55
5.67
5.97
Number of Firms
645
661
691
692
Number of Industries
81
82
85
85
Private Firms (before 1985)
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size
2.19
2.88
3.83
4.28
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size
2.08
3.67
5.61
6.38
Number of Firms
7564
7436
7035
6552
Number of Industries
111
111
111
111
Private Firms (after 1985)
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size
2.04
2.73
3.71
4.18
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size
1.94
3.52
5.51
6.27
Number of Firms
2664
5858
8983
9646
Number of Industries
103
110
115
118
Foreign Firms
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size
1.91
2.45
3.13
3.44
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size
1.85
3.06
4.65
5.01
Number of Firms
521
654
835
877
Number of Industries
76
81
89
90
Source: Prowess Data Set. See Appendix Tables A1 and A2 for detailed explanation of variables.

2003-2007
0.31
10.85
116.65
43.34
4.78
9.83
16318
121
4.21
8.59
636
84
4.82
10.12
5843
111
4.86
9.97
9069
118
3.96
7.00
771
88

Table 10a: The Evolution of Firm Size and Market Concentration--FDI Deregulation (Constant Rs. Crore)
Before FDI Deregulation
After FDI Deregulation
Full Sample
Herfindahl Index
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Assets)
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Sales)
Number of Firms
Number of Industries

0.26
1.95
1.86
5241
43

Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Assets)
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Sales)
Number of Firms
Number of Industries

2.02
1.91
198
33

Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Assets)
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Sales)
Number of Firms
Number of Industries

2.05
1.94
3495
43

Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Assets)
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Sales)
Number of Firms
Number of Industries

1.88
1.80
1228
40

Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Assets)
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Sales)
Number of Firms
Number of Industries

1.84
1.83
321
35

0.20
2.32
2.36
6434
43
State-Owned Firms

2.36
2.35
193
33
Private (Inc. pre-1985)

2.39
2.38
3402
43
Private (Inc. post-1985)

2.27
2.35
2458
42
Foreign Firms

2.23
2.32
381
37

Source: Prowess Data Set. See Appendix Tables A1 and A2 for detailed explanation of variables. This table provides descriptive
statistics of the "before-after" effect of foreign direct investment liberalization on the market share and profitability of firms and
concentration ratios in liberalized industries. The sample is restricted to industries that deregulated foreign investment and to two
years before (1989-1990) and two years after (1992-1993) the policy was implemented in 1991.

Table 10b: The Evolution of Firm Size and Market Concentration--Trade Liberalization (Constant Rs. Crore)
Before Trade liberalization
After Trade Liberalization
Full Sample
Herfindahl Index
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Assets)
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Sales)
Number of Firms
Number of Industries

0.32
2.27
2.09
4255
35

Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Assets)
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Sales)
Number of Firms
Number of Industries

2.23
2.06
182
28

Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Assets)
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Sales)
Number of Firms
Number of Industries

2.32
2.13
2784
34

Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Assets)
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Sales)
Number of Firms
Number of Industries

2.24
2.05
1055
32

Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Assets)
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Sales)
Number of Firms
Number of Industries

2.18
2.10
234
28

0.28
2.57
2.48
5110
35
State-Owned Firms

2.55
2.44
181
28
Private (Inc. pre-1985)

2.61
2.50
2701
34
Private (Inc. post-1985)

2.54
2.47
1959
34
Foreign Firms

2.48
2.49
270
29

Source: Prowess Data Set. See Appendix Tables A1 and A2 for detailed explanation of variables.This table provides descriptive
statistics of the "before-after" effect of foreign direct investment liberalization on the market share and profitability of firms and
concentration ratios in liberalized industries. The sample is restricted to industries that deregulated foreign investment and to two
years before (1989-1990) and two years after (1992-1993) the policy was implemented in 1991.

Table 10c: The Evolution of Firm Size and Market Concentration--Domestic Delicensing (Constant Rs. Crore)
Before Domestic Delicensing
After Domestic Delicensing
Full Sample
Herfindahl Index
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Assets)
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Sales)
Number of Firms
Number of Industries

0.35
1.57
1.54
3158
24

Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Assets)
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Sales)
Number of Firms
Number of Industries

1.73
1.63
131
16

Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Assets)
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Sales)
Number of Firms
Number of Industries

1.60
1.59
2139
24

Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Assets)
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Sales)
Number of Firms
Number of Industries

1.54
1.48
705
32

Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Assets)
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size (Sales)
Number of Firms
Number of Industries

1.49
1.58
181
17

0.24
2.03
1.93
3789
24
State-Owned Firms

2.11
1.94
124
16
Private (Inc. pre-1985)

2.03
1.94
2083
24
Private (Inc. post-1985)

2.03
1.90
1374
34
Foreign Firms

1.89
2.07
204
18

Source: Prowess Data Set. See Appendix Tables A1 and A2 for detailed explanation of variables. This table provides descriptive
statistics of the "before-after" effect of foreign direct investment liberalization on the market share and profitability of firms and
concentration ratios in liberalized industries. The sample is restricted to industries that deregulated foreign investment and to two
years before (1989-1990) and two years after (1992-1993) the policy was implemented in 1991.

Figure 1: Economic Activity of State-Owned Enterprises, 1978-1997 (Percentage of GDP)

25

20

% of GDP

15

10

5

0
1978

1982
Africa

1986
Asia

1990

Latin America

Notes: Weighted Average.
Source: World Bank (2001a) taken from Chong and Lopez-de-Silanes (2004).

1994
Industrial Countries

Figure 2: Trade Refirm in India, 1987-2001
Panel A: Average Nominal Tariff
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

1997

1999

2001

Panel A: Standard Deviation of Nominal Tariffs
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1987

1989

Taken from Topalova (2004).

1991

1993

1995

Figure 3: Service Liberalization 1991-2005
5

4

3

2

1

0
1991

1993
Finance

1995

1997
Insurance

1999

2001

Communication

2003

2005

Transport

Notes: Taken from Arnold, Javorcik, Lipscombe and Mattoo (2008). Index values: 0: Almost no reform, the
public sector is either the only relevant provider of services or has a strong grip on private providers. 1: some scope
for private sector participation and some liberalization of operational decisions, combined with very limited scope
for foreign participation (limited, for example, by low FDI ceilings or announced only as intentions). 2: limited
degree of interference in operational decisions by public authorities, substantial price liberalization, and clear
scope for foreign participation even if only in narrowly defined segments and as minority participations. However,
the state remains a dominant actor in the sector. 3: significant scope for private providers, including foreign ones, a
noticeable competitive pressure from new entrants on the public incumbents, and explicit possibilities for foreign
equity participation. 4: little public intervention into the freedom of operation of private providers, the possibility
of majority foreign ownership, and the dominance of private sector entities. 5: would be equal treatment of foreign
and domestic providers, full convergence of regulation with international standards and unrestricted entry into the
sector.

Figure 4:Average Return on Assets
Panel A: Average Return on Assets by Ownership Group
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1988-1990

1991-1994

State

1995-1998

Private (Inc. pre-1985)

1999-2002

Private (Inc. post-1985)

2003-2005
Foreign

Panel B: Average Return on Assets By Sector
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1988-1990
Agri., mining, extrac.
Util., Construct., Retail
Bus., Comp., & Comm.

Source: Prowess Data Set.

Food, Text., Pap. Mfg
Transport
Misc. diversified

2003-2005
Chem., Plastics Mfg.
Hosp, Tour. , & other

Metals, Ind. Mfg
Financ., real estate

Figure 5: Number of Firms, Assets, Sales and Profits by Ownership Group (Share of Total)
Panel A: 1988-1990
80%
70%

% of Total

60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Number of Firm

Total Assets

Total Sales

Profits (PBDIT)

Total Sales

Profits (PBDIT)

Panel B: 2003-2005
70%

% of Total

60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Number of Firm

Total Assets
State

Source: Prowess Data Set.

Pr. Pre-85

Pr. Post-85

Foreign

