                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 UNILATERAL MEASURES AND EMISSIONS MITIGATION

                                          Shurojit Chatterji
                                          Sayantan Ghosal
                                            Sean Walsh
                                           John Whalley

                                        Working Paper 15441
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15441


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2009




An early version of the is paper was presented at the ESRC funded Climate Change Workshop at Warwick,
March 2009. We would like to thank workshop participants for their helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Shurojit Chatterji, Sayantan Ghosal, Sean Walsh, and John Whalley. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Unilateral Measures and Emissions Mitigation
Shurojit Chatterji, Sayantan Ghosal, Sean Walsh, and John Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 15441
October 2009
JEL No. F53,Q50,Q54

                                               ABSTRACT

We discuss global climate mitigation that builds on existing unilateral measures to cut emissions. We
document and discuss the rationale for such unilateral measures argue that such measures have the
potential to generate positive spillover effects both within and across countries. In a simple dynamic
model of learning we show that while single countries on their own may never get to the point of switching
completely to low emission activities, a learning process with positive spillovers across nations is more
likely to deliver a global switch to low emissions. We discuss the key features of a new global Intellectual
Property (IP) regime that builds on the positive spillovers inherent in unilateral initiatives and accelerates
global convergence to low emissions.


Shurojit Chatterji                                    Sean Walsh
School of Economics                                   Centre for International Governance Innovation
Singapore Management University                       57 Erb Street West
90 Stamford Road                                      Waterloo, Ontario N2L 6C2
Singapore 178903                                      Canada
shurojitc@smu.edu.sg                                  swalsh@cigionline.org

Sayantan Ghosal                                       John Whalley
University of Warwick                                 Department of Economics
S.Ghosal@warwick.ac.uk                                Social Science Centre
                                                      University of Western Ontario
                                                      London, Ontario N6A 5C2 CANADA
                                                      and NBER
                                                      jwhalley@uwo.ca
1. Introduction

This paper studies the interplay between unilateral measures and multilateral negotiation
in relation to global climate change mitigation. Although participation and compliance in
broadly based multilateral initiatives may be hard to achieve, there are numerous unilat-
eral initiatives already underway to cut emissions. We begin by documenting the extent,
form and variety, at national/regional/urban/individual levels, of unilateral measures to
combat climate change and achieve signi…cant emissions reductions. These emissions are,
at …rst sight, hard to rationalize and we discuss the rationale for these unilateral mea-
sures. We discuss global climate change mitigation that builds on existing unilateral
actions to deliver ever deepening emission cuts over time via a process of global learning
and cumulative participation.
    We note that a multilateral accord may only consist of repackaging existing unilateral
measures. Any broad based global cooperation that requires nations to commit to emission
cuts beyond what nations are unilaterally willing to undertake is unlikely to be stable (i.e.
immune to deviations by a nation or a coalition of nations). By delaying participation
or by not complying with a global agreement to cut emissions, a deviating country or a
coalition of such countries can continue capture the short-term bene…ts from continuing
with high carbon economic activities but pass a signi…cant portion of the costs to others
(other countries, future generations)1 . A notable feature of the Kyoto Protocol has been
that enforcement mechanisms have been e¤ectively absent, with no penalties on non-
compliance or non-participation.
    The challenge is to shape the global regime to accelerate and strengthen multilateral
measures to cut emissions. There is a danger of slowing the pace of emission cuts if
multilateral measures held on to as bargaining chips.
    In this paper, we argue that multilateral negotiations can actually build on the positive
externalities generated by unilateral measures. We discuss the features of a global Intel-
lectual Property (IP) regime that would e¤ectively to build on the positive externalities
generated by existing unilateral initiatives to cut emissions.
    A simple dynamic model is constructed which demonstrates the following: (i) while a
country, as a whole, may be unwilling to commit to broad based multilateral initiatives
to cut emissions, agents within countries may undertake a variety of unilateral initiative
to cut emissions, (ii) learning, over time, can result in a greater proportion of individuals
   1
    A number of papers have pointed out the limitations of mulilateral cooperation due to free riding in
the presence of negative externalities (see, for instance, Shapley and Shubik (1969), Starrett (1973)).



                                                   2
switching to low carbon activities over time than in the case where it is absent, (iii) single
countries on their own may never get to the point of switching completely to low emission
activities while (iv) a suitably designed learning process which builds on, and strengthens,
positive spillovers across nations is more likely, over time, to deliver a global switch to
low emissions.
    Drawing on these results, we discuss how policy design could a¤ect global learning by
impacting both the structure of interaction between countries and the rate of convergence
to a global low emissions regime. Key features of a policy regime that could build on the
positive externalities involved in unilateral emissions reduction might include developing
a platform for exchange of information, a stable market for innovation that lowers the
relative cost of cutting emissions and new global IP regime involving subsidized technology
transfer of low carbon activities with the aim of altering the participation constraints of
relevant economic actors (agents/…rms/institutions/countries) over time.2
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses the current
use of unilateral measures; section 3 examines various rationales for unilateral measures.
Section 4 studies the conditions under which global learning, building on existing unilat-
eral measures, leads to a low emissions world. Section 5 discusses the interplay between
unilateral and multilateral initiatives while the last section concludes.


2. How extensive are unilateral measures on emissions mitiga-
      tion?

In this section we attempt to document, characterize and discuss the nature and extent of
unilateral measures which have been taken world wide towards climate change. In tandem
with the global negotiations in the UNFCCC, the major participant countries have also
simultaneously launched national action plans for combating climate change which involve
extensive use of unilateral commitments. To an extent, these unilateral commitments may
represent mechanisms for the implementation of proposed multilateral commitments, but
in other ways they are quite di¤erent. Thus, in the EU, there is a commitment to a 20-20
program, which involves a 20% reduction in emissions and 20% of energy to come from
renewables by 2020. This is separate from multilateral commitments, though the EU has
o¤ered to go further to a 30% emissions reduction if other entities will match. Similar
initiatives can be found in the case of China where there is an extensive commitment to a
20% energy consumption reduction relative to trend by 2020, and also a 20% commitment
  2
      For an initial contribution along these lines see Chatterji and Ghosal (2009).


                                                      3
to renewables.
    These forms of commitments, interestingly, also seem to involve deeper commitments
by smaller countries. One striking case is Norway, which has committed itself to become
a zero carbon economy by 2050 even though they would not be the direct bene…ciaries of
their own emissions reductions. Also, both New Zealand (via a major reliance on thermal
power) and Costa Rica (via major policy initiatives towards preventing deforestation)
have openly declared that they intend to be among the most carbon emission reduction
sensitive economies in the world, with major reductions in emissions relative to 1990
trends.
    All these unilateral commitments are national but, on the face of it, go substantially
beyond what countries are seemingly jointly willing to commit to multilaterally. Beyond
the multilateral level, there are also many further commitments also being made by sub-
national and local levels by governments, community based organizations, businesses, and
even by individuals.
    Before looking at the depth of mitigation these measures imply it is helpful to clarify
these reduction e¤orts. Direct emissions mitigation is typically the focal point of policy
both at national and international levels, and largely in the form of emissions reduction
targets and mandates on key carbon emitting industries such as power generation and
construction. Carbon trading schemes, cap-and-trade schemes and carbon taxes are also
in the direct category. Indirect mitigation occurs in myriad form and is more typically
used as vehicles for unilateral action at a subnational level. Common examples include
increasing capacity in renewables and reducing energy consumption through a focus on
energy saving techniques and increased e¢ciency i.e. the use of more energy e¢cient
equipment such as low power light bulbs, new forms of engines and turbines, as well as
reduction in energy consumption directly. Forest management and recycling programs also
fall under the indirect heading, as well as most private sector measures to reduce carbon
emissions. Use of these measures often involves commitments whose implementation are
contingent on the availability of appropriate technological innovation.
    In addition to the characterization by types, there is also classi…cation by the dif-
ferent levels of government and authority which are involved in these kinds of emissions
programs. Some examples of programs undertaken by national governments have already
been discussed above but signi…cant programs have also been put in place by state govern-
ments and local and city governments. It is not unusual in Europe for individual cities to
now have emissions reduction targets by speci…ed dates. These could involve community
based programs such as free bicycle plans, such as in Copenhagen, Denmark, or watershed
renewal programmes, such as in rural communities bordering major rain forests as in Mex-

                                            4
ico, and community information monitoring schemes such as sophisticated software which
tracks carbon from individual houses based on lifestyle and energy use (the idea being
that increased knowledge will change people’s behavior). Commitments are also made at
a business level, with new businesses o¤ering what is needed for other businesses, commu-
nities and individuals to "go green".3 : Because of the wider social/political commitment
to emissions reduction, it becomes good business to characterize products as emissions
sensitive, contributing to signi…cant emissions reductions. Finally, similar actions can be
taken at an individual level.
    These unilateral actions being undertaken to combat climate change and reduce carbon
emissions around the world are both diverse and in constant ‡ux. The examples given in
this paper are representative samples of the levels and types of unilateral actions occurring.

2.1. Unilateral Measures by Country

Unilateral measures interact with multilateral negotiations and it can be argued that
multilateral commitments will largely endorse, or consolidate, unilateral commitments.
At a global level we have discussions under the UNFCCC, which previously produced the
Kyoto Protocol and aim at a new (and improved) treaty to be concluded in their 2009
meeting in Copenhagen. At its core, the negotiation is about carbon emissions reduction,
although there are separate discussions of adaptation and innovation funds. Talks are
also occurring within the G7 and G20 on climate change, but no substantive agreements
to act on climate change have yet emerged from these groups aside from resolutions not
to interfere with the UNFCCC negotiations. But new unilateral measures, notably by the
US and China, have been announced in advance of the Copenhagen negotiations. It is
likely that any resulting multilateral agreement would thus largely re‡ect what countries
are willing to undertake unilaterally. But such commitments could be interpreted as a way
of staking out bargaining positions as part of the multilateral negotiation. There is also
the issue of whether, by committing to speci…c unilateral measures, these high emissions
nations alter the incentives of other nations to commit to more stringent measures as well.
    In addition to the examples of unilateral action already mentioned (New Zealand and
Costa Rica), a number of national governments and industries, particularly in Europe, are
pushing for renewable energy in all its forms and renewables are gaining ground relative
to other forms of power production, albeit from a very small base. For instance, Denmark
  3
    Recent estimates set the "green" industry worldwide at roughtly 360 billion USD, with
estimates that this could grow rapidly to 650-750 billion USD by late 2015.           See
http://english.cw.com.tw/article.do?action=shpw&id=10399&o¤set=0.


                                              5
stands out as the wind power capital of the world, especially notable since the push for
the development of wind power there predates the Kyoto Protocol.
    In some nations there is also a push towards increasing capacity in the generation
of nuclear power in addition to renewables. For example, in the UK, the national gov-
ernment, as part of its unilateral measures to cut emissions and achieve energy security,
has supported a new generation of nuclear power stations4 . Even though a nuclear path
is a somewhat controversial move for at least two reasons. First, there is no reliable
method for safely disposing of nuclear waste and second, given the large start-up costs
involved, investment in nuclear power may crowd out investment in other forms of green
power generation and use such as energy e¢ciency and renewables. Another concern is
that current estimates of the supply of nuclear fuel predict only another 100 years before
global stocks are depleted. Thus, if low or zero carbon power generation techniques do
not become su¢ciently commonplace in the intervening time, then nuclear proliferation
will only put o¤ the climate crisis, not solve it.
    In the developing world, countries such as China have adopted a 20-20-20 plan – to
reduce emissions intensity per unit of GDP by 20%, as well as achieving 20% renewable
energy, both by 2020. A signi…cant step towards this is the phasing out of older ine¢cient
coal plants. India, as part of its National Action Plan on Climate Change, is actively
seeking to alter its energy sector to one that is ‘green’ via improved e¢ciency, renewables
(and nuclear power), attempting to forge a ‘green’ development path which will take
environmental considerations into account with spillovers on other industries.
    Sweden, Finland, the Netherlands and Norway have all imposed carbon taxes which
have been in place since the 1990s. In South Africa, enforcement of existing environmental
law has been an issue and hundreds of new environmental enforcement agents have been
trained to ensure prescribed environmental measures are implemented. In Brazil, there
is a goal of 7000 MW of renewable energy capacity by 2010 and a substantial increase in
the production of ethanol. Ecuador’s 2007 Yatsuni-ITT proposal, which seeks to preserve
rainforest despite the oil below and to slowly wean Ecuador o¤ oil dependence is indicative
of the direction their government is taking. These actions seemingly directly bene…t
individual countries little relative to the e¤ort involved.
    Many of these national level unilateral actions, while reducing CO2 , also serve more
local climate needs (adaptation-based projects), adding a self-interest based element to
proposed actions. For instance, in Spain, as part of a push to halt deserti…cation there,
  4
      http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/7179579.stm




                                                  6
a government led plan to plant 45 million trees over 4 years is underway5 . This serves
to reduce carbon emissions and lessen the country’s Kyoto shortfall but the need to
halt deserti…cation is the primary driver. A similar e¤ort, with salt-resistant plants and
de-salting plans as the weapons of choice, is underway against the more saline-based
deserti…cation progressing in Australia6 . As an example of what may occur globally
as extreme climate impacts occur, in the Maldives, the current president has set up a
sovereign wealth fund speci…cally to buy a new homeland, should the islands become
inundated7 via sea level rise saying, “We can do nothing to stop climate change on our
own and so we have to buy land elsewhere. It’s an insurance policy for the worst possible
outcome”. Thus, the phenomenon of unilateral actions in regards to CO2 reduction and
similar issues that cannot be explained by short-run self-interest is likely to be limited in
duration should climate change worsen and as more speci…c climate ‘damage’ occurs.
   These national initiatives are summarized in table 1 below.
                        (TABLE 1 HERE).

2.2. Unilateral Measures by Territories, States and Provinces

Unilateral measures are also evident at the subnational level. At the state and inter-
state levels of government in the US we see multi-state agreements such as the Mid-West
Greenhouse Gas Reduction accord, the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, the Western
Climate Initiative and the Western Governors’ Association – Clean and Diversi…ed Energy
Initiative. On the face of it, these initiatives are reactive to the US rejection of the Kyoto
Protocol. Setting restrictions on CO2 emissions by speci…ed dates is the content of all of
these save the Clean and Diversi…ed Energy Initiative, which sets a 30000 MW production
goal by 2015 for renewable energy among member states as well as more long term goals.
Many of these agreements are not con…ned to the US. Several Canadian provinces have also
signed onto some of these agreements, Ontario and Alberta for the most part. Within
Canada as well, there is a cap and trade plan being negotiated between Ontario and
Quebec, two of the top three emitting provinces.
    Individual state e¤orts in North America have the common thread that nearly all
states and provinces have programs designed to improve energy e¢ciency, although direct
emissions reduction e¤orts are the most common activity. With a large amount of car-
   5
     http://www.abc.net.au/news/stories/2008/09/13/2363739.htm
   6
     http://www.planetark.org/dailynewsstory.cfm/newsid/37246/story.htm
   7
     http://features.csmonitor.com/environment/2008/11/11/faced-with-rising-sea-levels-the-maldives-
seek-new-homeland/



                                                  7
bon emissions originating in the power generation sector and North America having the
most energy intensive economy (per capita) globally, these two activities seem to be both
technical and political ‘low-hanging fruits’. The US states of California and Florida are
notable for e¤orts to improve energy e¢ciency and CO2 emissions reduction in numer-
ous areas including all of industry, transit/ autos and households, as well as opening the
market and experimenting with all types of renewable energies. Further north in Canada,
British Columbia is notable as the …rst province to independently impose a carbon tax
on itself.
    In Australia, New South Wales has a $63 million (AUD) plan to overhaul the homes
of 220 000 low income families to improve energy and water e¢ciency as a response to the
likely increased energy costs associated with Australia’s commitments under the Kyoto
Protocol. Most other Australian provinces are also improving energy e¢ciency and some,
such as Queensland, are also actively and independently funding research into renewable
energy. Queensland’s program has already provided over $7 million (AUD) to numerous
projects on renewable energy production and e¢ciency improvements.
    Even in China and India, where provinces, by and large, walk in step with the mandates
passed down from the federal level, some regional initiatives already exists (such as solar
power and bio fuel projects in Karnataka8 ). One striking case is within Brazil where,
somewhat in contrast to the national policies for increasing ethanol and biofuel production,
some states, particularly Amazonas, have shifted to rainforest preservation, going from
handing out chainsaws for free to ‘promote development’ to now adopting the motto that
‘the forests are worth more standing than cut down’9 . In Russia on the other hand,
perhaps due to the fact that it trivially met its Kyoto targets, provincial unilateralism is
muted and mostly limited to data and information gathering10 .
    Tables 2 and 3 summarize the various initiatives discussed above.
                              (TABLE 2 here.)
                               (TABLE 3 here.)

2.3. Unilateral Measures by Cities

City level emissions mitigation e¤orts tend to lend equal weight to adaptation and mit-
igation, usually blending the two in proposed plans. In New York City for example, a
major initiative is underway to improve energy e¢ciency and reduce emissions of all sorts
  8
    http://www.thehindu.com/2009/06/05/stories/2009060559100500.htm
  9
    http://www.sds.am.gov.br/dsv/download/img_download/20071226155008Relatorio%202.pdf
 10
    http://earth.esa.int/workshops/envisatsymposium/proceedings/posters/3P9/463731fr.pdf



                                              8
including a 30% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. The focus is on replacing older
infrastructure with new and more energy e¢cient technology which will also prepare the
way for any water, food, or natural disasters to be dealt with, and also to replace existing
cars with more fuel e¢cient ones and to increase the number of trees and parks within
the city. Toronto, Canada has also engaged in energy e¢ciency upgrading for many of
its buildings and infrastructure projects. Otherwise the plan of action is very di¤erent,
with Toronto seeming to prefer development of local sources of renewables over the larger
infrastructure upgrading projects and promoting green roofs heavily. Munich in Germany
has a plan very similar to Toronto’s, with the added …nancial innovation of weather deriv-
atives regarding the weather’s favorability for generating renewable power in order to help
manage the risks involved11 . Similarly, London, UK, has a plan that focuses most heavily
on energy e¢ciency upgrading, with projects on renewables.
    In China, Shanghai has invested 80 billion Yuan (11.6 billion USD) in environmental
protection projects. The city, which is near to sea level has increased plant and tree
coverage to help ward o¤ erosion as the threat of ‡oods increases and is also intensely
focused in upgrading and installing infrastructure to ensure the city’s water supply. The
plan also provides incentives for promoting green industries within and around the city
and also has a goal for decreasing the volume of vehicles on the roads by 65%.12 Sydney,
Australia is focusing on water infrastructure upgrading, but other types of infrastructure
are secondary to the drive towards making the city carbon neutral via energy e¢ciency
and renewable energy policies and related projects by 202013 .
    A common thread in these unilateral emissions reduction initiatives (direct and indi-
rect) is seen here in the form of a focus on renewables, energy e¢ciency upgrading and
infrastructure renovation at a city level within the global sphere. On the other hand, more
so than at high levels of government, a clear focus on adaptive measures is also interwoven
into these policies.
    Table 4 summarizes the various city-level initiatives discussed here.
                                 (TABLE 4 here).
 11
    http://www.munichre.com/en/ts/innovation_and_insurance_trends/
 windmills_against_climate_change/default.aspx
 12
    http://en.chinagate.cn/development/environment/2008-12/15/content_16950071.htm
 13
    http://www.sydneywater.com.au/EnsuringTheFuture/ClimateChangeStrategy/Ensuring_the_Futire_-
_Climate_Change_Strategy_-_Feb_2008.pdf#Page=1




                                             9
2.4. Unilateral Measures by Businesses and Joint Public-Private Partnerships

Unilateral measures are also being implemented by businesses and joint public- private
partnerships. While e¤orts similar to those mentioned above are ongoing in Mumbai (In-
dia) and in Moscow (Russia), unlike in most large cities around the world, most of the
e¤orts in these cities are often better described as business ventures rather than govern-
ment e¤orts. This is because the deployment of Clean Development Mechanism (CDM)
related projects in these cities has tended to overshadow the need for explicit climate
change legislation in favour of legislation to manage a proliferation of CDM projects.
These often take a form similar to other city e¤orts, focusing on renewables, energy ef-
…ciency upgrading and infrastructure renovation, but with CDM projects subsidized due
to the carbon credits generated. These are not managed fully within the public sphere,
nor are they speci…cally limited to one city’s boundaries14 . This makes CDM a common
mechanism for the emergence of private-public partnerships in those areas where CDM
projects are valid.
    One such project, for example, is the eco-friendly train project in Mumbai, where the
aim is that long term infrastructure viability will be maintained and government expenses
will be reduced by partnering with business to reduce train energy usage by over 30%.
Such projects take the place of pure public sphere e¤orts with the objective of greater
cost e¢ciency for government and higher pro…t for business from the government. This
does, however, come with a greater degree of risk in terms of a project’s success or failure,
particularly when the project relies on unproven technological innovations that re‡ect the
desire to mitigate carbon emissions.
    In some cases, CDM funding builds on existing locally owned private sector initiatives
such as the previously mentioned Karnataka Renewable Energy Project15 . While such
projects re‡ect an incentive to further local development goals (regardless of whether
those goals are intrinsically eco-friendly or not), the underlying incentives (driven by
CDM) still shape the projects so that they are ‘greener’ than what would likely occur
  14
     http://www.articlearchives.com/energy-utilities/utilities-industry-electric-powerity/1816583-1.html
and
  http://www.14000.ru/projects/city-climate/lea‡et0908e.pdf and
http://bangalorebuzz.blogspot.com/2006/12/emission-cuts-to-augur-well-for-bmtc.html
  15
     Ravikiran Power Projects Private Ltd,                Monitoring Report:           7.5 MW Grid-
Connected Biomass Power Project (UNFCCC Ref.                       No.        0971), Version:     Raviki-
ran / 001, dated 4 September 2008 (‘Monitoring Report’), p.                             8, available at:
http://cdm.unfccc.int/UserManagement/FileStorage/13KBH5NLQM60FOWXY9PZ8J47TCISAD,
accessed on 31 March 2009


                                                   10
otherwise. However, that the requirement of “additionality” in CDM funded projects is
hard to verify in practice16 .
    There are also large scale public-private partnerships, where the …nancial input of
CDM and similar incentive mechanisms is either less signi…cant or does not apply. In the
current global economy, when large businesses partner with governments at a national
or regional level, funding for large-scale experimental projects becomes possible. In the
United Arab Emirates, construction is underway for what is claimed will be the world’s
…rst zero carbon city (while in operation; construction is still just as carbon intensive).
This is notable for several reasons. First and foremost, the UAE is a country largely
dependant on production and sale of fossil fuels (mostly oil) and this project represents a
change from the status quo. Second, the scale of investment, which is roughly around $22
billion USD, makes it one of the most expensive green projects in the world. Third and
…nally, a key priority is given to pro…tability, in the hopes that this will signal to others
that similar projects can be pro…table in other areas of the world as well17 . The embryonic
city, which lies near Abu Dhabi, has infrastructure designed to encourage energy saving
and estimates are that it will use 75% less power than a conventional city of the same
size, and all energy that is used will be generated using renewables18 .
    Similar to this, a retro-…t for Dongtan in China is in the works in association with
the Shanghai Industrial Investment Corporation. With a retro-…t, zero carbon may not
be possible and so the project has been called building an ‘eco-city’, with an emphasis on
emissions reduction, e¢ciency upgrading, new city planning models, infrastructure and
architecture. The aim is that Dongtan will be transformed to use natures resources as
e¢ciently and e¤ectively as possible in the hope that this will ensure the city’s long term
survival and prosperity in environmental as well as economic terms19 .
    Business involvement in emissions mitigation also partly re‡ects the perceived prof-
itability of going ‘green’. For example, in Dubai, a company called Dynamic Architecture20
is working on rede…ning skyscraper construction in terms of e¢ciency and also in terms
of self-sustainability, suggesting new building methods as well as making skyscrapers into
wind power generating plants, able to power themselves and several city blocks at a frac-
  16
      We discuss the shortcomings of CDM as a funding mechanism for technogy transfer in greater detail
in Section 5.1.
   17
      This is an example of the demonstration e¤ect, a point that we will come back to later on in the
following section.
   18
      http://www.dailygalaxy.com/my_weblog/2008/05/the-worlds-…rs.html
   19
      http://www.arup.com/newsitem.cfm?pageid=7009
   20
      http://www.dynamicarchitecture.net/home.html



                                                  11
tion of the cost and construction time of a more traditional skyscraper. Another example
is Interface Carpets, a carpet manufacturer that boasts the so-called ‘greenest CEO in
the world’, Ray Anderson. Carpet making is oil and carbon intensive and Mr. Anderson
has managed to reduce carbon emissions in their process by 82% over the past 12 years
in absolute tonnage, while at the same time doubling pro…ts. Approximately, this is the
reduction goal for the whole world set out for the long term under the UNFCCC negotia-
tions to keep warming at 2 degrees. Thus a case study of this company makes for a good
example of how to reach that goal. Perhaps even more signi…cant, it stands as a signal
that the stated international goal is reachable even for fossil fuel intensive industries –
and at a pro…t as well21 .
    Similar businesses are growing on a global scale and a large subsection of them, mostly
from developed countries, attend the annual ‘Clean Equity’22 conference in Monaco, where
green industry leaders mingle to share ideas and network with each other. Here gather
companies developing greener cars, better batteries, better solar cells, consultancies o¤er-
ing services on how to green your business, concept businesses for launching new geother-
mal, wind and solar energy ideas, companies selling green gimmicks23 and several other
types of green companies.
    Perhaps somewhat counter-intuitively, oil companies have also embraced the statement
that going green is pro…table. This is embodied in the US Carbon Action Partnership
(USCAP)24 ; a large group of oil companies, mining companies and other heavy emitters
who are essentially calling for regulation to be placed over them in terms of carbon
emissions, calling for signi…cant and early action and for the US (home to all head o¢ces
of the members) to take an early and signi…cant stance on reducing carbon emissions.
While the purpose here is to guide change so that the most pro…t/ least damage is won,
that such an agreement exists at all is indicative how important these companies believe
emissions reduction to be, whether this stems from ecological concerns or worries over
their bottom line pro…t.
  21
     Mr.      Anderson’s speech on this at a recent TED conference may be found at
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iP9QF_lBOyA
  22
     http://www.cleanequitymonaco.com/
  23
     Things such as this idea from Honda, opening up more car options as your driving gets greener, would
qualify as a gimmick. http://earth2tech.com/2009/03/02/upcoming-honda-insight-turns-eco-friendly-
driving-into-game/
  24
     http://www.us-cap.org/, some members include Shell, Chrysler, DuPont, Dow Chemical, GM, Ford
and GE




                                                   12
2.5. Unilateral Measures by Individuals

Individual actions are also having a signi…cant impact on climate change mitigation. Re-
cycling is increasingly becoming common across the globe. In many developing countries,
recycling is a source of livelihood for the urban poor25 . Compact ‡orescent bulbs are
also becoming more commonplace every day, with LED technology, perhaps even more
e¢cient, progressing apace. Ultimately, the goal is to make households as energy e¢cient
and carbon free as possible. For the dedicated, this may involve purchasing for energy
e¢ciency, while installing home-based solar or wind power systems. If individuals have
the will, funds and supporting legislature this set of behavior is becoming a global com-
monality. Individuals also in‡uence higher levels of governance, businesses and whole
groups of other individuals. In simpler terms, these individuals attempt to shift culture
more towards the ‘carbon free’ mentality. Some who have put notable e¤ort into this
include signi…cant political …gures such as Al Gore and Arnold Schwarzenegger of the US,
Nicholas Stern of the UK and Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany. Some celebrities
and other well known people, with varying degrees of e¤ectiveness, have also advocated
climate change action and left a mark, albeit a smaller one. These include David Suzuki,
Sir Paul McCartney, Jimmy Bu¤et, Celine Dion, Keanu Reeves, Alanis Morrissette and
countless others, a large number of them well known internationally.
    Of other individuals, completely unknown before the climate change issue arose, there
are many who have had impact. Some are inventors and some are orators, but the former
need help from the business sector to have an impact, in general (and thus may be said
to have already been covered in the previous section), while orators tend to act on their
own. Perhaps one of the most e¤ective orators is Greg Craven. Using Youtube as his
initial medium, this small town physics & chemistry teacher has created, …rst an ominous
initial statement on climate change entitled “The most terrifying video you’ll ever see”
which has since generated several million hits, followed by a carefully planned and thought
out 7 hour long series of videos entitled “How it all Ends” that expands on the initial
message, responds to critiques, and discusses and explains the science climate change for
the average person in a way that cuts through all the media sensationalism and confusion.
His argument for action on climate change was so compelling that several international
news stations from around the world became interested and he has also seemingly been
contacted by a lead author of the Stern Review. His stated intent is to make his message
‘go viral’ via as many media formats as possible and change mainstream culture in regards
to views on emissions and climate change in general. These examples illustrate the point
 25
      http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2007/mar/04/india.recycling


                                                13
that individuals can, and do, in‡uence large groups of people via existing social networks
and, through them, seek to alter the mainstream culture enough to in‡uence higher levels
of authority and government.


3. The Rationale for Unilateral Measures

A number of the examples discussed in the preceding section make the point that it could
actually be in the short-term self-interest (adaptation to the local impacts of climate
change, ensuring energy security, halting the process of deserti…cation, local development
needs) of certain nations/regions/institutions (for future reference, "entities") to under-
take unilateral measures that also result lower emissions. Nevertheless, the full range of
unilateral measures being undertaken cannot seemingly be solely explained by perceptions
of narrow short-term self-interest especially for smaller countries or cities or individuals as
participation in emissions reductions initiatives generate little or no direct private bene…t.
    One potential explanation is in terms of collective identity. Certain forms of collective
identity can be self-enforcing in that conditional on other individuals accepting the same
collective identity, it is in the self-interest of any one individual not to deviate, a point
emphasized by Olson (1971) in his work on collective action. To the extent to which
"going green" is viewed as an essential part of the collective identity in a given entity,
individuals in that entity will undertake unilateral measures to cut emissions26 .
    A di¤erent rationalization of unilateral initiatives lies in "rule utilitarianism" (Harsanyi
(1977)) where individuals act to conform to a speci…c rule given that some group of other
individuals also conform to the relevant rule. Unilateral measures in a given entity can
be rationalized if each individual in that entity …nds its optimal to cut emissions given
that all individuals in that entity conform to the rule of cutting emissions27 .
    There are also arguments that unilateral measures can make sense in terms of the
  26
      We can formalize Olson’s argument as follows. Let  denote an entity where membership entails an
individual commitment to cut emissions. Consider an individual  who obtains a bene…t  from group
membership. Let  denote the cost of cutting emissions to individual . Then, as long as  ¡   0,
individual  will cut emissions to signal alleigance to the collective identity of the group.
   27
      Applied to our context, rule utilitarianism may be formalised as follows. Assume that each individual
in an eentity has a common set of actions  = [0 1] (where 0 corresponds to low emissions and 1 to high
emissions) and wishes to maximize a common utility function (which could be weighted sum of utility
functions of individuals belonging to the group) over the set of action pro…les. Under rule utilitarianism,
each individual ,  = 1  , an action  2  to maximize  (1       a) s.t.  =  , for all
 6= ,  belonging to the group, and a is the action pro…le chosen by individuals outside the group. This
formalization is useful in the context of the following section’s model.


                                                       14
demonstration e¤ects involved. By undertaking unilateral measures certain entities demon-
strate not only the feasibility of collective action and their awareness of the potential
threats to other entities but also lower the cost of cutting emissions for all other entities
as well28 . Therefore, even if it isn’t in the direct short-term interests of certain entities to
cut emissions, by anticipating that such activities will generate a similar response from
others, such entities will undertake unilateral measures. Thus Heal (1993) argues that as
one country undertakes even limited emission cuts it incurs a variety of costs (e.g. R and
D investments, retooling) that are "sunk" in nature. However, once the new low carbon
technology has been developed, it can be made available to another country at a rela-
tively lower cost. Moreover, given the larger market, there are greater private incentives
to innovate in both countries leading to deeper emission cuts within the two countries
and at some point, inducing emission cuts by a third country and so on. The general
point is that as one country cuts its emissions, the marginal cost of cutting emissions for
other countries may fall as well thus making emission cuts more worthwhile in these latter
countries.
    In related vein, it can be argued that the initial commitment to cut 50% of CFCs in
the Montreal protocol was critical to its success as it lowered the costs of making even
bigger reductions by providing a real incentive for the development of substitutes to CFCs
(Benedick (1998)). The only real di¤erence between this and the scenario described above
is one of scale, thus the events surrounding Montreal Protocol may be taken as a precedent
for the potential of such a mechanism.
    In an in‡uential contribution, Pacala and Socolow (2004) have argued that implement-
  28
    A simillar point has been made in a model of farsighted network formation in Dutta, Ghosal and Ray
(2005).




                                                 15
ing a series of "stabilization wedges"29 will place the world, approximately, on a path to
stabilizing CO2 levels. Arguably, a more grass-roots approach would be required in any
attempt to go further than stabilizing emissions. If a highly industrialized nation (or an
entity within it) implements some of these wedges within its borders, other nations (and
entities within it) can learn from its experience and use the innovations (be they policy
based or technological) stimulated by such an attempt. For example, if a city introduces
a raft of measures to induce more use of public transport and some of these measures
are successful, other cities elsewhere in the world can learn from its experience and im-
plement similar measures. At a national level, reducing the cost of generating electricity
by wind/solar power potentially bene…ts many countries and not just the country within
whose borders the innovation takes place. Such unilateral commitments induce innova-
tion in technologies that lower the cost of switching to low carbon economic activities by
creating a market for such innovations. The argument is thus that there are signi…cant
positive transnational externalities involved in any unilateral initiative30 .
    A critical issue relates to both the size and form that these emissions reductions take.
On the one hand, one could argue that these actions are often largely symbolic and un-
dertaken for political reasons foremost, or one can argue that there is more substance
involved. In the OECD, Europe and large population, rapidly growing developing coun-
tries that over 50% of industrial emissions are accounted for by 3-4 industries (power
generation foremost), and hence attempts to cut emissions and/or the adoption of open
technology standards in these key sectors will be seen to have a signi…cant potential impact
on overall emissions within these countries. Switching to low carbon activities requires
  29
      These are, by 2054, 1. double vehicle fuel e¢ciency, 2. reduce the use of vehicles by half, 3. reduce
all building and appliances emissions by 25%, 4. double our e¢ciency in obtaining energy from coal,
5. replace 1500 GW of coal based energy with natural gas, 6. introduce carbon capture and storage to
power plants totalling 800 GW coal or 1600 GW gas, 7. use CCS at 500 MtC/ year coal based H2 power
plants (or half that if gas is used), 8. use CCS at coal-to-synfuel production plants of total capacity
of 30 million barrels per day (assuming CCS is 50% e¢cient – ie – 50% waste carbon is fed back into
the system), 9. replace 700 MW of coal power with nuclear, 10. replace 2000 GW of coal power with 2
million 1 MW (peak) wind turbines, 11. replace 2000 GW of coal power with photovoltaic technology,
12. Add 4 million 1 MW (peak) wind turbines for production of H2 based vehicle fuel, 13. increase
ethanol production by a factor of 100 for vehicle fuels, 14. halt tropical deforestation, plant 2 times as
much new trees (300 Mha worth of land), and …nally, 15. practice conservation tillage on all farmland
globally 10 times as much as currently practiced. SeFor further information on Socolow wedges refer to
http://carbonsequestration.us/papers-presentations/htm/Pacala-Socolow-ScienceMag-Aug2004.pdf
   30
      The scope of such positive externalities may, however, be limited by issues of technology transfer and
absorptive capacity across locales in the face of binding political and cultural constraints.



                                                    16
technologies that relate primarily energy, infrastructure, transport and industry (Human
Development Report (2008)) and clearly e¤ective innovation in these technologies in one
nation or region will generate positive transnational externalities.
    It follows from this that even if a majority of entities in a nation do not …nd it in their
self-interest to cut emissions, a minority of entities might. Thus, even if a given country
is not willing to commit to emission cuts as part of a multilateral negotiation process,
a positive fraction of entities within each nation might be willing to cut emissions and
thereby reduce the costs involved in future multilateral agreements.


4. Unilateral Initiatives, Learning and Global Convergence to
   Emissions Cuts

In this section we present a simple dynamic model which demonstrates how social learning
which builds on unilateral initiatives could deliver a switch to a global low emissions regime
over time. We show that while single countries on their own may never get to the point of
switching completely to low emission activities, a suitably designed learning process with
strongly connected countries (which will be made precise below) will, over time, deliver a
global switch to low emissions. Subsidized targeted technology transfer31 may be essential
to alter the participation constraints of nations over time. We, then, use the model to
discuss how policy a¤ects the rate of convergence to a global low emissions regime.

4.1. The dynamic model of learning

We consider discrete time intervals which go from  = 1 2 . There are  = f1  g
countries. Each country consists of a number of individual entities of mass   032 and the
                                       P
total mass across countries is  =   . At  = 1 2,  2 f0 1g denotes the emissions
of greenhouse gases by individual  belonging to country  so that at any   = 0
corresponds to adopting low carbon activities while  = 1 corresponds to persisting
                                            R
with a high carbon activities. Let  =     denote the total emissions of country 
                         P
in period . Let   =   denote the total emissions at time .
    Let a fraction   (respectively, 1 ¡   ) of individuals  in country  have preferences
  31
     Technology is de…ned broadly here to include not only process and physical tech innovations but also
the associated behavioral/ cultural changes that go along with those innovations
  32
     We interpret  as the size of country . This is used as an approximate measure of a country’s
ability to in‡uence carbon levels. Formally, we assume that nation  consists of a set of individuals  of
Lebesgue measure  .



                                                   17
an incentive to cut emissions unilaterally (respectively, continue with high emission ac-
tivities). We assume that once a switch occurs from high to low emission activities it is
irreversible. We do not impute any particular motive to such individuals who want to cut
emissions unilaterally but several possibilities are evident in the preceding sections.
    We will assume that  1 =    21 ,   ¸ 0, for all countries  with strict inequality for
some countries . We assume that that underlying preferences (which we do not explicitly
specify) are such that it is globally e¢cient to set  = 0 for all  .33
    We assume that in each country  at each , individuals decide, via majority voting,
between two alternatives: (i) all individuals within the country switch to zero emission
activities or (ii) only those individuals who voluntarily choose to do so switch to low
emission activities. Therefore, a country  will commit to cut emissions to zero in period
 (and in all subsequent periods) i¤   ¸ 21 . Otherwise, the emissions level in country  at
 is given by  = (1 ¡   ) .
    We assume that the there is some underlying process of social learning within each
country  that works as follows. A unilateral commitment by a group of individuals
within country  at each  to cut emissions in any time period stimulates innovative
activity that lowers, over time, the relative cost34 of adopting low carbon activities for
other individuals both within country  and across all other countries  6= . Such an e¤ect
relies on the design of appropriate policy mechanisms that maximize the impact of positive
technological/institutional externalities to facilitate innovation, technology transfer and
adoption of low emission activities both within a country and across countries. This will
be the focus of the discussion on policy below.
    The fraction of individuals within a given country  who are willing to cut emissions
unilaterally is an increasing function of the number of other individuals globally who have
undertaken unilateral commitments to cut emissions. We allow for inertia in learning so
that at each , not all individuals within country  who bene…t from switching actually
do so- this could be due to variety of factors such as habit formation, lack of awareness
and information etc.
    Formally, the evolution of   within each country  over time is described, for  ¸ 2,
by the system of di¤erence equations :
  33
     The divergence between private payo¤s and global payo¤s is assumed to re‡ect the wide-spread
negative externalities (the medium term damage caused by global warming) resulting from continued
high emission activities.
  34
     These costs could be …nancial costs, lowering the relative costs in terms of the e¤ort or time sacri…ced
to do the ‘green’ thing i.e. making it easier in terms of the physical and cognitive e¤ort involved to do
the ‘green’ thing rather than the more carbon intensive equivalent action.


                                                     18
                 n           ³ ³P           ´         ´ o
         = min  ¡1
                       +        
                                   
                                        ¡1
                                              ¡  ¡1
                                                       1  = 1           (1)
                                                                                ³P                  ´
                                                                                              ¡1
     where  , 0   · 1, is a measure of inertia within country ,                  denotes
                                                                                        
the proportion of individuals in country  for whom it becomes a dominant action to cut
emissions at  given that a proportion  ¡1  ,  = 1 2   of individuals in all countries
have already cut emissions at  ¡ 1 and  , 0 ·  · 1, captures the spillover from
country  to country  with  = 1. We assume that  () = 1 for all  ¸ 1 Note that
(1) is a system of di¤erence equations that cannot, in general, be reduced to a collection
of uncoupled di¤erence equations, one for each country .
     The spillover e¤ects across countries, for any one country , is captured by the term
P           ¡1
       . Speci…cally, both the sign i.e. whether or not   0 and the magnitude
of  for a pair of countries   will be a consequence of the use of appropriate policy
mechanisms that build on positive technological spillover across countries.
     We assume that the map  = f :  2  g,  : [0 ] ! [0 ] , is continuous and
increasing on [0 1] : learning within and across countries is complementary. In e¤ect
we assume that all internal and external learning will cause an increasing proportion of
individuals within a country to cut emissions (or at least, any negative in‡uence is always
overridden by the positive in‡uences)35 .
     Will each country eventually be in a position to commit to cut emissions? We say that
country  is connected to country  if   0. De…ne a directed graph over  where the
vertices are individuals and an arc ( ) exists i¤  is connected to . A path in a directed
graph is an ordered collection of arcs and vertices in which all vertices are distinct. A
directed graph is strongly connected if for every pair of distinct if for every pair of distinct
vertices ( ) there exists a path connecting  to . We say countries are globally strongly
connected if the associated graph is strongly connected.
     An example of a scenario where countries are globally strongly connected is when
  0 for all  6= . A di¤erent scenario where countries are globally strongly connected
is one where 1  0, 1  0 but  = 0 for  6=  whenever  6= 1.
     More generally, when countries are globally strongly connected, between any two coun-
tries  , there is a chain of countries 0 =    =  with  ¡1  0.
     Suppose the set of countries is globally strongly connected with    0 for some
  35
     The restriction on  is strong but is made for reasons of expositional simplicity. By repeating the
argument made below to show  has a unique …xed-point (1  1), it is easily veri…ed that any …xed-point
                                                                 £          ¤
of  is greater than (in the ussual vector ordering) the vector 12   12 as long as  is increasing on
£ 1 ¤
 0 2 .




                                                    19
country . Consider the map  = f :  2 g where  : [0 ] ! [0 ]36 . Note that
by construction  () = 1 for all  ¸ 1, ³ = 1  .             ´ Therefore, the vector (1  1)
                                                         P
is always a …xed-point of . Note that                             whenever 0     1 for
some  6=  with   0. Whenever    0, for some country  at some , as there
is a³ path connecting  ´    each country  to country ,  6= , there exists 0 ¸  such that
      P            0
                   ¡1         0
                    ¡1 ¸ 0:  = 0 if    0 and   0, otherwise 0  , 0 ·  + 
where  is the minimum number of vertices (the minimum taken across all the paths
connecting  to ) between  and . As    0 for some country , it follows that (1  1)
is the only …xed-point of . Let f  :  ¸ 1g denote the sequence generated by an iterated
application of the RHS of (1). Then, by continuity of , for each country  sup   = 1 and
as f  :  ¸ 1g is a component-wise increasing sequence, !1  = 1 for all  = 1  .
                      ©            ª                                   ^
     Let ^ = inf  :   ¸ 21 . Therefore, for all  ¸ ^ ,   ¸ 21 : whenever, there are some
(however weak) spillover e¤ects in learning across countries  so that all countries are
globally strongly connected, eventually a majority of voters in each country  will vote
to commit to cut emissions. Therefore, a stable global agreement to cut emissions will
emerge at ^ = max ^ . As the RHS of (1) is increasing in  ,  and   ,   2  , for each
country , ^ is decreasing in  ,  and   ,   2  .
     We summarize the above discussion as the following proposition:
     Proposition: Suppose learning within each country is described by the map (1), coun-
tries are globally strongly connected and    0 for some country . Then, there exists ^ ,
decreasing in  ,  and   ,   2 , such that country  will commit to cut emissions
for all  ¸ ^ with  = (1¡  ) for all   ^ . A stable global agreement to cut emissions
will emerge at ^ = max ^ .
     So far, we have focused on the case of learning with spillovers in scenarios where
countries are strongly connected. To understand the importance of spillover e¤ects in
driving global learning to the point where countries commit to switching to low emissions,
it is useful to consider the polar opposite case, where  = 0 for all  6= . In this case, all
learning takes place within a single country and the evolution of   within each country
 over time is described, for  ¸ 2, by the equation:
                  ©              ¡ ¡    ¢         ¢ ª
       = min  ¡1   +    ¡1
                                         ¡  ¡1
                                                   1  = 1             (2)
  36
    We assume that all learning within and across countries is complementary so that  is increasing
         
on [0 1] : all internal and external learning will cause and increasing proportion of individuals within a
country to cut emissions (or at least, any negative in‡uence will tend to be overridden by the positive
in‡uences). Our analysis is robust to a perturbation where negative in‡uences dominate positive in‡u-
                                       £   ¤
ences as long as  is increasing on 0 12 (i.e. positive momentum) as any …xed-point of  is greater
                                                £          ¤
than (in the usual vector ordering) the vector 12   12 .


                                                    20
      where  () =  () on [0 1]. Clearly, in this case, (2) is a system of di¤erence
equations that can be reduced to a collection of uncoupled di¤erence equations, one for
each country  each of which can be analyzed separately.
      In this case, will each country eventually be in a position to commit to cut emissions?
The answer in general is no. Let  ¤ = min f 2 [0 1] :  () = g is smallest …xed point
of the map  : [0 1] ! [0 1].  ¤ is well-de…ned as 1 is always a …xed point of  () and
the set of …xed-points of  () is closed subset of a compact set and hence, compact. Let
f  ;  ¸ 1g denote the sequence generated by an iterated application of the RHS of (2)
with  1 =   ¸ 0 and  ¤ ¸    0. Clearly, if   = 0, country  never moves away from
0. If    0, then by continuity of  (), sup   =  ¤ and as f  ;  ¸ 1g is an increasing
sequence, !1   =  ¤ . Therefore, as long as  ¤  21 learning within country  will
never result in country , as a whole, switching to low emissions.
      More generally, note that it is straightforward to construct examples where  6= 0
for some  6= , countries are not globally connected and therefore, !1    21 for all
: simply set 0   1  12 ,   = 1 = 0,  6= 1.
      In conclusion, our formal analysis suggests that while single countries on their own
may never get to the point of switching completely to low emission activities, a suitably
designed learning process with strongly connected nations will, over time, deliver a global
switch to low emissions.

4.2. A new global IP regime: subsidies, spillovers and global learning

We will now use the model, developed in the preceding section, to discuss the key features
of a global policy regime that can a¤ect the rate of convergence to a global low emis-
sions regime i.e. e¤ectively build on the positive externalities inherent in such unilateral
initiatives.
    It bears repeating here that the variety of di¤erent unilateral initiatives re‡ects a het-
erogeneity of interests, beliefs, motivation at the level of countries, regions and groups.
Some unilateral initiatives are driven by perceptions of self-interest (adaptation to the
local impacts of climate change, ensuring energy security, halting the process of deserti-
…cation, local development needs) while others are more globally preventative in nature
(general greenhouse gas reduction accords, etc.). Groups within a nation might also
undertake unilateral initiatives primarily for signalling collective identity, in which case
concepts of rule utilitarianism and demonstration e¤ects come into play.
    In theory, although low emissions may not emerge as the outcome of majority voting at
a national level (at least in large countries), unilateral measures may well exist at various


                                                21
subnational levels. Moreover, subnational groups are more likely to have the autonomy
and resources in initiating unilateral measures in decentralized political systems that
empower individuals and communities.
    Although the main result in the formal model suggests that with spillovers all countries
will eventually agree to cut emissions down to zero, there still remains the issue of how
                                                                    P
quickly countries get there. For example, suppose  = 1 and    ¸ 21 : if  = 1 for
all countries  , then   ¸ 12 for all  and  ¸ 2. This is clearly a best-case scenario,
one where convergence is immediate: ^ = ^ = 2. More generally, for each country , ^ is
decreasing in  ,  and   ,   2 . Therefore, policy interventions that increase the
values of these variables will increase the rate at which there is global convergence to a
low emissions regime.
    We argue that subsidies to facilitate technological transfer could be a way of speeding
up the convergence to a global low emissions regime. A central part of the Copenhagen
negotiations are focused on issues relating to innovation and technology transfer. What
could be involved is a new global IP regime characterized by governments in countries
developing publicly funded new technology that involves users in other countries at the
development stage, paying a part (or whole) of the royalties paid by users in other countries
for privately funded technology, and lowering the cost of local use (and adaptation) of
proprietary technologies by designing an appropriate international licensing system.
    The design of such a system will have to deal with the question of much is paid
and on what basis is the payment made. What conditions should be attached to these
payments? While it is clear that any payments would have to be made conditional on
veri…able actions to switch to low emissions technology, the funding mechanism to subsi-
dize technology transfer will have to build on the experience and the lessons learnt from
the operation of the CDM. A key criticism of the CDM is that the requirement of “ad-
ditionality” is hard to verify in practice. For example, …rms may delay adoption of cost
e¤ective low carbon technologies to bene…t from CDM or use CDM to adopt technologies
that they would have funded from capital markets or internal funds in any case (Olsen
(2007), Wara and Victor (2008)). For example, funding could be conditional on countries
adopting speci…c commitments i.e. speci…c time-bound quantity targets like initially low-
ering carbon intensity followed by emission cuts, the adoption of low carbon technology
(carbon capture and storage, solar and wind energy etc.) in important sectors such as
energy, infrastructure, transport and industry. A portion of the funding could be reserved
for research and development. Decisions on funding individual projects would be taken
in the context of an overall carbon reduction plan for the country as whole. Institutional
design to ensure timely funding ‡ows, monitoring and evaluation would be essential to

                                             22
the successful operation of such a global innovation and technology transfer fund.
    Moreover, such a global funding mechanism would have to build on links (any actual
and potential spillovers) between countries. For example, the US and the EU would be
especially important because of their central role in the world economy and their gener-
ation of innovation and technology transfer. Others such as China and India would be
important because of the size of their populations. For example, existing "clean coal"
power plants and carbon capture technologies can be developed and further re…ned in the
US and EU with a subsequent (subsidized) transfer to China where it would have a sig-
ni…cant impact on cutting emissions. Other links may re‡ect structural similarities, land
use patterns, existing patterns of carbon consumption etc. Such a policy regime would
involve platforms where information relating to unilateral initiatives can be exchanged,
subsidies varied by characteristics such as the degree of spillover by type of technology
and by targeting countries that have the greatest potential to generate spillover e¤ects37 .
Identifying, quantifying and calculating such spillovers is key to the success of such a
process. Moreover, the timing of such subsidies would be clearly important as is the
manner in which such subsidies are phased out.
    However, in general, measures that reduce emissions inertia within a country and
measures that strengthen the positive spillover e¤ects across countries are both likely to
be costly. With resource constraints, there is likely to be a trade-o¤ between the two
such as subsidizing measures that improve the energy e¢ciency of domestic households or
subsidizing low carbon technologies that reduce emissions in the energy generation. The
latter may have a higher potential to generate spillovers across countries while the former
will have a bigger impact on reducing inertia within a country.
    In short, an e¤ective global policy regime might have to be structured so that the
cost of switching to low carbon activities falls quickly over time so that starting from
a situation with limited coverage, low carbon activities spread rapidly across localities,
entities and sectors.
    Such a new global IP regime and its funding mechanism would have also have to
stimulate investment in innovative ways to reduce the costs of emission cuts (a point
emphasized by Arrow (2007)). To achieve the goal of ensuring that the pace of innovation
in low carbon technologies is rapid, such a policy would have to be supplemented by
other measures. Information sharing, incentives (targeted subsidies, carbon pricing) that
  37
    This would be due to speci…c characteristics such as size, in‡uence, technological and innovation
capabilities, the degree of similarity with other national economies such as location, patterns of land and
energy use, dominance of key sectors, neighborhood e¤ects etc.



                                                    23
stimulate innovation, lowers inertia and maximize the impact of spillover e¤ects across
countries would be essential. If there is uncertainty over commitments to emission targets
and carbon prices ‡uctuate over time, or are too low or if too many economic activities
are excluded from emissions trading, there may be little or no impact on behavior of …rms
and households. This may discourage innovation (costly investment in the production of
new ideas) that lowers the relative cost of low carbon activities in the …rst place. In other
words, global policy would have to establish a stable and growing market for innovation
in technologies that lower the relative cost of low carbon activities.
    The process described here may take time to play out so that the emission cuts re-
quired to stabilize global temperatures may not be delivered quickly. We envisage a
process of technology di¤usion that involves chains of innovations with new inventions
based on other low carbon technologies: such a process may require roughly 5-10 years
to play out for each innovation, or more if the innovations become controversial in some
way. Some of these new technologies will not be compatible with high carbon technologies
and entire factories may need to be retooled (thus raising the adoption costs of the new
technologies). Although innovation and subsequent transfer of new technologies is essen-
tial, emissions reduction may be achieved by ensuring the spread and adoption of existing
low carbon technologies within and across countries. For example, households and …rms
within high income countries could be persuaded to insulate their houses or install solar
panels by a combination of subsidies (or low cost loans), and by the extension of carbon
markets to individual households and small …rms/businesses. As already argued, subsi-
dized technology transfer across countries (for example, the transfer of existing cleaner
and more e¢cient power generation from coal to China and/or the greater use of carbon
capture technologies in power generation globally) would require a new global IP regime.
    The speed of convergence to a global low carbon regime would increase if entities
in a given country choose to cut emissions even when it isn’t in their immediate short-
run interests to do so, anticipating that such an action would induce an earlier switch
by entities in all other countries. Individual entities in countries that (a) create the
largest spillover e¤ects, either directly or indirectly, on global learning, (b) are pivotal
(i.e. without whom global learning will be delayed substantially), and (c) are willing to
bear the costs of being one of the …rst to switch to low emission activities, are more likely
to act in anticipation of inducing an earlier switch to low emission activities by other
countries. Moreover, such behavior will be in‡uenced by the strength of the spillover in
learning across countries. For example, if  = 1,  = 1 for all countries  , voters in
country  could choose to cut emissions to zero (so that  1 = 1) anticipating that   ¸ 21
for all  6= ,  ¸ 2.

                                             24
    In addition to this, bundling trade and climate change negotiations together could
ensure broader participation and compliance in climate change negotiations because the
‡ow of immediate bene…ts associated with emission cuts (the bene…ts of lower trade bar-
riers) could alter incentives for countries to participate in global negotiations. However, a
necessary condition for such bundling to work is that the threat of increased protection-
ism by low carbon nations be renegotiation proof, a condition (i.e. increased protectionist
tendencies) more likely to met by nations already undertaking unilateral initiatives as
demonstrated by recent talks on carbon based border adjustments to address issues of
leakage.


5. Multilateral negotiations and unilateral initiatives

How do unilateral initiatives relate to multilateral negotiations? If countries hang on to
emissions reduction possibilities as bargaining chips, multinational negotiations can slow
the pace of unilateral emissions reductions. On the other hand, multilateral negotiations
can be seen merely as a repackaging of unilateral initiatives.
    There is a signi…cant literature on the autonomous increase in energy e¢ciency over
time within the OECD economies since the 1970’s38 . This was about 2% per year in the
1970-1980’s as a result of the sharp increases in oil prices under OPEC and is now at
around 1% per year since the early 1990s (lessened due to relatively ine¢cient consumer
electronics). The IPCC relies heavily on this positive trend continuing in their argu-
ments that the costs of meeting major reductions in emissions intensities are relatively
small. Thus, unilateral measures are already assumed in any multilateral agreement in
this limited sense.
    The issue then is how these autonomous increases in energy e¢ciency will be a¤ected
as a result of the broader scope of unilateral measures which have been taken beyond this.
These were not present in the 1970’s and 1980’s and they will, presumably, accelerate the
trend in autonomous increases in energy e¢ciency. More generally, how much linkage to
unilateral actions exists in multilateral agreements, as well as how much potential synergy
exists between those unilateral actions within a multilateral context are critical questions
to determining the role of unilateralism in a multilateral agreement.
    The spread and acceleration of unilateral measures in the ways we describe also makes
it easier to negotiate multilaterally beyond this view of energy e¢ciency already present
in multilateral negotiations. If multilateral commitments are to be largely met through
 38
      http://www.iea.org/Textbase/Papers/2008/Indicators_2008.pdf



                                                25
unilateral processes, or are to some extent shaped by existing/ planned unilateral actions,
then commitments taken on by negotiators involve little additional cost.
    But broadly, the question is whether unilateral measures can be considered to be an
engine for reduction in carbon emissions and how this engine will produce negotiated mul-
tilateral commitments in terms of both potential synergies and relative e¤ectiveness. Our
analysis implicitly assumes unilateral measures will play a large part in any future mul-
tilateral agreement, if one should come about. Under this view, a multilateral agreement
should build on national (and more local) e¤orts to promote the development and spread
of e¤ective unilateral actions by strengthening the spillovers across nations and result in
a process of social learning that delivers a global switch to a low emissions regime.


6. Concluding Remarks

In this paper we discuss both the size and extent of unilateral commitments to reduce
carbon emissions which are being taken in countries around the world and especially in
the OECD. The question is whether such initiatives are the most signi…cant part of the
global e¤ort at mitigation, or whether they represent symbolic and in some ways naïve
commitments which o¤er no serious possibility of major emissions reduction. If the latter
is the case, other mechanisms of either accommodation to adaptation or mitigation of
emissions would need to be resorted to achieve substantial emissions reduction. If there
are signi…cant externalities in unilateral actions, building on such measures via learning
supported by a new global IP regime could provide the route for any future multilateral
agreement, preemptively dealing with much of the additional cost involved in such a
multilateral agreement.


References

 [1] Arrow, K. J. (2007) "Global Climate Change: A Challenge to Policy,"
     The Economists’ Voice:     Vol. 4 :       Iss. 3, Article 2. Available at:
     http://www.bepress.com/ev/vol4/iss3/art2.

 [2] Barrett, S. (1994), "Self-Enforcing International Environmental Agreements", Oxford
     Economic Papers, 878-894.

 [3] Benedick, R.E. (1998), Ozone Diplomacy: New Directions in Safeguarding the Planet,
     Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


                                            26
 [4] Chatterji, S. and S. Ghosal (2009), "Technology, unilateral commitments and cumu-
     lative emissions reduction", forthcoming CESIFO Studies.

 [5] Coase, R. H. (1960), "The problem of social cost", The Journal of Law and Eco-
     nomics, 3, 1-44.

 [6] Dutta, B., S. Ghosal and D. Ray (2005), “Farsighted network formation”, Journal of
     Economic Theory, 122, 143-164, 2005.

 [7] Foley, D. K. (1970), "Lindahl’s solution and the core of an economy with public
     goods", Econometrica, 38, 66-72.

 [8] Gupta, S., D. A. Tirpak, N. Burger, J. Gupta, N. Höhne, A. I. Boncheva, G. M.
     Kanoan, C. Kolstad, J. A. Kruger, A. Michaelowa, S. Murase, J. Pershing, T. Saijo,
     A. Sari, 2007: Policies, Instruments and Co-operative Arrangements. In Climate
     Change 2007: Mitigation. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth As-
     sessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [B. Metz, O.R.
     Davidson, P.R. Bosch, R. Dave, L.A. Meyer (eds)], Cambridge University Press,
     Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

 [9] Harsanyi, J. C. (1977), "Rule Utilitarianism and Decision Theory", Erkenntnis, 11,
     pp. 25-53.

[10] Heal, G. (1993), "Formation of International Environmental Agreements", in C. Car-
     raro (ed.), Trade, Innovation and Environment. Dordrecht:Kluwer.

[11] Human Development Report 2008: Fighting Climate Change- Human Solidarity in
     a Divided World, UNDP, Palgrave Macmillan.

[12] IPCC, 2007: Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
     Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
     on Climate Change [Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B.
     Averyt, M.Tignor and H.L. Miller (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
     United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

[13] Olson, M., (1971). The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of
     Groups, Harvard University Press, 2nd edition.

[14] Olsen, K. H., (2007), "The clean development mechanism’s contribution", Climatic
     Change 84, 59–73.

                                          27
[15] Pacala, S., and R. Socolow, 2004. “Stabilization wedges: Solving the climate problem
     for the next 50 years with current technologies.” Science 305: 968-972.

[16] Shapley, L.S. and M. Shubik (1969), "On the core of a system with externalities",
     American Economic Review, 59, 678-684.

[17] Starret, D.A. (1973), "Externalities and the core", Econometrica, 41, 179-183.

[18] Stern, N.H. (2007), The Stern Review of the Economics of Climate Change (Cam-
     bridge: Cambridge University Press).

[19] Stiglitz, J.E. (2007), “A new agenda for global warming”, The Economists’ Voice,
     3(7): Art. 3. Available at: http://www.bepress.com/ev/vol3/iss7/art3.

[20] UNFCCC. 1997. Kyoto Protocol to UNFCCC. United Nations Framework Conven-
     tion on Climate Change. Bonn, Germany.

[21] Wara, M. W. and D. G. Victor (2008), "A realistic policy of international carbon o¤-
     setts", Stanford University Program on Energy and Sustainable Development Work-
     ing Paper #74.




                                           28
Table 1: Country-wide Measures
Country/Region   Type                             Actions/Goals
EU               General emissions reduction/     20% emissions reduction by 2020 / 20% of region
                 Renewables                       powered by renewables by 2020
China            Energy efficiency/ Renewables/   20% improvement in energy efficiency relative to
                 General emissions reduction      trend / 20% of region powered by renewables /
                                                  reduce emissions intensity per unit of GDP by 20%
                                                  - all goals to be achieved by 2020
Norway           General emissions reduction      Zero carbon economy by 2050
New Zealand      General emissions reduction      10-20% below 1990 levels by 2020, specific plan
                                                  outlined for achieving this
Costa Rica       Reforestation / Emissions        No set goal, 1986-2006 added +30% forest cover
                 reduction                        to the country / zero carbon economy by 2021
Denmark          Renewables                       user and prominent exporter of wind power
                                                  turbines to the rest of the world
UK               Emissions reduction              4 new nuclear power stations being built
India            Energy sector reform             Comprehensive efficiency and renewables (and
                                                  nuclear) energy plan, attempting to create ‘green’
                                                  development path
Brazil           Renewables/ alternate fuels      7000 MW production goal for renewables in 2010
                                                  / substantial ethanol production increase
Ecuador          Forest preservation              Rainforest sitting on top of oil field protected due
                                                  to legislature
Spain            Halting desertification          4 year program to plant 45 million trees near
                                                  desert edge underway
Australia        Halting desertification          Bio-engineering salt resistant plants and building
                                                  desalination plants to combat desertification
Maldives         Adaptation measure               Sovereign wealth fund created to purchase new
                                                  home should country be permanently flooded
Table 2: Interstate Measures
Regions/Provinces/ States (country)   Type                           Actions/Goals
Rural communities in Southern         Watershed Renewal/             Payment to farmers for preserving and
Provinces (Mexico)                    Preservation                   maintaining forest area deemed ecologically
                                                                     critical (Up to roughly 40 USD/ hectare/ year)
Iowa, Illinois, Kansas, Michigan,     General emissions reduction/   Midwest greenhouse gas reduction accord –
Minnesota, Wisconsin (US) and         cap and trade system           works similarly to the EU model for emissions
Manitoba (Canada)                                                    reduction/ trading, only on a shorter 30 month
                                                                     timescale – mandates group and individual
                                                                     reduction targets for this time
Connecticut, New Hampshire,           General emissions reduction/   Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative – cap power
Delaware, New Jersey, Maine, New      cap and trade system           sector emissions at 188 million tons
York, Maryland, Rhode Island,                                        immediately, tightened by 10% by 2018 –
Massachusetts and Vermont (US)                                       member policing of each other – pure auctioning
                                                                     ETS, with offsets allowed
Arizona, California, Montana, New     General emissions reduction/   Western Climate initiative – cap and trade
Mexico, Oregon, Utah and Washington   cap and trade system           approach modeled in phases as in the EU, focus
(US), British Columbia, Manitoba,                                    on all institutes emitting over 25,000 tons of
Ontario and Quebec (Canada)                                          CO2 annually, target is 15% emissions reduction
                                                                     from base year 2005 by 2020, enforced on a firm
                                                                     by firm basis rather than standard state basis.
Western Governors Association         renewables                     Clean and Diversified Energy Initiative – 30000
member states (US)                                                   MW capacity goal in renewables for the group
                                                                     by 2015, 20% group energy efficiency
                                                                     improvement goal by 2020
Table 3: Individual State Measures
Province/ State (country)   Type                           Actions/ Goals
Almost all Provinces        General emissions              Goals vary by state/province but most have a
(Canada) and States (US)    reduction/ energy efficiency   minimum of at least 10% improvement in energy
                                                           efficiency and emissions reduction by various
                                                           means by 2020
California (US)             Various – focus on             Samples - Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006,
                            renewables and integration     Alternative and Renewable Fuel and Vehicle
                            of them into infrastructure    Technology Program, Solar Water Heating and
                                                           Efficiency Act of 2007, The Clean Car Law, and
                                                           an 80% GHG reduction target by 2050 from base
                                                           year 1990
Florida (US)                Various – focus on             Samples – 40% reduction target from base year
                            decentralizing power grid      1990 by 2025, 80% by 2050, creation of Florida
                            through renewables             Climate and Energy Commission to oversee
                                                           policy, banning of common energy saving
                                                           devices prohibited, Florida Climate Protection
                                                           Act, tax break for residential property with
                                                           installed renewable power generators, Florida
                                                           Energy Systems Consortium created to
                                                           encourage R&D
British Columbia (Canada)   Carbon tax                     Revenue neutral tax easing in from a $10 CAD
                                                           carbon price equivalent tax in 2008 to a $30 one
                                                           in 2012, specific goods taxed by average carbon
                                                           content
New South Wales             Energy efficiency / adaption   $63 million (AUD) program to help 220 000 low
(Australia)                 preparedness                   income households incorporate new technology
                                                           into the home for improved energy and water
                                                           efficiency
Queensland (Australia)      Renewables & efficiency        $7 million (AUD) into various projects aimed at
                            R&D                            developing renewable technology and upgrading
                                                           energy efficency
Karnataka (India)           renewables                     A ‘100 000 solar roofs’ project centered around,
                                              but not limited to, the Bangalore area. To be
                                              achieved by 2013.
Amazonas (Brazil)   Rainforest preservation   Moved in opposition to Federal ethanol
                                              production mandates, halted practice of handing
                                              out chainsaws to ‘promote development’,
                                              adopted clear preservationist stance
Table 4: City-Level Measures
City                   Type                     Actions/Goals
Copenhagen (Denmark)   Emissions & pollution    City wide public bike system
                       reduction
New York City (US)     Adaptation measures /    Major infrastructure project – estimated 30%
                       emissions reduction/     reduction in emissions. Project includes improving
                       energy efficiency        city forest cover (erosion concern), reworking of
                                                electrical grid and building codes for energy
                                                efficiency, replacing all aging water pipes with focus
                                                on durability, and mandates on increased minimum
                                                allowable fuel efficiencies for cars
Toronto (Canada)       Energy efficiency/       Infrastructure upgrading for durability, updating
                       renewables               building codes for energy efficiency, green roof
                                                promotion, large number of wind power generators
                                                added, both on land and over water
Munich (Germany)       Energy efficiency/       Infrastructure and building code upgrades (similar to
                       renewables / financial   NYC and Toronto), wind power generators added,
                       innovation               weather based derivatives designed to manage wind
                                                power financial risks of variable winds
London (UK)            Renewables/ energy       Major infrastructure and building code upgrades for
                       efficiency               energy efficiency, various wind and solar projects
Shanghai (China)       Energy efficiency/       80 billion Yuan for tree & foliage planting & water
                       emissions reduction /    infrastructure upgrading, revamped tax structure to
                       green industry           encourage green industry, plan for removal of 65% of
                       promotion                vehicle traffic in the city
Sydney (Australia)     Renewables/ energy       Carbon neutral goal by 2020, energy efficiency and
                       efficiency / emissions   water infrastructure upgrades, building code
                       reduction                revamped for energy efficiency and carbon neutral
                                                goal
