                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   BREAKTHROUGH INVENTIONS AND MIGRATING CLUSTERS OF INNOVATION

                                          William R. Kerr

                                       Working Paper 15443
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15443


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2009




Comments are appreciated and can be sent to wkerr@hbs.edu. I am grateful to Ajay Agrawal, Megan
MacGarvie, Ed Glaeser, Stuart Rosenthal, Will Strange, and seminar participants at Kauffman Foundation
Cities and Entrepreneurship Conference, NBER Productivity, and UBC Sauder for feedback on this
work. This research is supported by Harvard Business School, the National Science Foundation, the
Innovation Policy and the Economy Group, and the MIT George Schultz Fund. A previous version
of this paper was titled "Immigrants and Spatial Adjustments in US Invention." The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by William R. Kerr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Breakthrough Inventions and Migrating Clusters of Innovation
William R. Kerr
NBER Working Paper No. 15443
October 2009
JEL No. F2,J4,J6,O3,O4,R1,R3

                                              ABSTRACT

We investigate the speed at which clusters of invention for a technology migrate spatially following
breakthrough inventions. We identify breakthrough inventions as the top one percent of US inventions
for a technology during 1975-1984 in terms of subsequent citations. Patenting growth is significantly
higher in cities and technologies where breakthrough inventions occur after 1984 relative to peer locations
that do not experience breakthrough inventions. This growth differential in turn depends on the mobility
of the technology's labor force, which we model through the extent that technologies depend upon
immigrant scientists and engineers. Spatial adjustments are faster for technologies that depend heavily
on immigrant inventors. The results qualitatively confirm the mechanism of industry migration proposed
in models like Duranton (2007).


William R. Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu
1    Introduction

The spatial location of invention can shift substantially over a short period of time. The San
Francisco Bay Area grew from 5% of US domestic patents in 1975-1984 to over 12% in 1995-2004,
while the share for New York City declined from 12% to 7%. Smaller cities like Austin, TX, and
Boise City, ID, seem to have become clusters of innovation overnight. While the correlation in
population levels of US cities between 1975-1989 and 1990-2004 is 0.99, the correlation for city
patenting levels is signi…cantly weaker at 0.88. This correlation further declines to 0.64 when
looking at the spatial patenting distribution within 36 basic technology groups.

    Despite the prevalence of these movements, we know very little about what drives spatial
adjustments in US invention, the speed at which these reallocations occur, and their economic
consequences. In this paper, we investigate whether breakthrough inventions draw subsequent
research e¤orts for a technology to a local area. A recent theoretical model by Duranton (2007)
describes the spatial evolution of cities and industries through the reallocation of production
across cities following discrete technological advances in locations outside of the industry’s cur-
rent core. Centers of innovation are dictated by where frontier inventions occur, and production
follows the location of invention to achieve agglomeration economies. While this model …ts
the distribution of cities and industries well in several countries (e.g., Duranton 2007, Findeisen
and Südekum 2008), only anecdotal evidence has been o¤ered that the measured industry-level
churning across cities is due to technological advances that are spatially distant from existing
clusters.

    We investigate this missing link by comparing the growth of patenting in cities where break-
through patents occurred to peer cities where they did not or were relatively scarce. We
identify by technology the top one percent of US patents during the 1975-1984 period in terms
of subsequent citations, which we refer to as breakthrough patents. Our analysis compares
the technology-level growth in patenting in cities where these breakthrough patents occurred
relative to similar cities also innovating in the technology in question. We do …nd evidence of
localized patent growth after breakthrough inventions. For example, looking just among the
ten largest patenting cities for a technology during 1975-1984, a one standard deviation increase
in the relative presence of breakthrough patents results in a 20% greater patenting growth for
1990-2004.

    To further characterize this relationship, we examine whether the spatial reallocation occurs
faster if the technology has a more spatially mobile workforce. We proxy the latter through
the extent to which the technology depends upon immigrant scientists and engineers (SEs).
Immigrants are very important for US invention, representing 24% and 47% of the US SE work-
force with bachelor’s and doctorate educations in the 2000 Census of Populations, respectively.

                                                1
This contribution was signi…cantly higher than the 12% share of immigrants in the US working
population. Moreover, much of the recent growth in the US SE workforce has come through
immigration (e.g., Kerr and Lincoln 2008). Using Census records, we show that immigrant SEs
are more mobile within the US than their domestic counterparts. Second, and more important,
the ‡exibility of new immigrants in their initial location decisions provides an important margin
for adjusting the geography of innovation. Immigrants over the past …ve years represent 6% of
the SE workforce in the 2000 Census but 25% of the net moves.

   We show that this greater ‡exibility and growing immigrant contributions result in technology
migration being faster across clusters for technologies that depend heavily on immigrant SEs.
As a …nal step, we con…rm that immigrants speed the spatial reallocation of invention through
an analysis of an exogenous surge in SE immigration following the Immigration Act of 1990.
This in‡ow promoted faster spatial reallocation in technologies that were dependent upon these
workers to cities with breakthrough technologies. This e¤ect was particularly strong in the
semiconductor industry.1

    This study relates to an extensive literature on agglomeration and local innovation. The
local nature of knowledge ‡ows is frequently noted, making the spatial clustering of invention
and related entrepreneurship important.2 Recent research, like Duranton (2007), has begun
to characterize the extent to which industries migrate across cities and the underlying causes.
Empirical work further documents that high-tech industries relocate across US cities and states
particularly quickly.3 This study complements this literature but also describes an under-
appreciated aspect. Major technology advances require extensive re…nement and follow-on
R&D to transform breakthrough concepts into realized products. Developing this SE labor
force itself takes time, well before production would migrate. Our analysis of migration speed
and the composition of the technology’s SE workforce also provides a partial explanation for why
technology-intensive industries migrate faster, although clearly other factors may be important,
too (e.g., less dependency upon natural resources that are spatially …xed).

   Second, understanding these trends is important for labor economics. It is well documented
that immigrants have a substantial impact on US innovation. Most research on this phenom-
   1
     Saxenian (1994, 1999) anecdotally links these phenomena for semiconductors when she reports, "When local
technologists claim that ‘Silicon Valley is built on ICs’ they refer not to the integrated circuit but to Indian
and Chinese engineers." This growth of the semiconductor industry in Silicon Valley represented a substantial
migration from the Route 128 corridor outside of Boston.
   2
     For example, Arzaghi and Henderson (2008), Carlino et al. (2007), Carlino and Hunt (2007), Delgado et al.
(2008, 2009), Ellison et al. (2009), Glaeser and Kerr (2009), Jacobs (1970), Ja¤e et al. (1993), Marshall (1920),
Rosenthal and Strange (2003), Thompson (2006), and Thompson and Fox-Kean (2005). Within this volume,
this phenomena closely relates to the company towns described by Agrawal et al. (this issue) and the mobility
of technical workers analyzed by Dahl and Sorenson (this issue). Our work also relates to cluster formation
analyzed by Glaeser et al. (this issue) and Klepper (this issue).
   3
     For example, Arzaghi and Davis (2005), Beardsell and Henderson (1999), Black and Henderson (1999), and
Wallace and Walls (2004). Broader studies of industrial locations across cities include Dumais et al. (2002),
Glaeser et al. (1992), Henderson et al. (1995), and Simon (2004).

                                                       2
ena focuses on determining the size of these contributions and the potential crowding-in or
crowding-out of natives.4 This paper is a step towards understanding how immigrants in‡uence
spatial patterns of US innovation. This is interesting in its own right, but it is also important
for understanding how we should evaluate the welfare consequences of immigration. Native
crowding-in or crowding-out can be spatially separate if reallocation is occurring; this is true for
SE occupations and spillovers into other occupations. The speed at which productive matches
are realized would similarly need to be considered. Future research uniting immigrants, shifts
in industrial spatial structures, and native outcomes is particularly warranted.5

    The next section describes the patent data we employ and its preparation. Section 3 pro-
vides cross-sectional growth estimations of technology migration patterns into cities experiencing
breakthrough technologies. Section 4 further characterizes the role of immigrants in spatial ad-
justments of US invention. The …nal section concludes.


2     Patterns of US Invention 1975-2004

We employ the individual records of all patents granted by the United States Patent and Trade-
mark O¢ ce (USPTO) from January 1975 to May 2008. Each patent record provides information
about the invention (e.g., technology classi…cation, citations of prior art) and the inventors sub-
mitting the application (e.g., name, city). The data are extensive, with 8 million inventors
associated with 4.5 million granted patents during this period. Hall et al. (2001) provide ex-
tensive details about this data set, and Griliches (1990) surveys the use of patents as economic
indicators of technology advancement.

   This section …rst describes how we identify breakthrough inventions from these data. We
then describe how we measure the reliance of technologies on immigrant SEs through assigning
probable inventor ethnicities for each patent. The section closes with tabulations of recent
patterns of innovation in prominent US cities. Cities with high patent growth after 1990 are
both 1) home to more breakthrough technologies in 1975-1984 and 2) are contemporaneously
experiencing large increases in immigrant invention.

   4
     For example, Borjas (2003, 2004), Card (2001), Friedberg and Hunt (1995), Hunt (2009), Hunt and Gauthier-
Loiselle (2008), Kerr and Lincoln (2008), Matlo¤ (2003), and Peri (2007). Borjas (1994) and Kerr and Kerr
(2008) survey the immigration literatures, and Saxenian (1999), Stephan and Levin (2001), and Wadhwa et al.
(2007) provide additional descriptions of high-skilled SE immigration.
   5
     This work also relates to studies in urban and labor economics of worker choices over cities. It most directly
connects to Bartel’s (1989) and Borjas’s (2001) emphasis on the role of immigrants for general spatial adjustments
to US employment. Greenwood (1997) surveys the internal migration literature. Our work also complements
analyses of business and household location decisions like Chen and Rosenthal (2008), Gabriel and Rosenthal
(2004), and Holmes (1998).



                                                        3
2.1     Identifying Breakthrough Inventions

Identifying breakthrough inventions is quite challenging. Our approach is to de…ne breakthrough
patents for 1975-1984 by the number of citations that each patent subsequently received. Tra-
jtenberg (1990) and related studies …nd that citations are a reasonable proxy for the value of a
patent. We note, however, that this proxy contains measurement error. Similar to academic
papers, we are reluctant to use citation counts to rank order all patents within a technology.
We thus take the top one percent of patents for each technology as our group of breakthrough
patents. To maintain a workable sample size, we principally de…ne technologies through the
36 sub-categories of the USPTO classi…cation scheme (e.g., "Optics", "Biotechnology", and
"Nuclear & X-rays"). In robustness checks, we consider di¤erent thresholds for identifying
breakthrough patents and also narrower technology divisions. The average threshold across
sub-categories is 42 citations, ranging from 26 to 87. Across all patents, the median and mean
citation counts are 3 and 4.8.

    We next assign patents to cities using inventor locations. Our initial mapping includes 280
Metropolitan Statistical Areas. We only employ patents with inventors who are residing in
the US at the time of their patent application. We use the most frequent city when multiple
inventors are present. Ties are further broken by the order of inventors on the patent …ling.
Cities are identi…ed from inventors’city names using city lists collected from the O¢ ce of Social
and Economic Data Analysis at the University of Missouri, with a matching rate of 99%. Manual
recoding further ensures all high citation patents and all city names with more than 100 patents
are identi…ed. Our …nal sample is restricted to 240 cities that could be consistently matched
to the 1990 Census of Populations. This excludes some smaller cities, but a¤ords a consistent
sample when including covariates in the regression analyses. The appendix lists major US cities
and their shares of US invention.6;7

   While theoretic models like Duranton (2007) describe a technology frontier where one city
holds the state-of-the-art patent per technology, the major advances for many technologies will
occur in several cities simultaneously. This is particularly true for a large country like the US
with multiple industrial centers. We thus do not designate a single frontier city for a technology,
but instead model the relative number of breakthrough inventions that occurred in locations.
Formally, our primary metric for a city-technology pair is the city’s share of breakthrough patents
   6
     The unpublished appendix is available at http://www.people.hbs.edu/wkerr/.
   7
     The 1975-2004 statistics employ patents granted by the USPTO through May 2008. Due to the long
and uneven USPTO review process, statistics are grouped by application year to construct the most accurate
indicators of when inventive activity occurs. The unfortunate consequence of using application years, however,
is substantial attrition in years immediately before 2008. As many patents are in the review process but have
yet to be granted, the granted patent series is truncated at the 2004 application year.




                                                      4
for a technology j divided by the city’s share of all patents for the technology:

                                                  High Citation%1975
                                                                c;j
                                                                         1984
                       Breakthrough Ratioc;j                      1975   1984   :               (1)
                                                     Total Patent%c;j

Both percentages sum to 100% across cities within each technology. High values indicate that
a city was disproportionately the center of new breakthrough innovations for a technology. A
ratio of one indicates that the city’s share of breakthrough patents was exactly in proportion to
the city’s existing base of invention.

    To focus on meaningful data, we restrict the sample to city-technology observations with at
least ten patents during 1975-1984. The mean ratio across all of these observations is 0.84; the
average ratio will generally not be equal to one with the ratio formulation. Of course, most
cities do not have ten patents in every technology in the pre-period. A total of 237 cities have at
least one technology represented. The unweighted average ratio at the city level is 0.66. This
lower mean value is due to an implicit weighting towards smaller cities with fewer industries
and frequently lower ratios. In general, city-technology pairs with more patents tend to have a
greater relative fraction of breakthrough inventions.


2.2    The Ethnic Composition of US Invention

We model the labor mobility of a technology’s workforce through the extent to which the technol-
ogy relies on immigrant inventors. While immigration status is not contained in the patent data-
base, one can determine the probable ethnicities of inventors through inventor names. USPTO
patents must list at least one inventor, and multiple inventors are often listed. Our approach
exploits the idea that inventors with the surnames Chang or Wang are likely of Chinese eth-
nicity, those with surnames Rodriguez or Martinez of Hispanic ethnicity, and similar. Several
commercial ethnic name databases are utilized, and the name-matching algorithms have been
extensively customized for the USPTO data. Kerr (2007) provides further details on the match-
ing process, lists frequent ethnic names, and provides multiple descriptive statistics and quality
assurance exercises.

    The match rate is 99% for domestic inventors, and the process a¤ords the distinction of nine
ethnicities: Anglo-Saxon, Chinese, European, Hispanic, Indian, Japanese, Korean, Russian,
and Vietnamese. Because the matching is done at the micro-level, greater detail on the ethnic
composition of inventors is available annually on multiple dimensions like technologies, cities, and
companies. When multiple inventors exist on a patent, we make individual ethnicity assignments
for each inventor and then discount multiple inventors such that each patent receives the same
weight.

                                                 5
    Figure 1 illustrates the evolving ethnic composition of US inventors from 1975-2004. We
group patents by the years in which they applied to the USPTO. For visual ease, Figure 1 does
not include the Anglo-Saxon and European ethnic shares. They jointly decline from 90% of US
domestic patents in 1975 to 76% in 2004. This declining share is partly due to the exceptional
growth over the 30 years of the Chinese and Indian ethnicities, which increase from under 2%
to 9% and 6%, respectively.

    Figure 2 shows the share of patenting being undertaken by inventors not of Anglo-Saxon or
European heritage for six broad technologies. For shorthand, we refer to this group of non-Anglo-
Saxon or European origin inventors as immigrant inventors throughout this study, although this
terminology is clearly a simpli…cation. Some inventors with Anglo-Saxon or European surnames
are immigrants to the US, just as some inventors with Vietnamese or Japanese surnames are
in fact native citizens. Nevertheless, immigrants are a much larger share of the latter group,
and this series principally follows the activity and contributions of Chinese and Indian ethnic
inventors. Figure 2 highlights that immigrant inventors are more concentrated in high-tech
industries like computers and pharmaceuticals.

   The appendix provides greater detail on the spatial distribution of immigrant inventors. Im-
migrant SEs are relatively more present in gateway cities closer to their home countries (e.g.,
Chinese in San Francisco, Hispanics in Miami), and they are more spatially concentrated than
general innovation and the population overall. The 1995-2004 immigrant inventor shares of
San Francisco, New York, and Los Angeles are 22%, 10%, and 9%, respectively. This com-
pares to 12%, 7%, and 6% shares for patenting more generally. Kerr (2009) documents how
immigrant inventors are becoming more spatially concentrated over time, thereby increasing the
agglomeration of US invention as whole.8


2.3     A Tale of 19 Cities

Tables 1 and 2 provide a preliminary analysis about the relationships among breakthrough
inventions, immigrant inventors, and city patenting growth. Table 1 lists 19 cities ordered
by their patenting rank in 1995-2004. These 19 cities are the union of the top 15 patenting
cities in 1975-1984 and the top 15 cities in 1995-2004. While the top eight cities are generally
stable, subject to repositioning, the next seven cities show greater turnover. The new entrants
in 1995-2004 are Austin, TX, San Diego, CA, Seattle, WA, and Boise City, ID, while the four
cities exiting the top 15 are Cleveland, OH, Cincinnati, OH, Albany-Schenectady-Troy, NY, and
   8
     Agrawal et al. (2008a,b) and Mandor¤ (2007) further describe issues in ethnic agglomeration. The former
studies are particularly interesting in their theoretical depiction of the substitutability between ethnic social ties
and geographic proximity. Di¤erences between a social planner’s optimal distribution of ethnic members, and
what the inventors themselves would choose, can emerge.


                                                          6
Pittsburgh, PA. The …rst set of three columns provides these two rankings and the rank changes
evident.

    The fourth column documents the average ratio of breakthrough to total patent shares for a
city across the 36 technologies. The highest average city ratios are Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN,
(1.96) and San Francisco, CA, (1.85); these cities both increased their rank by four spots. On
the other hand, the lowest average city ratios are Pittsburgh, PA, (0.45) and Chicago, IL, (0.63).
Both of these cities declined in rank. The bottom three rows of Table 1 show that this pattern
generally holds. The average ratios for cities improving and declining rank are 1.33 and 0.85,
respectively. A greater prevalence of breakthrough inventions in 1975-1984 clearly correlates
with improved relative patenting outcomes by 1995-2004 among prominent cities.

    The next set of three columns documents the share of each city’s invention that is undertaken
by Anglo-Saxon and European ethnicity inventors during the two periods. The secular decline
in relative Anglo-Saxon and European invention is clearly evident in this sample. All 19 cities
exhibit a lower share of Anglo-Saxon and European invention in 1995-2004 than earlier, with
an average decrease of -12%. This is not a mechanical outcome but instead evidence of the
pervasive growth in immigrant invention, which is documented in the last three columns. These
shares are relative to the speci…c city, so they sum to 100%, and changes likewise sum to 0%.

    We can take some suggestive evidence for the role of immigrant inventors in shifting location
patterns from these tabulations. The bottom of the table shows that cities that increase their
rank exhibit on average a larger increase in immigrant inventors (+15%) than cities that lose
rank (+9%). This di¤erence is not due to convergence or mean reversion. The cities that
lose rank start with a higher immigrant inventor share, but the cities that improve rank end
the sample period with the larger share. By looking at inventor workforce compositions, these
tabulations are also not keying in on changes in city patenting rates, city populations, or similar.
The fractions suggest that cities that increased their patenting share underwent simultaneous
shifts towards greater patenting by immigrant inventors. The overall correlation between rank
change and immigrant invention growth is 0.54.

   Table 2 demonstrates that these patterns hold when looking at changes across all cities.
We split the sample using application years of patents (1975-1989, 1990-2004) and calculate
the growth rate in patenting between the two periods by city. We divide cities by above and
below median growth and also by quintiles of growth. Faster growth is consistently associated
with a greater prevalence of breakthrough technologies and a more dramatic shift in the ethnic
composition of a city’s SE workforce towards immigrant inventors. In both cases, the di¤erence
between slow-growth and fast-growth cities is about two-fold.




                                                 7
3     Cross-Sectional Technology Growth Regressions

This section provides cross-sectional growth regressions to quantify localized patenting growth
after breakthrough inventions. While it is tempting to employ the full cross-section of cities and
technologies as the regression sample, this choice can lead to misleading results due to the non-
random locations of invention and breakthrough inventions. We therefore select narrower control
groups for most analyses to match better the pre-existing conditions when the breakthrough
invention occurred. Conditional on this match, we believe the occurrence of breakthrough
inventions can be treated as random or exogenous for studying subsequent patent migration.
We also use di¤erences across technologies in inventor mobility rates as a second identi…cation
strategy.


3.1    Graphical Analysis

Figure 3 illustrates our empirical design and these assumptions. For each of the 36 technologies,
we identify the top ten cities in terms of levels of patenting in 1975-1984 (i.e., the total number
of patents). There are two ties in the data, so this results in 362 city-technology pairs that
account for about 60% of all US patenting. Within each technology, we then group these ten
cities into the top …ve cities and the next …ve cities in terms of breakthrough patent ratios. As
a …nal step, we sum the share of US patenting across these top …ve cites in all technologies for
every year from 1975 onwards; we do the same for the next …ve cities per technology. By holding
the city-technology assignments constant, this presents a simple lens for studying the migration
of invention following breakthrough inventions.

    Figure 3 shows that the shares of US patenting in these two groups are approximately equal
at 30% of all US patenting for the pre-period of 1975-1984. Moreover, their growth patterns
are similar. Conditional on being in the top ten cities for a technology, the relative fraction of
breakthrough inventions is not systematically correlated with these pre-period traits. As one
example, New York City is among the top …ve cities in 20 technologies and the next …ve cites
in the other 16. Over the next 20 years, however, these pairs diverge. City-technologies with a
higher prevalence of breakthrough innovations increase their share of US patenting to about 35%,
while the comparable group declines by about half. This latter behavior is indicative of mean
reversion from high past employment levels for city-industries without additional innovation
(e.g., Simon 2004). While di¤erences in patenting growth are not as stark as a tipping model
would suggest, they do con…rm that breakthrough inventions are sources of localized growth in
patenting.

   As a second feature, we separately calculate the shares of Anglo-Saxon/European and immi-
grant ethnic inventor patenting in these pairs. These groups are again quite comparable during

                                                8
the period before 1984. Immigrant shares tend to be slightly higher than Anglo-Saxon and
European shares due to our focus on the largest patenting centers. The picture is again quite
di¤erent after 1985. Immigrant inventors are very important for the growth of new breakthrough
clusters, while they disproportionately leave the next …ve cities.

    Figure 4 repeats this analysis with a di¤erent sample design. We select the top ten cities
for each technology in terms of the breakthrough patent ratio. We do not sample on the overall
level of city-technology patenting except to require that the city-technology have at least ten
patents during the pre-period. We also require that at least one breakthrough patent exist in the
city-technology, which we did not do when looking at the largest patenting centers in Figure 3,
for a total of 341 observations. This approach thus includes a number of smaller city-technology
pairs, and our analysis compares across these clusters with breakthrough patents in their levels
of intensity.

   By technology, we again divide these ten cities into the …ve cases with the highest break-
through ratios and the next …ve cities. The top …ve cities have a smaller initial share of US
patenting than the comparison group of the next …ve cities (3% versus 9%), and both shares
are substantially smaller than in Figure 3. This is because, holding …xed the number of break-
through inventions, the ratio (1) is larger for places with smaller shares of overall patenting.
Thus, by selecting the top …ve ratios, we tend to select smaller places that experienced a dis-
proportionately high number of breakthrough inventions. The control group grows from 9% of
US patents during 1975-1984 and to around 14%. We would expect growth among this second
group of cities since they possess the sixth through tenth highest concentrations of breakthrough
patents. Growth for the treatment group is nevertheless stronger. The top …ve cities grow
four-fold from 3% of US patents to 12%. Immigrant inventors are again very important in this
growth.

    Overall, these …gures suggest that breakthrough inventions lead to localized patenting growth
in controlled settings. This growth is not instantaneous, however, and it does not display strong
tipping properties. Second, immigrant inventors appear important in this process. There are
limits, however, to the conclusions that can be drawn from these graphs. They do not control
for technology-level di¤erences in patenting growth rates (e.g., the surge of software patents),
di¤erences in regional growth, and similar issues. By summing across city-technology pairs, we
are also weighting larger patenting groups more heavily.


3.2    Growth Regressions

To control for these additional features, we employ cross-sectional growth regressions at the
city-technology level in Tables 3 and 4. We regress the log growth rate of patenting for a

                                               9
city-technology from 1975-1989 to 1990-2004 on the ratio of breakthrough inventions to total
inventions during the 1975-1984 period. We thus no longer sum the data into the top …ve and
next …ve cities, but instead treat each observation individually. Table 3 corresponds to the
sample design of the top ten innovation centers; Table 4 considers the ten highest breakthrough
ratios for each technology regardless of city size. As the breakthrough ratio does not have an
intuitive scale, we transform it to have zero mean and unit standard deviation.

    In all regressions, we control for technology …xed e¤ects and region …xed e¤ects (nine Census
regions). We also include measures of log city population in the pre-period, log growth in
city population, and log city-technology patenting during the pre-period. This latter measure
in particular captures the mean reversion properties of city patenting. The estimations are
unweighted and report robust standard errors.

    Column 1 of Table 3 …nds that a one standard deviation increase in the ratio of breakthrough
patents for the city-technology results in an 18% higher patent growth after 1990. This e¤ect
is statistically signi…cant and economically important in magnitude. It is weaker than that
implied in Figure 3, re‡ecting the tighter controls and the unweighted estimation strategy.

    Column 2 interacts the breakthrough ratio with the extent to which the technology relies on
immigrant inventors in the pre-period. This dependency averages 11% and ranges from 7% for
"Receptacles" (sub-category 68) to 27% for "Semiconductor Devices" (sub-category 46). We
again transform this variable to have zero mean and unit standard deviation before interacting;
this restores the main e¤ect for the ratio to its base value. The migration of invention around
breakthrough patents is stronger among immigrant-intensive technologies, which we take to
model the inherent labor mobility of the technology’s SE workforce. For a technology that is
one standard deviation above the mean in its immigrant inventor share (about 15%), the growth
e¤ect of breakthrough inventions is about 30%.

    Columns 3-7 contain a variety of robustness checks. Columns 3 and 4 exclude computers
and software (category 2) or electrical and electronics (category 4) patents; the latter includes
semiconductors. These two technology groups have the most extreme patent growth, and Figure
2 emphasizes the exceptional growth in immigrant contributions within them. Similar results
are found after these exclusions. Columns 5 and 6 show the patterns are robust to including
region by technology …xed e¤ects or city …xed e¤ects in these regressions. These are very
strict frameworks that compare variation in technology breakthroughs within local areas. They
con…rm that our results are not due to unmodeled factors operating at the city or regional levels.
Finally, Column 7 …nds similar results when expanding the sample to include all potential cities
for each technology.9
  9
      As a precaution, we cap patent growth rates at a ten-fold increase or decline, which a¤ects about 2% of the


                                                        10
    Table 4 repeats this analysis with the sample modi…ed to be the ten largest breakthrough
ratios for each technology as in Figure 4. Included city-technologies must have at least one
breakthrough patent and ten total patents during the 1975-1984 pre-period. The pattern of
…ndings is quite similar to Table 3. The growth e¤ects tend to be marginally weaker in both
economic magnitude and statistical signi…cance. This is to be expected given the focus on just
variation within the top ten breakthrough areas.

   We have performed a variety of extensions on this analysis. First, we …nd very similar results
when using narrower technology de…nitions. The 36 sub-categories of the USPTO system are
an aggregation of over 400 patent classes. Examples of patent classes include "Refrigeration",
"Chemistry: Electrical and Wave Energy", "Electrical Resistors", and "Cryptography". We
developed a sample that includes all patent classes with at least ten cities having ten patents
or more during 1975-1984. The elasticities at this level are very similar to those using sub-
categories. We prefer the latter aggregation given their more stable de…nition and better
measurement.10

   Second, varying the threshold for assigning breakthrough inventions does not substantively
change our results. We examined a range from the 90th percentile of citations to the 99.9th
percentile. For the sample of the ten largest cities for each technology, the main e¤ect is
mostly constant across thresholds. The only change is that the interaction e¤ect with the immi-
grant intensity in the industry increases with higher thresholds. Likewise, similar patterns are
found when exploiting variation among the ten highest relative concentrations of breakthrough
patents, although the sample size is too small for meaningful variation with the 99.9th percentile
framework.

    Finally, there is a potential endogeneity problem in the identi…cation of breakthrough patents.
Unmodeled factors may contribute to both higher breakthrough shares and also higher overall
numbers or levels of patents, causing our regressions to be upward biased. This bias could be
accentuated in this context due to our identi…cation of breakthrough patents with subsequent
citations. If citations are more frequent within cities than across them (e.g., Ja¤e et al. 1993;
Thompson 2007), we could in part be identifying breakthrough patents because of abnormal
patenting growth in the area. To con…rm this e¤ect is not driving our …ndings, we tested
…nal sample. We …nd almost exactly the same outcomes without this trimming (e.g., a 0.183 (0.038) coe¢ cient
versus 0.181 (0.037) in Column 1 of Table 3), but we do not want to overly emphasize extreme growth cases. We
also …nd very similar results when using growth formulations from Davis et al. (1996) and Autor et al. (2007).
These formulations compare growth to the average value of patenting in the two periods, which naturally limits
the scope for outliers. We have …nally con…rmed that our results do not depend upon on any one city or
technology.
  10
     Patent classes also a¤ord a more sophisticated treatment of software patents, which can spill out of the
computers category and are often di¢ cult to identify. Hall and MacGarvie (2008) identify classes in‡uenced by
software patents by examining the patenting of major software …rms. Megan MacGarvie kindly provided for
this study a list of these classes. The patent class results are robust to dropping these classes. See Graham and
Mowery (2004), Hall (2005), and Hall and MacGarvie (2008) for further details on software patents.


                                                       11
identifying top citation patents using only citations outside of the local area. This formulation
delivers very similar results.


4      Immigrants and Spatial Adjustments in Innovation

The cross-sectional regressions in Section 3 suggest that migration is faster in technologies that
rely more heavily on immigrant SEs. This interaction is of direct interest given the US’ dis-
proportionate reliance of immigrant inventors, and it further provides a window into how labor
mobility governs industry migration rates. This section further characterizes these relationships.
We …rst review why immigrants are more spatially mobile than their native SE counterparts.
We then discuss how the Immigration Act of 1990 brought about an exogenous in‡ow in SE
immigration. We use this natural experiment to con…rm the causal role of immigrants in spatial
technology adjustments within the US. Indirectly, this exercise also con…rms shifts in localized
patenting following breakthrough innovations by studying where these immigrants located.11


4.1     The Spatial Mobility of Immigrant SEs

The heightened spatial mobility of immigrants for SE descends from two sources. First, immi-
grants generally have greater rates of internal mobility once residing in the US. The appendix
presents descriptive tabulations from the 1980-2000 Census of Populations which we summarize
here. Among bachelor’s-educated SEs over the age of 35, 16% of immigrants report moving
states in the past …ve years compared to 12% of natives. The internal mobility rate is even more
striking at 22% for Chinese and Indian SEs. All of these SE migration rates are substantially
higher than the 7% rate in the general population, re‡ecting the greater mobility of technical
workers in many countries (e.g., Dahl and Sorenson, this issue).12

    Second, and more importantly, the initial location decisions of immigrant SEs are perhaps
the easiest margin through which to adjust spatial invention patterns. The rapid expansion of
patenting following a breakthrough innovation often leads …rms in that area to recruit foreign
workers. This international sourcing may be easier or cheaper for …rms than attracting the
internal migration of native SEs, especially when the city in question is viewed as a less attractive
option by native workers. Firms have the capacity to direct where immigrant workers are to
  11
     An earlier version of this paper used this reform to demonstrate that increases in immigrant inventor popu-
lations for a technology resulted in faster general migration of patenting across cities, without reference to which
group of cities were growing or declining in terms of patent shares. This analysis employed reallocation metrics
similar to Davis et al. (1996) and Autor et al. (2007). These results are available upon request.
  12
     The greater general mobility of technical workers actually weakens the comparative advantage of immigrants
for spatial adjustments in SE compared to general work (e.g., Borjas 2001). Nonetheless, immigrants account
for a greater fraction of migration among SE workers than in the general population in the US due to their larger
representation.

                                                        12
locate under many temporary visa categories, most notably the H-1B category that is very
in‡uential for SE and computer-related occupations. Moreover, the legal attachment of many
temporary immigrants to their sponsoring …rms make it easier for …rms to retain inventors in
their selected cities. Many of these arguments would further apply to foreign students graduating
from US universities. These students are a primary source for expansions of the US SE workforce
and often rely on employer-sponsored visas for remaining in the US.

    Even though new immigration represents a small part of the overall SE workforce in terms of
levels, it accounts for a substantial share of the net moves in SE placements. Immigrants over
the past …ve years represent 6% of the SE workforce in the 2000 Census but 25% of the net moves.
This contribution is somewhat greater than the 17% of net moves due to internal migration by
existing immigrants. Combining these e¤ects, immigrants account for about 42% of e¤ective
moves in the 2000 Census, despite only being 24% of the bachelor’s educated SE workforce (and
12% of the overall workforce). These forces help explain the mechanisms underlying faster
spatial shifts among immigrant-dependent technologies.


4.2     The Immigration Act of 1990

The US immigration system signi…cantly restricted the in‡ow of immigrant SEs from certain
nations prior to its reform with the Immigration Act of 1990 (1990 Act). We use the changes
in the quotas surrounding the 1990 Act to model an exogenous surge in immigrant SEs. US
immigration law applies two distinct quotas to numerically restricted immigrants.13 Both of
these quotas were increased by the 1990 Act, and their combined change dramatically released
pent-up immigration demand from SEs in constrained countries.

    The …rst quota governs the annual number of immigrants admitted per country. This quota
is uniform across nations, and the 1990 Act increased the limit from 20,000 to approximately
25,620.14 Larger nations are more constrained by uniform country quotas than smaller nations
and bene…ted most from these higher admission rates. Second, separately applied quotas govern
the relative admissions of family-based versus employment-based immigrants. Prior to the 1990
Act, the quotas substantially favored family-reuni…cation applications (216,000) to employment
applications (54,000). The 1990 Act shifted this priority structure by raising employment-
based immigration to 120,120 (20% to 36% of the total) and reducing family-based admissions
  13
     At its broadest levels, permanent residency admissions are made through both numerically restricted cate-
gories, governed by the quotas discussed in this section, and numerically unrestricted categories (e.g., immediate
relatives of US citizens). While the latter unrestricted category admits about 60% of all immigrants, most immi-
grant SEs obtain permanent residency through numerically restricted categories (75%). Immigrant SE in‡ows
through the unrestricted categories are stable in the years surrounding the 1990 reform, so we concentrate on the
numerically restricted grouping.
  14
     The worldwide ceiling for numerically restricted immigration now ‡uctuates slightly year-to-year based on
past levels; maximum immigration from a single country is limited to 7% of the worldwide ceiling.


                                                       13
to 196,000.15 Moreover, the relative admissions of high-skill professionals to low-skill workers
signi…cantly increased within the employment-based admissions.

    The uniform country quotas and weak employment preferences constrained high-skill immi-
gration from large nations, and Table 5 documents long waiting lists for Chinese, Indian, and
Filipino applicants around the reform. When the 1990 Act simultaneously raised both of these
quotas, the number of immigrant SEs entering the US dramatically increased. Figure 5 uses
records from the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) to detail the response. It plots
the number of immigrant SEs granted permanent residency in the US from 1983-1997 for se-
lected ethnicities (summed over countries within each ethnicity). Prior to the 1990 Act, no
trends are evident in SE immigration. The 1990 Act took e¤ect in October 1991, and a small
increase occurred in the …nal three months of 1991 for Chinese and Indian SEs. Immigration
further surged in 1992-1995 as the pent-up demand was released. On the other hand, low-skill
immigration from China and India did not respond to the 1990 Act.16

    The extremely large Chinese response and sharp decline is partly due to a second law that
slightly modi…ed the timing of the 1990 Act’s reforms. Following the Tiananmen Square crisis
in June 1989, Chinese students present in the US from the time of the crisis until May 1990
were permitted to remain in the US until at least 1994 if they so desired. The Chinese Student
Protection Act (CSPA), signed in 1992, further granted this cohort the option to change from
temporary to permanent status during a one-year period lasting from July 1993 to July 1994.
The CSPA stipulated, however, that excess immigration from the CSPA over Mainland China’s
numerical limit be deducted from later admissions. The timing of the CSPA partly explains
the 1993 spike.

    Finally, NSF surveys of graduating science and engineering doctoral students con…rm the
strong responses evident in the INS data. The questionnaires ask foreign-born Ph.D. students
in their …nal year of US study about their plans after graduation. Expected stay rates increased
from 60% to 90% for students from Mainland China from 1990 to 1992. Substantial increases
are also apparent for Indian students. These graduating students tend to have higher ‡exibility
in their location choices than older workers.

    To be clear, the legal change in quotas was not speci…c to either SE immigration or to
certain countries like China and India. The quota change technically applied to all countries
and employment-based admissions. The reduced-form approach exploits the fact that these
general changes produced a large SE in‡ow from several countries constrained under the previous
system. We formally de…ne the reduced-form estimator after discussing the data structure for
the panel estimations.

 15
      The employment limit increased to 140,000, but 120,120 corresponds to the previously restricted categories.
 16
      Kerr (2008) documents these calculations from immigrant-level INS records.

                                                        14
4.3    Data Structure for Interaction Estimations

To allow for a panel analysis of these reforms, we organize the data around the top ten cities
for each technology in terms of breakthrough patent ratios that we developed earlier. We
sum the patent data into four blocks of …ve years by technology for the top …ve cities and the
comparison group of the next …ve cities. These …ve-year blocks start with 1985-1989 and end
with 2000-2004. We calculate the log growth rate in patenting for each time period from the
previous period. We use data from 1975-1984 to calculate the …rst period’s growth rate and
initial immigrant shares by technology, but we exclude the period in which the breakthrough
technologies occurred from the regressions. In total, we have 288 observations representing 36
technologies, four time periods, and two groups of cities.

   The linear interaction speci…cation takes the form,

   ln(PATc;j;t ) =   c;j   +   t   +   [ISEj;t0   ln(ISEt )] +   [TOP5c ISEj;t0   ln(ISEt )] +   c;j;t ;   (2)

where c indexes city groups, j indexes technologies, and t indexes time periods. c;j is a vector
of cross-sectional …xed e¤ects that removes systematic patterns in growth rates by each city
group and technology pair. t is a vector of time period …xed e¤ects. These …xed e¤ects create
a very stringent empirical environment that focuses on discontinuities created by the 1990 Act
and how they a¤ected immigrant-intensive technologies.

    Turning to the regressors of interest, ISEj;t0 is the share of immigrant patenting by technology
in the pre-period of 1975-1984. This variable is identical to the one employed in the cross-
sectional estimations. We again normalize the dependency to have zero mean and unit standard
deviation.     ln(ISEt ) is the log growth in immigrant SE workers from the previous period. We
model this term both through actual immigration trends and also through the reduced-form
estimator constructed below. In both approaches, this variable is national in scope, not speci…c
to a city group or to a technology. Finally, TOP5c is an indicator variable for the top …ve city
group. The main e¤ects of the interacted variables are controlled for by the …xed e¤ects.

    The coe¢ cient measures the di¤erential impact of higher national immigration in‡ows on
patenting growth in immigrant-intensive technologies relative to other technologies in the sixth
through tenth ranked breakthrough cities. We do not have a strong prior about the size of the
   coe¢ cient given the narrowly selected sample and strict controls. The coe¢ cient measures
the additional patenting growth in the …ve most important breakthrough centers relative to their
peers. Finally, + measures the full impact for the top …ve cities. A positive and statistically
signi…cant coe¢ cient provides strong evidence of immigrants aiding the growth of new clusters
surrounding breakthrough innovations.


                                                      15
4.4    Interaction Estimations

Table 6 estimates speci…cation (2) using the national growth in immigrant patenting to model
   ln(ISEt ). The base e¤ect is not very strong or precisely measured. Increases in national im-
migrant patenting are, however, associated with strong growth among the top …ve breakthrough
cities for each technology ( + ). The di¤erences between these two groups, the coe¢ cient,
is economically important in size and statistically signi…cant at the 10% level. Comparable re-
sults are found when excluding very immigrant-intensive sectors in Columns 2 and 3. Likewise,
Column 4 …nds similar patterns when including broad technology by year …xed e¤ects using the
divisions illustrated in Figure 2.

    Table 7 substitutes the reduced-form quota changes. To construct the estimator, we …rst
assume that only the previous three years of immigration matter for an inventor pool. This
design is clearly quite stark, but the very sharp surge in immigration in Figure 5 makes this
assumption more reasonable for the purposes of modelling the discontinuity of the 1990 Act. We
then de…ne QUOTAt as the e¤ective quota for immigrant SEs in year t. Prior to the 1990 Act,
this e¤ective quota was the country limit of 20,000 interacted with the 20% of slots devoted to
employment-based applications. After the reform, the e¤ective quota increases to re‡ect both
the higher country limit of 25,600 and the larger employment preference allocation of 36% (i.e.,
120,120/336,000). The reduced-form immigration estimator takes the form,

                            X
                            5
                ISE-RFt =         QUOTAt   s   + QUOTAt   s 1   + QUOTAt   s 2   ;           (3)
                            s=1

where the summation is over the …ve years included in each of our time periods. This summation
allows for growing impacts of the higher quotas as the pool of immigrant SEs increases. While
the quotas are applied at the country level, the same e¤ective quota shift is present for all
immigrant SEs subject to a multiplicative constant. This scaling is not important for our panel
estimation techniques utilizing log variables, so we keep the simpler formula.

   The results in Table 7 are very similar to Table 6. The overall pattern suggests that larger
immigration in‡ows are associated with faster patenting growth for immigrant-intensive sectors
in places where breakthrough inventions have occurred. These e¤ects are particularly acute
among the top …ve centers of past breakthroughs.

   While the reduced-form estimator helps mitigate reverse causality concerns, its simple design
does have limitations. Most noticeably, the interaction could be biased by unmodeled factors
that are changing contemporaneously to the immigration reforms. To partially test this concern,
we construct two placebo estimators that move the e¤ective date of the 1990 Act forward or
back …ve years. We then test whether the placebos have greater explanatory power than the

                                                16
1990 Act. Table 8 documents these results in a panel setting where we model just the patenting
growth in the top …ve cities. Both placebo estimators are statistically insigni…cant and have
point estimates less than half the economic magnitude of the true reform. This stability is
comforting for the reduced-form design.

    The appendix reports a second robustness check. To be consistent with the earlier sections,
we did not build into the reduced-form estimator (3) that the vast majority of the SE immi-
gration in‡ow was Chinese and Indian SEs. These two ethnicities account for the majority of
inventors not of Anglo-Saxon and European heritage, so the di¤erence in modelling assumptions
is relatively small. Nonetheless, the appendix documents tests that separate Chinese and Indian
interactions from other immigrant ethnicities. The patent growth e¤ects following the 1990 Act
are particularly strong in technologies that rely heavily on Chinese and Indian inventors. This
localized impact, even among immigrant inventor groups, provides an additional measure of
con…dence in the empirical design.


5    Conclusions

This study has employed several approaches to assess whether centers of breakthrough innova-
tions experience subsequent growth in innovation relative to their peer locations. The evidence
strongly supports this conclusion. The underlying mobility of the workforce also appears quite
important for the speed at which spatial adjustments occur. We noted that immigrants, and
particularly new immigration to the US, can facilitate faster spatial reallocation. Patenting
migrates to locations with breakthrough technologies faster for technologies that employ immi-
grant inventors intensively than other technologies. These …ndings provide qualitative support
for theoretical models like Duranton (2007).

    There are several important areas for future research. One important step requires linking
shifts in technology location to shifts in industry production. Quantifying the time required for
both building innovation centers and building production centers will help evaluate the dynamics
of industry churning and model speeds of urban evolutions. Second, future research should
quantify other determinants of the speed at which these transitions occur. Examples include
the size of technology advances, the industrial organization of the industry, and the dependency
upon natural resources. Finally, this study and the underlying theory models take breakthrough
inventions outside of the existing industry core to be exogenous or random. It would appear
important to evaluate whether this is truly so.




                                               17
References
 [1] Agrawal, A., Kapur, D., McHale, J., 2008a. How do spatial and social proximity in‡uence
     knowledge ‡ows? Evidence from patent data, Journal of Urban Economics 64, 258-269.
 [2] Agrawal, A., Kapur, D., McHale, J., 2008b. Brain drain or brain bank? The impact of
     skilled emigration on poor-country innovation, NBER Working Paper 14592.
 [3] Agrawal, A., Cockburn, I., Rosell, C., 2010. Not invented here? Innovation in company
     towns, Journal of Urban Economics, this issue.
 [4] Arzaghi, M., Davis, J., 2005. Spatial mobility and geographic concentration, Working Paper.
 [5] Arzaghi, M., Henderson, J.V., 2008. Networking o¤ madison avenue, Review of Economic
     Studies 75:4, 1011-1038.
 [6] Autor, D., Kerr, W., Kugler, A., 2007. Does employment protection reduce productivity?
     Evidence from U.S. states, Economic Journal 117:521, 189-217.
 [7] Bartel, A., 1989. Where do the new immigrants live?, Journal of Labor Economics 7:4,
     371-391.
 [8] Beardsell, M., Henderson, J.V., 1999. Spatial evolution of the computer industry in the
     USA, European Economic Review 43:2, 431-456.
 [9] Black, D., Henderson, J.V., 1999. Urban evolution of population and industry in the United
     States, American Economic Review 89:2, 321-327.
[10] Borjas, G., 1994. Economics of immigration, Journal of Economic Literature 32, 1667-1717.
[11] Borjas, G., 2001. Does immigration grease the wheels of the labor market?, Brookings
     Papers on Economic Activity 2001:1, 69-119.
[12] Borjas, G., 2003. The labor demand curve is downward sloping: Reexamining the impact
     of immigration on the labor market, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118:4, 1335-1374.
[13] Borjas, G., 2004. Do foreign students crowd out native students from graduate programs?,
     NBER Working Paper 10349.
[14] Card, D., 2001. Immigrant in‡ows, native out‡ows, and the local labor market impacts of
     higher immigration, Journal of Labor Economics 19:1, 22-64.
[15] Carlino, G., Chatterjee, S., Hunt, R., 2007. Urban density and the rate of invention, Journal
     of Urban Economics 61, 389-419.
[16] Carlino, G., Hunt, R., 2007. Innovation across U.S. industries: The e¤ect of local economic
     characteristics, Working Paper.
[17] Chen, Y., Rosenthal, S., 2008. Local amenities and life-cycle migration: Do people move
     for jobs or fun?, Journal of Urban Economics 64, 519-537.
[18] Dahl, M., Sorenson, O., 2010. The migration of technical workers, Journal of Urban Eco-
     nomics, this issue.
[19] Davis, S., Haltiwanger, J., Schuh, S., 1996. Job Creation and Destruction, MIT Press,
     Cambridge, MA.


                                               18
[20] Delgado, M., Porter, M., Stern, S., 2008. Convergence, clusters and economic performance,
     Working Paper.
[21] Delgado, M., Porter, M., Stern, S., 2009. Entrepreneurship in clusters, Working Paper.
[22] Dumais, G., Ellison, G., Glaeser, E., 2002. Geographic concentration as a dynamic process,
     Review of Economics and Statistics 84, 193-204.
[23] Duranton, G., 2007. Urban evolutions: The fast, the slow, and the still, The American
     Economic Review 97:1, 197-221.
[24] Ellison, G., Glaeser, E., Kerr, W., 2009. What causes industry agglomeration? Evidence
     from coagglomeration patterns, The American Economic Review, forthcoming.
[25] Findeisen, S., Südekum, J., 2008. Industry churning and the evolution of cities: Evidence
     for Germany, Journal of Urban Economics 64, 326-339.
[26] Friedberg, R., Hunt, J., 1995. The impact of immigrants on host country wages, employment
     and growth, Journal of Economic Perspectives 9:2, 23-44.
[27] Gabriel, S., Rosenthal, S., 2004. Quality of the business environment versus quality of life:
     Do …rms and households like the same cities?, Review of Economics and Statistics 86,
     438-444.
[28] Glaeser, E., Kallal, H., Scheinkman, J., Shleifer, A., 1992. Growth in cities, Journal of
     Political Economy 100, 1126-1152.
[29] Glaeser, E., Kerr, W., 2009. Local industrial conditions and entrepreneurship: How much of
     the spatial distribution can we explain?, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy
     18:3, 623-663.
[30] Glaeser, E., Kerr, W., Ponzetto, G., 2010. Clusters of entrepreneurship, Journal of Urban
     Economics, this issue.
[31] Graham, S., Mowery, D., 2004. Software patents: Good news or bad news?, Working Paper.
[32] Greenwood, M., 1997. Internal migration in developed countries, in Rosenzweig, M., Stark,
     O. (Eds.), Handbook of Population and Family Economics, Elsevier, Amsterdam.
[33] Griliches, Z., 1990. Patent statistics as economic indicators: A survey, Journal of Economic
     Literature 28:4, 1661-1707.
[34] Hall, B., 2005. Exploring the patent explosion, Journal of Technology Transfer 30, 35-48.
[35] Hall, B., Ja¤e, A., Trajtenberg, M., 2001. The NBER patent citation data …le: Lessons,
     insights and methodological tools, NBER Working Paper 8498.
[36] Hall, B., MacGarvie, M., 2008. The private value of software patents, NBER Working Paper
     12195.
[37] Henderson, J.V., Kuncoro, A., Turner, M., 1995. Industrial development in cities, Journal
     of Political Economy 103:5, 1067-1090.
[38] Holmes, T., 1998. The e¤ects of state policies on the location of manufacturing: Evidence
     from state borders, Journal of Political Economy 106, 667-705.
[39] Hunt, J., 2009. Which immigrants are most innovative and entrepreneurial? Distinctions
     by entry visa, NBER Working Paper 14920.

                                               19
[40] Hunt, J., Gauthier-Loiselle, M., 2008. How much does immigration boost innovation?,
     NBER Working Paper 14312.
[41] Jacobs, J., 1970. The Economy of Cities, Vintage Books, New York, NY.
[42] Ja¤e, A., Trajtenberg, M., Henderson, R., 1993. Geographic localization of knowledge
     spillovers as evidenced by patent citations, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108:3,
     577-598.
[43] Kerr, S., Kerr, W., 2008. Economic impacts of immigration: A survey, HBS Working Paper
     09-013.
[44] Kerr, W., 2007. The ethnic composition of US inventors, HBS Working Paper 08-006.
[45] Kerr, W., 2008. Ethnic scienti…c communities and international technology di¤usion, Review
     of Economics and Statistics 90:3, 518-537.
[46] Kerr, W., 2009. The agglomeration of U.S. ethnic inventors, forthcoming in Glaeser, E.
     (Ed.), Economics of Agglomeration, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
[47] Kerr, W., Lincoln, W., 2008. The supply side of innovation: H-1B visa reforms and US
     ethnic invention, HBS Working Paper 09-005.
[48] Klepper, S., 2010. The origin and growth of industry clusters: The making of silicon valley
     and detroit, Journal of Urban Economics, this issue.
[49] Mandor¤, M., 2007. Social networks, ethnicity, and occupation, Working Paper.
[50] Marshall, A., 1920. Principles of Economics, MacMillan and Co., London, UK.
[51] Matlo¤, N., 2003. On the need for reform of the H-1B non-immigrant work visa in computer-
     related occupations, University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform.
[52] Peri, G., 2007. Higher education, innovation and growth, in Brunello, G., Garibaldi, P.,
     Wasmer, E. (Eds.), Education and Training in Europe, Oxford University Press, Oxford,
     UK.
[53] Rosenthal, S., Strange, W., 2003. Geography, industrial organization, and agglomeration,
     Review of Economics and Statistics 85:2, 377-393.
[54] Saxenian, A., 1994. Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and
     Route 128, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
[55] Saxenian, A., 1999. Silicon Valley’s New Immigrant Entrepreneurs, Public Policy Institute
     of California, San Francisco, CA.
[56] Simon, C., 2004. Industrial reallocation across US cities 1977–1997, Journal of Urban Eco-
     nomics 56, 119-143.
[57] Stephan, P., Levin, S., 2001. Exceptional contributions to US science by the foreign-born
     and foreign-educated, Population Research and Policy Review 20:1, 59-79.
[58] Thompson, P., 2006, Patent citations and the geography of knowledge spillovers: Evidence
     from inventor- and examiner-added citations, Review of Economics and Statistics 88:2,
     383-388.
[59] Thompson, P., Fox-Kean, M., 2005. Patent citations and the geography of knowledge
     spillovers: A reassessment, American Economic Review 95:1, 450-460.

                                              20
[60] Trajtenberg, M., 1990. A penny for your quotes: Patent citations and the value of innova-
     tions, The Rand Journal of Economics 21:1, 172-187.
[61] Wadhwa, V., Saxenian, A., Rissing, B., Gere¢ , G., 2007. America’s new immigrant entre-
     preneurs I, Working Paper.
[62] Wallace, N., Walls, D., 2004. Agglomeration economies and the high-tech computer cluster,
     Working Paper.




                                             21
                                              Fig. 1: Growth in US Immigrant Ethnic Patenting

                           10%
Percentage of US Patents




                                                                                                                                                      Chinese




                                                                                                                                                                Indian

                            5%
                                                                                                                                                          Hispanic


                                                                                                                              Russian

                                                                                                                                                      Other Asian



                            0%
                                  1975                    1980                    1985                    1990                    1995                     2000
                           Notes: Trends describe the growing shares of US patents filed by inventors of immigrant ethnicities. Only patents with inventors residing in the US are
                           included. Patents are grouped by application years. Inventor ethnicity is determine through inventor names listed on patents. Anglo-Saxon (75%→63%)
                           and European (16%→13%) contributions are excluded for visual clarity. Other Asian contributions include Japanese, Korean, and Vietnamese contributions.
                                        Fig. 2: Immigrant Ethnic Contributions by Technology

                           35%
                                                                                                                                                          Electrical &
                                                                                                                                                          Electronics
                           30%
Percentage of US Patents




                                                                                                                           Computers &
                                                                                                                          Communications                             Chemicals
                           25%

                                                                                                                                                                Drugs &
                           20%                                                                                                                                  Medical



                           15%
                                                                                                                              Mechanical
                                                                                                                                                      Miscellaneous
                           10%



                            5%
                                  1975                    1980                    1985                     1990                    1995                    2000
                           Notes: See Figure 1. This figure describes the share of US patenting by broad technology category undertaken by inventors not of Anglo-Saxon or European
                           heritage. Growth in immigrant contributions is strongest in advanced technologies.
                                      Fig. 3: Localized Patenting Growth after Breakthroughs
                                                 Ten Largest Cities per Technology
                           50%
                                     Period in which breakthrough
                                     inventions are measured
                                                                                                                      Top 5 Cities:
Percentage of US Patents




                                                                                                                       Immigrant
                           40%
                                                                                                                                                            Top 5 Cities Overall



                           30%                                                                                                                       Top 5 Cities: Anglo-
                                                                                                                                                     Saxon & European

                                                                                                                                     Next 5 Cities:
                                                                                                                                      Immigrant
                           20%                                                      Next 5 Cities: Anglo-
                                                                                     Saxon & European


                                                                                                                                         Next 5 Cities Overall
                           10%
                                  1975                     1980                      1985                     1990                     1995                     2000
                           Notes: Figure presents localized growth in US patenting following breakthrough technologies. The sample includes the top cities per technology in 1975-
                           1984 in terms of numbers of patents. Within each technology, these ten cities are grouped into the top five cities and the next five cities in terms of
                           breakthrough patent ratios. These ratios are the city’s share of breakthrough patents for the technology divided by the city’s total share of patents for the
                           technology. Breakthrough patents are defined as the top one percent of each technology's 1975-1984 patents in terms of citations subsequently received.
                           Included city-technology pairs are held constant to measure the migration of innovation following breakthroughs. Shares for Anglo-Saxon/European
                           ethnicity inventors and immigrant ethnicities are also provided for each series. Immigrant ethnicities play a disproportionate role in the migrations.
                                      Fig. 4: Localized Patenting Growth after Breakthroughs
                                           Ten Highest Concentrations of Breakthroughs
                           20%
                                     Period in which breakthrough
                                     inventions are measured
Percentage of US Patents




                                                                                                       Next 5 Cities:
                           15%
                                                                                                        Immigrant

                                                                                      Next 5 Cities Overall

                           10%

                                                                                                                                                    Top 5 Cities Overall
                                           Next 5 Cities: Anglo-                       Top 5 Cities:
                                            Saxon & European                            Immigrant
                                                                                                                           Top 5 Cities: Anglo-
                            5%                                                                                             Saxon & European




                            0%
                                  1975                     1980                      1985                     1990                     1995                      2000
                           Notes: See Figure 3. The sample is adjusted in this graph to be the top ten centers per technology in terms of breakthrough patent ratios. We do not
                           sample on the overall level of city-technology patenting except to require that the city-technology have at least ten patents and one breakthrough patent
                           during the pre-period. Within each technology, the ten cities are again grouped into the top five cities and the next five cities by the breakthrough ratio.
                           The top five cities have a smaller initial share of US patenting than the comparison group of the next five cities (3% versus 9%), and both shares are
                           substantially smaller than in Figure 3. This is because, holding fixed the number of breakthrough inventions, the ratio is larger for smaller places. Even
                           relative to this peer group, patent growth in the top five cities is stronger. Immigrant inventors are again very important in this growth.
               Fig. 5: S&E Immigration After Immigration Act of 1990

10,000


                                                                                                Chinese
 8,000



 6,000

                                                                                                         Indian
 4,000



 2,000
                                                                                                                    Hispanic
                                                                                                                                                Filipino
                                                                                                             Korean
     0
            1983      1984      1985      1986      1987      1988      1989     1990      1991      1992      1993      1994      1995      1996      1997

  Notes: Figure presents permanent residency admissions to the US for immigrants with science and engineering occupations. The vertical line marks the
  passage of the Immigration Act of 1990 that took effect in October 1991. Immigration for ethnicities is an aggregate of country-level immigration within
  each ethnicity.
                                    Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Prominent Patenting Cities
                                                                       City's Average         Anglo-Saxon and European                    Immigrant Ethnic
                                            City Rank                     Ratio of           Ethnic Inventor Share of City              Inventor Share of City
                                                                        Highly Cited
                                  1975-       1995-        Rank        Patents 1975-          1975-       1995-        Share         1975-        1995-       Share
                                  1984        2004        Change            1984              1984        2004        Change         1984         2004       Change

San Francisco, CA                    5           1          +4               1.85              84%         61%         -23%           16%         39%          23%
New York, NY                         1           2          -1               0.91              85%         69%         -16%           15%         31%          16%
Los Angeles, CA                      4           3          +1               1.05              87%         69%         -17%           14%         31%          17%
Boston, MA                           6           4          +2               1.48              89%         78%         -11%           11%         22%          11%
Chicago, IL                          2           5          -3               0.63              88%         80%          -8%           12%         20%           8%
Detroit, MI                          7           6          +1               0.85              89%         81%          -8%           11%         19%           8%
Minneap.-St. Paul, MN               11           7          +4               1.96              92%         86%          -6%            8%         14%           6%
Philadelphia, PA                     3           8          -5               0.76              87%         78%         -10%           13%         23%          10%
Dallas-Fort Worth, TX               13           9          +4               1.02              92%         74%         -18%            9%         26%          18%
Austin, TX                          36          10         +26               0.87              90%         76%         -14%           10%         24%          14%
San Diego, CA                       26          11         +15               1.32              89%         73%         -16%           12%         28%          16%
Seattle, WA                         21          12          +9               1.59              92%         79%         -13%            8%         21%          13%
Rochester, NY                       12          13          -1               1.15              87%         81%          -6%           13%         19%           6%
Houston, TX                          9          14          -5               0.64              91%         79%         -12%            9%         21%          12%
Boise City, ID                     161          15         +146              1.28              96%         74%         -22%            4%         26%          22%
Cleveland, OH                        8          21          -13              0.68              89%         84%          -5%           11%         16%           5%
Cincinnati, OH                      15          22           -7              1.14              93%         86%          -7%            7%         14%           7%
Albany-Sch.-Troy, NY                14          25          -11              1.28              86%         76%         -10%           14%         24%          10%
Pittsburgh, PA                      10          26          -16              0.45              89%         83%          -5%           11%         17%           5%
Top Cities Overall                                                           1.10              89%         77%         -12%           11%         23%          12%
- Those Improving Rank                                                       1.33              90%         75%         -15%           10%         25%          15%
- Those Losing Rank                                                          0.85              88%         79%          -9%           12%         21%           9%
Notes: Table documents city patenting rank, 1975-1984 breakthrough patent ratios, and ethnic compositions of inventors for prominent patenting cities. Listed
cities include the top 15 patenting cities in 1975-1984 and 1995-2004, for a total of 19 cities. City's average ratio of highly cited patents is an average across
technologies of the city's share of the top one percent of the technology's 1975-1984 patents in terms of subsequent citations divided by the city's share of all
patents in the technology. A ratio of one indicates that breakthrough patents occurred in the city in equal proportion to its general patenting behavior. The ratio is
only calculated for city-technologies with ten or more patents in 1975-1984. Ethnic inventor shares are relative to each city's inventor population in the indicated
period. Immigrant Ethnic Inventor Share includes Chinese, Indian, Hispanic, Japanese, Korean, Russian, and Vietnamese contributions. The bottom three rows
document that cities improving rank disproportionately had breakthrough patents and shifted their inventor compositions further towards immigrant ethnic
inventors.
                              Table 2: Descriptive Statistics for All Cities
                               City's Average         Anglo-Saxon and European                    Immigrant Ethnic
                                  Ratio of           Ethnic Inventor Share of City              Inventor Share of City
                                Highly Cited
                               Patents 1975-          1975-       1995-       Share          1975-       1995-       Share
                                    1984              1984        2004       Change          1984        2004       Change

All 280 Cities                       0.64             93%          87%         -6%            7%          13%          6%
- Below Median Growth                0.49             92%          88%         -4%            8%          12%          4%
- Above Median Growth                0.80             93%          85%         -8%            7%          15%          8%
- Q1 (Slowest Growth)                0.41             93%          90%         -3%            7%          10%          3%
- Q2                                 0.44             92%          88%         -4%            8%          12%          4%
- Q3                                 0.64             93%          85%         -8%            7%          15%          8%
- Q4                                 0.92             93%          87%         -6%            7%          13%          6%
- Q5 (Fastest Growth)                0.81             92%          85%         -7%            8%          15%          7%
Notes: Table extends Table 1 to consider variation across all 280 cities. Highly cited patent ratios are only calculated for
city-technology pairs with at least 10 patents during 1975-1984. A total of 237 cities have at least one technology that meets
this criterion.
        Table 3: Localized Patenting Growth after Breakthrough Inventions - Ten Largest Cities per Technology
                                                         Basic            Adding          Excluding          Excluding         Including     Including            Examining
                                                       Regression       Technology       Computers &        Electrical &     Reg. x Tech.       City              All Cities
                                                                        Interaction       Software          Electronics      Fixed Effects Fixed Effects          per Tech.
                                                           (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)               (7)
                                                                 Dependent Variable is Log Growth in City-Technology Patenting, 1990-2004 v. 1975-1989
                                                                  Regressions include Basic Controls, Region Fixed Effects, and Technology Fixed Effects
City Breakthrough Patent Ratio                            0.181             0.182             0.166             0.171             0.205            0.132             0.080
for the Technology, 1975-1984                            (0.037)           (0.033)           (0.033)           (0.033)           (0.063)          (0.033)           (0.014)
Interaction of City Breakthrough Ratio and                                  0.112             0.106             0.125             0.138            0.099             0.061
Immigrant Inventor Share by Technology                                     (0.030)           (0.030)           (0.040)           (0.053)          (0.034)           (0.018)

Linear Combination of Effects for                                           0.293             0.272             0.296             0.342            0.231             0.141
Unit Standard Deviation Increase in                                        (0.039)           (0.039)           (0.048)           (0.067)          (0.048)           (0.022)
Technology's Immigrant Inventor Share
Adjusted R-Squared                                         0.61              0.61             0.57              0.63              0.63              0.72              0.38
Observations                                               362               362              322               290               362               362               2854
Notes: Regressions describe growth of patenting in cities where breakthrough inventions occurred during 1975-1984. The sample includes the top ten cities for each
technology in terms of pre-period patenting levels. Technologies are classified through sub-categories of the USPTO classification system (36 in total); two ties result in a
total sample size of 362 observations for the base regressions. The core regressor is the ratio of the city's share of breakthrough patents divided by the city's share of all
patents for the technology. Breakthrough patents are identified as the top one percent of each technology's 1975-1984 patents in terms of citations subsequently received.
Immigrant inventors shares are the percentages of 1975-1984 patents filed by inventors not of Anglo-Saxon and European heritage. These shares are calculated specific to
each technology. Breakthrough patent ratios and immigrant inventors shares are both normalized to have zero mean and unit standard deviation before interacting.
Regressions include log city population levels, log city population growth, log city-technology patenting for 1975-1989, region fixed effects, and technology fixed effects.
Regressions are unweighted and report robust standard errors.
        Table 4: Localized Patenting Growth after Breakthrough Inventions - Ten Largest Breakthrough Ratios
                                                       Basic            Adding         Excluding         Excluding         Including     Including    Examining
                                                     Regression       Technology      Computers &       Electrical &     Reg. x Tech.       City     Top 30 Cities
                                                                      Interaction      Software         Electronics      Fixed Effects Fixed Effects  per Tech.
                                                         (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)              (7)
                                                               Dependent Variable is Log Growth in City-Technology Patenting, 1990-2004 v. 1975-1989
                                                                Regressions include Basic Controls, Region Fixed Effects, and Technology Fixed Effects
City Breakthrough Patent Ratio                          0.097            0.106            0.115             0.067            0.112            0.115             0.099
for the Technology, 1975-1984                          (0.054)          (0.052)          (0.058)           (0.056)          (0.081)          (0.050)           (0.019)
Interaction of City Breakthrough Ratio and                               0.109            0.110             0.124            0.193            0.090             0.079
Immigrant Inventor Share by Technology                                  (0.060)          (0.063)           (0.063)          (0.156)          (0.065)           (0.025)

Linear Combination of Effects for                                        0.214            0.224             0.191            0.304            0.205             0.178
Unit Standard Deviation Increase in                                     (0.055)          (0.068)           (0.057)          (0.167)          (0.074)           (0.029)
Technology's Immigrant Inventor Share
Adjusted R-Squared                                       0.42             0.43             0.41             0.49              0.41             0.61             0.39
Observations                                             341              341              307              273               341              341              1748
Notes: See Table 3. The sample is modified to consider variation among the ten largest breakthrough ratios for each technology. Included city-technologies must have at
least one breakthrough patent and ten total patents during the 1975-1984 pre-period.
                   Table 5: Waiting Lists and Admissions Data for Immigration Act of 1990
                            1983-1990 Occupation Admissions
                              As A Percentage of Theoretical                                            Employment Visa Waiting List
                              Employment Quota for Country                                                     January 1992
                          Scientists      Business         Total                                    High-Skill       Skilled       Low-Skill

Hong Kong                  20.5%           15.6%          102.6%        The Philippines                6795           9550            5995
India                      18.5%            5.7%           83.3%        Mainland China                 3266           1942            2976
Taiwan                     18.2%           10.8%          102.0%        India                          3132           1156            1131
United Kingdom             11.7%           13.9%          103.7%        Taiwan                         2065           2411            1613
Iran                        8.4%            4.5%           54.1%        Nigeria                        1854            166             298
Mainland China              6.5%            5.3%           57.1%        Great Britain                  1841           2521             714
The Philippines             4.6%            8.4%           96.4%        Canada                         1587           2107             191
Canada                      3.8%            9.5%           67.7%        Hong Kong                       811           1350             885
South Korea                 2.2%            5.0%           69.0%        Iran                            804           1536             927
Pakistan                    1.8%            1.4%           13.0%        Japan                           787           1634             800
Israel                      1.7%            1.6%           24.5%        South Korea                     539           1656            5466
World Average               0.8%            0.8%           8.8%         Total                         50,003         32,452          87,806
Notes: The left-hand panel documents employment-based admissions to US for 1983-1990 as a share of the theoretical country limit descending from
the US quotas structure for permanent residency immigration prior to the 1990 Act. Occupational percentages for scientists and business are even
stronger than they appear as accompanying family members are counted towards the quotas. The right-hand panel documents INS waiting list records
close to the October 1991 effective date of the 1990 Act. Kerr (2008) provides further details on these tabulations.
         Table 6: Interaction Estimations Employing US Immigrant Patenting Growth
                                                                         Base           Excluding         Excluding          Including
                                                                      Interaction      Computers &       Electrical &        Category
                                                                      Estimation        Software         Electronics         x Year FE
                                                                          (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)
                                                                             Dependent Variable is Log Patenting Growth
                                                                               Estimations include Panel Fixed Effects
Δ Log Immigration Patenting x                                            0.079             0.056             0.215             -0.014
  Initial Immigrant Dependency by Technology                            (0.126)           (0.119)           (0.122)           (0.097)
Δ Log Immigration Patenting x                                            0.298             0.301             0.240             0.298
  Initial Immigrant Dependency by Technology x                          (0.169)           (0.157)           (0.198)           (0.117)
  Top 5 Cities for Breakthrough Inventions

Linear Combination of Effects for Full Effect                            0.377             0.357             0.455             0.284
on Top 5 Cities                                                         (0.113)           (0.102)           (0.158)           (0.092)
Adjusted R-Squared                                                        0.39              0.37              0.40              0.48
Observations                                                              288               256               232               288
Notes: Regressions describe growth of patenting in cities where breakthrough inventions occurred during 1975-1984. The patent data
are summed into four blocks of five years by technology for the top five cities and the comparison group of the next five cities. These
five-year blocks start with 1985-1989 and end with 2000-2004. The dependent variable is the log growth rate in patenting for each
time period from the previous period. The 288 observations represent 36 technologies, four time periods, and two groups of cities.
The core regressor is the national growth in immigrant patenting interacted with the technology's initial dependence on immigrant
inventors. A second interaction characterizes the additional response in the top five cities relative to the next five cities. Main effects
are absorbed into the panel fixed effects. Regressions are unweighted and cluster standard errors cross-sectionally.
          Table 7: Interaction Estimations Employing Immigration Quotas Estimator
                                                                     Base          Excluding         Excluding        Including
                                                                   Quotas         Computers &       Electrical &      Category
                                                                  Estimation       Software         Electronics       x Year FE
                                                                      (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)
                                                                         Dependent Variable is Log Patenting Growth
                                                                           Estimations include Panel Fixed Effects
Δ Log Immigration Quotas Estimator x                                 0.077            0.054            0.197             -0.005
  Initial Immigrant Dependency by Technology                        (0.113)          (0.107)          (0.115)           (0.093)
Δ Log Immigration Quotas Estimator x                                 0.275            0.274            0.220             0.275
  Initial Immigrant Dependency by Technology x                      (0.157)          (0.144)          (0.196)           (0.115)
  Top 5 Cities for Breakthrough Inventions

Linear Combination of Effects for Full Effect                        0.351            0.328            0.417             0.269
on Top 5 Cities                                                     (0.109)          (0.097)          (0.162)           (0.092)
Adjusted R-Squared                                                    0.39             0.36             0.45             0.48
Observations                                                          288              256              232              288
Notes: See Table 6. The core regressor is the expected immigrant invention nationally due to immigration quotas altered by the 1990
Act interacted with each technology's initial dependency on immigrant inventors.
                   Table 8: Placebo Estimators on Timing of 1990 Act
                                                                      Base           Forward           Lagged
                                                                   Estimation         Placebo          Placebo
                                                                                     Estimator        Estimator

                                                                    Dep. Variable is Log Patenting Growth
                                                                    Estimations include Panel Fixed Effects
Δ Log Immigration Quotas Estimator x                                  0.351            0.359            0.348
  Initial Immigrant Dependency by Technology                         (0.109)          (0.112)          (0.109)
Placebo Estimator Five Years Earlier x                                                 0.122
  Initial Immigrant Dependency by Technology                                          (0.165)
Placebo Estimator Five Years Later x                                                                    -0.165
  Initial Immigrant Dependency by Technology                                                           (0.180)
Adjusted R-Squared                                                    0.41              0.41             0.41
Observations                                                          144               144              144
Notes: See Table 7. Placebo estimators that move the effective date of the 1990 Act forward or back five years.
The panel is restricted to the top five cities only.
                                     App. Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Inventors Residing in US
                                                                                        Ethnicity of Inventor
                         Anglo-Saxon        Chinese         European         Hispanic       Indian         Japanese           Korean           Russian         Vietnam.

                                                         A. Ethnic Inventor Shares Estimated from US Inventor Records, 1975-2004
1975-1979                74.8%              2.1%            15.6%            2.7%            2.0%             0.6%            0.3%             1.9%            0.1%
1980-1984                73.4%              2.9%            15.1%            2.7%            2.6%             0.7%            0.4%             2.0%            0.1%
1985-1989                72.2%              3.6%            14.6%            2.9%            3.1%             0.8%            0.5%             2.1%            0.2%
1990-1994                70.0%              4.8%            14.1%            3.2%            3.9%             0.9%            0.6%             2.2%            0.4%
1995-1999                66.4%              6.7%            13.6%            3.5%            5.2%             0.9%            0.7%             2.5%            0.5%
2000-2004                63.1%              8.8%            13.0%            3.8%            5.9%             1.0%            0.9%             2.8%            0.6%
Chemicals                65.8%              7.3%            14.4%            3.2%            4.9%             0.9%            0.7%             2.5%            0.3%
Computers                62.9%              8.4%            12.6%            3.4%            7.5%             1.0%            0.7%             2.7%            0.7%
Pharmaceuticals          64.8%              7.2%            14.8%            3.9%            4.6%             1.1%            0.8%             2.6%            0.3%
Electrical               64.3%              8.3%            13.3%            3.3%            5.3%             1.0%            0.9%             2.8%            0.7%
Mechanical               72.8%              3.3%            14.2%            3.3%            2.8%             0.7%            0.5%             2.2%            0.2%
Miscellaneous            74.1%              2.9%            13.9%            3.6%            2.3%             0.6%            0.5%             1.9%            0.2%
Top Cities as a          WS (84)            SF (14)         MIL (21)         MIA (16)        SF (8)           SD (2)          BAL (2)          NYC (4)         AUS (2)
Percentage of            SLC (83)           LA (8)          NOR (19)         SA (9)          AUS (7)          SF (2)          LA (1)           BOS (4)         SF (1)
City’s Patents           NAS (82)           AUS (6)         STL (19)         WPB (6)         PRT (6)          LA (2)          DC (1)           HRT (4)         LA (1)
                                                    B. Immigrant Scientist and Engineer Shares Estimated from 1990 US Census Records
Bachelor's Share         87.6%              2.7%            2.3%             2.4%            2.3%             0.6%            0.5%             0.4%            1.2%
Masters Share            78.9%              6.7%            3.4%             2.2%            5.4%             0.9%            0.7%             0.8%            1.0%
Doctorate Share          71.2%              13.2%           4.0%             1.7%            6.5%             0.9%            1.5%             0.5%            0.4%
Notes: Panel A presents descriptive statistics for inventors residing in the US at the time of patent application. Inventor ethnicities are estimated through inventors' names
using techniques described in the text. Patents are grouped by application years and major technology fields. Cities, defined through Metropolitan Statistical Areas,
include AUS (Austin), BAL (Baltimore), BOS (Boston), DC (Washington), HRT (Hartford), LA (Los Angeles), MIA (Miami), NAS (Nashville), NOR (New Orleans),
NYC (New York City), PRT (Portland), SA (San Antonio), SD (San Diego), SF (San Francisco), SLC (Salt Lake City), STL (St. Louis), WPB (West Palm Beach), and
WS (Winston-Salem). Cities are identified from inventors' city names using city lists collected from the Office of Social and Economic Data Analysis at the University of
Missouri, with a matching rate of 99%. Manual recoding further ensures all patents with more than 100 citations and all city names with more than 100 patents are
identified. Panel B presents comparable statistics calculated from the 1990 Census using country of birth for scientists and engineers. Country groupings follow Kerr
(2007); Anglo-Saxon provides a residual in the Census statistics. Many US inventors with European names are native citizens.
                                      App. Table 2: Ethnic Inventor Contributions by City
                          Total Invention Share     Anglo-Saxon and European     Immigrant Ethnicities        Chinese and Indian

                        1975-    1985-      1995-   1975-    1985-    1995-    1975-    1985-      1995-   1975-    1985-     1995-
                        1984     1994       2004    1984     1994     2004     1984     1994       2004    1984     1994      2004

Atlanta, GA             0.6%     1.0%       1.3%    0.6%     1.0%      1.4%    0.3%     0.7%       1.0%    0.3%     0.7%      1.0%
Austin, TX              0.4%     0.9%       1.8%    0.4%     0.9%      1.8%    0.4%     1.2%       2.0%    0.4%     1.5%      2.3%
Baltimore, MD           0.8%     0.8%       0.7%    0.8%     0.8%      0.7%    0.7%     0.7%       0.7%    0.5%     0.5%      0.6%
Boston, MA              3.6%     3.8%       3.9%    3.5%     3.7%      3.9%    3.8%     4.3%       3.9%    3.8%     4.0%      3.6%
Buffalo, NY             0.6%     0.5%       0.4%    0.6%     0.5%      0.4%    0.8%     0.6%       0.3%    1.1%     0.7%      0.3%
Charlotte, NC           0.3%     0.3%       0.3%    0.3%     0.4%      0.4%    0.1%     0.2%       0.2%    0.1%     0.2%      0.1%
Chicago, IL             6.0%     4.6%       3.5%    5.9%     4.6%      3.6%    6.7%     4.5%       3.3%    5.8%     4.0%      2.9%
Cincinnati, OH          1.0%     1.1%       1.0%    1.0%     1.2%      1.1%    0.7%     0.9%       0.7%    0.7%     1.0%      0.7%
Cleveland, OH           2.3%     1.7%       1.3%    2.3%     1.8%      1.5%    2.4%     1.5%       0.9%    2.6%     1.4%      0.8%
Columbus, OH            0.7%     0.5%       0.5%    0.7%     0.5%      0.5%    0.7%     0.6%       0.4%    0.8%     0.7%      0.3%
Dallas-Fort Worth, TX   1.6%     2.0%       2.3%    1.6%     2.0%      2.2%    1.2%     2.3%       2.6%    1.4%     2.3%      2.9%
Denver, CO              1.1%     1.2%       1.3%    1.1%     1.2%      1.5%    0.8%     1.0%       0.7%    0.7%     1.0%      0.6%
Detroit, MI             3.1%     3.3%       2.9%    3.1%     3.3%      3.0%    3.1%     3.0%       2.5%    3.2%     2.7%      2.5%
Greensboro-W.S., NC     0.2%     0.3%       0.3%    0.2%     0.4%      0.4%    0.1%     0.1%       0.1%    0.1%     0.1%      0.1%
Hartford, CT            0.9%     0.9%       0.6%    0.9%     0.9%      0.6%    0.8%     0.7%       0.5%    0.8%     0.5%      0.3%
Houston, TX             2.3%     2.5%       1.9%    2.3%     2.5%      1.9%    1.9%     2.5%       1.9%    2.2%     2.8%      1.8%
Indianapolis, IN        0.8%     0.7%       0.7%    0.8%     0.7%      0.7%    0.7%     0.4%       0.4%    0.8%     0.5%      0.4%
Jacksonville, NC        0.1%     0.1%       0.1%    0.1%     0.1%      0.2%    0.1%     0.1%       0.1%    0.1%     0.1%      0.1%
Kansas City, MO         0.4%     0.3%       0.4%    0.4%     0.4%      0.4%    0.2%     0.1%       0.2%    0.2%     0.1%      0.2%
Las Vegas, NV           0.1%     0.1%       0.2%    0.1%     0.1%      0.2%    0.0%     0.1%       0.1%    0.0%     0.0%      0.1%
Los Angeles, CA         6.6%     6.1%       6.0%    6.4%     5.8%      5.3%    8.4%     8.1%       8.6%    6.5%     7.0%      7.6%
Memphis, TN             0.1%     0.2%       0.2%    0.1%     0.2%      0.2%    0.1%     0.1%       0.1%    0.1%     0.1%      0.1%
Miami, FL               0.8%     0.9%       0.7%    0.7%     0.8%      0.6%    1.3%     1.4%       1.0%    0.6%     0.6%      0.4%
Milwaukee, WI           1.0%     0.9%       0.8%    1.0%     1.0%      0.9%    0.6%     0.6%       0.5%    0.4%     0.4%      0.5%
Minneap.-St. Paul, MN   1.9%     2.4%       2.6%    2.0%     2.6%      2.9%    1.5%     1.7%       1.6%    1.5%     1.8%      1.7%
                                          App. Table 2: Ethnic Inventor Contributions by City, continued
                                    Total Invention Share              Anglo-Saxon and European                  Immigrant Ethnicities                   Chinese and Indian

                                 1975-       1985-       1995-         1975-       1985-        1995-         1975-       1985-       1995-         1975-       1985-       1995-
                                 1984        1994        2004          1984        1994         2004          1984        1994        2004          1984        1994        2004

Nashville, TN                     0.1%       0.2%         0.2%          0.1%        0.2%        0.2%           0.0%        0.1%        0.1%          0.1%        0.1%        0.1%
New Orleans, LA                   0.3%       0.2%         0.2%          0.3%        0.2%        0.2%           0.2%        0.2%        0.1%          0.2%        0.1%        0.1%
New York, NY                     11.5%       8.9%         7.4%         10.9%        8.3%        6.7%          16.4%       12.9%       10.0%         17.3%       13.4%        9.7%
Norfolk-VA Beach, VA              0.2%       0.2%         0.2%          0.2%        0.2%        0.2%           0.1%        0.1%        0.1%          0.2%        0.1%        0.1%
Orlando, FL                       0.2%       0.3%         0.3%          0.2%        0.3%        0.3%           0.1%        0.2%        0.3%          0.1%        0.2%        0.4%
Philadelphia, PA                  4.6%       4.0%         2.7%          4.5%        3.8%        2.7%           5.5%        5.0%        2.7%          6.2%        5.8%        2.8%
Phoenix, AZ                       1.0%       1.2%         1.4%          1.0%        1.2%        1.4%           0.6%        1.2%        1.3%          0.4%        1.0%        1.4%
Pittsburgh, PA                    1.9%       1.3%         0.8%          1.9%        1.3%        0.8%           2.2%        1.4%        0.6%          2.2%        1.3%        0.5%
Portland, OR                      0.5%       0.8%         1.4%          0.5%        0.8%        1.4%           0.3%        0.5%        1.5%          0.2%        0.6%        1.6%
Providence, RI                    0.3%       0.3%         0.3%          0.3%        0.3%        0.3%           0.3%        0.4%        0.3%          0.2%        0.4%        0.2%
Raleigh-Durham, NC                0.3%       0.6%         1.1%          0.3%        0.6%        1.1%           0.3%        0.7%        1.0%          0.3%        0.8%        1.0%
Richmond, VA                      0.3%       0.3%         0.2%          0.3%        0.3%        0.2%           0.3%        0.3%        0.2%          0.3%        0.3%        0.2%
Sacramento, CA                    0.2%       0.4%         0.5%          0.2%        0.4%        0.5%           0.2%        0.4%        0.5%          0.2%        0.3%        0.5%
Salt Lake City, UT                0.4%       0.5%         0.6%          0.4%        0.6%        0.6%           0.2%        0.3%        0.3%          0.2%        0.3%        0.3%
San Antonio, TX                   0.1%       0.2%         0.2%          0.1%        0.2%        0.2%           0.2%        0.2%        0.2%          0.1%        0.1%        0.1%
San Diego, CA                     1.1%       1.6%         2.2%          1.1%        1.6%        2.1%           1.0%        1.6%        2.6%          0.8%        1.3%        2.4%
San Francisco, CA                 4.8%       6.6%        12.2%          4.6%        5.9%        9.6%           7.0%       10.8%       21.8%          8.3%       13.0%       25.7%
Seattle, WA                       0.9%       1.3%         1.9%          1.0%        1.3%        2.0%           0.7%        1.0%        1.8%          0.6%        1.0%        1.8%
St. Louis, MO                     1.0%       0.9%         0.8%          1.1%        1.0%        0.9%           0.8%        0.6%        0.4%          1.0%        0.8%        0.4%
Tallahassee, FL                   0.4%       0.5%         0.4%          0.4%        0.5%        0.5%           0.3%        0.4%        0.3%          0.2%        0.2%        0.2%
Washington, DC                    1.5%       1.5%         1.4%          1.5%        1.4%        1.4%           1.7%        1.8%        1.5%          1.6%        1.7%        1.6%
West Palm Beach, FL               0.3%       0.5%         0.4%          0.3%        0.5%        0.5%           0.2%        0.5%        0.4%          0.3%        0.3%        0.2%
Other 234 Major Cities           21.8%       22.3%       20.7%         22.2%       23.1%       22.3%          18.3%       17.5%       14.7%         19.2%       18.2%       14.4%
Not in a Major City               9.0%        8.2%        6.6%          9.4%       8.8%         7.6%           5.7%        4.4%        3.1%          5.1%        3.8%        2.4%
Notes: Table documents the spatial distribution of patenting across cities and time periods. The shares in each column sum to 100%. Immigrant Ethnicities in the third triplet
include Chinese, Indian, Hispanic, Japanese, Korean, Russian, and Vietnamese contributions.
                               App. Table 3: Migration Patterns in Census of Populations, 1980-2000
                                                               Total Workforce                                  Bachelor's Educated Scientists & Engineers
                                              1980            1990        2000              Mean               1980         1990         2000         Mean
                                               (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)               (5)            (6)             (7)            (8)
                                                       A. Share Who Moved States or Immigrated in Previous Five Years by Immigration Status
Overall                                        12%            12%             12%            12%               25%            23%             23%            24%
US Natives                                     11%            10%             10%            10%               23%            21%             18%            20%
Immigrants                                     26%            23%             24%            24%               38%            33%             42%            38%
Immigrants, Chinese and Indian                 40%            30%             33%            34%               45%            33%             51%            43%

                                                               B. Restricting Panel A to Internal Migration of Workers Aged 35 and Older
Overall                                        7%              7%             7%              7%               14%            13%             12%            13%
US Natives                                     7%              7%             7%              7%               13%            13%             11%            12%
Immigrants                                     7%              7%             8%              8%               19%            15%             15%            16%
Immigrants, Chinese and Indian                 17%            10%             12%            13%               29%            16%             21%            22%

                                                                                 C. Composition of Total Moves in Panel A
Natives                                        84%            79%             71%            78%               81%            78%             58%            72%
Immigrants, Previous Five Years                10%            12%             17%            13%                8%            10%             25%            14%
Immigrants, Earlier                            7%              9%             12%             9%               11%            12%             17%            13%
Notes: Table documents mobility patterns from the 1980-2000 Census of Populations 5% State samples. The total workforce is defined as workers aged 25 to 55,
employed in non-military jobs, living outside of group quarters, and working more than 40 weeks per year and 30 hours per week. Bachelor's educated scientists and
engineers are further designated through occupation titles and reported degree attainment. Immigration status and source country are designated through country of
birth. Panel A documents the percentage of each worker type who is new to his or her state of residence from five years earlier. This includes internal migration and
recent immigration to the US. Panel B further restricts the sample to workers aged 35 to 55 and residing in the US for five years or longer at the time of the Census
(removing recent immigration). Panel C documents the composition of all workers new to the state from five years earlier. Care should be exercised when comparing
across Censuses as some definitions can change (especially the occupation definition in the 2000 Census).
           App. Table 4: Disaggregated Interactions for Chinese/Indian and Other Ethnic Dependencies
                                                                     Log                                                                              Log
                                                                    Patent                                                                           Patent
                                                                    Growth                                                                           Growth

Δ Log Chinese/Indian Patenting x                                     0.079       Δ Log Immigration Quotas Estimator x                                 0.091
  Initial Chinese/Indian Dependency by Technology                   (0.099)        Initial Chinese/Indian Dependency by Technology                   (0.116)
Δ Log Chinese/Indian Patenting x                                     0.181       Δ Log Immigration Quotas Estimator x                                 0.208
  Initial Chinese/Indian Dependency by Technology x                 (0.174)        Initial Chinese/Indian Dependency by Technology x                 (0.193)
  Top 5 Cities for Breakthrough Inventions                                         Top 5 Cities for Breakthrough Inventions

Δ Log Other Ethnic Patenting x                                       -0.017      Δ Log Immigration Quotas Estimator x                                 -0.017
  Initial Other Ethnic Dependency by Technology                     (0.157)        Initial Other Ethnic Dependency by Technology                     (0.107)
Δ Log Other Ethnic Patenting x                                       0.177       Δ Log Immigration Quotas Estimator x                                 0.102
  Initial Other Ethnic Dependency by Technology                     (0.280)        Initial Other Ethnic Dependency by Technology                     (0.202)
  Top 5 Cities for Breakthrough Inventions                                         Top 5 Cities for Breakthrough Inventions

Linear Combination of Effects for Chinese/Indian                     0.260       Linear Combination of Effects for Chinese/Indian                     0.299
Interaction Effect on Top 5 Cities                                  (0.143)      Interaction Effect on Top 5 Cities                                  (0.155)
Linear Combination of Effects for Other Ethnic                       0.161       Linear Combination of Effects for Other Ethnic                       0.084
Interaction Effect on Top 5 Cities                                  (0.232)      Interaction Effect on Top 5 Cities                                  (0.171)
Cross-Sectional and Year Fixed Effects                               Yes         Cross-Sectional and Year Fixed Effects                               Yes
Adjusted R-Squared                                                   0.39        Adjusted R-Squared                                                   0.39
Observations                                                         288         Observations                                                         288
Notes: See Tables 6 and 7. Table disaggregates non-Anglo-Saxon and European ethnicities into Chinese and Indian ethnicities and other ethnicities. Other Ethnic
patenting includes Hispanic, Japanese, Korean, Russian, and Vietnamese contributions.
