                    NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     PORTFOLIO CHOICE AND THE
                   DEBT—TO—INCOME RELATIONSHIP


                       Benjamin M. Friedman



                      Working Paper No. 15145




              NATIONAL BUEEAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1985




The research reported here is part of the NBER'S research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper 1/1545
                                             January 1985



           Portfolio choice and the Debt-to-Income Relationship



                                 12BSTRPCT




         The ratio of outstanding debt to gross national product in the United

States has shown essentially no time trend over a period measured not in

years but in decades. The research reported in this paper indicates that

lenders' portfolio behavior exhibits characteristics that could    provide
a   plausible explanation of this phenomenon.
         Given the long-run stability of the U.S. economy's wealth in
relation to income, the question of lenders' behavior explaining the
stable aggregate debt—to--'income ratio turns on whether investors treat
debt and other assets as close or distant substitutes in their portfolios.
2nalysis   of financial assets' respective risk properties indicates that

debt and equity are indeed sufficiently distant substitutes for lenders'

behavior to confine the debt—to—income ratio within relatively narrow

limits. In particular, the substitutability of debt and equity securities

is sufficiently limited that very large movements in expected return

differentials — movements so large as presumably to elicit offsetting

responses from borrowers — would be required to induce major changes

in the debt share of investors' aggregate portfolio, and hence in the

economy's aggregate debt—to—income ratio.



                                                 Benjamin M. Friedman
                                                 Harvard University
                                                 Littauer 127
                                                 Cambridge, Mass. 02138
                                                 617—495—4246
                                                                       Pe vised
                                                                      December, 1984

                  PORTFOLIO CHOICE AND THE DEBT—TO-INCOME RELATIONSHIP

                                    njaxnin M. Friedman
                                     Harvard University


          The relationship between outstanding debt and economic activity has

attracted growing attention in recent years.      In the United States the principal

focus   of this attention thus far has been the empirical finding that, over time
horizons ranging from a calendar quarter to a year or two, the outstanding
indebtedness of all U.S. borrowers other than financial intermediaries bears as
close a relationship to incon and prices as does any of the more familiar monetary
aggregates or the monetary base) This finding has potentially important

implications for the conduct of monetary policy, and since 1983 the Federal

Reserve    System's semi—annual reports to Congress have specified a growth range for
"domestic nonfinancial credit" along with the growth ranges for three monetary
aggregates.
          A perhaps even more interesting aspect of the aggregate debt—to—income
relationship in the United States is that the simple ratio of the U.S. economy's
domestic nonfinancial debt to its gross national product has shown essentially no
time trend over a period measured not in years but in decades.2 This finding bears
potentially important implications for fiscal policy, especially in an      era of

federal    budget deficits that are large enough to increase rapidly the federal
government's outstanding indebtedness in relation to- GNP.3 It is puzzling,
however, in that many    of the factors that familiar theory suggests would determine

an economy's proclivity to finance its activity by issuing debt —     for   example,

aggregate risk levels, tax rates, and bankruptcy arrangements —have changed

dramatically over the decades during which the U.S. domestic nonfinancial debt

ratio   has remained approximately flat.
         ny potential   explanation for this phenomenon must, of course, focus on the

behavior   of lenders (debt holders) or borrowers (debt issuers) or both.      The

object of the research summarized in this paper is to see whether the behavior
                                        —2—




of investors in the U.S. financial markets could plausibly account for the economy's

relatively stable debt-to—income ratio. This question turns on whether investors

treat debt and other assets as close or distant substitutes in their portfolios.

To anticipate, analysis of financial assets' respective risk properties

indicates that debt and equity are indeed sufficiently distant substitutes for

lenders' behavior to be a plausible source of the constraint confining the debt—

to-income ratio within relatively narrow limits. At the same time, nothing in

this finding precludes the possibility that borrowers' behavior could also be an

equally or even more important part of the overall explanation.


I. Asset Risk and Asset Substitutability

       The key link to lenders' behavior exploited here is the well known fact that

the U.S. economy's total wealth—to—income ratio has been essentially trendless

for many decades, as would be implied by the life cycle model of saving under

standard conditions describing a mature (albeit growing) economy.4 Over substantial

periods of time, therefore, a stable debt—to—income ratio is equivalent to a

stable share of debt assets in the economy's aggregate portfolio. In terms

of familiar portfolio theory, if investors' behavior is imposing this constraint

then the relevant substitution elasticities must be small (in absolute value) in

comparison with the corresponding wealth and/or income elasticities. Wnether in

fact they are so is an empirical question.

       According to the standard theory describing the portfolio behavior of risk-

averse investors, the relevant asset substitutabilities that matter here depend

on investors' perceptions of the risk associated with holding debt and other

assets. Investors' willingness to hold different assets depends on their

assessments of the respective risks to which holding these assets exposes them,

and their treatment of some assets as substitutes for others in their portfolios

likewise depends on the relationships they perceive among the associated risks to

holding these assets as well as others. If two assets expose holders to essentially
                                                          —3—




the same set of risks, investors typically treat the two as close substitutes and

allocate their portfolios accordingly. Assets subject to quite disparate risks are

typically more distant substitutes, or perhaps even complements.

            The      basic framework of analysis used here         is the familiar discrete—time theory

relating         risk—averse portfolio choice to expected asset returns. The investor's
single—period objective, given initial wealth W, is to choose a vector of                      asset

       proportions a , satisfying a '1= 1, to maximize expected utility EIIU(W l•
holding
                                   tt
Under the conditions that U (W) is any power or logarithmic function (so that the
Pratt—arrow coefficient of relative risk aversjon is constant), that the investor
perceives        the vector of real net asset returns r to be              distributed normally (or
lognormaily)             with expectation re and variance_covariance structure Q, and that no

available asset is riskiess in real terms,5 solution of this problem yields


             t B(rt
              =               + 1) + IL                                                                (1)
                                        t
where
                            —U'   [E( 1fl
            Bt
                 =   {                      } • [ 1- (1'     1      1 —l
                                                                 1) ft 1
                                                                             —l
                                                                           1'Q                         (2)
                         W,. U" [E(w)]



             t = (i'Q11)1cr1-i
            IL       t     t                                                                           (3)

If    the   time unit is          sufficiently small   to render      a good approximation   to E(Wt+1)

for purposes of the underlying expansion, then the first (scalar) term within brackets

in (2) is simply the reciprocal of the constant coefficient of relative risk aversion.

            Matrix          in (1), expressing the response of each proportional asset demand

to movements in the expected real returns on that and other assets, contains the

set   of relative asset substitutabilities that determine how stable the respective
shares      of the typical investor's portfolio will be. The solution for Bin (2) makes

clear the central role of investors' risk perceptions in governing this behavior.

The asset substitutabilities in Bdepend only on the investor's risk aversion and

risk perceptions, here parameterized by a variance-covariance matrix                      that in
                                                  —4—




general   may   vary   over time.


II.    Substitutability     Among Financial   Assets

          The upper panel of Table 1 shows the variances and covariances, calculated

from quarterly data for 1960—80, of the realized after—tax real per annum returns on

three broad classes of U.S. financial assets that differ fundamentally from one

another according to the risks associated with holding them: Short-term debt Cs)

includes all assets bearing real returns that are risky, over a single year or

calendar   quarter, only because of uncertainty about inflation. Long-term debt (L)
is    risky because of uncertainty not only about inflation but also about changes

in asset prices directly reflecting changes in market interest rates. Equity (E)

is risky because of uncertainty about inflation and about changes in stock prices.6

          The lower panel of Table 1 indicates the iilications of this observed

1960—80 covariance structure for investors' portfolio behavior by showing the

transformation of Q given in (2), up to but not including multiplication by the

reciprocal of the coefficient of relative risk aversion. Apart from the risk

aversion coefficient, these values for B indicate the marginal responses of the

proportional portfolio allocations c. to changes in expected asset returns re.

Hence    they also indicate by what anount the structure of expected returns would have
to change in order to induce any given shift in the conosition of the typical
investor v5   portfolio.
          For plausible values of the risk aversion coefficient, the B values
shown    in Table 1 indicate that short- and long-term debt are fairly close

substitutes for one another, but not for equity. For relative risk aversion      equal

to four,7 for example, the increase in the expected short—term debt return

(relative to the two other returns) that would be required to raise the short—
plus-long debt share of the typical investor's portfolio by .01 is .63%. The
corresponding required increase in the expected long—term debt return is .27%.
Because the model is linear in expected returns, the analogous increase required
                                         TABLE 1

                    ASSET RETURN RISKS AND IMPLIED PORTFOLIO RESPONSES

Variance-Covariance Matrix

                                                       r           r
                                                        L              E

                                        11.18
            r5
            r                            29.91       209.35
                L
            r                            30.24       161.77       597.86
             E
Portfolio Response Matrix

                                         r             r           r
                                         —p-                           E

                                             .64].


                                         —.578             .727
             L
                                         — .0635       — .150              .213
             E
Notes: Asset returns scaled in per cent per annum.
        Portfolio responses based on relative risk aversion equal to one.
                                          —5—




to generate greater portfolio shifts are proportionally greater.

        One potentially serious shortcoming of drawing such inferences on the basis

of an unconditional sample variance-covariance structure is that it attributes too

little information to investors by disregarding their knowledge, at each point in

time, of the most recent realizations of asset returns and their principal

determinants. During the 1960-80 period the after—tax real returns on all three

classes of assets considered here ethibited substantial serial   correlation.8 en

returns are serially correlated, information about the most recent actual values is

a useful ingredient in forming expectations about returns in the immediate future.

Ignoring that information can lead to excessively large estimates of the uncertainty

surrounding these expectations.

        Table 2 presents a set of analogous results based on a procedure that takes

much more careful account of what information investors did and did not have at any

particular   time. 2s   of the beginning of each calendar quarter,   investors presumably
know the stated interest rates on short—term debt instruments, the current prices
and the coupon rates on long—term debt instruments, the current prices and
(approximately) the dividends on equities, and the relevant tax rates. The three
uncertain    elements that they must forecast over the coming quarter, in order to form

expectatations of the after—tax real returns on the three broad classes of assets

considered   here, are inflation, the capital gain or loss due to changing bond prices,
and the capital gain or loss due to changing stock prices.
       The procedure underlying the results reported in Table 2 represents investors
as   forming expectations of these three uncertain return elements, at each point in

tirr, by estimating a linear regression model relating each element to past values

of itself and the other two, using all data observed through the immediately

preceding period.9 In addition to providing forecast values of the three uncertain

elements for the period ahead, the linear regression model at each point in time

also directly indicates the variances and covariances associated with the forecasts
                                       ThBLE 2

                IMPLICATIONS OF CONTINUALLY UPDATED RETURN FORECASTING

Variance—Covariance Matrix

                                         S
                                                    rL          rE
           r                            1.25

           rL                           3.62       76.61

            rE                          6.45       48.09       317.27
Portfolio Response Matrix
                                        rS          rL          rE
           aS                           1.57

           aL                          -1.4l        1.61
           a                            —.161       —.204            .365
Notes: See Table 1.
                                         —6—




derived in this way. After each period elapses, investors can then repeat the same

procedure, incorporating the one new observation on inflation and on long—term

debt and equity capital gains into the data used   to   re-estimate the linear

regression model to make forecasts for the next period.

       Given the simple arithmetic connection between asset returns and these

underlying uncertain elements, and given investors' presumed knowledge of the

other elements comprising returns, these one—period—ahead forecasts of inflation

and the respective capital gains on long-term debt and equity directly imply one-

period—ahead forecasts of the after—tax real returns on all three classes of assets

at each point In time. Similarly, the variances and covariances associated with

the forecasts of inflation and the two capital gains directly imply the variances

and covariances associated with the corresponding forecasts of the three asset

returns.

       The upper panel of Table 2 shows the means of these implied return variances

and covarianceS for the 84 quarterS of the sample. These values are smaller than

the corresponding values shown in Table 1, indicating the importance of investors'

having (and using) information about recent actual returns.

       The lower panel of Table 2 shows the transformation of this Q given in

(2), again up to but not including multiplication by the risk aversion reciprocal.

The reduced uncertainty, in comparison with Table 1, makes investors more willing to

re—allocate their portfolios in response to changes in expected returns. Even so,

most of the asset substituability is still between short- and long—term debt. With

relative risk aversion again equal to four, the increases in the expected returns

on short- and long-term debt required (individually) to raise the overall debt share

of the typical investor's portfolio by .01 are .25% and .20%, respectively.


III. Substitutability Between Financial and Nonfinancial Assets

       An important limitation of the analysis reported in Section II is its

restriction to financial assets only. On a net basis, most of the total U.S.
                                             —7-.




national    wealth that has remained relatively stable in relation to U.S. economic

activity consists of nonfinancial assets. Even for the household sector alone,

yearend 1980 total wealth included $2.8 trillion of residential real estate and $1.0

trillion of consumer durables in addition to $3.5 trillion of financial assets. If

wealth holders are willing to substitute not just among financial assets but also

between financial and nonfinancial assets, then the results presented in Section II

presumably    overstate the movements in the expected return structure required to
change the share of debt in their portfolios,       and hence also overstate the likely

resulting stability of aggregate debt holdings in relation to either wealth or

income.

          Table 3 presents the results of applying the forecasting procedure underlying

Table 2 to the after—tax real returns on the same three classes of financial

assets together with two classes of nonfinancial assets, residential real estate

(H) and consumer durables CD), based on annual data for 1964_8l)0 Apart from the

use   of an annual time unit, the   treatment of the uncertain elements of the

financial    asset returns is just analogous to that described in Section II. In
order   to generate forecasts of the respective returns on housing and durables,

however,   the forecasting equation here also includes the change in the constant—
quality   housing price index and the change in the implicit price deflator for durables.

          Not surprisingly, given the role of inflation in making   asset   returns

uncertain,    the resulting variance—covariance matrix shown in the upper panel of
Table 3 indicates that both categories of nonfinancial assets are less risky in real
terms than any of the three financial assets. More importantly for the purposes of
the analysis here, the transformation of this variance—covariance structure shown
in the lower panel of the table indicates that the implied responsiveness of portfolio
allocations to changes in expected returns is far greater than suggested by the
analysis in Section II of financial assets alone. With relative risk aversion equal
to four, the increase in the expected short—term debt return (again, relative to
all   other returns) required to raise the total debt share of the typical investor's
                                    TABLE 3

       CONTINUALLY UPDATED RETURN FORECASTING INCLUDING NONFINANCIAL ASSETS

Variance—CovariaflCe Matrix



          r                        2.31
              S
                                    6.62      43.76
          rL
                                   11.92      49.92     191.03
          rE
                                     .47        1.24     4.47          1.19
          rH
          r                          .67        1.87      2.99              .16         .27


portfolio poI1e i1.LL1X
                                     rS         r
                                                 L
                                                          r
                                                           E
                                                                       r
                                                                        H
                                                                                        r
                                                                                          D

          a                        176
              S
          aL                       —14.5        6.25

                                    —4.49       —.628         .942

                                    34.0        6.79     —2.95        168
          ctH

                                  —191          2.12      7.13       —206         387
          aD
Notes: See Table 1.
                                                 —8—




 portfolio by .01 is only .025%. A comparison of the elements in the first column of
 the   matrix makes clear   that   more than all of this portfolio re—allocation occurs
 at the expense of the share invested in durables. Because of the cross—effects of
 the substitutability of short—term debt with both durables and long—term debt, however,
 the corresponding movement in the expected long—term debt return required to raise

 the total debt share by .01 is a decline of .48%.


 IV. Conclusions

         Whether or not investors' behavior can plausibly account for the U.S. economy's

 trendless debt—to—income ratio depends crucially on the proper treatment of wealth

 holding in nonfinancial forms. Among financial assets only, the substitutability

of debt and equity securities is sufficiently limited that very large movements

in expected return differentials — movements so large as presumably to elicit

offsetting responses from borrowers —would be required to induce major changes in

the debt share of investors' aggregate portfolio. Given the long-run stability

of the economy's wealth in relation to income, this lack of asset substitutability

along the relevant dimension also inlies a stable debt—to—income ratio.

         By contrast, a parallel analysis applied to financial and nonfinancial

assets together suggests that only quite modest movements in the structure of

expected returns would suffice to induce even very large changes in the debt

share of total assets, and hence in the aggregate debt—to—income ratio. The main

reason for this result is the close substitutability of short-term debt and

consumer durables implied by the respective risks associated with these two assets'

after—tax real returns,

        Especially since the key substitutubility on which this difference hinges

is to durables, rather than housing, the most sensible interpretation of these

results is probably to discount the findings including nonfinancial assets and

conclude that the portfolio behavior of risk—averse investors can plausibly

account for a stable debt share of assets, and hence also (given the stability
                                                 —9—




of wealth in relation to income in the United States) the observed stable debt-to—

income ratio. One        reason   for drawing this conclusion is simply that asset—type

considerations of risk and return alone probably do not constitute an adequate

description of the demand for consumer durables. In a more fully developed

description of that demand, the willingness to substitute holdings of short—term

debt    instruments for ownership of consumer durables would no doubt be much more
limited. A second reason is that, to a far greater extent than in the case of
return indexes for aggregates of financial assets (or even housing), the        variation

of    the   return   index for the aggregate of all consunr durables presumably understates
the    risk associated with any individual's holding. A more accurate representation

of that risk would also probably indicate less correlation with other asset risks,

hence less substitutability for other assets, and hence less responsiveness of asset

demands to changes in relative returns.

            With   this qualification, therefore, the behavior of lenders in the U.S.
financial market does        exhibit characteristics that could account for the observed

stability      of the economyt s   aggregate debt—to—income ratio over long periods of time.

Thisconclusion, however, in no way precludes the behavior of borrowers being as
important, or more so, in explaining this phenomenon. That possibility remains a
subject      for future research.
                                           Footnotes

 *1 am grateful to Jeff Fuhrer for research assistance to him, Andrew Abel        and James
  Earley for helpful coimnents on a preliminary draft, and to the National Science

  Foundation and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for research support.

  1. See, for example, the evidence in Friedman (1983).

  2. The typical value for the U.S. domestic nonfinancial debt ratio is about 1.45;

       see again, for example, Friedman (1983)

  3. The federal governinentts debt ratio declined (as is usual in peacetime) from a

      peak of 1.03 in 1946 to a low of .25 in 1974. At yearend 1980 it was still .27.

      By midyear 1984 it had risen to .35.

 4. See Modigliani (1966) for a clear exposition of this proposition at a theoretical

      level, and, for example, Goldsmith (forthcoming) for empirical evidence. The

      U.S. wealth-to-income ratio is typically around three.

 5. Alternatively, if one asset is riskless, it is necessary to partition the asset

      demand system so that the expression equivalent to (1) gives the demands for
                                            1
      risky assets only.    In that case        replaces the second (matrix) term in (2),

      and r in (3) is a vector of zeroes.

 6.   See Friedman (1984) for details of the construction of these three after—tax

      real return series.

 7.   This value is about in the middle of the range of available empirical estimates.

      Friend and Blume (1975) suggested a value in excess of two, Grossman and Shiller

      (1981) suggested four, and Friend and Hasbrouck (1982) suggested six.

 8. The first—order serial correlation coefficients are .86 for short-term debt, .51

      for long-term debt, and .33 for equity.

 9. See Friedman (1984) for details of the estimated vector autoregression and the

      calculations based on it.

10.   The nominal after-tax return for housing combines the BEA implicit rent and

      depreciation series, the FEA series on maintenance costs, the MPS series on

      property taxes, and changes in the Census Bureau constant—quality price index,
   using Barro and Sahasakul's (1983) average marginal income tax rate series.

   The nominal (untaxed) return on durables combines the BEA service value estimate

   and changes in the relevant BEA deflator. In both cases the corresponding real

   return follows from subtracting the percentage change in the consuirr price

   index. Use of an annual time unit in this part of the analysis reflects the

   unavailability of several of these series on a quarterly basis.


                                        Re ferences

Barro, pobert J., and Sahasakul, Chaipat. 'Measuring the Average Marginal Tax Rate from

  the Individual Income Tax." Journal of Business, 56 (October, 1981), 419—452.

Friedman, Benjamin M. "The Roles of Money and Credit in Macroeconomic Analysis."

   In Tobin (ed.), Macroeconomics, Prices and Quantities: Essays in Memory of

   z.rthur M.   Okun. Washington: The Brookings Institution, 1983.

Friedman, Benjamin M. "Crowding Out or Crowding In? Evidence on Debt-Equity

   Substitutability." Mimeo: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1984.

Friend, Irwin, and Blume, Marshall E. "The Demand for Risky
                                                                    Assets."   American Economic


   Review, 65 (December, 1975) 900—922.
                                                 of Inflation on the profitability and
Friend, Irwin, and Hasbrouck, joel. "Effect

   Valuatin of U.S. Corporations." In Sarnat and Szego (eds.), Savings, Investment

   and   Cap ital Marke   in   an Inflationary Economy. Cambridge:    Ballinger, 1982.

Goldsmith, Raymond W. comparatiVe          ona Balance Sheets. Chicago:        University of


   Chicago   press, forthcoming.
Grossman,    Sanford J., and Shiller,   Robert j.     "The Determinants of the Varability

   of Stock Prices." American Economic Review, 71 (may, l98l) 222—227.
                                                       of Saving, the Demand for Wealth and
Modigliani, Franco. "The Life Cycle Hypothesis

   the Supply of Capital." Social Research, 33 (Summer, 1966), 160—217.
