NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RATIONAL ATTENTION ALLOCATION OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE
Marcin Kacperczyk
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Laura Veldkamp
Working Paper 15450
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15450
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2009

We thank John Campbell, Joseph Chen, Xavier Gabaix, Vincent Glode, Lars Hansen, Christian Hellwig,
Ralph Koijen, Jeremy Stein, Matthijs van Dijk, Robert Whitelaw, as well as three anonymous referees,
and participants in several seminars and conferences for valuable comments and suggestions. We thank
Isaac Baley and Nic Kozeniauskas for outstanding research assistance. Finally, we thank the Q-group
for their generous financial support. A previous version of this paper was entitled “Rational Attention
Allocation over the Business Cycle”. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Marcin Kacperczyk, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Laura Veldkamp. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Rational Attention Allocation Over the Business Cycle
Marcin Kacperczyk, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Laura Veldkamp
NBER Working Paper No. 15450
October 2009, Revised October 2015
JEL No. E3,G2
ABSTRACT
The question of whether and how mutual fund managers provide valuable services for their clients
motivates one of the largest literatures in finance. One candidate explanation is that funds process
information about future asset values and use that information to invest in high-valued assets. But
formal theories are scarce because information choice models with many assets are difficult to solve
as well as difficult to test. This paper tackles both problems by developing a new attention allocation
model that uses the state of the business cycle to predict information choices, which in turn, predict
observable patterns of portfolio investments and returns. The predictions about fund portfolios’ covariance
with payoff shocks, cross-fund portfolio and return dispersion, and their excess returns are all supported
by the data. These findings offer new evidence that some investment managers have skill and that
attention is allocated rationally.
Marcin Kacperczyk
Imperial College Business School
Tanaka Building
South Kensington Campus
London SW7 2AZ
United Kingdom
m.kacperczyk@imperial.ac.uk
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 W 4th Street, Suite 9-120
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
svnieuwe@stern.nyu.edu

A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w15450

Laura Veldkamp
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 W Fourth Street,Suite 7-77
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
lveldkam@stern.nyu.edu

“What information consumes is rather obvious: It consumes the attention of its recipients. Hence a wealth of information creates a poverty of attention, and a need
to allocate that attention efficiently among the overabundance of information sources
that might consume it.” Simon (1971)

The question of whether and how mutual fund managers provide valuable services for their
clients motivates one of the largest literatures in empirical finance. A natural candidate
explanation is that funds process information about future asset values and use that information to invest in high-valued assets. But few such theories have been written because
information choice models with many assets are difficult to solve and difficult to test. This
paper tackles both of these problems by developing a new model that uses an observable
variable–the state of the business cycle–to predict information choices and that links those
information choices to observable patterns in portfolio investments and returns.
We use business cycle variation as our observable state because of recent empirical evidence suggesting that the way funds provide value changes over the cycle (Kosowski (2011),
Glode (2011), Kacperczyk, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2014)). We explore a fund
manager’s choice of what information to process in different states of the business cycle. We
find that fund managers optimally choose to process information about aggregate shocks in
recessions and idiosyncratic shocks in booms. The resulting fund portfolios exhibit the same
kind of “time-varying skill” as do those in the data.
To understand how fund information strategies depend on the cycle, we build a new
model. Existing mutual fund theories explain fund flows and fees, but do not tell us how funds
add value.1 Existing models of information processing and portfolio choice either prohibit
managers from choosing between aggregate or idiosyncratic information (Van Nieuwerburgh
and Veldkamp 2010), or require that there are only two assets (Mondria 2010), rendering
all shocks aggregate. Therefore, we develop a new methodology that can accommodate N
assets and information choices with a more general asset payoff and signal structure.
The model’s solution offers a rich set of predictions, which we test with mutual fund
data. Just as importantly, the model is a building block. It can be extended to allow for
asymmetric initial information across investors, multiple countries with home and foreign
1

For theoretical models of fees and flows, asset price effects, manager incentive problems, and other aspects
of mutual funds, see e.g., Mamaysky and Spiegel (2002), Berk and Green (2004), Kaniel and Kondor (2013),
Cuoco and Kaniel (2011), Chien, Cole, and Lustig (2011), Chapman, Evans, and Xu (2010), and Pástor and
Stambaugh (2012). A number of recent papers in the empirical mutual fund literature also find that some
managers have skill, e.g., Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2005, 2008), Kacperczyk and Seru (2007), Cremers
and Petajisto (2009), Huang, Sialm, and Zhang (2011), Koijen (2014), Baker, Litov, Wachter, and Wurgler
(2010).

1

funds, high and low-capacity funds, a choice over the quantity of information capacity, etc.
The framework provides a new lens through which to analyze the empirical literature and to
study which empirical patterns are consistent with optimal information-processing behavior.
In the model, a fraction of investment managers have skill. These skilled managers can
observe a fixed number of signals about asset payoffs and choose what fraction of those signals
will contain aggregate versus stock-specific information. We think of aggregate signals as
macroeconomic data that affect future cash flows of all firms, and of stock-specific signals as
firm-level data that forecast the part of firms’ future cash flows that is independent of the
aggregate shocks. Based on their signals, skilled managers form portfolios, choosing larger
portfolio weights for assets that are more likely to have high returns. In the data, recessions
are times when aggregate volatility rises and the price of risk surges. When we embed these
two forces in our model, both govern attention allocation.
The model generates six main predictions. It predicts how volatility and the price of
risk each affect attention allocation, portfolio dispersion, and portfolio returns. The first
pair of predictions tell us that attention should be reallocated over the business cycle. In
recessions, more volatile aggregate shocks should draw more attention, because it is more
valuable to pay attention to more uncertain outcomes. The elevated price of risk amplifies
this reallocation: Since aggregate shocks affect a large fraction of the portfolio’s value, paying
attention to aggregate shocks resolves more portfolio risk than learning about stock-specific
risks. When the price of risk is high, such risk-minimizing attention choices become more
valuable. While the idea that it is more valuable to shift attention to more volatile shocks is
straightforward, whether changes in the price of risk would amplify or counteract this effect
is not obvious.
The remaining predictions do not come from the reallocation of attention. Rather, they
help to distinguish this theory from non-informational alternatives and support the idea that
at least some portfolio managers are engaging in value-maximizing behavior. The second pair
of results predict business cycle effects on cross-fund portfolio and profit dispersion. Since
recessions are times when large aggregate shocks to asset payoffs create more comovement in
asset payoffs, passive portfolios would have returns that also comove more in recessions, which
would imply less dispersion. In contrast, when investment managers learn about asset payoffs
and manage their portfolios according to what they learn, fund returns comove less and
dispersion increases in recessions. One reason is that when aggregate shocks become more
volatile, managers who learn about aggregate shocks put less weight on their common prior
beliefs, which have less predictive power, and more weight on their heterogeneous signals.

2

This generates more heterogeneous beliefs in recessions and therefore more heterogeneous
investment strategies and fund returns. The other reason is that a higher price of risk
induces managers to take less risk, which makes prices less informative. Like prior beliefs,
information in prices is common information. When prices contain less information, this
common information is weighted less and heterogeneous signals are weighted more, resulting
in more heterogeneous portfolio returns.
Finally, the fifth and sixth predictions describe the effect of risk and the price of risk on
fund performance. Since the average fund can only outperform the market if there are other,
non-fund investors who underperform, the model also includes unskilled non-fund investors.
Both the heightened uncertainty about asset payoffs and the elevated price of bearing risk in
recessions make information more valuable. Therefore, the informational advantage of the
skilled over the unskilled increases and generates higher returns for informed managers. The
average fund’s outperformance rises.
We test the model’s predictions on the universe of actively managed U.S. equity mutual
funds. To test the first prediction, a key insight is that managers can only choose portfolios
that covary with shocks they pay attention to. Thus, to detect cyclical changes in attention,
we should look for changes in covariances. We estimate the covariance of each fund’s portfolio
holdings with the aggregate payoff shock, proxied by innovations in industrial production
growth. This covariance measures a manager’s ability to time the market by increasing
(decreasing) her portfolio positions in anticipation of good (bad) macroeconomic news. This
timing covariance rises in recessions. We also calculate the covariance of a fund’s portfolio
holdings with asset-specific shocks, proxied by innovations in firms’ earnings. This covariance
measures managers’ ability to pick stocks that subsequently experience unexpectedly high
earnings. Consistent with the theory, this stock-picking covariance increases in expansions.
The idea that one can test rational inattention models by looking for changes in covariances
is similar to that in Maćkowiak, Moench, and Wiederholt (2009). Our paper exploits timeseries rather than cross-sectional variation in the covariance of shocks and economic outcomes
and uses mutual fund portfolios instead of firm-level pricing data.
Second, we test for cyclical changes in portfolio dispersion. We find that, in recessions,
funds hold portfolios that differ more from one another. As a result, their cross-sectional
return dispersion increases, consistent with the theory. In the model, much of this dispersion
comes from taking different bets on market outcomes, which should show up as dispersion
in CAPM betas. We find evidence in the data for higher beta dispersion in recessions.
Third, we document fund outperformance in recessions, extending earlier results in the

3

literature. Risk-adjusted excess fund returns (alphas) are around 1.6 to 4.6% per year higher
in recessions, depending on the specification. Gross alphas (before fees) are not statistically
different from zero in expansions, but they are significantly positive in recessions.2 These
cyclical differences are statistically and economically significant.
Fourth, we decompose effects of recessions on covariance, dispersion, and performance, by
separating them into price of risk and volatility. When we use both price of risk and aggregate
volatility as explanatory variables, we find that both contribute about equally to our three
main results. Showing that these results are truly business-cycle phenomena–as opposed to
merely high volatility phenomena–is interesting because it connects these results with the
existing macroeconomics literature on rational inattention (e.g., Sims (2003), Maćkowiak
and Wiederholt (2009, 2015)).
Related theories of mutual funds Many mutual fund theories account for some of
the facts we document. But they do not explain all our facts jointly or answer our main
question: How do funds go about adding value for investors? One strand of the literature
focuses on changes in fund performance that arise when fund managers change. While
manager turnover and sample selection effects may be important for the measurement of
many mutual fund facts, they do not change the nature of the puzzles our model aims to
explain. In the Supplementary Appendix (Section S.10), we re-estimate our main results
using managers, instead of funds, as the unit of observation, and include manager fixed
effects. We find the same results as at the fund level. Kacperczyk, Van Nieuwerburgh, and
Veldkamp (2014) document that it is the same managers who pick stocks well in booms that
also time the market in recessions, and check that there are no systematic differences in age,
educational background, or experience of fund managers in recessions versus expansions.
Similarly, Chevalier and Ellison (1999) show that young managers with career concerns may
have an incentive to herd. It would seem logical that the concern for being fired would
be greatest in recessions. But if that were the case, herding should be most prevalent in
recessions and it should make the dispersion in portfolios decline. Instead, our results show
that portfolio dispersion rises in recessions. The convex relationship between mutual fund
performance and fund inflows can explain outperformance and higher portfolio dispersion in
recessions (Kaniel and Kondor 2013). Likewise, Glode (2011) argues that funds outperform
2

Net alphas (after fees) for the average fund are negative in expansions (-0.6%) and positive (1.0%) in
recessions for our most conservative metric. Gross alphas are higher by about 1% point per year. Since
funds do not set fees in our model, we have no predictions about after-fee alphas. For a theory about why
we should expect net alphas to be zero, see Berk and Green (2004). For recent empirical work, see Berk and
van Binsbergen (2015).

4

in recessions because their investors’ marginal utility is highest then. Neither mechanism
explains why performance and dispersion also rise in times of high macro volatility or why
skill measures are cyclical. Each of these theories likely captures an important feature of the
mutual fund market. But the set of facts we present, taken together, are supportive of our
explanation for the information-based origins of mutual fund skill.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 lays out our model. After
describing the setup, we characterize the optimal information and investment choices of
skilled and unskilled investors. We show how equilibrium asset prices are formed. We derive
theoretical predictions for funds’ attention allocation, portfolio dispersion, and performance.
Section 2 explains how we bring the model to the data. Section 3 tests the model’s predictions
using the context of actively managed equity mutual funds. Section 4 concludes.

1

Model

We develop a model whose purpose is to understand how the optimal attention allocation of
investment managers depends on the business cycle, and how attention affects asset holdings
and asset prices. The model builds on the information choice model in Van Nieuwerburgh
and Veldkamp (2010), but with a new solution methodology that allows us to consider signals
about any linear combination of assets, a generalization advocated by Sims (2006). Much
of the complexity of the model comes from the fact that it is an equilibrium model. But in
order to study the effects of attention on asset holdings, asset prices, and fund performance,
having an equilibrium model is a necessity. In particular, an equilibrium model ensures that
for every investor that outperforms the market, there is someone who underperforms.

1.1

Setup

The model has three periods. At time 1, skilled investment managers choose how to allocate
their attention across different assets. At time 2, all investors choose their portfolios of risky
and riskless assets. At time 3, asset payoffs and utility are realized.
Assets The model features 1 riskless and n risky assets. The price of the riskless asset is
normalized to 1 and it pays off r at time 3. Risky assets i ∈ {1, ..., n−1} have random payoffs
fi with respective loadings bi , ..., bn−1 on an aggregate shock zn , and face stock-specific shocks
z1 , ..., zn−1 . The n-th asset, is a composite asset whose payoff has no stock-specific shock and

5

a loading of one on the aggregate shock zn . We use this composite asset as a stand-in for all
other assets. Formally,

fi = µi + bi zn + zi ,
fn = µn + zn

i ∈ {1, . . . , n − 1}

(1)
(2)

where the risk factors zi ∼ N(0, σi ), are mutually independent for i ∈ {1, . . . , n − 1, n}. We
define the n × 1 vector f = [f1 , f2 , ..fn ]′ .
Risk factors The vector of risk factor shocks, z = [z1 , z2 , ..., zn−1 , zn ]′ , is normally distributed as: z ∼ N (0, Σ) where Σ is a diagonal matrix. Stacking the equations above,
we can write f = µ + Γz, where Γ is a n × n invertible matrix of loadings that map risk
factors, z, into the mean-zero payoffs (f − µ). We define the payoff of the risk factors as
f˜ ≡ Γ−1 f = Γ−1 µ + z. Thus, payoffs of risk factors are linear combinations of payoffs of
the underlying assets. In other words, they are a payoff to a particular portfolio of assets.
Working with risk factor payoffs and prices (denoted with tildes) allows us to solve the model
in a tractable way.
Each risk factor has a stochastic supply given by x̄i + xi , where noise xi is normally distributed, with mean zero, variance σx , and no correlation with other noises: x ∼ N (0, σx I).
The vector of noisy asset supplies is (Γ′ )−1 (x̄+ x). As in any (standard) noisy rational expectations equilibrium model, the supply is random to prevent the price from fully revealing the
information of informed investors. An important assumption is that the supply of aggregate
risk is large, relative to other risks: x̄n >> x̄i for i 6= n. Its size is what makes aggregate
risk fundamentally different from the other risks in the economy.
Portfolio Choice Problem There is a continuum of atomless investors. Each investor is
endowed with initial wealth, W0 .3 They have mean-variance preferences over time-3 wealth,
with a risk-aversion coefficient, ρ. Let Ej and Vj denote investor j’s expectations and variances conditioned on all information known at time 2, which includes prices and signals.
Thus, investor j chooses how many shares of each asset to hold, qj to maximize time-2
expected utility, U2j :
ρ2
U2j = ρEj [Wj ] − Vj [Wj ]
(3)
2
3

Since there are no wealth effects in the preferences, the assumption of identical initial wealth is without
loss of generality.

6

subject to the budget constraint: Wj = rW0 + qj′ (f − pr), where qj and p are n × 1 vectors of
prices and quantities of each asset held by investor j. We can rewrite the budget constraint
in terms of risk factor prices and quantities by defining p̃ ≡ Γ−1 p, q̃j ≡ Γ′ qj , and substituting
f = Γf˜ to get
Wj = rW0 + q̃ ′ (f˜ − p̃r).
(4)
j

Prices Equilibrium prices are determined by market clearing:
Z

q̃j dj = x̄ + x,

(5)

where the left-hand side of the equation is the vector of aggregate demand and the right-hand
side is the vector of aggregate supply of the risk factors.
Information, updating, and attention allocation At time 1, a skilled investment
manager j chooses the precisions of signals that she will receive at time 2. Allocating
attention to a risk factor means that a manager gets a more precise signal about that risky
outcome. Mathematically, a manager j’s vector of signals is ηj = z + εj , where the vector of
signal noise is distributed as εj ∼ N (0, Σηj ).4 The variance matrix Σηj is diagonal with ith
diagonal element Kij−1 . Thus, Kij is the precision of investor j’s signal about risk i. Private
signal noise is independent across risks i and managers j. Note that these signals are about
asset payoffs and contain no direct information about asset supply x. Managers combine
signal realizations with priors and information extracted from asset prices to update their
beliefs, using Bayes’ law.
Signal precision choices {Kij } maximize time-1 expected utility, U1j , of the fund’s terminal wealth Wj . The objective is −E[lnEj [exp(−ρWj )]], which is equivalent to maximizing
U1j



ρ2
= E ρEj [Wj ] − Vj [Wj ] ,
2

(6)

subject to three constraints.5
4
This signal structure is similar to that in Mondria (2010) because signals are linear combinations of asset
payoffs, plus normally-distributed noise. While Mondria allows for a choice over the linear combination, he
only works with 2 assets and 1 signal. Appendix B shows how to use our method to solve the N -asset
problem for signals that are about any linear combination of asset payoffs f of the form ηj = ψf + ej , where
ψ is an invertible matrix and f and ej are normally distributed with covariance matrices that need not be
diagonal.
5
See Veldkamp (2011) for a discussion of the use of expected mean-variance utility in information choice
problems. The Supplementary Appendix (Section S.2) proves versions of the main propositions for the

7

The first constraint is the budget constraint (4) that determines Wj as a function of
investment decisions. The second constraint is information capacity constraint. It states
that the sum of the signal precisions must not exceed the information capacity:
n
X

Kij ≤ K.

(7)

i=1

In Bayesian updating with normal variables, observing one signal with precision Ki or two
signals, each with precision Ki /2, is equivalent. Therefore, one interpretation of the capacity
constraint is that it allows the manager to observe N signal draws, each with precision Ki /N,
for large N. The investment manager then chooses how many of those N signals will be
about each shock.6 Note that our model holds each manager’s total attention fixed and
studies its allocation in recessions and expansions. Section 1.8 relaxes this assumption.
The third constraint is the no-forgetting constraint, which ensures that the chosen precisions are non-negative:
Kij ≥ 0 i ∈ {1, ..., n − 1, n}
(8)
It prevents the manager from erasing any prior information, to make room to gather new
information about another shock.
Skilled and Unskilled Investors The only ex-ante difference between investors is that
a fraction χ of them have skill, meaning that they can choose to observe a set of informative
private signals about the risk factor shocks zi . Unskilled investors are ones with zero signal
precision: Σ−1
ηj = 0, or equivalently, Kij = 0, ∀i. Both unskilled and skilled investors observe
the information in prices, which are public signals, costlessly.7
When we bring the model to the data, we will call all skilled investors mutual funds.
Furthermore, we will distinguish between two types of unskilled investors: unskilled mutual
funds and non-fund investors.8 In the model, the latter two types are identical. The reason
expected exponential utility model.
6
The results are not sensitive to the exact nature of the information capacity constraint. The Supplementary Appendix (Section S.4) re-proves each one of our propositions for a model with an entropy constraint.
The linear constraint (7) makes sense in our setting because additional fund analysts can be hired to process
information. Twice as many analysts could produce twice the precision at twice the cost. To make information precision a continuous choice variable, let k̇δ be the precision of each analyst and let ċδ be the cost of
each analyst. Then take lim δ → 0. That problem with a continuous, linear cost function is a dual problem
to our constrained maximization problem.
7
If investors must expend capacity to learn from prices, the model predictions are unchanged. See
Supplementary Appendix S.5.
8
For our results to hold, it is sufficient to assume that the fraction of non-fund investors that are unskilled

8

for modeling non-fund investors is that without them, we cannot talk about average fund
performance. The sum of all funds’ holdings would have to equal the market by market
clearing, and therefore, the average fund return would have to equal the market return.
Without uninformed non-fund investors, the average fund could never systematically outperform the market return, in recessions or expansions.
Modeling recessions Since this is a static model, the investment world is either in the
recession (R) or in the expansion state (E). The asset pricing literature identifies three principal effects of recessions: (1) returns are more volatile, (2) the price of risk is high, and (3)
returns are unexpectedly low. Section 3 discusses the empirical evidence supporting the first
two effects. The third effect of recessions, unexpectedly low returns, cannot affect attention
allocation because attention must be allocated before returns are observed. Therefore, we
abstract from it and consider only effects (1) and (2). To capture the return volatility effect
(1) in the model, we assume that the prior variance of the aggregate shock in recessions (R)
is higher than the one in expansions (E): σn (R) > σn (E). To capture the varying price of
risk (2), we vary the parameter that governs the price of risk, which is risk aversion. We
assume ρ(R) > ρ(E).We continue to use σn and ρ to denote aggregate shock variance and
risk aversion in the current business cycle state.

1.2

Equilibrium

This paper’s methodological innovation is that its model relaxes an important assumption.
Previous work assumed that assets and signals have the same principal components. Observing signals about aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks violates that assumption. Updating
with such signals changes the conditional correlations of assets. So to solve the model, we
perform a change of variables. We create linear combinations of assets (synthetic assets) such
that the payoff of each synthetic asset is determined only by one shock (either aggregate or
idiosyncratic). Then, we can choose information about, choose quantities of, and price these
synthetic assets easily because each asset’s payoff is independent of all the others and each
signal is informative about one and only one asset. After we have a solution to the synthetic
asset problem, we can invert the linear transformation to back out portfolios and prices of
the original assets.
We begin by working through the mechanics of Bayesian updating. There are three
types of information that are aggregated in time-2 posteriors beliefs: prior beliefs, price
is higher than that for the mutual funds.

9

information, and (private) signals. We conjecture and later verify that a transformation
of prices p̃ generates an unbiased signal about the risk factor payoffs, ηp = z + ǫp , where
ǫp ∼ N(0, Σp ), for some diagonal variance matrix Σp . Then, by Bayes’ law, the posterior
−1
beliefs about z are normally distributed with mean ẑj = Σ̂j (Σ−1
ηj ηj + Σp ηp ) and posterior
−1
−1
−1
˜
precision Σ̂−1
+ Σ−1
p + Σηj . Using the definition f = Γ µ + z, we find that posterior
j = Σ
beliefs about risk factor payoffs are f˜ ∼ N(Ej [f˜], Σ̂−1 ) where
j

−1
Ej [f˜] = Γ−1 µ + Σ̂j (Σ−1
ηj ηj + Σp ηp ).

(9)

Next, we solve the model in four steps.
Step 1: Solve for the optimal portfolios, given information sets.
Substituting the budget constraint (4) into the objective function (3) and taking the
first-order condition with respect to q̃j reveals that optimal holdings are increasing in the
investor’s risk tolerance, precision of beliefs, and expected return:
1
q̃j = Σ̂−1
(Ej [f˜] − p̃r).
ρ j

(10)

Step 2: Clear the asset market.
Substitute each agent j’s optimal portfolio (10) into the market-clearing condition (5).
Collecting terms and simplifying reveals that equilibrium asset prices are linear in payoff risk
shocks and in supply shocks:
Lemma 1. p̃ =

1
r

(A + Bz + Cx)

A detailed derivation of coefficients A, B, and C, expected utility, and the proofs of this
lemma and all further propositions are in the Appendix.
In this model, agents learn from prices because prices are informative about the payoff
shocks z. Next, we deduce what information is implied by Lemma 1. Price information is the
signal about z contained in prices. The transformation of the price vector p̃ that yields an
unbiased signal about z is ηp ≡ B −1 (p̃r−A). Note that applying the formula for ηp to Lemma
1 reveals that ηp = z + εp , where the signal noise in prices is εp = B −1 Cx. Since we assume
′
x ∼ N(0, σx I), the price noise is distributed εp ∼ N(0, Σp ), where Σp ≡ σx B −1 CC ′ B −1 .
Substituting in the coefficients B and C from the proof of Lemma 1 shows that public signal
R
K¯i2
−1
Kij dj
precision Σ−1
p is a diagonal matrix with ith diagonal element σpi = ρ2 σx , where K̄i ≡
is the average capacity allocated to risk factor i.
Step 3: Compute ex-ante expected utility.
10

Substitute optimal risky asset holdings
from equation (10) intoithe first-period objective
h
1
˜
˜
function (6) to get: U1j = rW0 + 2 E1 (Ej [f ] − p̃r)Σ̂−1
j (Ej [f ] − p̃r) . Note that the expected
excess return (Ej [f˜] − p̃r) depends on signals and prices, both of which are unknown at time
1. Because asset prices are linear functions of normally distributed shocks, Ej [f˜] − p̃r, is
2
˜
normally distributed as well. Thus, (Ej [f˜]−p̃r)Σ̂−1
j (Ej [f ]− p̃r) is a non-central χ -distributed
variable. Computing its mean yields:
1
1
′ −1
˜
˜
˜
U1j = rW0 + trace(Σ̂−1
j V1 [Ej [f ] − p̃r]) + E1 [Ej [f ] − p̃r] Σ̂j E1 [Ej [f ] − p̃r].
2
2

(11)

Step 4: Solve for information choices.
Note that in expected utility (11), the choice variables Kij enter only through the posterior variance Σ̂j and through V1 [Ej [f˜] − p̃r] = V1 [f˜ − p̃r] − Σ̂j . Since there is a continuum
of investors, and since V1 [f˜ − p̃r] and E1 [Ej [f˜] − p̃r] depend only on parameters and on
aggregate information choices, each investor takes them as given.
˜
˜
Since Σ̂−1
j and V1 [Ej [f ] − p̃r] are both diagonal matrices and E1 [Ej [f ] − p̃r] is a vector,
the last two terms of (11) are weighted sums of the diagonal elements of Σ̂−1
j . Thus, (11)
P
−1
can be rewritten as U1j = rW0 + i λi Σ̂j (i, i) − n/2, for positive coefficients λi . Since rW0
−1
−1
is a constant and Σ̂−1
j (i, i) = Σ (i, i) + Σp (i, i) + Kij , the information choice problem is:

max

K1j ,...,Knj

s.t.

n
X

λi Kij + constant

(12)

i=1

n
X

Kij ≤ K

(13)

i=1

where λi = σ̄i [1 + (ρ2 σx + K̄i )σ̄i ] + ρ2 x̄2i σ̄i2 ,
where σ̄i−1 =

R

(14)

Σ̂−1
j (i, i)dj is the average precision of posterior beliefs about risk i. Its inverse,

average variance σ̄i is decreasing in K̄i . Equation (14) is derived in the Appendix.
To maximize a weighted sum (12) subject to an unweighted sum (13), the skilled manager
optimally assigns all capacity to the risk(s) with the highest weight. If there is a unique i∗ =
argmaxi λi , then the solution is to set Ki∗ j = K and Klj = 0, ∀l 6= i∗ .
In many cases, there will be multiple risks with identical λ weights. That is because λi
is decreasing in K̄i , the average investor’s signal precision. When there exist risks i, l s.t.
λi = λl , then investors are indifferent about which risk to learn about. The next result shows
that this indifference is not a knife-edge case. It arises whenever the aggregate amount of
11

information capacity is sufficiently high.
Lemma 2. If x̄i is sufficiently large ∀i and
such that λl = λl′ .

P P
i

j

Kij ≥ K, then there exist risks l and l′

This is strategic substitutability in information acquisition, an effect first noted by Grossman and Stiglitz (1980). The more other investors learn about a risk, the more informative
prices are and the less valuable it is for other investors to learn about the same risk. If one
risk has the highest marginal utility for signal precision, but capacity is high, then many
investors will learn about that risk, causing its marginal utility to fall and equalize with the
next most valuable risk. With more capacity, the highest two λi ’s will be driven down until
the equate with the next λ, and so forth. This type of equilibrium is called a “waterfilling”
solution (see, Cover and Thomas (1991)). The equilibrium uniquely pins down which risk
factors are being learned about in equilibrium, and how much is learned about them, but
not which investor learns about which risk factor. For simplicity, we restrict attention to
the unique symmetric equilibrium where all skilled investors choose the same allocation of
information precision. However, only the dispersion results (Propositions 3 and 4) depend
on this restriction.
The following sections explain the model’s key predictions: attention allocation, dispersion in investors’ portfolios, average performance, and the effect of recessions on these objects
beyond that of aggregate volatility. For each prediction, we state and prove a proposition.
The next section explains how we test the hypothesis in the data.

1.3

Cyclical Attention Reallocation

Recessions involve changes in the volatility of aggregate shocks and changes in the price
of risk. In order to see the effect of the two recession aspects on the attention allocation
strategies of skilled investors, we consider each separately, beginning with the rise in volatility.
Proposition 1. For each skilled investor j, the optimal attention allocation for risk i (Kij )
is weakly increasing in its variance σi .
The proof of this and subsequent propositions are in the Appendix.
The result tells us that investors prefer to learn more about any shock that has a high
prior payoff variance. Information is most valuable about the most uncertain outcomes. The
shift of attention to aggregate risk in recessions is just one application of this proposition,
but it is the empirically relevant case. Since recessions are times when aggregate volatility
12

increases (while idiosyncratic volatilities do not), it is a time when aggregate shocks are
relatively more valuable to learn about. The converse is true in expansions.
The proposition takes into account not only the effect of a marginal increase of variance on
the marginal value of learning about a risk, and hence on the capacity allocated to that risk,
but also the offsetting equilibrium effect. In any interior equilibrium, attention is reallocated
until the marginal values of learning about any risks that are learned about are equalized.
Thus, when σn rises in recessions, the marginal value of learning more about the aggregate
risk rises, more attention is allocated to the aggregate risk, which offsets the increase in
marginal value until indifference in the marginal values across risk factors is restored. The
net result is always a weakly increasing capacity devoted to the risk whose variance increases.
As the proof shows, the “weakly” increasing refers to the cases where either all capacity is
already allocated to the risk whose variance increases or no capacity is allocated to that risk
and the marginal increase in variance does not change that. In all other cases, when risk i
is one of the risks being learned about prior to the increase in σi , the increase in capacity
devoted to i is strict.
Next, we consider the effect of an increase in the price of risk. An increase in the
price of risk induces managers to allocate even more attention to the shock that is in the
most abundant supply. We have assumed that the aggregate risk is the most abundant. The
additional price of risk effect should show up as an effect of recessions on attention allocation,
over and above what aggregate volatility alone can explain. The parameter that governs the
price of risk in our model is risk aversion. The following result implies that an increase in
risk aversion in recessions is an independent force driving the reallocation of attention from
stock-specific to aggregate shocks.
Proposition 2. If x̄i is sufficiently large then, for each skilled investor j, the optimal attention allocation for risk i (Kij ) is weakly increasing in risk aversion ρ.
The intuition for this result rests on the fact that a shock in abundant supply affects
a large fraction of the value of an investor’s portfolio. Therefore, a marginal reduction
in the uncertainty about this shock reduces total portfolio risk by more than the samesized reduction in the uncertainty about a less abundant shock. In other words, learning
about the abundant shock, which is the aggregate shock, is the most efficient way to reduce
portfolio risk. The more risk averse an agent is, the more attractive allocating attention
to aggregate shocks becomes. Like the previous one, this result takes into account the
equilibrium reallocation of capacity after the increase in risk aversion.

13

These results are robust to many model changes. In the Supplementary Appendix, we
examine versions of the model in which agents learn about the payoffs of assets, rather
than about risks directly (Section S.3) and in which information choices are governed by
an entropy constraint rather than a linear capacity constraint (Section S.4). Both of our
attention allocation results hold in these settings. When the aggregate shock variance rises or
risk aversion increases, agents pay more attention to assets whose returns are most sensitive
to aggregate shocks.
Investors’ optimal attention allocation decisions are reflected in their portfolio holdings.
In recessions, skilled investors predominantly allocate attention to the aggregate payoff shock,
zn . They use the information they observe to form a portfolio that covaries with zn . In times
when they learn that zn will be high, they hold more risky assets whose returns are increasing
in zn . This positive covariance can be seen from equation (10) in which q̃ is increasing in
Ej [f˜] and from equation (9) in which Ej [f˜] is increasing in ηj , which is further increasing
in zn . The positive covariances between the aggregate shock and funds’ portfolio holdings
in recessions, on the one hand, and between stock-specific shocks and the portfolio holdings
in expansions, on the other hand, directly follow from optimal attention allocation decisions
switching over the business cycle. As such, these covariances are the key moments that
enable us to test the attention allocation predictions of the model. We define the empirical
counterparts to these covariances in Section 2.

1.4

Portfolio Dispersion

Since many empirical studies on investment managers detect no outperformance, perhaps
the most controversial implication of the attention reallocation result is that investment
managers are processing information at all. The next four results speak directly to that
implication. They do not identify changes in attention allocation, but they help to distinguish
our theory from non-information-based alternative explanations for mutual fund performance
patterns.
In recessions, as aggregate shocks become more volatile, the firm-specific shocks to assets’
payoffs account for less of the variation, and the comovement in stock payoffs rises. Since
asset payoffs comove more, the payoffs to all passive investment strategies that put fixed
weights on assets also comove more. Dispersion across investor portfolios and portfolio
returns would fall if investment strategies were passive. But when investment managers are
processing information and actively investing based on that information, this prediction is
reversed. To see why, consider a simple example in which there is no learning from prices.
14

A skilled agent is updating beliefs about a random variable f˜ ∼ N(µ, Σ), using a signal
ηj |f˜ ∼ N(f˜, Ση ). Bayes’ law says that the posterior mean is a weighted average of the prior
mean µ and the signal, where each is weighted by their relative precision:
E[f˜|ηj ] = Σ−1 + Σ−1
η

−1

Σ−1 µ + Σ−1
η ηj



(15)

If in recessions, aggregate shock variance σn rises, then the prior beliefs about asset payoffs
become more uncertain: Σ rises and Σ−1 falls. This makes the weight on prior beliefs µ
decrease and the weight on the signal ηj increase. The prior µ is common across agents,
while the signal realization ηj is heterogeneous. When informed managers weigh their heterogeneous signals more, their resulting posterior beliefs become more different from each
other and more different from the beliefs of uninformed managers or investors. More disagreement about asset payoffs results in more heterogeneous portfolios and portfolio returns.
Since price signals are also common, the same result holds once they are incorporated. The
feature of the model that underpins this result is the idiosyncratic component of signal noise.
We could allow signal noise to be correlated across agents, as long as signals are not identical.
Such idiosyncratic signal noise is inherent in the idea of rational inattention.
Thus, the model’s second set of predictions are that in recessions, the cross-sectional
dispersion in funds’ investment strategies and returns should rise.
Proposition 3. If x̄i is sufficiently large then, an increase in variance σi weakly increases
R
¯ ′ (q̃j − q̃)]dj,
¯
(a) the dispersion of fund portfolios, E[(q̃j − q̃)
and (b) the dispersion of portfolio
R
′
2
¯ (f˜ − p̃r)) ]dj.
excess returns, E[((q̃j − q̃)
This result takes into account that when variance of a shock changes, the equilibrium
allocation of attention and equilibrium asset returns change as well. While this is a generic

result for any risk i, the effect is particularly large for the aggregate risk because it affects
every asset and therefore it is in abundant supply. This shows up in the proof as a high x̄n ,
which amplifies the effect of σn on portfolio and return dispersion.
Next, we consider the second effect of recessions: an increase in the price of risk. The
following result shows that, when prices are sufficiently noisy, an increase in the price of risk
increases the dispersion of portfolio returns.
Proposition 4. If σx and x̄n are sufficiently large, then an increase in risk aversion ρ
R
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r))2 ]dj.
increases the dispersion of portfolio excess returns, E[((q̃j − q̃)
When risk aversion rises, skilled investors make smaller bets on their information. These
15

smaller deviations from the market portfolio affect prices less and make prices less informative. The reduced precision of price information implies that agents weigh prices less
and private signals more in their posterior beliefs. Just like priors, information in prices is
common. Thus, weighing common signals less and heterogenous private signals more leads
to higher dispersion in beliefs and therefore in portfolio returns as well.
This effect has to offset a counteracting force. Recall that the optimal portfolio for investor j takes the form q = (1/ρ)Σ̂−1
j (f − pr). If ρ increases, investors scale down their risky
asset positions and q falls. The increase in returns needs to increase dispersion enough to
offset the decrease in dispersion coming from the effect of 1/ρ reducing q. The proof of the
proposition in the Appendix shows that a sufficient condition for the first effect to dominate
is that the elasticity of V1 [f˜ − p̃r] with respect to ρ be greater than 1, which requires a
large enough asset supply variance. The high average supply of aggregate risk is what makes
the nth risk aggregate. In addition to this result, we can sign the effect of a change in risk
aversion on the dispersion of risk-adjusted returns as well, with looser conditions on parameters that produce stronger equilibrium effects through aggregate attention reallocation.
See Supplementary Appendix Section S.6 for a proof. In addition, our numerical example
below confirms that portfolio dispersion increases in risk aversion, even in cases where our
parameter restrictions are not satisfied.

1.5

Fund Performance

To measure performance, we want to measure the portfolio return, adjusted for risk. One risk
adjustment that is both analytically tractable in our model and often used in empirical work
is the certainty equivalent return, which is also an investor’s objective (6). The following
proposition shows that abnormal portfolio returns, defined as the fund’s portfolio return,
q̃j′ (f˜ − p̃r), minus the market return, q̃¯′ (f˜ − p̃r), for skilled funds exceeds that for unskilled
funds and non-fund investors by more when volatility is higher.
Proposition 5. If x̄i is sufficiently large then, for each skilled investor j, an increase in the
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r)].
variance σi weakly increases the portfolio excess return, E[(q̃j − q̃)
Because aggregate risk factor payoffs are more uncertain in recessions (σn is higher),
recessions are times when information is more valuable. The return effect is larger for the
aggregate shock because it depends on how abundant the risk is (x̄n ) and the aggregate
shock is naturally the most abundant one.
Next, we consider the effect of an increase in the price of risk on performance.
16

Proposition 6. If σx and x̄n are sufficiently large then, for each skilled investor j, an
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r)].
increase in risk aversion ρ increases excess return, E[(q̃j − q̃)
The reason why a higher price of risk leads to higher performance is that information
can resolve risk. Therefore, informed managers are compensated for risk that they do not
bear because the information has resolved some of their uncertainty about random asset
payoffs. When the price of risk rises, the value of being able to resolve this risk rises as
well. Put differently, informed funds take larger positions in risky assets because they are
less uncertain about their returns. These larger positions pay off more on average when the
price of risk is high.
The role of the high σx and x̄n is the same as in Proposition 4. And just like for
Proposition 4, we can prove that risk-adjusted returns rise with looser parameter conditions.
See Supplementary Appendix Section S.6. In addition, our numerical example confirms that
when the price of risk increases, average performance of informed funds rises, for a wide
range of parameter values.
Taken together, these results provide two reasons why skilled investors’ advantage over
unskilled investors increases in recessions. Of course, the model predicts that skilled investors
should always outperform unskilled. In practice, this outperformance is difficult to detect.
The model helps to guide the search for skill by explaining why one ought to focus on
recessions as times when skill should be particularly salient.
Measuring Performance: Mapping skill into alpha The previous outperformance results were for abnormal fund returns, measured as the fund’s return minus the market return.
One other way to risk-adjust fund returns, which is common in the empirical literature, is
to estimate a Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) using each fund’s returns and look at
the fund’s α, the intercept of the Security Market Line. This CAPM is estimated using only
information that is in every investor’s information set, which is the unconditional moments
of asset returns. The following result shows that if one constructs such an unconditional
CAPM from the fund returns in our model, the fund α captures information capacity K
(skill) and rises in recessions.
Proposition 7. If the net supply of idiosyncratic risk is small, thenexpected excess portfolio

P
return of fund j is E[Rj ]−r = αj +βj (E[rm ]−r), where αj = i 1/ρ var[f˜i ](σi−1 + Kij ) − 1 −
ρ̄ij .
The model tells us that the CAPM alpha of a fund’s return is increasing in its ability
to process information about each type of risk. But the alpha also varies over the cycle
17

as aggregate risk changes. In recessions, aggregate risk (σn ) increases, which increases αj .
As in Hansen and Richard (1987), the unconditional CAPM correctly prices all portfolios
constructed using only the common information set and assigns them zero alpha. But when
skilled investors, who have a richer information set, construct portfolios, the portfolios will
lie on a different mean-variance frontier and thus achieve a higher alpha.

1.6

Who Underperforms?

The requirement that markets clear implies that not all investors can be successful at investing in the right stock at the right time (stock-picking) or at timing the aggregate market
fluctuations. In each period, someone must make poor stock-picking or market-timing decisions if someone else makes profitable decisions. We explain now why rational, unskilled
investors underperform in equilibrium.
In recessions, unskilled investors have negative timing ability. When the aggregate state
zn is low, most skilled investors sell, pushing down asset prices, p, and making prior expected
returns high. The high expected return (high (µ − pr)) causes uninformed investors to
demand more of the asset (equation (10)). The unskilled demand more because they cannot
distinguish low prices that arise because of information from those that arise from positive
asset supply shocks. Thus, unskilled investors’ holdings covary negatively with aggregate
payoffs, making their market timing measure negative. Since no investors learn about the
aggregate shock in expansions, prices do not fall when unexpected aggregate shocks are
negative and market timing is close to zero for both skilled and unskilled.
Likewise, unskilled investors exhibit negative stock-picking ability in expansions. When
the stock-specific shock zi is low, and some investors know this, they sell and depress the
price of asset i. A low price raises the expected return (µi − pi r). The high expected return
induces unskilled investors to buy more of the asset. Since they buy more of assets that
subsequently have negative asset-specific payoff shocks, these uninformed investors display
negative stock-picking ability.
Note that when there is a positive aggregate supply shock, prices will be lower (Lemma
1), and assets will look more attractive to both uninformed and informed agents, all else
equal. In that case, both informed and uninformed can trade in the same direction because
of the additional asset supply.

18

1.7

Interaction Effects

The previous results describe the effects of aggregate risk and risk aversion separately. But
there is also a subtle interaction between the two. Higher risk aversion amplifies the effect of
aggregate risk on attention allocation, dispersion, and performance. The resulting testable
prediction is that the effect of aggregate volatility on all three outcome variables should be
greater in recessions, when the market price of risk is high. We derive these results in the
Separate Appendix (Section S.7).

1.8

Endogenous Capacity Choice

So far, we have assumed that skilled investment managers choose how to allocate a fixed
information-processing capacity, K. We now extend the model to allow for skilled managers
to add capacity at a cost C (K). We model this cost as a utility penalty, akin to the disutility
from labor in business-cycle models. Since there are no wealth effects in our setting, it
would be equivalent to modeling a cost of capacity through the budget constraint. We
draw three main conclusions. First, the proofs of Propositions 1 and 2 hold for any chosen
level of capacity K, below an upper bound, no matter the functional form of C. The other
propositions also continue to hold because they only depend on the attention reallocation
effects proven in Propositions 1 and 2. Endogenous capacity only has quantitative, not
qualitative implications. Second, because the marginal utility of learning about the aggregate
shock is increasing in its prior variance (Proposition 1), skilled managers choose to acquire
higher capacity in recessions. This extensive-margin effect amplifies our dispersion and
performance results. Third, the degree of amplification depends on the convexity of the
cost function, C (K). The convexity determines how elastic equilibrium capacity choice is
to the cyclical changes in the marginal benefit of learning. The Supplementary Appendix
discusses numerical simulation results from an endogenous-K model; they are similar to our
benchmark results.

2

Bringing the Model to Data

To test the model, we look at various measures of mutual fund investments in recessions and
in non-recession periods. Of course, our model is not a dynamic one. It could be. A simple
dynamic model would amount to a succession of static models that are either in the expansion
or in the recession state. As we stated in the model setup, a recession state would be one in
19

which aggregate risk and the price of risk are both high. Aggregate risk is captured by the
variance parameter σa . We capture changes in the price of risk by varying risk aversion ρ. A
variety of economic mechanisms can generate this kind of time-varying price of risk: external
habits, heterogeneous labor income risk and limited commitment, borrowing constraints, or
a concern for model misspecification (see Hansen (2013)). Since these mechanisms are too
complex to embed in our model, we settle for varying a risk aversion parameter.
Propositions 1 and 2 teach us that both the increase aggregate shock variances and
the increased price of risk prompt attention reallocation toward aggregate risk. Thus, the
prediction is that in recessions, the average amount of attention devoted to aggregate shocks
should increase and the average amount of attention devoted to stock-specific shocks should
decrease. But of course, attention is not directly observable. Learning about a shock allows
managers choose portfolio holdings that covary more with that shock. We see this in the
portfolio first order condition (10). A manager who knows nothing about a shock cannot
possibly hold a portfolio that covaries with the shock. It is not a feasible or measurable
strategy. This covariance argument, combined with the reallocation results leads us to make
the first testable prediction:
Prediction 1. In recessions, portfolios should covary more with the aggregate component of
payoffs. Conversely, in expansions, portfolio holdings should covary more with stock-specific
payoff shocks.
Because recessions are times of high aggregate risk and high risk prices, and both forces
increase dispersion (Propositions 3 and 4), we make the next empirical prediction:
Prediction 2. In recessions, the dispersion of fund portfolios should rise.
Finally, both more aggregate risk and the higher price of risk cause skilled funds to
generate higher returns (Propositions 5 and 6). The skill of these funds should be reflected
in their portfolios’ α, which increases in σn (Proposition 7). Since fund managers are skilled
or unskilled, while other investors are only unskilled, an increase in the skill premium implies
that the average mutual fund’s excess return rises in recessions. Together, these findings lead
us to make the following empirical prediction:
Prediction 3. In recessions, the average fund should earn a higher excess return and have
a higher alpha.
Next, we introduce the empirical measures that we use in Section 3 to test each of these
predictions.
20

2.1

Market-Timing and Stock-Picking Measures

We define a fund’s fundamentals-based timing ability, F timing, as the covariance between its
portfolio weights in deviation from the market portfolio weights, wij − wim , and the aggregate
payoff shock, zn , over a T -period horizon, averaged across assets:
j

F timingtj

N T −1
1 XX j
m
=
(w
− wit+τ
)(bi zn(t+τ +1) ),
T N j i=1 τ =0 it+τ

(16)

where N j is the number of individual assets held by fund j. The portfolio weights are dated
t + τ because they are chosen and thus known at t + τ . The aggregate shock that affects the
payoff of that portfolio is dated t + τ + 1 because that shock is not fully observed until one
period later. Relative to the market, a fund with a high F timing overweights assets that
have high (low) sensitivity to the aggregate shock in anticipation of a positive (negative)
aggregate shock realization and underweights assets with a low (high) sensitivity.
When skilled investment managers allocate attention to stock-specific payoff shocks,
zi , i ∈ {1, . . . , n − 1}, information about zi allows them to choose portfolios that covary
with zi . Fundamentals-based stock-picking ability, F picking, measures the covariance of a
fund’s portfolio weights of each stock, relative to the market, with the stock-specific shock,
zi :
j

F pickingtj

N
1 X j
(wit − witm )(zit+1 ).
= j
N i=1

(17)

How well can the manager choose portfolio weights in anticipation of future asset-specific
payoff shocks is closely linked to her stock-picking ability.
F timing and F picking are closely related to commonly used market-timing and stockpicking variables, which measure how a fund’s holdings of each asset, relative to the market,
covary with the systematic and idiosyncratic components of the stock return. The key difference is that we measure how a portfolio covaries with aggregate and firm-specific fundamentals. We use the fundamentals-based measures because they correspond more closely to the
idea in the model that funds are learning about fundamentals and using signals about those
fundamentals to time the market and pick stocks. The returns-based picking and timing
facts might be explained by managers who forecast sentiment, momentum, liquidity, etc.
Also, since funds affect asset values, but do not directly affect earnings or production, the
returns-based covariance can come from some reverse causality. The fundamentals-based results make it clear that the changing covariance between portfolios and returns comes from
21

the covariance with one-quarter-ahead fundamentals. That offers a much clearer view of
what information fund managers are collecting and processing. It also significantly narrows
down the set of possible explanations consistent with the covariance facts.

2.2

Dispersion Measures

To connect the propositions to the data, we measure portfolio dispersion as the sum of
squared deviations of fund j’s portfolio weight in asset i at time t, witj , from the average
fund’s portfolio weight in asset i at time t, witm , summed over all assets held by fund j, N j :
j

P ortf olio

Dispersionjt

=

N
X
i=1

witj − witm

2

(18)

This measure is similar to the portfolio concentration measure in Kacperczyk, Sialm, and
Zheng (2005) and the active share measure in Cremers and Petajisto (2009). The average
R
dispersion P ortf olio Dispersionjt dj is the same quantity as in Proposition 3, except that
the number of shares q is replaced with portfolio weights w. In recessions, the portfolios of
the informed managers differ more from each other and more from those of the uninformed

investors. Part of this difference comes from a change in the composition of the risky asset
portfolio and part comes from differences in the fraction of assets held in riskless securities.
Fund j’s portfolio weight witj is a fraction of the fund’s assets, including both risky and
riskless, held in asset i. Thus, when one informed fund gets a bearish signal about the market,
its witj for all risky assets i falls. Dispersion can rise when funds take different positions in
the risk-free asset, even if the fractional allocation among the risky assets remains identical.
The higher dispersion across funds’ portfolio strategies translates into a higher crosssectional dispersion in fund abnormal returns (Rj − Rm ). To facilitate comparison with
the data, we define the dispersion of variable X as |X j − X̄|, where X̄ denotes the equally
weighted cross-sectional average across all fund managers (excluding non-fund investors).
When funds get signals about the aggregate state zn that are heterogenous, they take
different directional bets on the market. Some funds tilt their portfolios to high-beta assets
and other funds to low-beta assets, thus creating dispersion in fund betas. To look for
evidence of this mechanism, we form a CAPM regression for fund j and test for an increase
in the beta dispersion in recessions as well.
We measure outperformance by looking at abnormal fund returns, measured as the fund’s
return minus the market return, and several risk-adjusted returns. One way to do that

22

risk adjustment is to estimate a CAPM for each fund’s return and look at the fund α.
Proposition 7 shows that the alpha of a CAPM regression of fund returns on market returns
should capture a fund’s total information capacity, or skill. As a robustness check, we also
compute the α from models with multiple risk factors that are common in the empirical
literature, with the proviso that these additional risk factors are not present in our model.

3

Evidence from Equity Mutual Funds

Our model studies attention allocation over the business cycle, and its consequences for
investors’ strategies. We now turn to a specific set of investors, active U.S. equity mutual
fund managers, to test the predictions of the model. The richness of the data makes the
mutual fund industry a great laboratory for these tests. In principle, similar tests could
be conducted for hedge funds, real estate investment trusts, other professional investment
managers, or even individual investors.

3.1

Data

Our sample builds upon several data sets. We begin with the Center for Research on Security
Prices (CRSP) survivorship bias-free mutual fund database. The CRSP database provides
comprehensive information about fund returns and a host of other fund characteristics, such
as size (total net assets), age, expense ratio, turnover, and load. Given the nature of our
tests and data availability, we focus on actively managed open-end U.S. equity mutual funds.
We further merge the CRSP data with fund holdings data from Thomson Financial. The
total number of funds in our merged sample is 3477.9 We also use the CRSP/Compustat
stock-level database, which is a source of information on individual stocks’ returns, market
capitalizations, book-to-market ratios, momentum, liquidity, and standardized unexpected
earnings (SUE). The aggregate stock market return is the value-weighted average return of
all stocks in the CRSP universe.
We use innovations in monthly seasonally adjusted industrial production, obtained from
the Federal Reserve Statistical Release, as a proxy for aggregate shocks. We measure recessions using the definition of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) business
cycle dating committee. The start of the recession is the peak of economic activity and its
end is the trough. Our aggregate sample spans 312 months of data from January 1980 until
9

The unit of observation is a fund. In Supplementary Appendix S.10, we verify that our results are robust
to using the manager as a unit of observation.

23

December 2005, among which 38 are NBER recession months (12%). We consider several
alternative recession indicators and find our results to be robust.10

3.2

Motivating Fact: Aggregate Risk and Prices of Risk Rise in
Recessions

At the outset, we present empirical evidence for the main assumption in our model: Recessions are periods in which individual stocks contain more aggregate risk and prices of risk
are higher.
Table 1 shows that an average stock’s aggregate risk increases substantially in recessions
whereas the change in idiosyncratic risk is not statistically different from zero. The table
uses monthly returns for all stocks in the CRSP universe. For each stock and each month, we
estimate a CAPM equation based on a twelve-month rolling-window regression, delivering
i
the stock’s beta, βti , and its residual standard deviation, σεt
. We define the aggregate risk of
i m
i
stock i in month t as |βt σt | and its idiosyncratic risk as σεt , where σtm is formed monthly as

the realized volatility from daily return observations. Panel A reports the results from a timeseries regression of the aggregate risk (columns 1 and 2), the idiosyncratic risk (columns 3
and 4), and the ratio of aggregate to idiosyncratic risk (columns 5 and 6), all averaged across
stocks, on the NBER recession indicator variable. The aggregate risk is twenty percent higher
in recessions than it is in expansions (8.04% versus 6.69% per month), an economically and
statistically significant difference. In contrast, the stock’s idiosyncratic risk is not statistically
different in expansions and in recessions. As a result, the ratio of aggregate to idiosyncratic
risk increases from 0.508 in expansions to 0.606 in recessions, and this cyclicality is driven
exclusively by the numerator. The results are similar whether one controls for other aggregate
risk factors (columns 2, 4, and 6) or not (columns 1, 3, and 5).
Panel B reports estimates from pooled (panel) regressions of each stock’s aggregate risk
(columns 1 and 2), idiosyncratic risk (columns 3 and 4), or the ratio of aggregate to idiosyncratic risk (columns 5 and 6) on the recession indicator variable, Recession, and additional
stock-specific control variables including size, book-to-market ratio, and leverage. The panel
results confirm the time-series findings.
A large literature in economics and finance presents evidence supporting the results in
Table 1. First, Ang and Chen (2002), Ribeiro and Veronesi (2002), and Forbes and Rigobon
(2002) document that stocks exhibit more comovement in recessions, consistent with stocks
10

Results are omitted for brevity but are available from the authors upon request.

24

Table 1: Individual Stocks Have More Aggregate Risk in Recessions
For each stock i and month t, we estimate a CAPM equation based on twelve months of data (a twelve-month rolling-window
i . We define stock i’s aggregate
regression). This estimation delivers the stock’s beta, βti , and its residual standard deviation, σεt
i , where σ m is the realized volatility from daily market return
risk in month t as βti σtm and its idiosyncratic risk as σεt
t
1 PN
i m
observations. Panel A reports results from a time-series regression of the average stock’s aggregate risk, N
i=1 βt σt , in
P
N
1
i
columns 1 and 2, of the average idiosyncratic risk, N
i=1 σεt , in columns 3 and 4, and of the ratio of aggregate to average
idiosyncratic risk, in columns 5 and 6, on Recession. Recession is an indicator variable equal to one for every month the
economy is in a recession according to the NBER, and zero otherwise. In columns 2, 4, and 6 we include several aggregate
control variables: the market excess return (MKTPREM), the return on the small-minus-big portfolio (SMB), the return on the
high-minus-low book-to-market portfolio (HML), the return on the up-minus-down momentum portfolio (UMD). The data are
monthly from 1980-2005 (309 months). Standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity.
Panel B reports results of panel regressions of each stock’s aggregate risk, βti σtm , in columns 1 and 2 and of its idiosyncratic
i , in columns 3 and 4, and of the ratio of a stock’s aggregate to idiosyncratic risk, in columns 5 and 6, on Recession.
risk, σεt
In Columns 2, 4, and 6 we include several firm-specific control variables: the log market capitalization of the stock, log(Size),
the ratio of book equity to market equity, B − M , the average return over the past year, M omentum, the stock’s ratio of book
debt to book debt plus book equity, Leverage, and an indicator variable, N ASDAQ, equal to one if the stock is traded on
NASDAQ. All control variables are lagged one month. The data are monthly and cover all stocks in the CRSP universe for
1980-2005. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the stock and time dimensions.
(1)
(2)
Aggregate Risk
Recession

1.348
(0.693)

6.694
(0.204)

1.308
(0.678)
-4.034
(3.055)
8.110
(3.780)
0.292
(5.458)
-4.279
(2.349)
6.748
(0.212)

309
6.85

309
9.70

1.203
(0.242)

0.064
(0.493)

4.924
(0.092)

1.419
(0.238)
-0.145
(0.021)
-0.934
(0.056)
0.097
(0.101)
-0.600
(0.074)
0.600
(0.075)
4.902
(0.095)

1,312,216
0.62

1,312,216
2.90

MKTPREM
SMB
HML
UMD
Constant

Observations
R-squared
Recession
Log(Size)
B-M Ratio
Momentum
Leverage
NASDAQ
Constant

Observations
R-squared

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Idiosyncratic Risk
Aggregate/Idiosyncratic Risk
Panel A: Time-Series Regression
0.058
(1.018)

13.229
(0.286)

0.016
(1.016)
-1.865
(3.043)
12.045
(4.923)
9.664
(8.150)
-1.112
(3.888)
13.196
(0.276)

0.098
(0.027)

0.508
(0.013)

309
309
309
0.10
3.33
8.58
Panel B: Pooled Regression

0.097
(0.027)
-0.215
(0.226)
0.167
(0.199)
-0.308
(0.302)
-0.270
(0.178)
0.513
(0.014)
309
10.52

0.096
(0.021)

12.641
(0.122)

0.510
(0.580)
-1.544
(0.037)
-2.691
(0.086)
2.059
(0.177)
-1.006
(0.119)
1.937
(0.105)
12.592
(0.144)

0.450
(0.009)

0.104
(0.024)
0.043
(0.002)
0.008
(0.004)
-0.040
(0.005)
-0.010
(0.003)
-0.043
(0.005)
0.450
(0.009)

1,312,216
0.000

1,312,216
19.33

1,312,216
0.58

1,312,216
7.56

25

carrying higher systematic risk in recessions. In addition, Schwert (1989, 2011), Hamilton
and Lin (1996), Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel, and Xu (2001), and Engle and Rangel (2008)
show that aggregate stock market return volatility is much higher during periods of low
economic activity. The evidence on the cyclicality of idiosyncratic risk is less unanimous.
Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Saporta-Eksten, and Terry (2012) find that the cross-sectional
dispersion in firm earnings growth rises in recessions. Using a similar measure of stockspecific risk as ours, Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel, and Xu (2001) also report an increase
in firm-level risk in recessions. Exploring the difference with the Campbell et al. (2001)
results, Supplementary Appendix S.8 shows that the countercyclicality of idiosyncratic risk
only holds for a value-weighted measure and only in the Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel, and Xu
(2001) sample. For our sample as well as for a long sample, we find no significant differences
between idiosyncratic risk in expansions and recessions. Finally, we reiterate that what
matters for our theoretical results is that aggregate risk rises by more than idiosyncratic risk
in recessions, a conclusion supported by the last two columns of Table 1.
Our second assumption, that the price of risk rises in recessions, is supported in four ways.
First is an empirical literature that documents the countercyclical nature of risk premia
and Sharpe ratios on equity, bonds, options, and currencies.11 Second, a large theoretical
literature has developed models that generate such counter-cyclical market prices of risk
(see Section 2). Third, Dew-Becker (2012) uses the structure of his model to construct an
empirical proxy for risk aversion and shows it rises in recessions. Fourth, several papers show
that aggregate risk aversion rises in recessions because of properties of aggregation.12

3.3

Testing Predictions 1 and 2: Time-Varying Skill

Turning to our main model predictions, we first test whether skilled investment managers
reallocate their attention over the business cycle in a way that is consistent with measures
of time-varying skill. To estimate time-varying skill, we need measures of F timing and
F picking for each fund j in each month t. We proxy for the aggregate payoff shock with
11

E.g., Fama and French (1989), Cochrane (2006), Ludvigson and Ng (2009), Lettau and Ludvigson (2010),
Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2014), and the references therein. A related fact consistent with countercyclical market prices of risk is high corporate bond yields in recessions despite only modestly higher default
rates, see Chen (2010).
12
See Dumas (1989), Chan and Kogan (2002), and Garleanu and Panageas (2015), among others. In these
models, heterogeneous agents with the same preferences but different risk aversion parameters aggregate
into a representative agent who has wealth-weighted functions of the individual agent’s parameters. Because
more risk-averse agents are more conservative, their relative wealth rises in recessions, making aggregate risk
aversion counter-cyclical.

26

the innovation in log industrial production growth, estimated from an AR(1).13 A time
series of F timingtj is obtained by computing the covariance of the innovations and each fund
j’s portfolio weights (as in equation (16)), using twelve-month rolling windows. Following
equation (17), F picking is computed in each month t as a cross-sectional covariance across
the assets between the fund’s portfolio weights and firm-specific earnings shocks (SUE).
We then estimate the following two equations using pooled (panel) regression model and
calculating standard errors by clustering at the fund and time dimensions.

F pickingtj = a0 + a1 Recessiont + a2 Xjt + ǫjt ,

(19)

F timingtj = a3 + a4 Recessiont + a5 Xjt + εjt ,

(20)

Recessiont is an indicator variable equal to one if the economy in month t is in recession, as
defined by the NBER, and zero otherwise. X is a vector of fund-specific control variables,
including the fund age, the fund size, the average fund expense ratio, the turnover rate, the
percentage flow of new funds, the fund load, the volatility of fund flows, and the fund style
characteristics along the size, value, and momentum dimensions.
Our model predicts that F timing should be higher in recessions, which means that the
coefficient of Recession, a4 , should be positive. Conversely, the fund’s portfolio holdings
and its returns covary more with subsequent firm-specific shocks in expansions. Therefore,
our hypothesis is that F picking should fall in recessions, or that a1 should be negative.
The parameter estimates appear in columns 1, 2, 4, and 5 of Table 2. Column 1 shows
the results for a univariate regression model. In expansions, F timing is not different from
zero, implying that funds’ portfolios do not comove with future macroeconomic information
in those periods. In recessions, F timing increases. The increase amounts to ten percent of a
standard deviation of F timing. It is measured precisely, with a t-statistic of 3. To remedy
the possibility of a bias in the coefficient due to omitted fund characteristics correlated with
recession times, we turn to a multivariate regression. Our findings, in column 2, remain
largely unaffected by the inclusion of the control variables. Columns 4 and 5 of Table 2 show
that the average F picking across funds is positive in expansions and substantially lower in
recessions. The effect is statistically significant at the 1% level. It is also economically significant: F picking decreases by approximately ten percent of one standard deviation. In sum,
the data support both main predictions of the theory: Portfolio holdings are more sensitive
13
Our results are robust to using industrial productions growth itself. Our results are also robust to
measuring aggregate shocks to fundamentals as innovations in non-farm employment growth

27

Table 2: Attention Allocation is Cyclical
Dependent variables: Fund j’s F timingtj is defined in equation (16), where the rolling window T is 12 months and the aggregate
shock at+1 is the change in industrial production growth between t and t + 1. A fund j’s F pickingtj is defined as in equation
(17), where sit+1 is the change in asset i’s earnings growth between t and t + 1. All are multiplied by 10,000 for readability.
Independent variables: Recession is an indicator variable equal to one for every month the economy is in a recession according
to the NBER, and zero otherwise. Log(Age) is the natural logarithm of fund age in years. Log(T N A) is the natural logarithm
of a fund total net assets. Expenses is the fund expense ratio. T urnover is the fund turnover ratio. F low is the percentage
growth in a fund’s new money. Load is the total fund load. F lowV ol is the volatility of fund flows, measures from the last
twelve months of fund flows. The last three control variables measure the style of a fund along the size, value, and momentum
dimensions, calculated from the scores of the stocks in their portfolio in that month. They are omitted for brevity. All control
variables are demeaned. Flow and Turnover are winsorized at the 1% level. P riceof Risk is an indicator variable for periods
with high default spread. Default spread is defined as a difference in yields of Baa and Aaa-rated U.S. corporate bonds. Price
of risk equals one if default spread is in the highest 10% of months in the sample. V olatility is an indicator variable for periods
of high volatile earnings. We calculate the twelve-month rolling-window standard deviation of the year-to-year log change in
the earnings of S&P 500 index constituents; the earnings data are from Robert Shiller for 1926-2008. Volatility equals one if
this standard deviation is in the highest 10% of months in the 1926-2008 sample. During 1985-2005, 12% of months are such
high volatility months. The data are monthly and cover the period 1980 to 2005. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered
by fund and time.
(1)
Recession

0.011
(0.003)

(2)
Ftiming
0.012
(0.003)

Price of Risk
Volatility
Log(Age)

Constant

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.000)
-0.208
(0.219)
-0.004
(0.001)
-0.010
(0.011)
0.006
(0.022)
-0.006
(0.017)
0.000
(0.002)

Observations
R-squared

221,488
0.03

221,488
0.09

Log(TNA)
Expenses
Turnover
Flow
Load
Flow Vol

(3)

(4)
-0.742
(0.138)

0.019
(0.012)
0.003
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.000)
-0.208
(0.219)
-0.004
(0.001)
-0.010
(0.011)
0.006
(0.023)
-0.004
(0.017)
-0.001
(0.001)
221,488
0.08

(5)
Fpicking
-0.680
(0.126)

(6)

3.082
(0.069)

0.447
(0.061)
-0.130
(0.029)
96.748
(11.200)
-0.260
(0.063)
0.637
(0.652)
-9.851
(1.951)
6.684
(1.042)
3.238
(0.107)

-2.780
(0.514)
-0.440
(0.123)
0.040
(0.144)
-0.225
(0.052)
-90.819
(21.241)
0.182
(0.087)
1.305
(0.526)
-9.876
(5.322)
3.931
(1.164)
3.119
(0.072)

165,029
0.03

165,029
0.25

165,029
0.21

to aggregate shocks in recessions and more sensitive to firm-specific shocks in expansions.
These results differ from Kacperczyk, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2014) who
measure timing and picking as covariances with returns, rather than covariances with fundamental payoffs. The return-based results in Kacperczyk, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2014) could, in principle, be explained by funds who forecast non-fundamental return
drivers such as sentiment, momentum, liquidity, etc. That would be harder to reconcile with
an information-processing theory like ours. In unreported results, we construct a measure of
28

covariation of portfolio weights with innovations to the Baker and Wurgler (2006) sentiment
index. We subsequently correlate this measure with the (return-based) timing measure, but
find no relationship between the two quantities. In contrast, F timing shows a strong positive correlation with the return-based timing measure, highlighting that managers seem to
adjust portfolio weights in anticipation of fundamental news.
Testing for Separate Effects of Volatility and Price of Risk. To identify a more
nuanced prediction of the model, we can split the recession effect into that which comes
from aggregate volatility and that which comes from an increased price of risk. Proposition
1 predicts that an increase in aggregate volatility alone should cause managers to reallocate
attention to aggregate shocks. Furthermore, there should be an additional effect of recessions,
after controlling for aggregate volatility, that comes from the increase in the price of risk
(Proposition 2). To test for these two separate effects, we re-estimate the previous results
with both an indicator for price of risk and an indicator for high aggregate payoff volatility.
The price of risk indicator variable equals one in months with the highest level of default
spread where default spread is defined as a difference in yields between BBB and AAArated bonds. The high-volatility indicator variable equals one in months with the highest
volatility of aggregate earnings growth, where aggregate volatility is estimated from Shiller’s
S&P 500 earnings growth data.14 We include both high price of risk and high aggregate
payoff volatility indicators as explanatory variables in an empirical horse race.
Columns 3 and 6 of Table 2 show that both price of risk and volatility contribute to
a lower F picking in expansions. For the F timing result, the price of risk effect is much
stronger and drives out some of the volatility effect, while for the F picking result both price
of risk and volatility contribute to a large degree. Clearly, there is an effect of recessions
beyond the one coming through volatility. This is consistent with the predictions of our
model, where recessions are characterized both by an increase in aggregate payoff volatility
and an increase in the price of risk. In the Supplementary Appendix (Section S.9), we
also explore a non-linear volatility specification and find the same pattern but somewhat
stronger effects for the highest-volatility periods. Finally, when we interact volatility with a
recession indicator and with an expansion indicator, we find the strongest effects of volatility
in recessions. This is consistent with the model’s prediction that the effect of aggregate risk
14

We calculate the twelve-month rolling-window standard deviation of aggregate earnings growth. The
volatility cutoff selects 6% of months. Of the high-volatility periods, 28% are recessions. Of all other
periods (when high-volatility indicator is 0), 10.6% are recessions. Conversely, 14% of recessions are also
high-volatility periods whereas only 4.8% of expansions are high-volatility periods.

29

(volatility) should be strong in recessions, when the price of risk is high (Section 1.7).

3.4

Testing Predictions 3 and 4: Dispersion

The second main prediction of the model states that heterogeneity in fund investment strategies and portfolio returns rises in recessions. To test this hypothesis, we estimate the following regression specification, using various return and investment heterogeneity measures,
generically denoted as Dispersionjt , the dispersion of fund j at month t.
Dispersionjt = g0 + g1 Recessiont + g2 Xjt + ǫjt ,

(21)

The definitions of Recession and other controls mirror those in regression (19). Our coefficient of interest is g1 .
The first dispersion measure we examine is P ortf olio Dispersion, defined in equation
(18). It measures a deviation of a fund’s investment strategy from a passive market strategy,
and hence, in equilibrium, from the strategies of other investors. The results in columns
1 and 2 of Table 3 indicate an increase in average P ortf olio Dispersion across funds in
recessions. The increase is statistically significant at the 1% level. It is also economically
significant: The value of portfolio dispersion in recessions goes up by about 15% of a standard
deviation.
Since dispersion in fund strategies should generate dispersion in fund returns, we next
look for evidence of higher return dispersion in recessions. To measure dispersion, we use the
absolute deviation between fund j’s return and the equally weighted cross-sectional average,
|returnjt − returnt |, as the dependent variable in (21). Columns 5 and 6 of Table 3 show that
return dispersion increases by 17% in recessions. Finally, portfolio and return dispersion in
recessions should come from different directional bets on the market. This should show up as
an increase in the dispersion of portfolio betas. Columns 3 and 4 show that the CAPM-beta
dispersion increases by 36% in recessions, all consistent with the predictions of our model.
These findings are robust. Counter-cyclical dispersion in funds’ portfolio strategies is
also found in measures of fund style shifting and sectoral asset allocation. The dispersion in
returns is also found for abnormal returns and fund alphas. Results are available on request.
Testing for Separate Effects of Volatility and Price of Risk. Propositions 3 and
4 tell us that return dispersion increases in recessions for two reasons. One is that the
volatility of aggregate shocks increases and the other reason is that the price of risk increases.
30

Table 3: Portfolio and Return Dispersion Rise in Recessions
Dependent variables: Portfolio dispersion is the Herfindahl index of portfolio weights in stocks i ∈ {1, · · · , N }
PN
j
m 2
in deviation from the market portfolio weights i=1 (wit
− wit
) × 100. Return dispersion is |returnjt −
returnt |, where return denotes the (equally weighted) cross-sectional average. The CAPM beta comes from
twelve-month rolling-window regressions of fund-level excess returns on excess market returns (and returns
on SMB, HML, and MOM). Beta dispersion is constructed analogously to return dispersion. The right-hand
side variables, the sample period, and the standard error calculation are the same as in Table 2.

Recession

(1)
(2)
Portfolio Dispersion
0.204
0.118
(0.027)
(0.025)

(3)
(4)
Beta Dispersion
0.083
0.088
(0.015)
(0.014)

0.228
(0.006)

-0.005
(0.002)
0.004
(0.001)
4.162
(0.212)
0.013
(0.001)
-0.004
(0.018)
-0.318
(0.041)
0.075
(0.027)
0.228
(0.006)

(6)
(7)
Return Dispersion
0.316
0.380
(0.147)
(0.146)
0.188
(0.088)
0.637
(0.201)
-0.121
-0.108
(0.017)
(0.018)
0.043
0.035
(0.009)
(0.010)
28.330
25.526
(2.621)
(2.519)
0.090
0.076
(0.013)
(0.015)
-0.230
-0.280
(0.223)
(0.218)
-4.071
-3.519
(0.509)
(0.517)
1.570
1.905
(0.240)
(0.242)
1.904
1.899
1.843
(0.084)
(0.077)
(0.078)

224,130
1.35

224,130
8.10

227,141
0.19

Price of Risk
Volatility
Log(Age)

Constant

1.525
(0.024)

0.210
(0.028)
-0.165
(0.014)
31.986
(4.867)
-0.113
(0.026)
-0.230
(0.108)
-1.658
(0.900)
2.379
(0.304)
1.524
(0.022)

Observations
R-squared

227,141
0.10

227,141
4.80

Log(TNA)
Expenses
Turnover
Flow
Load
Flow Vol

(5)

227,141
7.00

227,141
7.83

We can disentangle these two effects by regressing return dispersion on volatility and price
of risk simultaneously. The model would predict that volatility should be a significant
determinant of dispersion and that after controlling for volatility, there should be some
additional explanatory power of recessions that comes from the price of risk effect.
Column 7 of Table 3 shows that both the price of risk and the volatility effects are present
in the data. Both are associated with a significant increase in the dispersion of returns. The
volatility and price of risk fluctuations both have significant effects on portfolio dispersion,
with the effect of volatility being somewhat larger. Similar results are found for the other
dispersion measures. A non-linear volatility specification in the Supplementary Appendix
shows that the effect of volatility on return dispersion is strongest in high-volatility periods.
Both recession and high-volatility indicators are significant when a recession indicator is used

31

instead of the price of risk as explanatory variable. Finally, the volatility effect on dispersion
is significant both in recessions and expansions. But the fact that it is twice as strong in
recessions supports the interaction effect predicted by the theory (Section 1.7).

3.5

Testing Predictions 5 and 6: Performance

The third prediction of our model is that recessions are times when information allows funds
to earn higher average risk-adjusted returns. Empirical work by Moskowitz (2000), Kosowski
(2011), Glode (2011), and de Souza and Lynch (2012) also documents such evidence. Their
results are based on time-series analysis, while we account for differences in fund size, age,
turnover, flows, loads, style and flow volatility, using the following regression specification:
P erf ormancejt = c0 + c1 Recessiont + c2 Xjt + ǫjt

(22)

where P erf ormancejt denotes fund j’s performance in month t, measured as fund abnormal
returns, or CAPM, three-factor, or four-factor alphas. All returns are net of management
fees. The coefficient of interest is c1 .
Column 1 of Table 4 shows that the average fund’s net return is statistically indistinguishable from zero in expansions. But the coefficient of Recession is 38bp per month, implying
that the average mutual fund’s abnormal return is 4.6% per year higher in recessions. This
difference is highly statistically significant and increases further after we control for fund
characteristics (column 2). Similar results (columns 3 and 4) obtain when we use the CAPM
alpha as a measure of fund performance, except that the net alpha is now significantly negative in expansions. In recessions, the 34bp per month higher net alpha corresponds to 4%
per year. When we use alphas from the three- and four-factor models, the recession return
premium diminishes (columns 5-8). But in recessions, the four-factor alpha still represents a
non-trivial 1% per year risk-adjusted excess return, 1.6% higher (significant at the 1% level)
than the -0.6% recorded in expansions.
The advantage of this cross-sectional regression model is that it allows us to include
fund-specific control variables. The disadvantage is that performance is measured using
past twelve-month rolling-window regressions. Thus, a given observation can be classified
as a recession when some or even all of the remaining eleven months of the window are
expansions. To verify the robustness of our cross-sectional results, we also employ a timeseries approach.15 We explore alternative performance measures, such as gross fund returns,
15

In each month, we form the equally weighted portfolio of funds and calculate its net return, in excess of

32

Table 4: Fund Performance Improves in Recessions
Dependent variables: Abnormal Return is the fund return minus the market return. The alphas come from twelve-month
rolling-window regressions of fund-level excess returns on excess market returns for the CAPM alpha, additionally on the size
(SMB) and the book-to-market (HML) factors for the three-factor alpha, and additionally on the momentum (UMD) factor
for the four-factor alpha. The independent variables, the sample period, and the standard error calculations are the same as in
Table 2.

Recession

(1)
(2)
Abnormal Return
0.384
0.433
(0.056)
(0.059)

(3)
(4)
CAPM Alpha
0.339
0.399
(0.048)
(0.050)

(5)
(6)
3-Factor Alpha
0.043
0.062
(0.034)
(0.026)

-0.060
(0.025)

-0.032
(0.008)
0.040
(0.004)
-0.929
(0.892)
-0.054
(0.010)
2.308
(0.172)
-0.810
(0.174)
1.025
(0.137)
-0.065
(0.024)

-0.059
(0.020)

-0.023
(0.006)
0.018
(0.003)
-5.793
(0.720)
-0.087
(0.010)
1.510
(0.096)
-0.143
(0.129)
1.461
(0.109)
-0.061
(0.018)

(8)
(9)
4-Factor Alpha
0.108
0.131
(0.041)
(0.033)
0.052
(0.031)
0.149
(0.061)
-0.035
-0.036
(0.006)
(0.006)
0.019
0.010
(0.003)
(0.003)
-5.970
-8.277
(0.677)
(1.248)
-0.076
-0.068
(0.008)
(0.009)
1.386
1.544
(0.096)
(0.056)
-0.371
-0.205
(0.139)
(0.200)
1.210
1.311
(0.104)
(0.109)
-0.051
-0.053
-0.066
(0.023)
(0.021)
(0.021)

224,130
1.15

224,130
10.70

224,130
0.03

224,130
6.20

224,130
0.16

Price of Risk
Volatility
Log(Age)

Constant

-0.032
(0.064)

-0.015
(0.021)
0.023
(0.013)
-5.120
(2.817)
0.021
(0.039)
2.127
(0.672)
-0.698
(0.457)
-0.106
(0.588)
-0.036
(0.063)

Observations
R-squared

224,130
0.01

224,130
0.57

Log(TNA)
Expenses
Turnover
Flow
Load
Flow vol

(7)

224,130
5.50

224,130
5.16

gross alphas, or the information ratio (the ratio of the CAPM alpha to the CAPM residual
volatility). Finally, we find similar results when we lead alpha on the left-hand side by one
month instead of using a contemporaneous alpha. All results point in the same direction:
Outperformance increases in recessions.
Testing for Separate Effects of Volatility and Price of Risk. As before, two forces
increase the performance of funds relative to non-funds in recessions: the increase in volatility
and the increase in the price of risk (Propositions 5 and 6). Column 9 of Table 4 shows that
the data are consistent with each force having a distinct effect on fund outperformance. We
use the 4-factor alpha as the dependent variable for this exercise because we want to avoid
the risk-free rate. We then regress this time series of fund portfolio returns on Recession and common risk
factors, adjusting standard errors for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation.

33

conflating more risk taking in recessions with greater fund outperformance in recessions.
When we regress each fund’s 4-factor alpha on a price of risk indicator and a volatility
measure, both have positive, significant coefficients. We also estimated the effect of price of
risk and volatility on the other three measures of performance. The results are qualitatively
similar but quantitatively stronger. A non-linear volatility specification shows that the effect
of volatility on performance is strongest in high-volatility periods (Supplementary Appendix
S.9). In a specification that adds the recession indicator both recession and high-volatility
indicators retain significance. The volatility effect is only significant in recessions. These
results suggest that fund outperformance in recessions is due mostly to the higher volatility
of aggregate shocks and is due to a lesser extent to the increased price of risk. But the fact
that both variables have a significant relationship with fund outperformance, dispersion,
and attention, in the direction predicted by the theory offers solid support for the model.
Furthermore, the fact that the volatility effect is four times as strong in recessions as in
expansions is empirical support for the interaction effect between volatility and price of risk
predicted by the model.

4

Conclusion

Do investment managers add value for their clients? The answer to this question matters
for issues ranging from the discussion of market efficiency to practical portfolio advice for
households. The large amount of randomness in financial asset returns makes it a difficult
question to answer. The multi-billion investment management industry is first and foremost
an information-processing business. We model investment managers not only as agents
making optimal portfolio decisions, but also as human beings with finite mental capacity
(attention), who optimally allocate that scarce capacity to process information at each point
in time. Since the optimal attention allocation varies with the state of the economy, so do
investment strategies and fund returns. As long as a subset of skilled investment managers
can process information about future asset payoffs, the model predicts a higher covariance
of portfolio holdings with aggregate asset payoff shocks, more cross-sectional dispersion in
portfolio investment strategies and returns across funds, and a higher average outperformance
in recessions. We observe these patterns in investments and returns of actively managed
U.S. mutual funds. Hence, the data are consistent with a world in which some investment
managers have skill.
On the technical side, our paper contributes a novel change-of variable technique to solve
34

models with normal signals, but arbitrary signal structures. These tools can be used to generalize the information assumptions in related models of rational inattention, a generalization
advocated by Sims (2006).
Beyond the mutual fund industry, a sizeable fraction of GDP currently comes from industries that produce and process information (consulting, business management, product
design, marketing analysis, accounting, rating agencies, equity analysts, etc.). Ever increasing access to information has made the problem of how to best allocate a limited amount
of information-processing capacity ever more relevant. While information choices have consequences for real outcomes, they are often poorly understood because they are difficult to
measure. By predicting how information choices are linked to observable variables (such as
the state of the economy) and by tying information choices to real outcomes (such as portfolio investment), we show how models of information choices can be brought to the data. This
information-choice-based approach could be useful in examining other information-processing
sectors of the economy.

References
Ang, A., and J. Chen (2002): “Asymmetric correlations of equity portfolios,” Journal of Financial Economics, 63 (3), 443–94.
Baker, M., L. Litov, J. Wachter, and J. Wurgler (2010): “Can mutual fund managers
pick stocks? Evidence from their trades prior to earnings announcements,” Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis, 45(5), 1111–31.
Baker, M., and J. Wurgler (2006): “Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock returns,”
Journal of Finance, 61(4), 1645–1680.
Berk, J., and R. C. Green (2004): “Mutual fund flows and performance in rational markets,”
Journal of Political Economy, 112, 1269–95.
Berk, J., and J. H. van Binsbergen (2015): “Measuring managerial skill in the mutual fund
industry,” Journal of Financial Economics, 118 (1), 1–20.
Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta-Eksten, and S. J. Terry (2012):
“Really uncertain business cycles,” NBER Working Paper No 18245.
Campbell, J., M. Lettau, B. Malkiel, and Y. Xu (2001): “Have individual stocks become
more volatile? An empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk,” Journal of Finance, 56 (1), 1–44.

35

Chan, Y. L., and L. Kogan (2002): “Catching up with the Joneses: Heterogeneous preferences
and the dynamics of asset prices,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(6), 1255–85.
Chapman, D., R. Evans, and Z. Xu (2010): “The portfolio choices of young and old active
mutual fund managers,” Working Paper, Boston College.
Chen, H. (2010): “Macroeconomic conditions and the puzzles of credit spreads and capital structure,” Journal of Finance, 65(6), 2171–12.
Chevalier, J., and G. Ellison (1999): “Career concerns of mutual fund managers,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 104, 389–432.
Chien, Y., H. Cole, and H. Lustig (2011): “A multiplier approach to understanding the macro
implications of household finance,” Review of Economic Studies, 78 (1), 199–234.
Cochrane, J. H. (2006): “Financial markets and the real economy,” in International Library of
Critical Writings in Financial Economics, vol. 18. London: Edward Elgar.
Cover, T., and J. Thomas (1991): Elements of information theory. John Wiley and Sons, New
York, New York, first edn.
Cremers, M., and A. Petajisto (2009): “How active is your fund manager? A new measure
that predicts performance,” Review of Financial Studies, 22, 3329–65.
Cuoco, D., and R. Kaniel (2011): “Equilibrium prices in the presence of delegated portfolio
management,” Journal of Financial Economics, 101(2), 264–96.
de Souza, A., and A. W. Lynch (2012): “Does mutual fund performance vary over the business
cycle?,” Working Paper, Fordham University and New York University.
Dew-Becker, I. (2012): “A model of time-varying risk premia with habits and production,”
Working Paper, Harvard.
Dumas, B. (1989): “Two-person dynamic equilibrium in the capital market,” Review of Financial
Studies, 2 (2), 157–88.
Engle, R., and J. Rangel (2008): “The spline-GARCH model for low-frequency volatility and
its global macroeconomic causes,” Review of Financial Studies, 21 (3), 1187–1222.
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (1989): “Business conditions and expected returns on stocks
and bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics, 25 (1), 23–49.
Forbes, K., and R. Rigobon (2002): “No contagion, only interdependence: Measuring stock
co-movements,” Journal of Finance, 57, 2223–2261.
Garleanu, N., and S. Panageas (2015): “Young, old, conservative and bold: The implications
of heterogeneity and finite lives for asset pricing,” Journal of Political Economy, 123(3), 670–85.
Glode, V. (2011): “Why mutual funds underperform?,” Journal of Financial Economics, 99 (3),
546–59.

36

Grossman, S., and J. Stiglitz (1980): “On the impossibility of informationally efficient markets,” American Economic Review, 70(3), 393–408.
Hamilton, J. D., and G. Lin (1996): “Stock market volatility and the business cycle,” Journal
of Applied Econometrics, 11 (5), 573–93.
Hansen, L., and S. Richard (1987): “The role of conditional information in deducing testable
restrictions implied by dynamic asset pricing models,” Econometrica, 55(3), 587–613.
Hansen, L. P. (2013): Handbook of the Economics of Financechap. Risk pricing over alternative
investment horizons, pp. 1571–1611. Elsevier.
Huang, J., C. Sialm, and H. Zhang (2011): “Risk shifting and mutual fund performance,”
Review of Financial Studies, 24 (8), 2575–2616.
Kacperczyk, M., and A. Seru (2007): “Fund manager use of public information: New evidence
on managerial skills,” Journal of Finance, 62, 485–528.
Kacperczyk, M., C. Sialm, and L. Zheng (2005): “On the industry concentration of actively
managed equity mutual funds,” Journal of Finance, 60, 1983–2012.
(2008): “Unobserved actions of mutual funds,” Review of Financial Studies, 21, 2379–2416.
Kacperczyk, M., S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and L. Veldkamp (2014): “Time-varying fund
manager skill,” Journal of Finance, 69, 1455–1484.
Kaniel, R., and P. Kondor (2013): “The delegated Lucas tree,” Review of Financial Studies,
26(4), 929–84.
Koijen, R. (2014): “The cross-section of managerial ability, incentives, and risk preferences,”
Journal of Finance, 69(3), 1051–1098.
Kosowski, R. (2011): “Do mutual funds perform when it matters most to investors? US mutual
fund performance and risk in recessions and expansions,” Quarterly Journal of Finance, 1 (3),
607–64.
Lettau, M., and S. Ludvigson (2010): “Measuring and modeling variation in the risk-return
tradeoff,” in Handbook of Financial Econometrics, ed. by Y. Ait-Sahalia, and L. P. Hansen,
vol. 1. Elsevier Science B.V., North Holland.
Ludvigson, S., and S. Ng (2009): “Macro factors in bond risk premia,” Review of Financial
Studies, 22, 5027–67.
Lustig, H., N. Roussanov, and A. Verdelhan (2014): “Countercyclical currency risk premia,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 111(3), 527–553.
Maćkowiak, B., E. Moench, and M. Wiederholt (2009): “Sectoral price data and models
of price setting,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 56S, 78–99.
Maćkowiak, B., and M. Wiederholt (2009): “Optimal sticky prices under rational inattention,” American Economic Review, 99 (3), 769–803.

37

(2015): “Business cycle dynamics under rational inattention,” Review of Economic Studies,
82(4), 1502–32.
Mamaysky, H., and M. Spiegel (2002): “A theory of mutual funds: Optimal fund objectives
and industry organization,” Working Paper Yale School of Management.
Mondria, J. (2010): “Portfolio choice, attention allocation, and price comovement,” Journal of
Economic Theory, 145, 1837–64.
Moskowitz, T. J. (2000): “Discussion of mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition
into stock-picking talent, style, transactions costs, and expenses,” Journal of Finance, 55, 1695–
1704.
Pástor, L., and R. F. Stambaugh (2012): “On the size of the active management industry,”
Journal of Political Economy, 120, 740–81.
Ribeiro, R., and P. Veronesi (2002): “Excess co-movement of international stock markets in
bad times: A rational expectations equilibrium model,” Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Schwert, G. W. (1989): “Why does stock market volatility change over time?,” Journal of
Finance, 44(5), 1115–53.
(2011): “Stock volatility during the recent financial crisis,” European Financial Management, 17 (5), 789–805.
Simon, H. (1971): Computers, communications, and the public interestchap. Designing organizations for an information-rich world. The Johns Hopkins Press.
Sims, C. (2003): “Implications of rational inattention,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(3),
665–90.
(2006): “Rational inattention: beyond the linear-quadratic case,” American Economic
Review, Papers and Proceedings, May, 158–63.
Van Nieuwerburgh, S., and L. Veldkamp (2010): “Information acquisition and underdiversification,” Review of Economic Studies, 77 (2), 779–805.
Veldkamp, L. (2011): Information choice in macroeconomics and finance. Princeton University
Press.

38

A

Proofs

A.1

Useful notation, matrices and derivatives

All the following matrices are diagonal with ii entry given by:
1. Precision of the information prices convey about shock i: (Σ−1
p )ii =

1
−1 2
ρ2 σx (Σ̄η )ii

=

K̄i2
ρ2 σx

−1
= σip

−1
2. Precision of posterior belief about shock i for an investor j is σ̂ij
, which is equivalent to
−1
−1
−1
(Σ̂−1
+ Σ−1
+ Kij +
j )ii = (Σ
ηj + Σp )ii = σi

K̄i2
−1
= σ̂ij
ρ2 σx

(23)

R
3. Average signal precision: (Σ̄−1
where K̄i ≡ Kij dj. Since we focus on symmetric equiη )ii = K̄i ,
libria and the fraction of skilled investors is χ, K̄i = χKij for any skilled investor j.
4. Average posterior precision of shock i: σ̄i−1 ≡ σi−1 + K̄i +


K̄ 2
Σ̄ii = [ σi−1 + K̄i + ρ2 σix ]−1 = σ̄i , with derivatives:
∂ σ̄i
=
∂σi



σ̄i
σi

2

K̄i2
ρ2 σx .

The average variance is therefore

> 0,

∂ σ̄i
2 σ̄i2
=
> 0.
∂ρ
ρ σip

(24)
(25)

R
5. Difference from average posterior beliefs: Recall that Σ̄−1
≡ Σ−1
η
ηj dj is the average private signal
R −1
−1
−1
−1
−1
precision and that Σ̄
≡ Σ̂j dj = Σ + Σp + Σ̄η is the average posterior precision. Define
∆ as the difference between the precision of an informed investor’s posterior beliefs and the average
posterior precision. Since the Σ−1 + Σ−1
p terms are equal for all investors, this quantity is also equal to
the difference between the precision of an informed investor’s private signals and the average private
signal precision:
−1
−1
∆ ≡ Σ̂−1
= Σ−1
(26)
j − Σ̄
ηj − Σ̄η .
In symmetric information choice equilibria, ∆ = (1 − χ)Σ−1
ηj for any skilled investor j.
6. Ex-ante mean and variance of returns: Using Lemma 1 and the coefficients given by (42), we can
write the risk factor return as:
f˜ − p̃r

= (I − B)z − Cx − A


 
′
1
= Σ̄ Σ−1 z + ρ I + 2 Σ̄−1
x + ρΣ̄x̄.
ρ σx η

This expression is a constant plus a linear combination of two normal variables, which is also a normal
variable. Therefore, we can write
f˜ − p̃r = V 1/2 u + w,
(27)
where u is a standard normally distributed random variable u ∼ N (0, I), and w is a non-random
vector measuring the ex-ante mean of excess returns
w ≡ ρΣ̄x̄.

39

(28)

and V is the ex-ante variance matrix of excess returns:
"


′ #
′
′
1
1
V ≡ Σ̄ Σ−1 + ρ2 σx I + 2 Σ̄−1
I + 2 Σ̄−1
Σ̄
ρ σx η
ρ σx η



′
1
1
−1′ −1
−1
Σ̄
Σ̄
Σ̄
+
Σ̄
)
+
= Σ̄ Σ−1 + ρ2 σx I + 2 (Σ̄−1
η
η
ρ σx η
ρ4 σx2 η


′
1
−1′ −1
= Σ̄ Σ−1 + ρ2 σx I + (Σ̄η−1 + Σ̄−1
)
+
Σ̄
Σ̄
Σ̄
η
η
ρ2 σx η
i
h
′
−1
Σ̄
= Σ̄ ρ2 σx I + Σ̄−1
+ Σ−1 + Σ̄−1
η
η + Σp
h
i
′
= Σ̄ ρ2 σx I + Σ̄−1
+ Σ̄−1 Σ̄.
η

The first line uses E[xx′ ] = σx I and E[zz ′] = Σ, the fourth line uses (43) and the fifth line uses
−1
Σ̄−1 = Σ−1 + Σ−1
p + Σ̄η .
This variance matrix V is a diagonal matrix. Its diagonal elements are:


−1
Vii = (Σ̄ ρ2 σx I + Σ̄−1
Σ̄)ii
η + Σ̄
=

σ̄i [1 + (ρ2 σx + K̄i )σ̄i ].

(29)

Diagonals of V have the following derivatives (using (24) and (25)):
∂Vii
∂σi
∂Vii
∂ρ



σ̄i
σi

2


1 + 2(ρ2 σx + K̄i )σ̄i > 0


1
= 2ρσx σ̄i2 1 + 2
(1 + 2(ρ2 σx + K̄i )σ̄i ) > 0
ρ σx σip
=

(30)
(31)

7. The elasticity of Vii with respect to ρ is


∂Vii ρ
1
ρ
2
2
= 2ρσx σ̄i 1 + 2
(1 + 2(ρ σx + K̄i )σ̄i )
2
∂ρ Vii
ρ σx σip
σ̄i [1 + (ρ σx + K̄i )σ̄i ]


2ρ2 σx σ̄i
1
2
=
1
+
(1
+
2(ρ
σ
+
K̄
)σ̄
)
x
i
i
ρ2 σx σip
[1 + (ρ2 σx + K̄i )σ̄i ]
The second term is always larger than one. We look for a sufficient condition that also makes the first
term larger than one:
2ρ2 σx σ̄i

>

1 + (ρ2 σx + K̄i )σ̄i

ρ2 σx

>

σ̄i−1 + K̄i

ρ2 σx

>

σi−1 + 2K̄i +

K̄i2
ρ2 σx

(32)

Since the LHS is increasing in σx and the RHS is decreasing in σx , if σx is sufficiently high, the
elasticity of Vii with respect to ρ becomes larger than one.

40

A.2

Solving the Model

Step 1: Portfolio Choices From the FOC, the optimal portfolio of risk factors chosen by investor
j is
q̃j =

1 −1
Σ̂ (Ej [f˜] − p̃r)
ρ j

where Ej [f˜] and Σ̂j depend on the skill of the investor.
Next, we compute the risk factor portfolio of the average investor.
Z
Z
1
˜
q̃¯ ≡ q̃j dj =
Σ̂−1
j (Ej [f ] − p̃r)dj
ρ
Z

1
−1
−1
−1
=
Σ̂j (Γ µ + Ej [z])dj − Σ̄ p̃r
ρ
Z

1
−1
−1
−1
−1
=
Σηj ηj dj + Σp ηp + Σ̄ (Γ µ − p̃r)
ρ

1 −1
−1
=
Σ̄η z + Σ−1
(Γ−1 µ − p̃r) ,
p ηp + Σ̄
ρ

(33)

(34)

where the fourth equality uses the fact that average noise of private signals is zero. Using the portfolio
expressions (33) and (34), we compute the difference between the portfolio of investor j and the average
investor portfolio:
q̃j − q̃¯ =
=
=
=
=


1  −1
−1
−1
−1
Σ̂j (Ej [f˜] − p̃r) − (Σ̄−1
(Γ−1 µ − p̃r)
η + Σp )z − Σp εp − Σ̄
ρ

1  −1
−1
−1
−1
−1
−1
(Σηj ηj + Σ−1
η
)
−
Σ̄
z
−
Σ
η
+
(
Σ̂
−
Σ̄
)(Γ
µ
−
p̃r)
p
p
p
η
p
j
ρ


1
−1
−1
−1
−1
(Σ−1
)(Γ−1 µ − p̃r)
ηj − Σ̄η )z + Σηj εj + (Σ̂j − Σ̄
ρ

1 ˜
∆(f − p̃r) + Σ−1
ε
)
j
ηj
ρ
h
i
1 −1
Σηj εj + ∆(V 1/2 u + w) ,
ρ

(35)
(36)

where the third equality uses ηj = z + εj , the fourth equality uses (26) and the definition f˜ = Γ−1 µ + z, and
the last line uses (27).

Step 2: Clearing the asset market and computing expected excess return Lemma
1 describes the solution to the market-clearing problem and derives the coefficients A, B, and C in the
pricing equation. The equilibrium price, along with the random signal realizations determines the time-2
expected return (Ej [f˜] − p̃r). But at time 1, the equilibrium price and one’s realized signals are not known.
To compute period-1 utility, we need to know the time-1 expectation and variance of this time-2 expected
return.
The time-2 expected excess return can be written as: Ej [f˜] − p̃r = Ej [f˜] − f˜ + f˜ − p̃r and therefore its
variance is:
V1 [Ej [f˜] − p̃r] = V1 [Ej [f˜] − f˜] + V1 [f˜ − p̃r] + 2Cov1 [Ej [f˜] − f˜, f˜ − p̃r].
(37)
Combining (9) with the definitions ηj = z + εj and ηp = z + εp , we can compute expectation errors:
h
i
−1
−1
−1
−1
Ej [f˜] − f˜ = Σ̂j (Σ−1
+
Σ
−
Σ̂
)z
+
Σ
ε
ε
+
Σ
j
p
p
p
ηj
j
ηj
 −1

−1
−1
= Σ̂j −Σ z + Σηj εj + Σp εp .

41

Since this is a sum of mean-zero variables, its expectation is E1 [Ej [f˜] − f˜] = 0 and its variance is V1 [Ej [f˜] −

 ′
−1
f˜] = Σ̂j Σ−1 + Σ−1
Σ̂j = Σ̂j .
ηj + Σp
From (27) we know that V1 [f˜ − p̃r] = V . To compute the covariance term, we can use the definition
f˜ = Γ−1 µ + z and rearrange the definition of ηp to get p̃r = Bηp + A and ηp = z + εp to write
f˜ − p̃r

=
=

Γ−1 µ + (I − B)z − A − Bεp
ρΣ̄x̄ + Σ̄Σ

−1

z − (I − Σ̄Σ

−1

)εp

(38)
(39)

where the second line comes from substituting the coefficients A and B from Lemma 1. Since the constant
ρΣ̄x̄ does not affect the covariance, we can write
Cov1 [Ej [f˜] − f˜, f˜ − p̃r]

=

−1
z − (I − Σ̄Σ−1 )εp ]
Cov[−Σ̂j Σ−1 z + Σ̂j Σ−1
p εp , Σ̄Σ

=

−1
−Σ̂j Σ−1 ΣΣ̄Σ−1 − Σ̂j Σ−1
)]
p Σp (I − Σ̄Σ

=

−Σ̂j Σ̄Σ−1 − Σ̂j (I − Σ̄Σ−1 ) = −Σ̂j

Substituting the three variance and covariance terms into (37), we find that the variance of excess return is
V1 [Ej [f˜] − p̃r] = Σ̂j + V − 2Σ̂j = V − Σ̂j . Note that this is a diagonal matrix. Substituting the expressions
(29) and (23) for the diagonal elements of V and Σ̂j we have
V1 [Ej [f˜] − p̃r] = (V − Σ̂j )ii = (σ̄i − σ̂i ) + (ρ2 σx + K̄i )σ̄i2
In summary, the excess return is normally distributed as Ej [f˜] − p̃r ∼ N (w, V − Σ̂j ).

Step
h 3: Compute
iex-ante expected utility Ex-ante expected utility for investor j is U1j =
2

E1 ρEj [Wj ] − ρ2 Vj [Wj ] . In period 2, the investor has chosen his portfolio and the price is in his information
set, therefore the only random variable is z. We substitute the budget constraint in the optimal portfolio
choice from (33) and take expectation and variance conditioning on Ej [f˜] and Σ̂j to obtain U1j = ρrW0 +
1
′
˜
˜
2 E1 [(Ej [f ] − p̃r) Σ̂j (Ej [f ] − p̃r)].
−1/2
−1/2
Define m ≡ Σ̂j
(Ej [f˜] − p̃r) and note that m ∼ N (Σ̂j
w, Σ̂−1
j V − I). The second term in the Uij is
′
equal to E[m m], which is the mean of a non-central Chi-square. Using the formula, if m ∼ N (E[m], V ar[m]),
then E[m′ m] = tr(V ar[m]) + E[m]′ E[m], we get
1
1 ′ −1
U1j = ρrW0 + tr(Σ̂−1
j V − I) + w Σ̂j w.
2
2
Finally, we substitute the expressions for Σ̂−1
and w from (23) and (28):
j
U1j




N 
N
N
1 X −1
K̄i2
ρ2 X 2 2
K̄i2
−1
= ρrW0 −
+
σi + Kij + 2
Vii +
x̄ σ̄ σi + Kij + 2
2
2 i=1
ρ σx
2 i=1 i i
ρ σx

N
N 
1X
N
1X
K̄ 2
=
Kij [Vii + ρ2 x̄2i σ̄i2 ] + ρrW0 −
+
σi−1 + 2 i
[Vii + ρ2 x̄2i σ̄i2 ]
2 i=1
2
2 i=1
ρ σx
N

=

1X
Kij λi + constant
2 i=1

(40)

λi = σ̄i [1 + (ρ2 σx + K̄i )σ̄i ] + ρ2 x̄2i σ̄i2

(41)

where the weights λi are given by the variance of expected excess return Vii from (29) plus a term that
depends on the supply of the risk.

42

Step 4: Information choices The attention allocation problem maximizes ex-ante utility in (40)
subject to the information capacity and no-forgetting constraints:
N

max

{Kij }N
i=1

subject to

1X
Kij λi + constant
2 i=1

N
X

Kij ≤ K and Kij ≥ 0 ∀i

i=1

Observe that λi depends only on parameters and on aggregate average precisions. Since each investor has
zero mass within a continuum of investors, he takes λi as given. Since the constant is irrelevant, the optimal
choice maximizes a weighted sum of attention allocations, where the weights are given by λi (equation (14)),
subject to a constraint on an un-weighted sum. This is not a concave objective, so a first-order approach
will not deliver a solution. A simple variational argument reveals that allocating all capacity to the risk(s)
with the highest λi achieves the maximum utility. For a formal proof of this result, see Van Nieuwerburgh
and Veldkamp (2010). Thus, the solution is given by: Kij = K if λi = maxk λk , and Kij = 0, otherwise.
There may be multiple risks i that achieve the same maximum value of λi . In that case, the manager is
indifferent about how to allocate attention between those risks. We focus on symmetric equilibria.

A.3

Proofs

Proof of Lemma 1
Proof. Following Admati (1985), we know that the equilibrium price takes the following form p̃r = A + Bz +
Cx where
A = Γ−1 µ − ρΣ̄x̄
B = I − Σ̄Σ−1


′
1
C = −ρΣ̄ I + 2 Σ̄−1
ρ σx η
h
and therefore the price is given by p̃r = Γ−1 µ + Σ̄ (Σ̄−1 − Σ−1 )z − ρ(x̄ + x) −
precision of the public signal is

−1
−1
′ −1′
Σ−1
≡
σ
B
CC
B
=
x
p

1
ρ2 σx

′

−1
Σ̄−1
η Σ̄η

(42)

i

1
−1′
ρσx Σ̄η x

. Furthermore, the

(43)

Proof of Lemma 2
Proof. To show: If x̄i is sufficiently large ∀i and
λl = λl′ .

P P
i

j

Kij ≥ K, then there exist risks l and l′ such that

Suppose not. Then, there would be a unique maximum λi in the set of {λl }N
l=1 , no matter how large
K is. Since there is a unique maximum, the solution above dictates that all information capacity is used to
study this risk: Kij = K for all skilled investors j. Thus, K̄i becomes arbitrarily large.
However, the value of learning about risk i falls as the aggregate capacity devoted to studying it increases:
∂λi /∂ K̄i < 0. We show this next. The solution for λi is given by (41). It is clearly increasing in K̄i directly.
But there is also an indirect negative effect through σ̄i . Recall that by Bayes’ Law, the average posterior

43

−1
precision σ̄i−1 = σi−1 + σpi
+ K̄i . Thus,

∂ σ̄i
∂ K̄i

< 0. To sign the net effect, it is helpful to rewrite λi as



λi = σ̄i2 σ̄i−1 + ρ2 (σx + x̄2i ) + K̄i

−1
Substituting in σ̄i−1 = σi−1 + σpi
+ K̄i , we get

λi =

−1
σi−1 + σpi
+ ρ2 (σx + 2x̄2i ) + K̄i
−1
(σi−1 + σpi
+ K̄i )2

Finally, the partial derivative with respect to K̄i is
−1
−1
+ K̄i ) − 2(σi−1 + σpi
+ ρ2 (σx + 2x̄2i ) + K̄i )
2(σi−1 + σpi
∂λi
=
−1
−1
∂ K̄i
(σi + σpi + K̄i )3

=

−2ρ2 (σx + 2x̄2i ) − 2K̄i )
<0
−1
(σi−1 + σpi
+ K̄i )3

Since the numerator is all terms that can only be negative and the denominator is a sum of precisions, that
can only be positive, the sign is negative. This proves that λi is decreasing in K̄i .
Furthermore, as the supply of the risk factor x̄i becomes large, ∂λi /∂ K̄i becomes an arbitrarily large
negative number. Thus, for a sufficiently large x̄i , there exists a K such that if K̄i = K, then λi < λi′ for
some other risk i′ . But then, λi is not a unique maximum in the set of {λl }N
l=1 , which is a contradiction.

Proof of Proposition 1 For each skilled investor j, the optimal attention allocation for risk i (Kij )
is weakly increasing in its variance σi .
Proof. The information choice problem is not a concave optimization problem. Therefore, a first-order
approach is not valid. Instead we need to consider each of the various possible corner solutions, one by one.
Let j denote an informed investor. From step 4 of the model solution, we know that when there is a unique
maximum λi the optimal information choice is Klj = K if λl = maxi λi , and Klj = 0, otherwise. If multiple
risks achieve the same maximum λl then all attention will be allocated amongst those risks. Therefore, there
are three cases to consider.
Case 1: λl is the unique maximum λi . Holding attention allocations constant, a marginal increase in σl
will cause λl to increase:
 

 σ̄l 2
∂λl
2
2
= 1 + 2σ̄i (ρ (σx + x̄l ) + K̄l )
> 0.
∂σl
σl
The marginal increase in σl will not effect λl′ for l′ 6= l (see equations (14) and (23)). It follows that after
the increase in σl , λl will still be the unique maximum λi . Therefore, in the new equilibrium, attention
allocation is unchanged.
Case 2: Prior to the increase in σl , multiple risks – including risk l – attain the maximum λi . Let IM be
the set of such risks. If σl marginally increases and we held attention allocations fixed, then λl would be the
unique maximum λi . If λl is the unique maximum, then Klj should increase and Kl′ j for l′ ∈ IM \ l should
decrease. However, using equations (14) and (23) we can show that an increase in Klj would decrease λl :
n K̄


∂λl
2K̄l o
l
= −2σ̄l2 2 + σ̄l ρ2 (σx + x̄2l ) + K̄l 1 + 2
< 0,
ρ σx
ρ σx
∂ K̄l

(44)

and since K̄l = χKlj , ∂λl /∂Klj < 0. This effect works to partially offset the initial increase in λl . In the rest
of the proof that follows, we construct the new equilibrium attention allocation, following an initial increase
in λl and show that even though the attention reallocation works to reduce λl , the net effect is a larger K̄l .

44

This solution to this type of convex problem is referred to as a “waterfilling” solution in the information
theory literature. (See textbook by (Cover and Thomas 1991).) To construct a new equilibrium, we reallocate
attention from risk l′ ∈ IM \ l to risk l (increasing K̄l , decreasing K̄l′ ). This decreases λl and increases λl′ .
We continue to reallocate attention from all risks l′ ∈ IM \ l to risk l in such a way that λl′ = λl′′ for all
l′ , l′′ ∈ IM \ l is maintained. We do this until either (i) all attention has been allocated to risk l or (ii)
λl = λl′ for all l′ ∈ IM \ l. Note that in the new equilibrium λl will be larger than before and the new
equilibrium K̄i will be larger than before.
Case 3: Prior to the increase in σl , λl < λl′ for some l′ 6= l. Because λl is a continuous function of σl , a
marginal increase in σl , will only change λl marginally. Because λl is discretely less than λ′l , the ranking of
the λi ’s will not change and the new equilibrium will maintain the same attention allocation.
In cases one and three Klj does not change in response to a marginal increase in σl . In case two Klj is
strictly increasing in σl . Therefore, Klj is weakly increasing in σl .

Proof of Proposition 2 If x̄i is sufficiently large then, for each skilled investor j, the optimal attention
allocation for risk i (Kij ) is weakly increasing in risk aversion ρ.
Proof. Let j denote an informed investor. Differentiating (41), we see that the partial derivative of λi with
respect to ρ is
∂λi
∂ρ

=

h
i
K̄ 2 
2σ̄i2 ρ(σx + x̄2i ) + 3 i 1 + 2σ̄i [ρ2 (σx + x̄2i ) + K̄i ] > 0.
ρ σx

(45)

The remaining task is to determine how the change in the marginal value of all signals λi , ∀i affects the
attention allocation K̄i , ∀i. There are again three cases to consider.
Case 1: Prior to the increase in ρ, there is a unique maximum λi . Holding K̄i fixed, λi is continuous
in ρ, so a marginal change in ρ cannot change the rankings of the λi ’s. Therefore, it is an equilibrium to
maintain the same Kij for all i.
Case 2: Let IM be the set of risks which attain the maximum λl . In the previous proof, we showed that
an increase in λl increases K̄l if λl ∈ IM . The same equilibrium assignment argument demonstrates that K̄l
will increase after the change in ρ if ∂λl /∂ρ ≥ ∂λl′ /∂ρ for all l′ ∈ IM \ l.
From equation (45) we see that, ∂λi /∂ρ is strictly increasing in x̄i , finite-valued and not bounded above.
Therefore, there exists x̄∗ such that ∂λi /∂ρ > ∂λi′ /∂ρ, ∀i′ if x̄i > x̄∗ . It follows that K̄i , and therefore Kij ,
is weakly increasing in ρ if x̄i > x̄∗ .
Case 3: Prior to the increase in ρ, λi < maxj λj . Since λi is not part of the maximal set, K̄i = 0 before
the increase in ρ. But λi is continuous in ρ, so a marginal change in ρ cannot cause λi ≥ maxj λj to hold.
Since λi is not part of the maximal set, K̄i = 0 after the increase in ρ. Thus, K̄i does not change.
In all three cases, Kij , is weakly increasing in ρ if x̄i > x̄∗ .

Derivation of excess returns and their dispersion We begin by calculating the portfolio
excess return. Note that the return of the portfolio expressed in terms of assets is equal to the return
expressed in risk factors:
(qj − q̄)′ (f − pr)

¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r)
= (qj − q̄)′ Γ−1 (Γf − Γpr) = (q̃j − q̃)

45

(46)

Substitute (27) and (36) into (46) to get


′
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r)] = 1 E Σ−1 εj + ∆(V 1/2 u + w) (V 1/2 u + w)
E[(q̃j − q̃)
ηj
ρ
h
i
1
′ −1 1/2
′
1/2
′
′ 1/2
1/2
E ǫ′j Σ−1
w
+
ǫ
Σ
V
u
+
2w
∆V
u
+
w
∆w
+
u
V
∆V
u
=
j ηj
ηj
ρ
h
i
1
=
E w′ ∆w + u′ V 1/2 ∆V 1/2 u
ρ

i
1h 2 ′
=
ρ x̄ Σ̄∆Σ̄x̄ + T r V 1/2 ∆V 1/2 E(uu′ )
ρ
1
= ρT r(x̄′ Σ̄∆Σ̄x̄) + T r(∆V )
ρ

(47)

where the third equality comes from the fact that w is a constant and εj and u are mean zero and uncorrelated.
To get return dispersion, we substitute (27) and (36) into (46), then square the excess return and take
the expectation:
"
2 #
1 −1
′
1/2
′ ˜
2
1/2
¯
E[((q̃j − q̃) (f − p̃r)) ] = E
[Σ εj + ∆V u + ∆w] (w + V u)
ρ η
Using the fact that for any random variable x, V (x) = E(x2 ) − E 2 (x), the dispersion of funds’ portfolio
returns is equal to:
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r))2 ]
E[((q̃j − q̃)

=


1  −1
1/2
′
1/2
V
[Σ
ε
+
∆V
u
+
∆w]
(V
u
+
w)
ηj j
ρ2

2
1
1/2
+ 2 E[Σ−1
u + ∆w]′ (V 1/2 u + w)
ηj εj + ∆V
ρ

We compute each term separately.
h
i
′ −1 1/2
V (·) = V ε′j Σ−1
u + 2w′ ∆V 1/2 u + w′ ∆w + u′ V 1/2 ∆V 1/2 u
ηj w + εj Σηj V

E(·)2

=

′
w′ Σ−1
ηj w + 0 + 4w ∆V ∆w + 0 + 2T r(∆V ∆V )

=

2
′
ρ2 T r(x̄′ Σ̄Σ−1
ηj Σ̄x̄) + 4ρ T r(x̄ Σ̄∆V ∆Σ̄x̄) + 2T r(∆V ∆V )
2
2
(w′ ∆w + T r(∆V )) = ρ2 x̄′ Σ̄∆Σ̄x̄ + T r(∆V )

=

where the last lines uses the definition of w from (28). Next, we use the definition of ∆ and the focus
on symmetric information acquisition equilibria to get ∆ = (1 − χ)Kj for any informed investor j. For
an uninformed investor, the expression is the same, except that the (1 − χ) terms are replaced with −χ.
Substituting in the squared expectation and variance, we have that for any informed investor j:
E[((q̃j − qz)
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r))2 ]

′
= T r(x̄′ Σ̄Σ−1
ηj Σ̄x̄) + 4(1 − χ)T r(x̄ Σ̄Kj V ∆Σ̄x̄)

2
2
(1 − χ)2 2 ′
2
(1
−
χ)
T
r(∆K
V
K
V
)
+
ρ x̄ Σ̄Kj Σ̄x̄ + T r(Kj V )
j
j
2
2
ρ
ρ
n
X

2
2 2
=
x̄2i σ̄i2 Kij 1 + 4(1 − χ)2 Kij Vii + 2 (1 − χ)2 Kij
Vii
ρ
i=1
!2
n
X
1
2
2 2
+(1 − χ)
ρx̄i σ̄i Kij + Kij Vii
(48)
ρ
i=1
+

46

The last line uses the fact that all square matrices are diagonal and that the trace is the sum of the diagonal
elements.

Proof of Proposition 3 We prove part (a) and then part(b).
Proposition 3(a)
If x̄i is sufficiently large then an increase in variance σi weakly increases the dispersion
R
¯ ′ (q̃j − q̃)]dj.
¯
of fund portfolios, E[(q̃j − q̃)
¯ ′ (q̃j − q̃)]
¯ increases.
Proof. We prove the proposition by proving that for any given investor j, E[(q̃j − q̃)
Thus, the integral over j increases as well.
From (35), we know that q̃j − q̃¯j = ρ1 (∆(f˜ − p̃r) + Σ−1
ηj εj )) where ∆ and Ση are diagonal matrices with
−1
diagonal elements ∆ii = Kij − K̄i and (Σηj )ii = Kij . Using these elements, we can write
" n
#
2
X
1
′
˜
¯
¯
(Klj − K̄l )(fl − p̃l r) + Klj εlj
.
E[(q̃j − q̃) (q̃j − q̃)] = 2 E
ρ
l=1

−1
Recall that the expected return is f˜ − p̃r = V 1/2 u + w, with u ∼ N (0, 1) and w ≡ ρΣ̄x̄. Since E[ε2ij ] = Kij
,
P
˜
εlj is uncorrelated with (fl − p̃l r), ul ∼ N (0, 1), and in equilibrium l Klj = K, we get
"
#
X
1
1
1/2
¯ ′ (q̃j − q̃)]
¯ = E
E[(q̃j − q̃)
(Klj − K̄l )2 (Vll ul + wl )2 + 2 K
ρ2
ρ
l


1 X
1
= 2
(Klj − K̄l )2 Vll + ρ2 σ̄l2 x̄2l + 2 K.
(49)
ρ
ρ
l

To assess the effect of an increase in σi we consider two cases. The first case is when there is no change in
attention allocation after a marginal increase in σi and the second case is when there is a change in attention
allocation. The first case occurs if all attention or no attention is allocated to risk i before the change in σi ,
otherwise the second case occurs (this is explained in the proof of Proposition 1).
Case 1 (includes also what was previously called case 3): A marginal increase in σi will only change two
variables on the right-hand side of equation (49), Vii and σ̄i . In equations (24) and (30), we showed that
that both σ̄i and Vii are strictly increasing in σi . If all attention or no attention is allocated to risk i before
the increase in σi , then Kij − K̄i > 0 or Kij − K̄i = 0, respectively. Therefore, when all attention is allocated
¯ ′ (q̃j − q̃)]
¯ strictly increases in σi . When no attention is allocated
to risk i before the change in σi , E[(q̃j − q̃)
′
¯
¯
to risk i E[(q̃j − q̃) (q̃j − q̃)] is constant in σi .
Case 2: From Proposition 1 we know that a marginal increase in σi will cause Kij − K̄i to increase and
Klj − K̄l to decrease for all risks l ∈ IM \ i. The other variables that will change in equation (49) are Vll
¯ ′ (q̃j − q̃)]
¯
and σ̄l for all risks l ∈ IM . If x̄i is sufficiently large then the sign of the effect of σi on E[(q̃j − q̃)
will be determined by its effect on σ̄i . We will now show that, when x̄i is sufficiently large, σ̄i is increasing
¯ ′ (q̃j − q̃)]
¯ is increasing in σi . We
in σi , even after accounting for the reallocation of attention, so E[(q̃j − q̃)
will prove this by contradiction.
Suppose that σ̄i decreases when σi increases. Recall that
λi = σ̄i [1 + (ρ2 σx + K̄i )σ̄i ] + ρ2 x̄2i σ̄i2 .
Therefore, if x̄i is sufficiently large and σ̄i decreases, λi decreases. But, we know from Proposition 1 that if
Kij > 0 and σi increases, then λi increases. Therefore, σ̄i must increase in σi .
Combining cases, if x̄i is sufficiently large, dispersion weakly increases in σi .

47

Proposition 3(b) Prove: If x̄i isRsufficiently large then an increase in variance σi weakly increases the
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r))2 ]dj.
dispersion of portfolio excess returns, E[((q̃j − q̃)

Proof. As before, we prove that the integral increases by proving that the expectation increases for every
investor j, and we consider three cases: The first case is when all attention is allocated to risk i before the
change in σi . The second case is where some, but not all, attention is allocated to risk i. In the third case,
no attention is allocated to risk i
Case 1: All attention is allocated to risk i. Since λi > λl , ∀l 6= i, a marginal change in σi will change λ’s
continuously and will not reverse the inequality. Thus λi will still be the unique maximum and attention will
not change. The only variables on the right-hand side of equation (48) that will change when σi increases
are Vii and σ̄i . Both will increase strictly. Both are multiplied by quantities and parameters that are always
non-negative. Thus, dispersion increases strictly.
Case 2: For an informed investor some, but not all, attention is allocated to risk i before the change
in σi . To prove that expression (48) increases in σi we use the same method that we used for this case
in the proof of Proposition 3(a). If x̄i is sufficiently large, then the positive effect of the increase in Kij
and σ̄i will outweigh any negative effect of the decrease in Klj and σ̄l for l 6= i. We established in the
proof of Proposition 3(a) that an increase in σi causes σ̄i to increase. Therefore, if x̄i is sufficiently large,
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r))2 ] is increasing in σi .
E[((q̃j − q̃)
Case 3: When no attention is allocated to risk i (Kij = 0), dispersion is constant in σi because all the
σi and Vii terms are multiplied by Kij .
For an uninformed investor, dispersion is the same, except that the (1 − χ)2 terms are replace with
(−χ)2 terms. Since both are non-negative, the same arguments hold for any uninformed
investor j. Since
R
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r))2 ] weakly increases in σi for every investor j, the integral E[((q̃j − q̃)
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r))2 ]dj
E[((q̃j − q̃)
weakly increases as well.

Proof of Proposition 4 If σx and x̄n areRsufficiently large, then an increase in risk aversion ρ
increases the dispersion of portfolio excess returns,

¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r))2 ]dj.
E[((q̃j − q̃)

Proof. Dispersion of excess returns is given in (48). We first work through the direct effect of ρ on σ̄l and
Vll and then turn to the indirect effect that works through attention allocation K. Both σ̄l and Vll are
increasing in ρ, as shown in (25) and (31). Both are multiplied by parameters and variables that are always
non-negative. Therefore, the only terms of (48) whose derivative we need to work out to sign are the ones
with Vii /ρ or Vii2 /ρ2 .


∂ Vll
1 ∂Vll
Vll
=
−
∂ρ ρ
ρ ∂ρ
ρ
This expression is positive if the elasticity of Vll with respect to ρ is larger than one for all l, which is
ensured if σx is sufficiently large, i.e. it satisfies (32). Thus, the Rdirect effect of risk aversion is to increase
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r))2 ] for each investor j and therefore increase E[((q̃j − q̃)
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r))2 ]dj as well.
E[((q̃j − q̃)
The total derivative is the sum of the partial derivative and the indirect effect that comes from reallocation
of attention: d/dρ = ∂/∂ρ + (∂/∂Kj )(∂Kj /∂ρ). The previous part of the proof signed the first term. This
second part signs the second term.
From (41), note that ∂λi /∂ x̄i = 2ρ2 σ̄i2 x̄i . This is positive and increasing in x̄i . For any values of ρ2 σ̄i2 ,
there is an x̄i sufficiently large that λi > λj , ∀j 6= i. Specifically for the supply of aggregate risk, if x̄n
is sufficiently large then λn > λj , ∀j 6= n and thus Knj = K, for all informed investors j. At this corner
solution, where λn > λj , with strict inequality ∀j 6= n, a marginal change in ρ will not change the inequality
because λi is continuous in ρ. Thus, after a marginal change in ρ, it is still true that Knj = K, for all
informed investors j. Because attention allocation is unchanged by a marginal change in ρ, the direct effect
and the total effect are identical. Next, consider lower levels of x̄n where a marginal increase in ρ does change
the attention allocation. Since dispersion is continuously differentiable in Kj , and is strictly increasing in ρ
for a given capacity allocation, there exists a ball of parameters such that ∂Kij /∂ρ > 0 for some risk i 6= n
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r))2 ] > 0.
and d/dρ E[((q̃j − q̃)

48

Proof of Proposition 5 If x̄i is sufficiently large then an increase in the variance σi weakly increases
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r)].
the portfolio excess return of an informed fund, E[(q̃j − q̃)
Proof. Writing the trace terms in equation (47) as sums and using the definition of ∆ yields:
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r)] =
E[(q̃j − q̃)

i
1h X
(Klj − K̄l )(Vll + (ρσ̄l x̄l )2 ) .
ρ

(50)

l

To determine the effect of an increase in σi on this expression we consider two cases. The first case is when
there is no change in attention allocation after the increase in σi and the second one is when there is a change
in attention allocation. Recall (from the proof of Proposition 1) that the first case occurs if all attention or
no attention is allocated to risk i before the change in σi , otherwise the second case occurs.
Case 1: As discussed in the proof of Proposition 3(a), the only variables that will change on the righthand side of equation (50) when σi increases are Vii and σ̄i . Both will increase. If no attention is allocated
¯ ′ (f˜− p̃r)].
to risk i before the change in σi then Kij − K̄i = 0, and the change in σi has no effect on E[(q̃j − q̃)
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r)]
If all attention is allocated to risk i then Kij − K̄i > 0. Thus, the increase in σi causes E[(q̃j − q̃)
to increase strictly.
Case 2: As argued in the proof of 3(a), if x̄i is sufficiently large then we can assess the effect of an
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r)] by only considering the effect on Kij − K̄i , Vii and σ̄i . As proved in
increase in σi on E[(q̃j − q̃)
Proposition 3(a), Kij − K̄i is increasing in σi and, if x̄i is large enough, σ̄i is increasing in σi . Therefore, it
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r)] is increasing in σi .
follows from equation (50) that if x̄i is sufficiently large then E[(q̃j − q̃)

Proof of Proposition 6

If σx and x̄n are sufficiently large, then an increase in risk aversion ρ
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r)].
increases expected excess return, E[(q̃j − q̃)
Proof. Taking a partial derivative of (47) with respect to ρ, we get:
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r)]
∂E[(q̃j − q̃)
∂ρ


 

∂ Σ̄
′
Σ̄x̄ −
= T r(x̄ Σ̄∆Σ̄x̄) + 2ρT r x̄ ∆
∂ρ




∂ Σ̄
= T r(x̄′ Σ̄∆Σ̄x̄) + 2ρT r x̄′ ∆
Σ̄x̄ +
∂ρ
′



1
1 
∂V 
T r(∆V ) + T r ∆
ρ2
ρ
∂ρ
  
 
1
∂V
V
Tr ∆
−
.
ρ
∂ρ
ρ

V
Since (25) tells us that ∂ Σ̄ii /∂ρ ≥ 0, ∀i, a sufficient condition for this expression to be positive is ∂V
∂ρ − ρ > 0,
which is equivalent to the elasticity of Vii with respect to ρ larger than one for each i. This holds if σx is
sufficiently large, i.e. it satisfies (32).
The total derivative is the sum of the partial derivative and the indirect effect that comes from reallocation
of attention: d/dρ = ∂/∂ρ + (∂/∂Kj )(∂Kj /∂ρ). The previous part of the proof signed the first term. This
second part signs the second term. Note that capacity allocation Kj enters through ∆.
From (41), note that ∂λi /∂ x̄i = 2ρ2 σ̄i2 x̄i . This is positive increasing in x̄i . For any values of ρ2 σ̄i2 , there
is an x̄i sufficiently large that λi > λj , ∀j 6= i. Specifically for the supply of aggregate risk, if x̄n is sufficiently
large then λn > λj , ∀j 6= n and thus Knj = K, for all informed investors j. At this corner solution, where
λn > λj , with strict inequality ∀j 6= n, a marginal change in ρ will not change the inequality because λi is
continuous in ρ. Thus, after a marginal change in ρ, it is still true that Knj = K, for all informed investors
j. Because K is unchanged by a marginal change in ρ, the direct effect and the total effect are identical.
Next, consider lower levels of x̄n where a marginal increase in ρ does change K. Since expected return is
continuously differentiable in Kj , and is strictly increasing in ρ for a given capacity allocation, there exists
¯ ′ (f˜ − p̃r)] is still increasing in risk
a ball of parameters such that ∂Kij /∂ρ > 0 for some risk i and E[(q̃j − q̃)
aversion.

Proof of Proposition 7

If the net supply of idiosyncratic risk is small, then expected excess
 portfolio
P
return of fund j is E[Rj ] − r = αj + βj (E[rm ] − r), where αj = i 1/ρ var[f˜i ](σi−1 + Kij ) − 1 − ρ̄ij .

49

Proof. Define the weight that fund j puts on asset i as
qij pi
qij pi
ωij ≡ P
,
=
W0
q
p
k kj k

let ωj ≡ [ω1j . . . ωnj ]′ and define Rj ≡ ωj′ R, where R is the vector of all risky asset returns, [r1 , r2 , . . . , rn ]′ .
The unconditional expected value of fund j’s excess return Rj is
X
E[ωj′ (R − r)] =
E[ωij (ri − r)]
i

Next, we substitute in the following definitions. Let R be a vector of returns with ith entry Ri ≡ fi /pi and
ωij = pi qij /W0 be
P portfolio weight of investor j on asset i, where W0 is initial wealth and by the budget
constraint W0 = i pi qij .
1
fi
pi qij ( − r)]
W
p
0
i
i
X
1
E[qij (fi − pi r)]
=
W0 i
1 X
=
E[qij ]E[(fi − pi r)] + cov[qij , (fi − pi r)]
W0 i

E[ωj′ (R − r)] =

X

E[

where the last line follows from the definition of a covariance.
P
First, we work out the sum of the covariances. In matrix notation, this sum is i cov[qij , (fi − pi r)] =
T r(Cov(qj , (f − pr))). This covariance is slightly different from the unconditional covariance we worked
out to solve the model, because this is a covariance conditional on the signals and price in fund j’s interim
information set. This is the term that will distinguish skilled funds, whose portfolios covary with payoffs,
from unskilled ones. Since f = Γf˜, qj = (Γ′ )−1 q̃j , and (Γ′ )−1 = (Γ−1 )′ we can express this covariance in
terms of risk quantities and payoffs as T r(Cov((Γ−1 )′ q̃j , Γ(f˜ − p̃r))) = Γ−1 ΓT r(Cov(q̃j , f˜ − p̃r)). Canceling
P
the Γ terms and rewriting this as a sum, we obtain i cov[q̃ij , (f˜i − p̃i r)]. Recall from the portfolio first-order
−1
(Ej [f˜i ] − p̃i r). Thus,
condition that q̃ij = ρ1 σ̂ij
cov[q̃ij , (f˜i − p̃i r)] = 1/(ρσ̂i )var[Ej [f˜i ]].
By the law of total variance, the unconditional variance of a posterior belief var[Ej [f˜i ]] is the variance of
the prior σi minus the posterior variance σ̂i .
cov[q̃ij , (f˜i − p̃i r)] = 1/(ρσ̂ij )(σi − σ̂ij ).
By Bayes’ law, this posterior variance is σ̂ij = 1/(σi−1 + Kij ). Substituting this in we get
cov[q̃ij , (f˜i − p̃i r)] =


1
σi (σi−1 + Ki ) − 1
ρ

Since ρ > 0 and the variance term is positive, this covariance is increasing in signal precision Ki .
Next, we work out the product of the expectations E[qij ]E[(fi − pi r)] and rewrite it in a CAPM representation.
E[qij ]E[(fi − pi r)] = E[qij ]E[pi (Ri − r)]
= E[qij ] (E[pi ]E[Ri − r] + cov(pi , Ri ))
= E[qij ]E[pi ]βi (E[rm ] − r) + E[qij ]cov(pi , Ri )

50

where the last line holds approximately if the relative supply of aggregate risk is large, and thus Ri = βi rm .
Using the definitions ω̂ij ≡ E[qij ]E[pi ]/W0 and ρ̄ij ≡ −E[qij ]cov(pi , Ri )/W0 , we can write
1
E[qij ]E[(fi − pi r)] = ω̂j βi (E[rm ] − r) − ρ̄ij
W0
Note that since Ri = fi /pi , cov(fi , Ri ) < 0, the ρ̄ij terms are positive for positive expected portfolio holdings.
Putting the two pieces together,
Rj =

X

ω̂ij βi (E[rm ] − r) − ρ̄ij +

i


1
var[f˜i ](σi−1 + Ki ) − 1
ρ

Rj = αj + βj (E[rm ] − r)


P
P
where αj = i 1/ρ var[f˜i ](σi−1 + Ki ) − 1 − ρ̄ij and βj = i ω̂ij βi .

51

B

Model with a General Signal Covariance Structure

For the purposes of this mutual fund theory, we assumed a particular risk factor structure and assumed the
signals are the payoffs of these risk factors, plus independent noise. However, our methodology can solve a
much more general class of models. We show here how to transform any problem with an arbitrary asset
and signal covariance structure into an equivalent problem of independent signals about independent risk
factors.
Model: Suppose there are N assets with a random N × 1 vector of payoffs f ∼ N (µ, Σ). Each agent j
receives a signal vector ηj about linear combinations of these asset payoffs plus noise:
ηj = ψf + ej

(51)

where ψ is invertible and the N × 1 vector of signal noise ej ∼ N (0, Σe ). Σe and Σ need not be diagonal,
but must be positive-definite and invertible. As before, portfolio choices q maximize (3) subject to (4) and
information choices maximize (6) subject to (7) and (8).
Solution: Begin by using a Cholesky decomposition to transform signals so that each signal is about an
independent payoff event. Consider the transformed signal
Σ−1/2 ψ −1 ηj = Σ−1/2 f + Σ−1/2 ψ −1 ej

(52)

Note that var(Σ−1/2 f ) = I. Thus, each signal in the signal vector Σ−1/2 ψ −1 ηj is about an independent
random event – an entry of Σ−1/2 f , albeit with correlated signal error.
Next, use an eigen-decomposition to make the signal noise independent. The variance-covariance matrix
of the transformed signal above is Σ−1/2 ψ −1 Σe ψ −1′ Σ−1/2′ = GLG′ where G is the eigenvector matrix and
L is the diagonal matrix of eigenvalues of the variance-covariance matrix. Next, let η̃j ≡ G′ Σ−1/2 ψ −1 ηj , let
f˜ ≡ G′ Σ−1/2 f and let ẽj ≡ G′ Σ−1/2 ψ −1 ej . Then, premultiplying each term in (52) by G′ yields
η˜j = f˜ + ẽj

s.t.

var(f˜) = I and

var(ẽj ) = L (diagonal).

(53)

The new signal η˜j is simply a linear combination of observed signals ηj . Each new signal (element of
η˜j ) is about an independent event – an element of the vector f˜ and each has independent signal noise. To
see that, note that var(f˜) = G′ Σ−1/2 ΣΣ−1/2 G. Cancelling inverse matrices yields G′ G. Since eigenvector
matrices are idempotent, G′ G = I. Thus, var(f˜) = I. Furthermore, var(e˜j ) = G′ Σ−1/2 ψ −1 Σe ψ −1′ Σ−1/2′ G.
Substituting in the definition of the eigen-decomposition GLG′ , we get var(e˜j ) = G′ GLG′ G. Since G′ G = I,
var(e˜j ) = L. Since L is an eigenvalue matrix, it is diagonal.
Given this set of independent signals about independent risk factors (combinations of assets with payoffs
f˜), we can follow the steps above to solve our portfolio choice problem: Choose quantities q̃ of each risk
to hold. Compute expected utility from that portfolio problem for a given signal precision matrix Σ−1
e .
Then choose precisions, diagonal entries of the L−1 matrix, to maximize the expected continuation utility,
as outlined in the steps below. Finally, map the solutions of the risk-factor problem q ∗ , L∗ back to quantities
and precision in the underlying problem: q = Σ−1/2 Gq̃ ∗ and Σe = ψΣ1/2 GL∗ G′ Σ1/2 ψ ′ .

52

