NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RISK PROTECTION, SERVICE USE, AND HEALTH OUTCOMES UNDER COLOMBIA’S
HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM FOR THE POOR
Grant Miller
Diana M. Pinto
Marcos Vera-Hernández
Working Paper 15456
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15456
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2009
This paper previously circulated as "High-Powered Incentives in Developing Country Health Insurance:
Evidence from Colombia’s Régimen Subsidiado." We are grateful to Orazio Attanasio, Jay Bhattacharya,
Adriana Camacho, Pedro Carneiro, Ken Chay, Will Dow, Liran Einav, Alan Garber, Ursula Giedion,
Mike Grossman, Ted Joyce, Robert Kaestner, Carlos Medina, Costas Meghir, Imran Rasul, anonymous
referees, and numerous seminar participants for helpful suggestions; to Luis Carlos Ortiz, Renata Pardo,
Licerole Ruiz, Sandra Sterling, and Elisa Torrenegra for discussions about the health policy context
in Colombia; to the Departamento Nacional de Planeación (DNP), the Departamento Administrativo
Nacional de Estadística (DANE), and Profamilia for data and SISBEN index information; to Adriana
Ruiz for GIS assistance; and to the Economic and Social Research Council (RES-167-25-0124), Economic
and Social Research Council-NCRM (ES/I03685X/1), Advanced ERC Grant (249612), the Inter-American
Development Bank, the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (K01 HD053504),
and the Stanford Center on the Demography and Economics of Health and Aging for financial support.
Soledad Giardili, Carolina Mejia, Nicole Smith, and Julieta Trias provided excellent research assistance.
We alone are responsible for the views in this paper as well as all errors. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Grant Miller, Diana M. Pinto, and Marcos Vera-Hernández. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Risk Protection, Service Use, and Health Outcomes Under Colombia’s Health Insurance Program
for the Poor
Grant Miller, Diana M. Pinto, and Marcos Vera-Hernández
NBER Working Paper No. 15456
October 2009, Revised December 2012
JEL No. I10,O10
ABSTRACT
Unexpected medical care spending imposes considerable financial risk on developing country households.
Based on managed care models of health insurance in wealthy countries, Colombia’s Régimen Subsidiado
is a publicly financed insurance program targeted to the poor, aiming both to provide risk protection
and to promote allocative efficiency in the use of medical care. Using a “fuzzy” regression discontinuity
design, we find that the program has shielded the poor from some financial risk while increasing the
use of traditionally under-utilized preventive services – with measurable health gains.
Grant Miller
CHP/PCOR
Stanford University
117 Encina Commons
Stanford, CA 94305-6019
and NBER
ngmiller@stanford.edu
Diana M. Pinto
Department of Clinical Epidemiology
and Biostatistics
Faculty of Medicine
Pontificia Universidad Javeriana
7th Avenue, #40-62, Second Floor
Bogotá, Colombia
dmpinto@gmail.com

Marcos Vera-Hernández
University College London
Department of Economics
Gower St.
London WC1E 6BT
United Kingdom
m.vera@ucl.ac.uk

1. Introduction
In developing countries, the inability to smooth consumption directly reduces welfare and
leads to informal risk management strategies that stifle productive activity (Paxson 1993,
Townsend 1994, Morduch 1995). Because unexpected illness is a leading source of economic
risk, the expansion of health insurance is therefore a public policy priority in many parts of the
developing world (Gertler and Gruber 2002, GTZ, WHO, and ILO 2005, WHO 2010, Mohanan
2012).1 Such initiatives are often large, centrally-planned programs operated exclusively
through the public sector – and they focus primarily on reducing the out-of-pocket price of
medical care.2
An early exception is Colombia’s Régimen Subsidiado (or “Subsidized Regime,”
henceforth “SR”). Introduced in 1993, the SR is a pluralistic, publicly-financed health insurance
program targeted to the poor.3 Colombians meeting a proxy means-test (determined by the
Sistema de Identificación de Beneficiarios, or SISBEN) are fully-subsidized to purchase
insurance from private, government-approved insurers. In contrast to the classical ‘managed
competition’ model of insurance (Enthoven 1978a and 1978b), participating insurers must offer
standardized benefits packages and accept standardized premiums. Insurers can, however, form
restrictive medical care networks, deny reimbursement for services deemed ‘unnecessary,’ and
pay health care providers in ways that encourage higher quality and lower cost medical care
1

For example, one study finds that 5% of Latin American households spend 40% or more of ‘non-subsistence’
income on medical care each year (Xu et al. 2003). As Gertler and Gruber (2002) note, there are two major costs of
illness: medical care costs and reduced labor income. Health insurance (our focus) addresses the former, while
disability insurance addresses the latter.
2
See Abel-Smith (1992); Dow, Gertler, Schoeni, Strauss, and Thomas (1997); WHO (2000); WHO Commission on
Macroeconomics and Health (2001); Gertler and Solon (2002); Dow, Gonzalez, Rosero-Bixby (2003); Dow and
Schmeer (2003); Gakidou et al. (2006); Pauly, Zweifel, Scheffler, Preker, and Bassett (2006); Hughes and
Leethongdee (2007); Wagstaff (2007); Wagstaff and Yu (2007); O’Donnell et al. (2008); Pauly, Blavin, and
Meghan (2008); and Gruber, Hendren, and Townsend (2012).
3
According to Article 153 of Law 100 (authorizing the creation of the SR), one of the SR’s guiding principles is
Proteccion Integral: “The System of Social Security in health will provide health care to the population in:
education, information, health promotion and prevention, diagnostic, treatment and rehabilitation in quantity and
quality according to the Plan Obligatorio de Salud.”

1

(through capitated payment contracts, for example – fixed payments per enrollee per month).
Overall, Colombia’s SR shares features of managed care models of health insurance that
emphasize cost-containment and allocative efficiency traditionally found only in wealthy
countries. It therefore represents important early experience in a markedly different institutional
environment.
This paper studies the impact of the SR on financial risk protection, service use, and
health outcomes among Colombia’s poor. Program eligibility is supposed to be determined
according to a discrete threshold in the continuous SISBEN index, so in principle we could use a
regression discontinuity design to do so. Because SISBEN scores are manipulated in practice
(BDO and CCRP 2000, DNP 2001, 2003a, and 2003b, Fresneda 2003, Camacho and Conover
2011), we instead use underlying index components collected through independent household
surveys to generate our own (un-manipulated) SISBEN score calculations. We then instrument
for SR enrollment with our re-constructed eligibility measure (Hahn, Todd, and Van der Klaauw
2001). In general, our estimates are robust across a variety of parametric and non-parametric
specifications.
Despite our strategy for addressing manipulation of eligibility, our approach has
limitations. First, because we use household surveys to implement a “fuzzy” regression
discontinuity design, our samples are relatively small. Second, we measure SISBEN index
components after official SISBEN classification occurred, presumably resulting in a degree of
measurement error. Third, due to financial shortfalls, many of Colombia’s municipios (hereafter,
“counties”) used eligibility thresholds that fell short of the official one. Following Chay,
McEwan, and Urquiola (2005), we therefore estimate and use county-specific thresholds. These

2

limitations introduce noise into the regression discontinuity design and generally bias us against
finding behavioral responses to the SR.
We first find evidence that by the mid-2000s, the SR succeeded in protecting poor
Colombians from financial risk associated with the medical costs of unexpected illness. In
particular, SR enrollment appears to have reduced the variability of out-of-pocket spending for
inpatient care. Despite this reduction in risk, however, we observe little evidence of meaningful
portfolio choice effects (changes in the composition of household assets, human capital
investments, or household consumption), perhaps because the SR falls short of providing full
insurance.
Our results also suggest that SR enrollment is associated with large increases in the use of
traditionally under-utilized preventive services – some of which nearly doubled. Moreover, we
find evidence of health improvement under the SR as well – specifically, gains along margins
sensitive to the increases in preventive care that we observe. There is more mixed evidence of
changes in the use of curative services (although theoretical predictions about the use of curative
care are ambiguous).
We conclude by discussing the underlying behavioral mechanisms that may explain our
results. Because the SR is complex and multi-faceted, it is important to note that we cannot draw
firm inferences about them; we emphasize this as an important direction for future research.
Overall, we highlight two mechanisms that we suspect are important: high-powered supply-side
incentives and the possibility that enrollees receive care from higher-quality private sector
facilities.

3

2. Background and Policy Context
2.1 Public Sector Health Insurance for Colombia’s Poor Prior to the Reform
Prior to the introduction of the SR in 1993, roughly 25% of Colombians (a subset of
those with formal sector jobs) had any form of explicit health insurance (Pinto 2008). However,
Colombians lacking formal insurance also had a degree of implicit insurance provided through
the public sector. Specifically, they could receive medical care from public sector hospitals and
clinics for a fraction of the full cost of their services; out-of-pocket payments were generally
progressive and loosely based on socio-economic status. Public sector facilities, in turn, covered
their losses with direct transfers from national and local governments, and health care
professionals were typically paid fixed salaries that did not reward productivity. Thus, poor
Colombians effectively had a degree of implicit health insurance coupled with inefficient
provider incentives – and the reform that we study aimed to expand coverage while improving
efficiency.
2.2 Overview of Colombia’s Subsidized Health Insurance Regime for the Poor
Under Law 100 in 1993, Colombia introduced the SR, a novel form of publicly-financed
health insurance for the poor (Gwatkin et al. 2005, Escobar 2005). Primarily through SR
expansion, formal health insurance coverage in Colombia grew from about 25% of the
population in 1993 to 80% in 2007 (CENDEX 2008). The SR is organized as a variant of the
classical ‘managed competition’ model (Enthoven 1978a and 1978b). Beneficiaries are fully
subsidized to purchase health insurance from competing health plans. During our study period
(the mid-2000s), subsidies were financed by a combination of public resources including payroll
taxes and national and local general revenue. These resources are transferred to county
governments, which in turn are responsible for eligibility determination, enrollment, and

4

contracting with health plans. This role of local government has important implications for our
empirical analysis.
Health plans charge county health authorities a government-regulated premium per
enrollee and offer a standardized package of benefits (see Appendix 1 for the details of these
benefits).4 Participating health plans then act as group purchasers of health services for their
enrollees by contracting with a network of health facilities and clinicians. Because premiums
and benefit packages are standardized by law (unlike the classical ‘managed competition’
model), health plans compete for enrollees on the basis of provider networks and service quality.
In practice, however, very few cities had more than one insurer during the years that we study.
Insurers’ ability to contract with health care providers (hospitals and medical groups) for
more efficient service provision is a central innovation of the SR. Insurers receive premiums
(fixed payments per enrollee per unit time) for all covered services, giving them strong
incentives to constrain total spending. Insurers then (partially) transmit these incentives to
provider organizations through capitated payment contracts, and they have the authority to deny
reimbursement for services deemed inefficient.5
In the next section we describe the major demand- and supply-side incentive changes
under the SR, and Section 3 then provides predictions based on them for health service use, outof-pocket spending on medical care, and health outcomes.

4

During our study period, the benefits package of the SR (Plan Obligatorio de Salud Subsidiado) emphasized
coverage for primary and basic outpatient services, drugs, and some catastrophic care. There was limited coverage
for specialist services, and there were substantial gaps in coverage for hospital care.
5
Provider organizations, in turn, must transmit the incentives they face to individual clinicians whom they employ.
Our interviews with stakeholders in the Colombian health care system suggest that organizations solve this agency
problem through non-financial rather than payment-based incentives (systematic data on organizational incentives
and clinician contracts is unfortunately unavailable).

5

2.3 Changes in Demand- and Supply-Side Incentives under the SR
There were important changes in both demand- and supply-side incentives with the
introduction of the SR. On the demand-side, out-of-pocket prices for covered curative services
are 10% of the full price (as opposed to 30% for poor uninsured Colombians).6 Moreover, total
out-of-pocket spending per episode of illness each year is capped at half of the monthly
minimum wage for SR beneficiaries – while the same cap is six times as large for uninsured
patients (Decreto 2357 and Acuerdo 260 of the Consejo Nacional de Seguridad Social en Salud).
Notably, preventive services are essentially free regardless of insurance status.
On the supply-side, changes in provider payment contracts created substantially different
incentives for the provision of health services. Specifically, there are two types of contracts
between insurers and provider organizations under the SR: capitated primary care contracts and
fee-for-service specialty care contracts. For primary care, insurers pay providers fixed amounts
per month for all services used by enrollees (“capitation”). These contracts create strong
incentives for providers to constrain total spending on primary care and have important
implications for both preventive and curative health care (as discussed in the next section).
Importantly, promotion of preventive care can be a central means of reducing total expenditures.7
For specialty care, insurers generally pay providers a pre-determined fee for each covered
service that they supply (i.e., on a “fee-for-service” basis). These contracts encourage the
provision of all reimbursable services (both efficient and inefficient). However, SR insurers also

6

The Colombian Ministry of Social Protection maintains a fee schedule (SOAT) regulating out-of-pocket prices.
For example, the full price for a physician consultation was 17,300 pesos in 2007 and 18,460 pesos in 2008
(approximately US $10). Medical facility social workers assess uninsured patients’ “ability to pay” and may charge
them sliding scale out-of-pocket fees (greater than 10% of the full price) on a case-by-case basis.
7
Many medical professionals believe that increasing prevention reduces overall medical spending – whether or not
this is true depends on prices, the health production function, and competing risks. Cohen, Neumann and Weinstein
(2008) find that 20% of preventive measure in the US are cost saving.

6

have the authority to deny reimbursement on a case-by-case basis for inefficient specialty care
(termed “utilization review”), allowing them to limit wasteful service use.8
2.4 Eligibility for the SR
Eligibility for the SR is determined using a poverty-targeting index called SISBEN (or
Sistema de Identificación de Beneficiarios). The original SISBEN index consisted of fourteen
components measuring different aspects of household well-being (such as housing material,
access to public utilities, ownership of durable assets, demographic composition, educational
attainment, and labor force participation – for a complete description, see Appendix 2).9 On each
dimension, households are classified according to mutually exclusive, collectively exhaustive
categories with varying weights assigned to each category; these weights vary between urban
and rural areas. A household’s SISBEN score is then calculated by summing points across
components. Possible scores range from 0 to 100 (with 0 being the most impoverished) and are
divided into six strata. Households scoring in SISBEN strata 1 and 2 (the lowest strata) are
eligible for the SR (below 48 in urban areas, below 31 in rural areas).10
2.5 Eligibility and Enrollment in Practice
Although eligibility for the SR increases the likelihood of enrollment, neither one
necessarily implies the other for at least three reasons: misclassification or manipulation of

8

Utilization review does little to promote services traditionally used sub-optimally.
Eligibility also varies within households because certain demographic groups (including pregnant women and
young children) are prioritized for enrollment.
10
SISBEN eligibility shifts abruptly at each county’s cabecera boundary, an administrative demarcation formally
distinguishing urban and rural parts of each county and loosely corresponding to the fringe of public utility
infrastructure. Distinct urban and rural SISBEN scales are applied to households on corresponding sides of the
boundary, differing both in component parts and in the weighting of response categories for each component. We
implemented a research design exploiting these urban/rural index differences, but inconsistent application of the
rural index and data limitations prevent us from drawing meaningful conclusions from it. In this paper we therefore
focus on urban eligibility.
9

7

SISBEN scores, shortfalls in local government revenue, and enrollment that preceded SISBEN
enumeration.11
First, both local governments and households have incentives to manipulate SISBEN
scores. Local governments receive fixed transfers from the national government for each
resident they enroll, creating incentives to maximize enrollment. The selective enrollment of key
constituents can also provide political benefits (Camacho and Conover 2011). Households prefer
enrollment over “uninsurance” as well because co-payments are lower for SR beneficiaries than
for those lacking formal insurance. Consistent with both types of incentives, there is evidence of
considerable SISBEN score manipulation between 1997 and 2003 (Camacho and Conover
2011).12
Second, most local governments lack sufficient revenue to finance the enrollment of all
eligible residents. According to law, those with lower SISBEN scores and those belonging to
specific targeted groups (such as children under five and pregnant women) are therefore
prioritized for enrollment.13 This means that many counties use de facto eligibility thresholds
that fall below the uniform national threshold.
Third, some counties began enrolling residents in the SR before all of their residents had
been classified using SISBEN. These counties instead used other means-test criteria such as
residents’ estrato, a neighbourhood-level measure of socio-economic status used to establish
electricity prices paid by local households.
11

Administrative mistakes in the enrollment process are also important.
Using results from the 2005 population census, the Colombian newspaper El Tiempo reports that there are more
SR enrollees than residents in some counties (El Tiempo, October 26, 2006). Camacho and Conover (2011) show
that the distribution of official SISBEN scores exhibits both large leftward shifts in density over time and the
formation of a mass point just to the left of the national eligibility threshold in urban areas. Neither are present in
Colombian household surveys. The former suggests misrepresentation by households, while the latter suggests
misrepresentation by enumerators or officials.
13
The laws formalizing this prioritization are Acuerdos 244 and 253 of the Consejo Nacional de Seguridad Social
en Salud. This prioritization also means that although SISBEN scores are calculated at the level of family
“nucleus,” individuals within families can vary in enrollment status; we observe this in our household survey data.
12

8

In general, these realities of the program’s implementation have two broad implications
for our empirical analyses (which we discuss in greater detail in Section 4.2). One is the
necessity of an empirical strategy that addresses manipulation of SISBEN scores. The other is
that de facto county threshold must be estimated (because they are not officially reported).
2.6 Previous Studies
Several previous empirical papers have studied Colombia’s SR as well (see Giedion and
Uribe (2009) for a comprehensive review). Trujillo et al. (2005) use propensity score matching
to compare SR enrollees to observationally similar uninsured Colombians, finding that the SR is
associated with greater medical care use. Giedion et al. (2009) also use propensity score
matching and find that SR enrollment is associated with more visits to health care providers,
higher vaccination coverage rates, and fewer reports of not seeking medical care for financial
reasons. Gaviria, Medina, and Mejía (2007) instrument for SR enrollment using length of time a
household head lived in his/her current place of residence and report that SR enrollment is
associated with better self-reported health, more preventive and curative outpatient care, and
fewer hospitalizations. Finally, matching official SISBEN score data with birth records,
Camacho and Conover (2008) use a regression discontinuity design in two samples: a county
lacking clear evidence of manipulation and selected counties observed shortly after SR
implementation. They find that SR enrollment is associated with increased birth weight and
better APGAR scores but not antenatal care use, medical supervision of deliveries, or probability
of hospital delivery. Relative to previous studies of the SR, our paper employs a different
strategy for addressing manipulation of program eligibility, uses an approach that disentangles

9

the role of the SR from other public programs using SISBEN, and studies a broader range of
behavioral responses to health insurance.14

3. Empirical Predictions on the Interaction of Supply- and Demand-Side Incentives
Although we emphasize the centrality of changes in supply-side incentives under the SR,
out-of-pocket prices for covered services also fell. This section therefore considers the joint
effect of supply- and demand-side changes in formulating predictions about changes in risk
protection, the use of preventive and curative services, and health outcomes. Section 5 then
provides empirical evidence on each.
Risk Protection and Out-of-Pocket Medical Spending. Protecting households against
medical care costs associated with unexpected illness is a central objective of health insurance.
As Appendix 1 shows, the SR covers many of the most expensive services including trauma
care, dialysis, and major joint replacement (hips and knees, for example). It also caps total outof-pocket spending per episode of illness each year at half of the monthly minimum wage. The
SR should therefore reduce the variability of out-of-pocket medical spending. Assuming that the
price elasticity of demand for medical care is less than one, the SR should also reduce total outof-pocket spending for medical care.
Preventive Health Services. Most preventive services in Colombia are free regardless of
insurance status (i.e., free both for SR enrollees and the uninsured), so the main difference in
incentives for preventive care originate on the supply-side. Primary care providers are paid on a
capitated basis, so they have strong incentives to limit total primary care spending. Increasing
14

See Card, Dobkin, and Maestas (2008), Card, Dobkin, and Maestas (2009), Chandra, Gruber, and McKnight
(2010a), and Anderson, Dobkin, and Gross (2012) for recent regression discontinuity studies of health insurance in
the United States. For recent work on the United States using other methodologies, see Doyle (2005), Dafny and
Gruber (2005), Finkelstein (2007), Finkelstein and McKnight (2008), Kolstad and Kowalski (2010), Chandra,
Gruber, and McKnight (2010b), and Kowalski (2011).

10

preventive service use can reduce the need for more costly curative care – and can therefore be
cost-saving – so capitated primary care incentives are likely to increase preventive care use.15
An opposing force at work is ex ante moral hazard: SR enrollees may have weaker
incentives to use preventive services because they pay less for curative care (Nordquist and Wu
1976, Phelps 1978). Although we fail to find evidence of ex ante moral hazard (as shown in
Section 5.5) and there is little evidence of it in other studies (Kenkel 2000), our preventive care
estimates reflect the net effect of these forces.16 Because preventive services generate important
positive externalities (both pecuniary and infectious disease-related), increases in their use
presumably improve welfare.17
Curative Medical Care. Three changes under the SR are likely to influence the use of
curative medical care: reductions in out-of-pocket prices, increases in the use of preventive
services, and supply-side incentives for limiting total medical spending. First, for negative price
elasticities of demand, reductions in out-of-pocket prices will increase the use of curative care.
This increase is inefficient under standard assumptions (ex post moral hazard); however, curative
care in developing countries may produce positive externalities, and there may also be important
credit constraints. Second, any increases in preventive service use may reduce the use of
curative care (an efficient result). Third, both capitation and utilization review produce
incentives for providers to limit the use of curative medical care. Some reductions may be
efficient (counterbalancing demand-side incentives leading to ex post moral hazard) while others

15

One randomized controlled trial in the US and another in the UK show that capitation increases preventive service
use (Manning et al. 1984, Lennon et al. 1990). This finding is also consistent with the evidence from observational
studies summarized by Miller and Luft (1994) and more recent research by Keenan et al. (2009).
16
The RAND Health Insurance Experiment reports no sizeable or significant effect of insurance coverage on health
behaviors (smoking, drinking, and exercise) (Newhouse and the Insurance Experiment Group 1993). Medicare
coverage has also been reported not to increase unhealthy behaviors (Dave and Kaestner 2006).
17
Popular conditional cash transfer programs – including the Familias en Acción program in Colombia – aim to
increase the use of preventive services even though they are otherwise available for free. At least eleven developing
countries have introduced such conditional cash transfer programs (Fiszbein and Schady 2009).

11

may be inefficient (leading to “stinting” – see for example Ellis and McGuire (1990), Holmstrom
and Milgrom (1991), Ma and McGuire (1997), and McGuire (2000)). Predictions about changes
in curative care under the SR as well as their welfare implications are therefore ambiguous.
Health Outcomes. Both preventive and curative services are inputs into health
production. If at least one of these two types of care increases and neither of them decreases,
health should presumably improve to some degree. Alternatively, the prediction is ambiguous if
one type increases and the other decreases. In our empirical analyses, we are able to examine the
prevalence of infectious diseases common among children (diarrhea, cough and fever) as well as
the number of days lost to illness.

4. Data and Empirical Strategy
4.1 Data
Our empirical approach requires household survey data containing three types of
information: (1) enrollment in the SR, (2) components of the SISBEN index (enabling us to
simulate SR eligibility), and (3) potential behavioral responses and outcomes of interest (both
welfare-improving and distortionary). There are two candidate Colombian household surveys
that meet these criteria: the Encuestas de Calidad de Vida (ECV) and the Demographic and
Health Surveys (DHS). The ECVs are nationally-representative household surveys designed to
measure socio-economic well-being and “quality of life,” broadly defined. The DHS data
reports detailed fertility, health, and socio-economic information for nationally-representative
samples of fertile age women (defined as ages 15-49) and their households. Because the de facto
implementation of the SR occurred in 1996/1997, we use the 2003 ECV and the 2005 DHS for

12

our analyses.18 Table 1 shows descriptive statistics by type of behavior/outcome for the full
samples as well as those with and without SR coverage.
As our empirical strategy requires, we calculate household-level SISBEN scores to
simulate SR eligibility because simulated eligibility should not reflect manipulation of SISBEN
scores (Camacho and Conover 2011).19 However, not all household surveys contain all
necessary components of the SISBEN index. Appendix 2 provides a complete description of the
SISBEN components present in each survey.20 We impute values using ordered probit models
for the few variables that are missing (firm size and per-capita income in the DHS and primary
roof material in both surveys).
4.2 Empirical Strategy
Instrumenting for Enrollment with Simulated Eligibility
In principle, the SISBEN index’s SR eligibility threshold can be used to study behavioral
responses associated with SR enrollment. This discontinuity induces an abrupt shift in eligibility
(and enrollment) along otherwise smooth distributions of household characteristics; coincident
shifts in behaviors and outcomes can reasonably be linked to the program. However, adverse or
propitious selection into eligibility – or manipulation according to unobserved household
characteristics, as discussed in Section 2.5 – is likely to bias the estimates of interest (McCrary
2008).
To circumvent this difficulty, we employ an instrumental variables strategy closely
resembling one proposed by Hahn, Todd, and Van der Klaauw (2001). Conceptually, we seek to
18

There was also a Colombian DHS survey conducted in 2000, but it is much smaller and contains few outcome
variables of interest. We do not use the 1997 wave of the ECV because SR enrollment was still very low in that
year.
19
Official SISBEN scores are also not available in the datasets that we use.
20
In theory, SISBEN scores should be calculated at the family (or “nucleus”) level. However, we treat entire
households as families given reports that SISBEN enumerators adopted this definition in practice due to difficulties
in conforming to the technical definition.

13

reconstruct ‘true’ SISBEN scores when both official SISBEN scores and observed SR enrollment
reflect manipulation. To do so, we calculate SISBEN scores for each household in the ECV and
DHS data and then use calculated scores to instrument for SR enrollment (for prominent
examples of simulated instruments, see Currie and Gruber (1996a and 1996b), and Cutler and
Gruber (1996), and Hoxby (2001)).21
Using urban households with simulated SISBEN scores near the urban eligibility
threshold (we do not use rural households because of sufficiently inconsistent application of the
rural scale)22, we could in principle begin by estimating the following first-stage equation for
individuals i in household h:
(1)

enrollih = α + γbelowh + βSISBENh + Σkδkestratohk + εih,

where enroll is an indicator for whether or not individual i is enrolled in the SR, below is an
indicator for simulated SISBEN score lying below the eligibility threshold, SISBEN is simulated
SISBEN score, and estrato is a dummy variable for an estrato category (a neighborhood-level
measure of socio-economic status used to establish electricity prices paid by local households).
Using Two-Stage Least Squares (2SLS), we could then estimate the following second-stage
equation:
(2)

outcomeih = φ + λenrollih + θSISBENh + Σkπkestratohk + ξih,

instrumeting for enroll with below. The relationship between behavioral outcomes of interest
(outcome) and SR enrollment would then be captured by estimates of the parameter λ.
21

We emphasize “old” SISBEN scores – those calculated using the official scale in effect between the beginning of
the SR and 2003. Enrollees eligible only under the old scale were not disenrolled with the introduction of the “new
scale,” and the old (but not the new) eligibility discontinuity is evident in the 2005 DHS.
22
The combination of smaller sample size and inconsistent application of the scale in rural areas means that our
first-stage relationships are considerably weaker than in urban areas. In the DHS, the first-stage F-statistics are
about 9 for the sample of children (N=574) and about 3 for the sample of mothers (N=302). In the ECV, the firststage F-statistics are about 18, but the size of the rural sample is roughly one quarter of the urban one (1318 vs.
4129).

14

Estimating County-Specific Eligibility Thresholds
As described in Section 2.5, financial shortfalls led many Colombian counties to use SR
eligibility thresholds at SISBEN scores below the official national threshold. We therefore use
county-specific eligibility thresholds. In addition to improving the strength of our first stage,
this approach offers another key benefit: because some local governments use the official
national threshold for other public benefits, changes in outcomes observed at county-specific SR
thresholds will not reflect behavioral responses to other public programs. (Section 5.1 shows
that participation in other public programs is not discontinuous at county-specific thresholds.)
Exact county-specific eligibility thresholds are unknown, so we estimate them following
Chay, McEwan, and Urquiola (2005). Specifically, using our full samples, we establish countyspecific breaks in SR eligibility at the SISBEN score that maximize the goodness-of-fit of a
model of SR enrollment as a function of a dichotomous indicator for whether or not a
household’s score falls below the threshold.23 This approach establishes thresholds that
maximize the percentage of individuals correctly classified as eligible in each county. Threshold
means in the ECV and DHS are 45.03 and 45.83, respectively, and their interquantile ranges are
4.96 and 3.89. Intuitively, estimated thresholds are positively correlated with current county
income (the sum of taxes, transfers from the state, and non-tax income) and negatively correlated
with the share of households having unmet basic needs.24

23

There are 84 counties in the ECV and 220 counties in the DHS. We exclude individuals from a few counties using
two criteria related to having very few observations in some counties. One is having the first percentile in the
SISBEN score distribution lie above the national threshold or the 99th percentile score lie below the national
threshold. The other is having an estimated threshold with those below it having relatively lower SR enrollment
rates than those above it. The total number of observations excluded for these reasons is minor (3.8% of the sample
in the ECV data and 5.2% of the sample in the DHS data). Estimated thresholds are constrained to be lower than 49.
24
To assess this, we ran an OLS regression of county-specific eligibility thresholds on current county income and
the share of households in the county having unmet basic needs (a composite indicator that collapses across
household population density, water source, toilet availability at home, education of household head, ratio of
employed household members to all household members, and children’s school attendance rate). Using the ECV
sample, the estimate for current county income is 0.0091 with a standard error of 0.004; in the DHS, the estimate is

15

We then use county-specific thresholds to re-code the variable below for each individual i
in households h and Colombian counties c and estimate the following first stage equation:
(3)

enrollihc = α + γbelowhc + βSISBENh + φSISBEN_diffhc + Σkδkestratohk + μc + εihc,

where below is now an indicator for whether or not individual i’s simulated SISBEN score falls
below the eligibility threshold in the individual’s county c, SISBEN_diff is the difference
between an individual’s simulated SISBEN score and the estimated eligibility threshold in the
individual’s county (i.e., relative SISBEN score), μc represents county fixed effects (allowing us
to focus on within-county variation in simulated eligibility across county-specific thresholds),
and all other variables are defined as in equation (1). To adhere transparently to the identifying
assumption that individuals with simulated SISBEN scores very near the threshold are
comparable with the exception of their eligibility, we conservatively focus on individuals whose
calculated scores lie within two index points of the county-specific cutoff (our main estimates
persist across various bandwidths, as shown in Section 5.6).25
Figures 1A and 1B use ECV and DHS data to show SR enrollment and “uninsurance” by
simulated SISBEN score relative to county-specific eligibility thresholds. Each county’s
threshold is normalized to zero, and the figure then shows means and 95% confidence intervals
for each SISBEN index integer relative to the threshold as well as non-parametric kernel density
plots on either side. The figure illustrates large discrete increases in the probability of enrollment
and concomitant decreases in the probability of uninsurance at the threshold ranging between 25
to 30 percentage points. Figures 2A and 2B show the enrollment and “uninsurance” separately

0.0043 with a standard error of 0.002. For the share of households with unmet basic needs, the estimates are -0.0456
and -0.0444 with standard errors of 0.024 and 0.015, respectively.
25
Because eligibility thresholds vary by county, our approach essentially averages across sample respondents with
different absolute SISBEN scores. To investigate how our estimates vary with absolute SISBEN score, we also
estimate variants of equation (4) below with interactions between SR enrollment and absolute SISBEN score
(instrumenting for this term with interactions between an indicator for falling below county-specific thresholds and
absolute SISBEN score) and find insignificant estimates for this interaction term (see Section 5.7).

16

by regions of Colombia as well. It is worth noting than SR enrollment falls short of 100% at low
(calculated) SISBEN scores. This may not only be due to mistargeting, but also to our use of
household survey data (rather than official data) to construct SISBEN scores
Using our re-coded variable below to instrument for enroll, we then estimate the
following equation by 2SLS:
(4)

outcomeihc = φ + λenrollihc + θSISBENh + ψSISBEN_diffhc + Σkπkestratohk + μc + ξihc,

where the estimate of interest is the estimate of λ.26 Section 5.6 shows that our results are robust
across bandwidths to including higher-order relative SISBEN score polynomials, using
interactions between relative SISBEN scores and simulated eligibility, and excluding county
fixed effects. We also estimate λ using local linear regression without any covariates other than
relative SISBEN score.27
Limitations of the Empirical Strategy
Although our approach addresses key irregularities in SR implementation, it also has
shortcomings. First, because the ECV and DHS household survey data that we use to calculate
SISBEN scores was collected after official SISBEN classification, our calculations presumably
include measurement error (even absent manipulation of official SISBEN status). Second, our
estimates of county-specific eligibility thresholds presumably do not match those used in practice
exactly, introducing additional noise into the relationship between our measure of simulated
eligibility and actual enrollment. Third, manipulation of official SISBEN scores further weakens
the strength of the first stage relationship. Fourth, our sample sizes are relatively small in the
neighborhood of the eligibility thresholds. Overall, these limitations clearly compromise the

26

We estimate equations (3) and (4) using linear models; marginal probabilities computed using bivariate probit
models yield similar results to the 2SLS estimates for dichotomous outcomes examined throughout the paper. We
calculate our standard errors clustered by county.
27
For comparison, we also estimate equation (4) by OLS and show the results at the bottom of our tables.

17

power of our estimates (few are significant at significance thresholds below α=0.10) and suggest
that our results should also be interpreted as lower bounds.

5. Results
This section presents empirical evidence on a variety of important behavioral responses
to the SR. We begin by demonstrating that both background characteristics not influenced by the
program and participation in other social programs using SISBEN are balanced across estimated
SR eligibility thresholds. We then investigate the effectiveness of health insurance in protecting
households against financial risk (and possibly changing the optimal composition of household
spending and assets). Next, we study changes in the use of traditionally under-utilized
preventive services in light of the SR’s emphasis on allocative efficiency. In doing so, we also
examine changes in health outcomes that are sensitive to the use of important preventive
services. We then analyze how SR enrollment is related to changes in the use of curative
medicine. To investigate possible behavioral distortions, we also test for reductions in private
health investments (ex ante moral hazard) and insurance ‘crowd-out’ associated with SR
enrollment. Finally, we assess the robustness of our estimates through a variety of additional
parametric and non-parametric specifications.28
5.1 Balance across Discontinuous Eligibility Thresholds
Our empirical approach assumes that no individual or household characteristics – other
than SR enrollment – that could influence the outcomes of interest vary discontinuously across
our estimated eligibility thresholds. To test this assumption, Table 2 shows results obtained by

28

As expected, power is lower in all analyses if we use the uniform national threshold rather than estimated countyspecific ones. In contrast to the F statistics shown in our main tables, using the uniform national threshold yields
first stage F statics of 4.7 in the ECV and 18 in the DHS. Even so, many of our key results on health care use and
health outcomes are nonetheless present when we use the uniform national threshold.

18

estimating equations (3) and (4) for individual attributes that could not reasonably change in
response to SR enrollment (such as age or educational attainment among adults). Consistent with
our assumption, the estimates are not generally distinguishable from zero. (Examining the
distribution of simulated SISBEN scores across eligibility discontinuities, Appendix 3 shows
evidence in support of this assumption as well.)
We then consider whether or not our estimates from equation (4) could be attributed to
participation in other public programs that also use the SISBEN index. Before investigating this
possibility directly, we first note that it is unlikely because these programs use the uniform
national eligibility threshold, while we estimate and utilize de facto county-specific thresholds
for the SR – many of which fall below the uniform national threshold. To confirm this, we reestimate equations (3) and (4) using a dichotomous indicator for participation in these other
programs – including job training, home mortgage subsidies, education vouchers, Hogares
Comunitarios (a large child care program), and services provided by the Instituto Colombiano de
Bienestar Familiar (the largest social welfare agency in Colombia) – as the dependent variable in
equation (4).29 Table 2 presents these results, suggesting that participation in other programs is
also balanced across county-specific SR eligibility thresholds.
5.2 Financial Risk Protection and Portfolio Choice
Although a key innovation of the SR is its emphasis on allocative efficiency, a central
objective of any health insurance program is to provide protection against financial risk. We
therefore begin by examining the relationship between SR enrollment and both level and
29

The program Empleo en Acción (a workfare program active in 2003 but abolished in 2004) is the only public
program of which we are aware that used the uniform national SISBEN eligibility threshold for which the 2003
ECV does not contain data. Participation in the program was low (only 7.4% of those in SISBEN strata 1 or 2) and
provided no benefits directly related to health (it paid 60% of the minimum wage to individuals who worked on
official program projects an average of at least 30 hours per week for 2.4 months) (IFS-SEI-Econometria 2005). We
do not have information about participation in Familias en Acción, a Colombian conditional cash transfer program,
but the eligibility threshold for this program (36) is considerably lower, falling more than two standard deviations
below the mean of our estimated SR thresholds.

19

variability of out-of-pocket medical spending. To construct our variability measure, we first
calculate mean individual spending separately among those enrolled and those not enrolled in the
SR. For each individual, we then measure the difference between each individual’s spending and
the mean among those with the same enrollment status, constructing our variability measure as
the absolute value of this difference. We analyze outpatient and inpatient out-of-pocket spending
(within the past twelve months) separately and emphasize the latter because of idiosyncrasies in
how outpatient spending is reported.30
We first graphically examine shifts in the distribution of medical spending associated
with simulated eligibility for the SR. Figure 3 shows cumulative density functions for inpatient
medical spending in the preceding year separately for those falling above and below countyspecific thresholds (using our sample of those within two index points of the cutoff).31 Both
distributions are heavily right-skewed, but mass in the distribution for those who are eligible
(those below the threshold) falls to the left of the distribution for those who are ineligible. No
clearly comparable pattern is present for outpatient medical spending (Figure 4). Overall, these
figures suggest that SR eligibility is associated with reductions in right-tail inpatient medical
spending – a pattern consistent with risk protection.32
The first four columns of Panel A in Table 3 then present econometric results obtained by
estimating equations (3) and (4) for medical spending by type. The first row presents IV
30

The ECV 2003 question about outpatient spending in the preceding 30 days excludes outpatient costs associated
with illness ultimately leading to hospitalization; the inpatient expenditure question asks about all inpatient spending
in the past 12 months.
31
These graphs do not correspond exactly to our formal RD estimates for several reasons. One is that they only
include observations with positive expenditures and hence do not capture differential selection into any spending
between those above vs. below the eligibility threshold. Another is that using our bandwidth of two sample, they
depict mean differences between those above vs. below the eligibility threshold (rather than differences between the
two groups as one converges to the threshold from above vs. below). Conducting a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for
equality of distributions, we are unable to reject the null hypothesis of equality, presumably because of these
limitations and small sample sizes when conditioning on any spending. They are nonetheless suggestive.
32
These figures may understate the magnitude of risk protection under the SR for two reasons: (1) some people may
not receive medical care at all, but nonetheless incur non-medical financial expenses due to poor health, and (2) the
figures show densities by eligibility rather than enrollment status (because enrollment is endogenous).

20

estimates for SR enrollment, and the second row reports intent-to-treat (ITT) estimates for
simulated SR eligibility (estimates for a dummy variable coding whether or not an individual
falls below the eligibility threshold obtained by OLS regressions of outcomes on this dummy and
the other covariates in equation 4). The first column suggests that SR enrollment lowers mean
inpatient spending by about 60,000 pesos (α=0.10), around a 30% reduction among those using
any inpatient services. Perhaps more importantly for assessing protection against financial risk,
the third column shows that SR enrollment is associated with reductions in the variability of
inpatient medical spending (α=0.05).33 There is no statistically significant association for
outpatient care. Appendix 4 Figure 1 graphically shows all outcomes examined in Panel A across
county-specific eligibility thresholds (essentially, graphical versions of our intent-to-treat
analyses).
Overall, the results shown in Table 3 Panel A suggest that SR enrollment is associated
with meaningful risk protection benefits. By reducing household exposure to financial risk, SR
enrollment could also produce meaningful changes in the composition of household assets,
human capital investments, and household consumption (i.e., portfolio choice effects).
Specifically, it may increase investments not previously undertaken because of costly informal
risk-management activities (such as precautionary saving). Panel B of Table 3 presents estimates
for durable goods not used to construct the SISBEN index (car and radio ownership) as well as
household education and consumption expenditures. In general, it implies that SR enrollment is
not associated with discernible portfolio choice effects (perhaps because the SR falls short of
providing full insurance).

33

Although this result is unsurprising given that Colombia’s reform caps the amount that SR enrollees are required
to pay out-of-pocket, it cannot be taken for granted in a developing country context. For example, Wagstaff and
Lindelow (2008) find that health insurance in China increases financial risk due to a combination of poor regulation
and asymmetric information.

21

5.3 Preventive Service Use and Health Status
As described earlier, a key innovation of the SR is its focus on improving allocative
efficiency in medical care. In particular, increasing the use of highly beneficial preventive
services – many of which produce large positive externalities – is likely to improve welfare.
These externalities are due both to reduced rates of infectious disease transmission and to
reduced curative care costs borne by others through risk pools.
The first two columns of Table 4 report estimates for different types of preventive care
use obtained from equations (3) and (4) (Appendix 4 Figure 2 shows graphical versions of the
intent-to-treat analyses). In general, they suggest substantial increases in the use of preventive
health care services.34 Specifically, SR enrollment is associated with a 29 percentage point
increase in the probability of a preventive physician visit in the past year (a 75% increase;
α=0.01). Importantly, the SR is also associated with 1.50 more growth-monitoring and well-care
visits in the past year, a 50% increase relative to uninsured children (α=0.05). These well-care
visits are a principal way of addressing important childhood health problems (parents receive
nutritional advice, iron supplements, and de-worming medications, for example – which are
important for strengthening children’s immune systems and making them less susceptible to
major childhood illnesses such as severe diarrhea and acute respiratory infections/pneumonia).35
We then investigate whether or not health status has improved under the SR – in
particular, dimensions of health that are sensitive to the use of preventive care. Although our
preventive physician visit variable is not service-specific, our measure of childhood growth and
development checks should correspond directly with infectious disease prevalence. Columns

34

This increase in preventive care use dominates any ex ante moral hazard (which would reduce prevention –
although Section 5.5 suggests no evidence of ex ante moral hazard).
35
See Fogel (1994), Santos et al. (2001), Alderman (2007), Currie et al. (2008), Galasso and Umapathi (2009), and
Linnemayr and Alderman (2011) on the relationship between preventive care and child health.

22

three through six of Table 4 show estimates for child health outcomes linked to preventive care
use. SR enrollment is associated with 1.4 fewer child days absent from usual activities due to
illness in the past month (α=0.05). Enrollment is also associated with an 18 percentage point
reduction in the self-reported incidence of cough, fever, or diarrhea among children in the
preceding two weeks (but it is not statistically significant at conventional levels). Appendix 4
Figure 2 shows graphical versions of the intent-to-treat analyses for these health outcomes as
well.36 Because these health gains can be linked to increases in preventive service use, they are
also likely to improve welfare.
5.4 Use of Curative Medical Care
As Section 3 discusses, there are a variety of competing incentives and other forces
influencing curative medical care under the SR. These include reductions in out-of-pocket
prices, increases in the use of preventive services, and supply-side incentives for limiting total
medical spending. Predictions about changes in curative service use under the SR – and their
welfare implications – are therefore ambiguous, but they remain a central interest of
policymakers and are important for assessing the costs of Colombia’s innovative health
insurance reform.
Table 5 reports estimates for various categories of curative care obtained from equations
(3) and (4) (Appendix 4 Figure 3 shows graphical versions of the intent-to-treat analyses). We
find that SR enrollment is associated with a 13 percentage point increase in reported physician
visits because of health problems within the past 30 days (α=0.05). There is no change in use of
curative care among children, which may be due to improvements in child health associated with
36

Interestingly, for some of the more statistically pronounced results (such as physician visits for preventive care
and children’s healthy days lost due to illness), the graphical pattern of results shown in Figure 2 Appendix 4 closely
resemble the graphical pattern enrollment in the SR shown in Figure 1: a more or less flat relationship to the left of
the threshold, and a monotonic relationship to the right of the threshold. Although suggestive, these shape
similarities must still be interpreted cautiously.

23

SR enrollment (as Table 4 shows). Finally, there is no meaningful relationship at conventional
significance levels between participation in the SR and hospitalizations.
5.5 Ex Ante Moral Hazard and Insurance Crowd-Out
Protection from financial risk associated with unexpected illness weakens private
incentives for costly health protection (ex ante moral hazard) (Pauly 1968). Because we find
evidence of greater risk protection, we investigate how protective private health behaviors not
directly linked to medical care change with SR enrollment.37 As Table 6 and Appendix 4 Figure
4 show, however, we find no meaningful change in breastfeeding or maternal investments in
fetal health (alcohol, drug, or tobacco use during pregnancy; or prenatal dietary supplementation
with iron, calcium, or folic acid), suggesting little ex ante moral hazard associated with SR
enrollment.38
Manipulation of official SISBEN scores suggests that Colombians perceive benefits of
SR enrollment, so we also investigate the possibility that SR enrollment displaces other forms of
explicit health insurance.39 Table 6 also presents intent-to-treat (ITT) estimates obtained by
estimating equation (3) with dichotomous indicators for Regimen Contributivo enrollment, other
forms of health insurance (those for the military, police officers, and certain industrial groups
like oil industry workers, for example), and “uninsurance” as dependent variables. The Regimen
Contributivo estimates are generally small (-0.02 in the ECV and -0.05 in the DHS) and the latter
is statistically significant (α=0.05), suggesting that some modest crowding-out of formal
insurance may have occurred.
37

More generally, private health behaviors and public health services could theoretically be either complements or
substitutes for publicly provided health services. While reductions in the price of medical care may raise the return
to private health investments given competing risks, cheaper health services could also instead ‘crowd-out’ costly
private health behaviors (Dow, Holmes, Philipson, and Sala-i-Martin 1999, Murphy and Topel 2003).
38
We cannot rule-out the possibility that social desirability bias in reporting might attenuate a true effect.
39
Formal sector employees are mandated to enroll in an employment-based health insurance system called Regimen
Contributivo. This mandate holds even for individuals with SISBEN scores falling below the SISBEN eligibility
threshold for the SR.

24

5.6 Robustness
To investigate the robustness of our results, we estimate a variety of alternative
parametric and non-parametric specifications based on our main estimating equations. First, we
re-estimate equations (3) and (4) using SISBEN score bandwidths ranging between two and four.
Second, at each bandwidth we estimate specifications that include higher order polynomials of
relative SISBEN scores (including squared, cubic, and fourth power terms) as well as models
that include interactions between relative SISBEN scores and simulated eligibility (although
allowing SISBEN gradients to vary on either side of the eligibility threshold should matter little
given our narrow bandwidth). Third, we re-estimate specifications that do not include county
fixed effects (at each bandwidth), allowing us also to make cross-county comparisons among
individuals with identical simulated SISBEN scores but that fall on opposite sides of countyspecific eligibility thresholds. Finally, we also estimate models using non-parametric local linear
regression.40 As Tables 1-4 of Appendix 5 show that our results are generally robust (with some
variation in precision) across these alternative bandwidths and specifications.
5.7 Heterogeneity and External Validity
While RD estimates can have good internal validity, their external validity is often limited
because they typically utilize a sample only in the neighborhood of the discontinuity (Imbens and
Lemieux 2008, Lee and Lemieux 2010). However, because SR eligibility thresholds vary by
county, our empirical strategy allows us to investigate the external validity of our estimates by
extending equation (4) to include interactions between absolute SISBEN score and SR

40

Specifically, we use local linear regression functions with triangle kernels to estimate conditional means of
outcome variables (conditioning on SISBEN_diff) on either side of the eligibility threshold, and we repeat this
estimation process for enrollment in the SR. We then construct Wald statistics using differences in the estimated
conditional means of the outcome variable on either side of the threshold as numerators and the difference in the
conditional mean of SR enrollment on either side of the threshold as the denominator. We estimate our standard
errors using 250 bootstrap replications. Details of the implementation can be found in Nichols (2007).

25

enrollment.41 This allows us to test for heterogeneity by SISBEN score, a summary measure of
socio-economic status. As Appendix 6 Tables 1-4 show, we find little evidence of
heterogeneous effects, suggesting that our estimates are not sensitive to local variation in
SISBEN scores and may therefore apply to a broader range of the Colombian population.42 We
note, however, that the interaction terms’ standard errors are large, so our power to detect
heterogeneity is limited.

6. Conclusion
This paper studies the role of Colombia’s Régimen Subsidiado in protecting the poor
against financial risk, influencing their use of health services, and ultimately affecting their
health status. Unusual among middle- and low-income countries at the time of its introduction,
the SR is a publicly-financed health insurance program with features of managed care
emphasizing allocative efficiency that are traditionally only found in wealthy countries. We find
evidence that the SR provides some protection against financial risk and is associated with
greater use of preventive services having positive externalities – as well as with measurable
health gains among children.
Pinpointing the mechanisms through which complex insurance programs such as SR
work is an important topic of future research. In our case, because preventive services are
generally free regardless of insurance status, one plausible interpretation of the increase in
prevention that we observe links them to the SR’s high-powered supply-side incentives (if

Specifically, we estimate: outcomeihc = φ + λenrollihc + θSISBENh +δ(enrollihc×SISBENh) + ψSISBEN_diffhc +
Σkπkestratohk + μc + ξihc, using belowhc and (belowhc×SISBENh) as instruments. All variables are defined as in
equations (3) and (4).
42
The fifth row of Appendix 6 Tables 1-4 shows implied effects of Subsidized Regime enrollment evaluated at the
average SISBEN score (45) and their accompanying p-values. The magnitude and significance of these effect sizes
generally match the estimates in Tables 3-6.
41

26

providers with capitated contracts believe that prevention is cost-saving). Another potentially
important channel is patient substitution from public to private sector providers contracting with
insurance plans under the SR (if private providers were more likely to supply preventive care).
Although we suspect that these two mechanisms may be most salient, we cannot rule out others
(individual feeling more comfortable going to the doctor when insured, the provision of
insurance making the universal entitlement to preventive care more salient, etc.).
We conclude by emphasizing that the welfare-improving potential of SR has yet to be
fully realized. For example, a variety of political concessions followed the creation of the SR –
including exemptions from the end of government subsidies as well as requirements that insurers
contract with public facilities for a minimum share of the services that they finance. These
concessions presumably limit the ability of health plans to contract with medical care providers
in ways that best encourage higher quality and lower cost services.

27

References
Abel-Smith, Brian. 1992. “Health Insurance in Developing Counties: Lessons from Experience.”
Health Policy and Planning 7(3): 215-226.
Alderman, Harold. 2007. “Improving Nutrition Through Community Growth Promotion:
Longitudinal Study of the Nutrition and Early Child Development Program in Uganda.”
World Development 35 (8) (August): 1376–1389.
Anderson, Michael, Carlos Dobkin, and Tal Gross. 2012. “The Effect of Health Insurance
Coverage on the Use of Medical Services.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
4(1): 1–27.
Arrow, Kenneth. 1963. “Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care.” The
American Economic Review 53: 941-973.
BDO International and Corporación Centro Regional de Población (CCRP). 2000. Evaluation
of SISBEN: Efficiency, Institutional Efficacy of the Identification, Classification and
Beneficiary Selection Processes. Bogotá: Ministry of Health.
Bhushan, I., E. Bloom, D. Clingingsmith, R. Hong, E. King, M. Kremer, B. Loevinsohn, and B.
Schwartz. 2006. “Contracting for Health: Evidence from Cambodia.” Unpublished
Manuscript. Harvard University.
Black, Robert E., Saul S. Morris, and Jennifer Bryce. 2003. “Where and Why are 10 Million
Children Dying Every Year?” The Lancet 361: 2226-2234.
Camacho, Adriana and Emily Conover. 2008. “Effects of Subsidized Health Insurance on
Newborn Health in a Developing Country.” Centro de Estudios sobre Desarrollo
Económico (CEDE) Working Paper 14, Universidad de Los Andes.
------. 2011. “Manipulation of Social Program Eligibility.” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy 3 (2): 41-65.
Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas. 2008. “The Impact of Nearly Universal
Coverage on Health Care: Evidence from Medicare.” American Economic Review 98(5):
2242-2258
------. 2009. “Does Medicare Save Lives?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2): 597-636.
CENDEX. 2008. Resultados de la Encuesta Nacional de Salud 2007. Power point presentation
available online at: http://www.cendex.org.co.
Chandra, Amitabh, Jonathan Gruber, and Robin McKnight. 2010a. “Patient Cost-Sharing in Low
Income Populations.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 100(2): 303-308.
------. 2010b. “Patient Cost-Sharing and Hospitalization Offsets in the Elderly.” American
Economic Review 100(1): 193-213.
Chaudhury, Nazmul and Jeffrey Hammer. 2004. “Ghost Doctors: Absenteeism in Rural
Bangladeshi Health Facilities.” World Bank Economic Review 18(3): 423-441.
Chay, Kenneth Y., Patrick J. McEwan, and Miguel Urquiola. 2005. “The Central Role of Noise
in Evaluating Interventions that Use Test Scores to Rank Schools.” American Economic Review
95(4): 1237-1258.
28

Cohen, Joshua T., Peter J. Neumann, and Milton C. Weinstein. 2008. “Does Preventive Care
Save Money? Health Economics and the Presidential Candidates.” New England Journal of
Medicine 358 (7): 661–663.
Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. 1996a. “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical
Care, and Child Health.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 431-466.
------. 1996b. “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in the Medicaid
Eligibility of Pregnant Women.” Journal of Political Economy 104(6): 1263-96.
Currie, Janet, Sandra Decker, and Wanchuan Lin. 2008. “Has Public Health Insurance for Older
Children Reduced Disparities in Access to Care and Health Outcomes?” Journal of Health
Economics, 27 (6): 1407-1652.

Cutler, David M. 2002. “Health Care and the Public Sector.” In Handbook of Public Economics
4, ed. A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Cutler, David and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. “Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private
Insurance?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 391-430.
Cutler, David and Richard Zeckhauser. 2000. “The Anatomy of Health Insurance.” In Handbook
of Health Economics 1, ed. A. J. Culyer & J. P. Newhouse. Chapter 11. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Dafny, Leemore and Jonathan Gruber. 2005. “Public Insurance and Child Hospitalizations:
Access and Efficiency Effects.” Journal of Public Economics 89(1): 109–129.
Das, Jishnu and Jeffrey Hammer. 2007. “Money for Nothing: The Dire Straits of Medical
Practice in Delhi, India.” Journal of Development Economics 83(1): 1-36.
Dave, Dhaval and Robert Kaestner. 2006. “Health Insurance and Ex-ante Moral Hazard:
Evidence from Medicare.” NBER Working Paper 12764, Cambridge, MA.
Department of National Planning (DNP). 2004. Programa Familias en Acción – Condiciones
Iniciales de los Beneficiarios e Impactos Preliminares. Bogotá: Department of National
Planning.
Department of National Planning (DNP) and Ministry of Social Protection. 2001. Proceedings of
the National Conference on SISBEN: Integral Evaluation. Bogotá: Department of National
Planning.
------. 2003a. Who Benefits from SISBEN? Integral Evaluation. Bogotá: Department of National
Planning.
------. 2003b. Results of the Evaluation Survey of SISBEN at the Municipal Level. Bogotá:
Department of National Planning.
Dow, William, Paul Gertler, Robert Schoeni, John Strauss, and Duncan Thomas. 1997. “Health
Care Prices, Health, and Labor Outcomes: Experimental Evidence.” Labor and Population
Working Paper 97-01, RAND.
Dow, William, Tomas Philipson, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 1999. “Longevity Complementarities
under Competing Risks.” American Economic Review 89(5): 1358-1371.
Dow, William, Gonzalez, Kristine and Luis Rosero-Bixby. 2003. “Aggregation and InsuranceMortality Estimation.” NBER Working Paper 9827, Cambridge, MA.
29

Dow, William and Kammi K. Schmeer. 2003. “Health Insurance and Child Mortality in Costa
Rica.” Social Science and Medicine 57(6): 975-986.
Doyle, Joseph. 2005. “Health Insurance, Treatment and Outcomes: Using Auto Accidents as
Health Shocks.” Review of Economics and Statistics 87(2): 256-270.
Duflo, Esther, Abhijit Banerjee, and Angus Deaton. 2004. “Wealth, Health, and Health Services
in Rural Rajasthan.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 94(2): 326-330.
Ellis, Randall and Thomas McGuire. 1990. “Optimal Payment Systems for Health Services.”
Journal of Health Economics 9: 375-396.
------. 1993. “Supply-Side and Demand-Side Cost Sharing In Health Care,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 7(4): 135-151.
Enthoven, Alain. 1978. “Consumer Choice Health Plan (first of two parts). Inflation and Inequity
in Health Care Today: Alternatives for Cost Control and an Analysis of Proposals for
National Health Insurance.” New England Journal of Medicine 298: 650-658.
------. 1978. “Consumer Choice Health Plan (second of two parts). A National Health Insurance
Proposal Based on Regulated Competition in the Private Sector.” New England Journal of
Medicine 298: 709-720.
Escobar, Maria Luisa. 2005. “Health sector reform in Colombia.” in Development Outreach
Magazine. World Bank Institute, Washington, D.C.
Filmer, Deon, Jeffrey Hammer, and Lant H. Pritchett. 2000. “Weak Links in the Chain: A
Diagnosis of Health Policy in Poor Countries.” World Bank Research Observer 15(2): 199224.
Finkelstein, Amy 2007. “The Aggregate Effects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the
Introduction of Medicare,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3): 1-37.
Finkelstein, Amy and Robin McKnight. 2008. “What Did Medicare Do? The Initial Impact of
Medicare on Mortality and Out of Pocket Medical Spending.” Journal of Public Economics
92(7): 1644-1669.
Fiszbein, Ariel and Norbert Schady. 2009. Conditional Cash Transfers – Reducing Present and
Future Poverty. The World Bank, Washington D.C.
Fogel, Robert. 1994. “Economic Growth, Population Theory, and Physiology: The Bearing of
Long-term Processes on the Making of Economic Policy,” American Economic Review
84(3): 369-395.
Fresneda, Bautista. 2003. “Focusing on the subsidized health regime in Colombia,” Revista
Salud Pública 5(3): 209-245.
Fuchs, Victor. 1974. Who Shall Live? Health, Economics, and Social Choice. Singapore: World
Scientific Publishing Company.
Gakidou, E., R. Lozano, E. Gonzalez-Pier, J. Abbott-Klafter, and J. Barofsky. 2006. “Assessing
the Effect of the 2001-2006 Mexican Health Reform: An Interim Report Card.” The Lancet
368: 1920-1935.

30

Galasso, Emanuela and Nithin Umapathi. 2009. “Improving Nutritional Status Through
Behavioural Change: Lessons from Madagascar.” Journal of Development Effectiveness 1
(1): 60–85.
Gaviria, Alejandro, Carlos Medina, and Carolina Mejía. 2007. “Assessing Health Reform in
Colombia: From Theory to Practice.” Economía 7(1): 29-72.
Gertler, Paul. 2004. “Do Conditional Cash Transfers Improve Child Health? Evidence from
PROGRESA’s Control Randomized Experiment.” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings 94(2): 336-341.
Gertler, Paul and Jonathan Gruber. 2002. “Insuring Consumption against Illness,” American
Economic Review 92(1): 51–70.
Gertler, Paul and Orville Solon. 2002. “Who Benefits From Social Health Insurance? Evidence
from the Philippines,” Unpublished Manuscript, University of California, Berkeley and the
University of the Philippines.
Gruber, Jonathan, Hendren, Nathaniel and Robert Townsend. 2012 “Demand and
Reimbursement Effects of Healthcare Reform: Health Care Utilization and Infant Mortality
in Thailand,” NBER Working Paper 17739, Cambridge, MA.
Giedion, Ursula and Manuela Uribe. 2009. “Colombia’s Universal Health Insurance System.”
Health Affairs 28(3): 853-863.
Giedion, Uusula, Beatrice Díaz, Educardo Alfonso, and William Savedoff. 2009. “The Impact of
Subsidized Health Insurance on Health Status and on Access to and Use of Health Services.”
In Glassman, A., Giuffrida, A., Escobar, M-L., and U. Giedion (eds.) From Few to Many:
Ten Years of Health Insurance Expansion in Colombia. Inter-American Development Bank
and The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.
GTZ, ILO and WHO. 2005. Recommendations for Action. The International Conference on
Social Health Insurance in Developing Countries. Geneva: GTZ, ILO, and WHO.
Gwatkin, Davidson R, Adam Wagstaff, and Abdo S. Yazbeck. 2005. Reaching the Poor with
Health, Nutrition and Population Services: What Works, What Doesn’t, and Why. World
Bank. Washington, D. C.
Hahn, Jinyong, Petra Todd, and Wilbert Van der Klaauw. 2001. “Identification and Estimation
of Treatment Effects with a Regression-Discontinuity Design.” Econometrica 69(1): 201209.
Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom. 1991. “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive
Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design.” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization
7: 24-52.
Hoxby, Caroline. 2001. “All School Finance Equalizations Are Not Created Equal.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 116(4): 1189-1231.
Hughes, David and Songkramchai Leethongdee. 2007. “Universal Coverage in the Land of
Smiles: Lessons from Thailand’s 30 Baht Health Reforms.” Health Affairs 26(4): 999-1008.
IFS-SEI-Econometria. 2005. Evaluación de Impacto del Programa Empleo en Acción (Volume
VI). Bogotá: National Planning Department.
31

Imbens, Guido and Thomas Lemieux. 2008. “Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide to
Practice.” Journal of Econometrics 142(2): 615-635.
Keenan, P., M. Elliott, P. Cleary, A. Zaslavsky, and M. Landon. 2009. “Quality Assessments by
Sick and Healthy Beneficiaries in Traditional Medicare and Medicare Managed Care.”
Medical Care 47(8): 882-888.
Kenkel, Donald. 2000. “Prevention.” In Handbook of Health Economics 1, ed. A. J. Culyer &
J. P. Newhouse. Edition 1, Chapter 31. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Kolstad, Jonathan and Amanda Kowalski. 2010. “The Impact of Health Care Reform on Hospital
and Preventive Care: Evidence from Massachusetts.” NBER Working Paper 16012,
Cambridge, MA.
Kowlaski, Amanda. 2011. “Estimating the Trade-off between Risk Protection and Moral Hazard
with a Nonlinear Budget Set Model of Health Insurance.” Unpublished Manuscript, Yale
University.
Lagarde, Mylene, Andy Haines, and Natasha Palmer. 2007. “Conditional Cash Transfers for
Improving Uptake of Health Interventions in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: A
Systematic Review.” Journal of the American Medical Association 298(16): 1900-1910.
Lee, David and Thomas Lemieux. 2010. “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics.”
Journal of Economic Literature 48: 281-355.
Lennon, M. A., H. V. Worthington, P. Coventry, A. C. Mellor, and P. J. Holloway. 1990. ‘The
Capitation Study. 2. Does Capitation Encourage More Prevention?’ British Dental Journal
168 (5) (March 10): 213–215.
Levy, Helen and David Meltzer. 2004. “What Do We Really Know about Whether Health
Insurance Affects Health?” In Health Policy and the Uninsured: Setting the Agenda, edited
by C. McLaughlin. Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press.
Linnemayr, Sebastian, and Harold Alderman. 2011. “Almost Random: Evaluating a Large-scale
Randomized Nutrition Program in the Presence of Crossover.” Journal of Development
Economics 96 (1) (September): 106–114.
Ma, Albert C. and Thomas McGuire. 1997. “Optimal Health Insurance and Provider Payment.”
American Economic Review 87: 685-704.
Manning, Willard, Arleen Leibowitz, George Goldberg, Joseph Newhouse, and William Rogers.
1984. “A Controlled Trial of the Effect of a Prepaid Group Practice on Use of Services”, New
England Journal of Medicine 310 (23): 1505-1510.
McGuire, Thomas. 2000. “Physician Agency.” In Handbook of Health Economics 1, ed. A. J.
Culyer & J. P. Newhouse. Edition 1, Chapter 9. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Miller, Robert H., and Harold S. Luft. 1994. “Managed Care Plan Performance Since 1980A
Literature Analysis.” Journal of the American Medical Association 271 (19) (May 18): 1512–
1519.
Mohanan, Manoj. 2012. “Causal Effects of Health Shocks on Consumption and Debt: QuasiExperimental Evidence from Bus Accident Injuries.” The Review of Economic and Statistics.
Forthcoming.
32

Morduch, Jonathan. 1995. “Income Smoothing and Consumption Smoothing.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 9(3): 103 - 114.
------. 1999. “The Microfinance Promise,” Journal of Economic Literature 37(4): 1569-1614.
Muralidharan, Karthik and Venkatesh Sundararaman. 2011. “Teacher Performance Pay:
Experimental Evidence from India.” Journal of Political Economy 119: 39-77.
Murphy, Kevin. M., and Robert H. Topel. 2006. “The Value of Health and Longevity.” Journal
of Political Economy 114: 871-904.
Newhouse, J. and the Insurance Experiment Group. 1993. Free for All? Lessons from the RAND
Health Insurance Experiment. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Newhouse, Joseph. P. 2002. Pricing the Priceless – A Health Care Conundrum. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Nichols, Austin. 2007. rd: Stata Module for Regression Discontinuity Estimation. Available
online at: http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s456888.html.
Nordquist, Gerald and S. David Wu. 1976. “The Joint Demand for Health Insurance and
Preventive Medicine.” In The Role of Health Insurance in the Health Services Sector, ed. R.
Rosett. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Odonnell, O. et al. 2008. “Who Pays for Health Care in Asia?” Journal of Health Economics
27: 460-475.
Panopoulus, G. and C. Vélez. 2001. “Subsidized Health Insurance, Proxy Means Testing, and
the Demand for Health Care among the Poor in Colombia,” in Colombia Poverty Report
(Volume 2). Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Pauly, Mark. 1968. “The Economics of Moral Hazard,” American Economic Review 49: 531537.
Pauly, Mark, Frederic E. Blavin, and Sudha Meghan. 2008. “Is There a Market for Voluntary
Health Insurance in Developing Countries?” NBER Working Paper 14095, Cambridge, MA.
Pauly, Mark, Peter Zweifel, Richard Scheffler, Alexander Preker, and Mark Bassett. 2006.
“Private Health Insurance in Developing Countries.” Health Affairs 25(2): 369-379.
Paxson, Christina. 1993. “Consumption and Income Seasonality in Thailand,” Journal of
PoliticalEconomy 101(1): 39-72.
Phelps, Charles. 1978. “Illness Prevention and Medical Insurance.” Journal of Human Resources
13: 183-207.
Pinto, Diana. 2008. “Good Practices in Expanding Health Care Coverage.” In Gottret P.,
Schieber, G.J., and H.R. Waters (eds), Good Practices in Health Financing Lessons from
Reforms in Low and Middle-Income Countries. The International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development/The World Bank. Washington DC.
Pitt, Mark and Shahidur Khandker. 1998. “The Impact of Group-Based Credit Programs on Poor
Households in Bangladesh: Does the Gender of Participants Matter?” Journal of Political
Economy 106(5): 958-996.

33

Santos, Iná, Cesar Victora, José Martines, Helen Gonçalves, Denise Gigante, Neiva Valle, and
Gretel Pelto. 2001. “Nutrition Counseling Increases Weight Gain Among Brazilian Children.”
The Journal of Nutrition 131 (11) (November): 2866–2873.
Townsend, Robert. 1994. “Risk and Insurance in Village India.” Econometrica 62(3): 539-591.
Trujillo, Antonio, Jorge Portillo, and John Vernon. 2005. “The Impact of Subsidized Health
Insurance for the Poor: Evaluating the Colombian Experience Using Propensity Score
Matching.” International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics 5(3): 211-239.
Wagstaff, Adam. 2007. “Health Insurance for the Poor: Initial Impacts of Vietnam’s Health Care
Fund for the Poor.” Policy Research Paper Series Working Paper 4134, The World Bank.
Wagstaff, Adam and Shengchao Yu. 2007. “Do Health Sector Reforms Have Their Intended
Impacts? The World Bank’s Health VIII Project in Gansu Province, China,” Journal of
Health Economics 26: 505-535.
WHO Commission on Macroeconomics and Health. 2001. Macroeconomics and Health:
Investing in Health for Economic Development. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health
Organization.
WHO. 2010. The World Health Report: Health Systems Financing: the Path to Universal
Coverage. Geneva, World Health Organization.
Xu, Ke, David Evans, Kei Kawabata, Riadh Zeramdini, Jan Klavus, and Christopher Murray.
2003. “Household Catastrophic Health Expenditure: A Multicountry Analysis.” The Lancet
362(9378): 111-117.
Wagstaff, Adam and Magnus Lindelow. 2008. “Can Insurance Increase Financial Risk?” Journal
of Health Economics 27 (4) (July): 990–1005.
Zeckhauser, Richard. 1970. “Medical Insurance: A Case Study of the Tradeoff between Risk
Spreading and Appropriate Incentives.” Journal of Economic Theory 2(1): 10-26.

34

35

36

37

38

0.60
0.56
0.65
3.26

0.11
2.75
12.58
0.54
3.96
0.09
0.14
0.44
0.01
0.00
0.38

46.81
46.58
0.18
0.19
0.20
0.07
0.30
0.28
0.02
0.02
0.08
0.01
0.05
0.10
0.18

Health Status
Child Days Lost to Illness
Cough, Fever Diarrhea
Any Health Problem
Birthweight (KG)

Behavioral Distortions
Drank Alcohol during Pregnancy
Number of Drinks per Week during Pregnancy
Months Child Breastfed
Folic Acid During Pregnancy
Number Months Folic Acid during Pregnancy
Contributory Regime Enrollment
Contributory Regime Enrollment
Other Health Insurance
Other Health Insurance
Uninsured
Uninsured

Balance
Household Head Age
Household Head Age
Completed Elementary School
Completed Elementary School
Completed Secondary School
Completed Secondary School
Household Head Completed Elementary School
Household Head Completed Elementary School
Household Head Completed Secondary School
Household Head Completed Secondary School
Student Received School Grant
Benefits to Buy House
Attended Training
Household in Hogar Comunitario program
Services from Bienstar Familiar
14.81
14.79
0.39
0.39
0.40
0.26
0.46
0.45
0.15
0.13
0.26
0.08
0.21
0.30
0.38

0.31
9.76
10.87
0.50
2.42
0.29
0.34
0.50
0.09
0.06
0.49

2.01
0.50
0.48
0.57

0.50
1.81
0.24
0.21
0.12
0.26
0.49
0.46

129,777
22,565
128,137
22,209
20,279
48,468
217,392
599,861
0.16
0.49

SD

Total

3334
4222
3333
3764
3333
3764
3334
4222
3334
4222
1305
4222
3010
4222
4222

998
110
946
988
515
4222
3334
4222
3334
4222
3334

1161
1167
1161
897

4222
1167
4222
4222
4222
4222
564
1161

4219
4218
4219
4218
3567
4222
4096
966
3334
3334

N

47.36
45.71
0.18
0.18
0.21
0.08
0.29
0.27
0.02
0.01
0.05
0.00
0.06
0.09
0.16

0.12
3.15
11.15
0.56
4.05
0.17
0.26
0.82
0.01
0.01
0.73

0.65
0.56
0.64
3.25

0.39
1.00
0.06
0.04
0.01
0.07
0.52
0.29

11,360
2,513
216,891
4,698
7,501
34,089
279,128
688,065
0.03
0.60

Mean

N

504
60
578
500
266
2253
1758
2253
1758
2253
1758

680
682
680
534

2253
683
2253
2253
2253
2253
262
680

2252
2249
2252
2249
1874
2253
2171
479
1758
1758

15.37
15.12
0.38
0.39
0.41
0.27
0.45
0.45
0.13
0.11
0.22
0.06
0.23
0.29
0.37

1758
2253
1757
1985
1757
1985
1758
2253
1758
2253
651
2253
1593
2253
2253

Baseline Demographic Variables

0.32
10.85
10.18
0.50
2.39
0.38
0.44
0.39
0.12
0.08
0.45

2.14
0.50
0.48
0.53

0.49
1.75
0.23
0.20
0.12
0.25
0.50
0.45

129,227
20,170
127,393
19,615
23,234
52,464
201,735
716,382
0.18
0.49

Outcome Variables

SD

Not Enrolled in the Subsidized Regime

46.18
47.57
0.19
0.19
0.19
0.07
0.31
0.28
0.03
0.02
0.10
0.01
0.04
0.11
0.20

0.10
2.28
14.83
0.53
3.86
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.53
0.56
0.66
3.27

0.57
1.38
0.07
0.06
0.02
0.08
0.64
0.34

10,145
1,666
192,631
3,140
7,684
36,352
270,091
621,590
0.02
0.62

14.14
14.35
0.39
0.39
0.39
0.25
0.46
0.45
0.18
0.15
0.30
0.10
0.19
0.31
0.40

0.30
8.36
11.53
0.50
2.45
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

1.82
0.50
0.47
0.63

0.49
1.87
0.26
0.23
0.13
0.28
0.48
0.48

130,435
25,019
129,004
24,822
16,407
43,428
233,756
455,559
0.15
0.49

SD

1576
1969
1576
1779
1576
1779
1576
1969
1576
1969
654
1969
1417
1969
1969

494
50
368
488
249
1969
1576
1969
1576
1969
1576

481
485
481
363

1969
484
1969
1969
1969
1969
302
481

1967
1969
1967
1969
1693
1969
1925
487
1576
1576

N

Enrolled in the Subsidized Regime
Mean

DHS
ECV
DHS
ECV
DHS
ECV
DHS
ECV
DHS
ECV
ECV
ECV
ECV
ECV
ECV

DHS
DHS
DHS
DHS
DHS
ECV
DHS
ECV
DHS
ECV
DHS

DHS
DHS
DHS
DHS

ECV
DHS
ECV
ECV
ECV
ECV
ECV
DHS

ECV
ECV
ECV
ECV
ECV
ECV
ECV
ECV
DHS
DHS

Data Source

39

All data summarized is from samples of "urban" individuals within two SISBEN index points of county-specific eligibility thresholds in either the 2003 Encuesta de Calidad de Vida (ECV) or the 2005 Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) (as indicated in the last
column). SISBEN index calculations are described in detail in Appendix 2, and estimation of county-specific eligibility thresholds is presented in Section 4.2. The first group of three columns present summary statistics for the entire bandwidth of 2 sample, the second
group for those not enrolled in the Subsidized Regime, and the third group for those enrolled in the Subsidized Regime.

0.47
1.16
0.06
0.05
0.02
0.08
0.58
0.31

10,794
2,118
205,581
3,971
7,588
35,145
274,881
654,552
0.03
0.61

Mean

Medical Care Use
Preventive Physician Visit
Number of Growth Development Checks Last Year
Curative Care Use (Not Conditional on Health Status)
Primary Care
Medical Visit - Specialist
Hospital Stay
Medical Visit for Chronic Disease
Curative Care Use among Children (Not Conditional on Health Status)

Risk Protection, Consumption Smoothing, and Portfolio Choice
Individual Inpatient Medical Spending
Individual Outpatient Medical Spending
Variability of Individual Inpatient Medical Spending
Variability of Individual Outpatient Medical Spending
Individual Education Spending
Household Education Spending
Total Spending on Food
Total Monthly Expenditure
Has Car
Has Radio

Variable:

TABLE 1:
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

0.26***
[0.07]
14.08
1.62***
[0.55]
45.71

0.40***
[0.04]

125.75

-0.04
[0.66]

47.36

3,334

DHS

First Stage Estimate, Below Eligibility Threshold

First Stage F-Statistic

OLS Estimate

Mean for those Not Enrolled in the Subsidized Regime

Observations

Data Source

DHS

3,333

0.18

0.00
[0.01]

125.91

0.40***
[0.04]

0.01
[0.03]

0.01
[0.08]

Completed
Elementary
School

ECV

3,764

0.18

0.00
[0.01]

17.02

0.25***
[0.06]

-0.04**
[0.02]

-0.15
[0.10]

Completed
Elementary
School

DHS

3,333

0.21

-0.01
[0.02]

125.91

0.40***
[0.04]

0.01
[0.03]

0.03
[0.07]

Completed
Secondary
School

ECV

3,764

0.08

-0.01
[0.01]

17.02

0.25***
[0.06]

0.01
[0.01]

0.05
[0.05]

Completed
Secondary
School

DHS

3,334

0.29

0.02
[0.02]

125.75

0.40***
[0.04]

-0.04
[0.05]

-0.09
[0.12]

Household
Head
Completed
Elementary
School

ECV

4,222

0.27

-0.01
[0.02]

14.08

0.26***
[0.07]

-0.10**
[0.05]

-0.37
[0.24]

Household
Head
Completed
Elementary
School

DHS

3,334

0.02

0.01*
[0.01]

125.75

0.40***
[0.04]

-0.01
[0.01]

-0.02
[0.03]

Household
Head
Completed
Secondary
School

ECV

4,222

0.01

0.01
[0.01]

14.08

0.26***
[0.07]

-0.01
[0.02]

-0.04
[0.07]

Household
Head
Completed
Secondary
School

ECV

1,305

0.05

0.03
[0.02]

5.17

0.21***
[0.09]

-0.01
[0.02]

-0.06
[0.11]

ECV

4,222

0.00

0.00**
[0.00]

14.08

0.26***
[0.07]

0.00**
[0.00]

0.02
[0.01]

Student
Benefits to
Received
Buy House
School Grant

ECV

3,010

0.06

-0.02***
[0.00]

23.45

0.27***
[0.06]

0.00
[0.01]

0.01
[0.04]

ECV

4,222

0.09

0.01
[0.01]

14.08

0.26***
[0.07]

0.01
[0.02]

0.03
[0.08]

ECV

4,222

0.16

0.02
[0.02]

14.08

0.26***
[0.07]

-0.01
[0.03]

-0.04
[0.13]

Household in
Services from
Attended
Hogar
Bienestar
Training Comunitario
Familiar
Program

40

Individual-level “urban” data for those within two SISBEN index points of county-specific eligibility thresholds from the 2003 ECV and 2005 DHS. Dependent variables are shown at the top of each column. The first row shows 2SLS estimates for enrollment in the Subsidized Regime (SR), instrumenting for
SR enrollment using simulated eligibility. The second row shows reduced-form intent-to-treat estimates for simulated SISBEN score falling below the county-specific eligibility threshold. The third row shows first stage estimates from OLS regressions of Subsidized Regime enrollment on an indicator for
falling below the county-specific eligibility threshold. All specifications also include SISBEN score, distance from the county-specific threshold, estrato dummy variables, and county fixed effects. Standard errors (clustered by county) are shown in brackets below each estimate. *p<0.10, **p<0.05,
***p<0.01.

ECV

4,222

0.79
[1.84]

1.77
[1.22]

Intent to Treat Estimate

3.05
[7.68]

4.38
[3.05]

Household
Head Age

2SLS Estimate, Subsidized Regime Enrollment

Outcome:

Household
Head Age

TABLE 2:
BALANCE ACROSS ELIGIBILITY THRESHOLDS

TABLE 3:
RISK PROTECTION AND PORTFOLIO CHOICE
Panel A: Risk Protection
Individual
Inpatient
Medical
Spending

Individual
Outpatient
Medical
Spending

Variability of
Individual
Inpatient
Medical
Spending

Variability of
Individual
Outpatient
Medical
Spending

2SLS Estimate, Subsidized Regime Enrollment

-58,870*
[33,263]

3,562
[2,702]

-67,499.38**
[32,906]

167.57
[2,417]

Intent to Treat Estimate

-15,108*
[8,888]

918.23
[821]

-17322.90*
[9,120]

43.20
[626]

First Stage Estimate, Below Eligibility Threshold

0.26***
[0.07]

0.26***
[0.07]

0.26***
[0.07]

0.26***
[0.07]

13.91

14.01

13.91

14.01

-5,655
[3,898]

-1,204***
[342]

-13,888***
[3,893]

-4,387***
[357]

11,359.86

2,512.98

263,380.40

7,342.59

Observations

4,219

4,218

4,219

4,218

Data Source

ECV

ECV

ECV

ECV

Individual
Education
Spending

Household
Education
Spending

2SLS Estimate, Subsidized Regime Enrollment

-341.68
[3,781]

30,366
[25,055]

32,136
[103,540]

Intent to Treat Estimate

-84.72
[945]

7,815
[4,880]

First Stage Estimate, Below Eligibility Threshold

0.25***
[0.06]

First Stage F-Statistic

Outcome:

First Stage F-Statistic
OLS Estimate

Mean for those Not Enrolled in the Subsidized Regime

Panel B: Portfolio Choice
Outcome:

Total Spending Total Monthly
on Food
Expenditure

Has Car

Has Radio

-33,826
[278,060]

0.01
[0.04]

0.17
[0.11]

8,709
[28,491]

-14,036
[115,736]

0.01
[0.01]

0.07
[0.05]

0.26***
[0.07]

0.27***
[0.06]

0.41***
[0.12]

0.40***
[0.04]

0.40***
[0.04]

19.28

14.08

18.80

12.18

125.75

125.75

OLS Estimate

122.82
[231]

2,952.32***
[902]

-12,036
[10,330]

-39,273
[58,730]

-0.01
[0.01]

0.03
[0.02]

Mean for those Not Enrolled in the Subsidized Regime

7,501

34,089

279,128

688,065

0.03

0.60

Observations

3,567

4,222

4,096

966

3,334

3,334

Data Source

ECV

ECV

ECV

ECV

DHS

DHS

Individual-level “urban” data for those within two SISBEN index points of county-specific eligibility thresholds from the 2003 ECV and 2005 DHS. Dependent variables are
shown at the top of each column. The first row shows 2SLS estimates for enrollment in the Subsidized Regime (SR), instrumenting for SR enrollment using simulated eligibility.
The second row shows reduced-form intent-to-treat estimates for simulated SISBEN score falling below the county-specific eligibility threshold. The third row shows first stage
estimates from OLS regressions of Subsidized Regime enrollment on an indicator for falling below the county-specific eligibility threshold. All specifications also include
SISBEN score, distance from the county-specific threshold, estrato dummy variables, and county fixed effects. Standard errors (clustered by county) are shown in brackets below
each estimate. *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

41

TABLE 4:
USE OF PREVENTIVE MEDICAL CARE AND HEALTH STATUS
Use of Preventive Care

Health Status (Children)

Preventive
Physician
Visit

Number of
Growth Dev.
Checks Last
Year

Child Days
Lost to
Illness

Cough,
Fever,
Diarrhea

Any Health
Problem

Birthweight
(KG)

2SLS Estimate, Subsidized Regime Enrollment

0.29***
[0.11]

1.50**
[0.69]

-1.40**
[0.65]

-0.18
[0.17]

-0.06
[0.18]

0.26
[0.29]

Intent to Treat Estimate

0.08***
[0.03]

0.55**
[0.25]

-0.49**
[0.20]

-0.07
[0.06]

-0.02
[0.06]

0.11
[0.12]

First Stage Estimate, Below Eligibility Threshold

0.26***
[0.07]

0.36***
[0.07]

0.35***
[0.07]

0.37***
[0.07]

0.35***
[0.07]

0.41***
[0.09]

14.08

25.24

23.46

25.19

23.46

19.10

0.17***
[0.01]

0.33***
[0.12]

-0.04
[0.17]

0.01
[0.04]

0.03
[0.04]

0.04
[0.05]

Mean for those Not Enrolled in the Subsidized Regime

0.39

1.00

0.65

0.56

0.64

3.25

Observations

4,222

1,167

1,161

1,167

1,161

897

Data Source

ECV

DHS

DHS

DHS

DHS

DHS

Outcome:

First Stage F-Statistic
OLS Estimate

Individual-level “urban” data for those within two SISBEN index points of county-specific eligibility thresholds from the 2003 ECV and 2005 DHS. Dependent variables are
shown at the top of each column. The first row shows 2SLS estimates for enrollment in the Subsidized Regime (SR), instrumenting for SR enrollment using simulated
eligibility. The second row shows reduced-form intent-to-treat estimates for simulated SISBEN score falling below the county specific eligibility threshold. The third row
shows first stage estimates from OLS regressions of Subsidized Regime enrollment on an indicator for falling below the county-specific eligibility threshold. All
specifications also include SISBEN score, distance from the county-specific threshold, estrato dummy variables, and county fixed effects. Standard errors (clustered by
county) are shown in brackets below each estimate. *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

42

TABLE 5:
USE OF CURATIVE MEDICAL CARE

Curative Use (Not
Conditonal on
Health Status)

Curative Use
among Children
(Not Conditional
on Health Status)

Medical Visit for
Chronic Disease

Hospital Stay

2SLS Estimate, Subsidized Regime Enrollment

0.13**
[0.05]

-0.00
[0.16]

0.51*
[0.28]

-0.04
[0.11]

Intent to Treat Estimate

0.03*
[0.02]

0.00
[0.06]

0.18***
[0.06]

-0.01
[0.03]

0.26***
[0.07]

0.35***
[0.07]

0.35***
[0.10]

0.26***
[0.07]

14.08

23.46

13.49

14.08

0.03***
[0.01]

0.07*
[0.04]

0.13***
[0.03]

0.02**
[0.01]

Mean for those Not Enrolled in the Subsidized Regime

0.06

0.29

0.52

0.07

Observations

4,222

1,161

564

4,222

Data Source

ECV

DHS

ECV

ECV

Outcome:

First Stage Estimate, Below Eligibility Threshold

First Stage F-Statistic
OLS Estimate

Individual-level “urban” data for those within two SISBEN index points of county-specific eligibility thresholds from the 2003 ECV and 2005 DHS. Dependent
variables are shown at the top of each column. The first row shows 2SLS estimates for enrollment in the Subsidized Regime (SR), instrumenting for SR enrollment
using simulated eligibility. The second row shows reduced-form intent-to-treat estimates for simulated SISBEN score falling below the county specific eligibility
threshold. The third row shows first stage estimates from OLS regressions of Subsidized Regime enrollment on an indicator for falling below the county-specific
eligibility threshold. All specifications also include SISBEN score, distance from the county-specific threshold, estrato dummy variables, and county fixed effects.
Standard errors (clustered by county) are shown in brackets below each estimate. *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

43

-0.04
[0.04]
0.40***
[0.07]
28.83
-0.02
[0.02]
0.12
998
DHS

Intent to Treat Estimate

First Stage Estimate, Below Eligibility Threshold

First Stage F-Statistic

OLS Estimate

Mean for those Not Enrolled in the Subsidized Regime

Observations

Data Source

DHS

946

11.15

4.02***
[0.91]

19.00

0.31***
[0.07]

-0.07
[1.64]

-0.23
[5.36]

Months
Breastfed as
Child

DHS

988

0.56

0.02
[0.03]

30.12

0.41***
[0.07]

0.04
[0.07]

0.10
[0.18]

Folic Acid
During
Pregnancy

ECV

4,222

0.17

-0.02
[0.02]

Contributory
Regime
Enrollment

ECV

4,222

0.01

-0.23***
[0.06]

Uninsured

ECV

4,222

0.82

-0.00
[0.00]

Other Health
Insurance

DHS

3,334

0.26

-0.05**
[0.02]

Contributory
Regime
Enrollment

Insurance Crowd-Out

DHS

3,334

0.73

-0.35***
[0.04]

Uninsured

DHS

3,334

0.01

-0.01*
[0.01]

Other Health
Insurance

44

Individual-level “urban” data for those within two SISBEN index points of county-specific eligibility thresholds from the 2003 ECV and 2005 DHS. Dependent variables are shown at the top of each column. The first row shows 2SLS
estimates for enrollment in the Subsidized Regime (SR), instrumenting for SR enrollment using simulated eligibility. The second row shows reduced-form intent-to-treat estimates for simulated SISBEN score falling below the countyspecific eligibility threshold. Intent-to-treat estimates only are reported for the crowd-out analyses of other insurance types (the last six columns). The third row shows first stage estimates from OLS regressions of Subsidized Regime
enrollment on an indicator for falling below the county-specific eligibility threshold. All specifications also include SISBEN score, distance from the county-specific threshold, estrato dummy variables, and county fixed effects. Standard
errors (clustered by household) are shown in brackets below each estimate. *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

-0.10
[0.11]

Drank Alcohol
during
Pregnancy

2SLS Estimate, Subsidized Regime Enrollment

Outcome:

Ex-Ante Moral Hazard

TABLE 6:
BEHAVIORAL DISORTIONS - EX ANTE MORAL HAZARD AND INSURANCE CROWD-OUT

APPENDICES:
“Risk Protection, Service Use, and Health Outcomes
under Colombia’s Health Insurance Program for the Poor”

APPENDIX 1: Subsidized Regime Benefits
APPENDIX 2: Components of the SISBEN Index and SISBEN Score Calculations
APPENDIX 3: Sample Density by Simulated SISBEN Score
APPENDIX 4: Figures 1-4: Outcomes by SISBEN Score Relative to the Subsidized Regime
Eligibility Threshold
APPENDIX 5: Tables 1-4: Robustness Analyses
APPENDIX 6: Tables 1-4: Heterogeneity Analyses

Appendix 1: Subsidized Regime Benefits
AGE /
POPULATION
GROUP

< 1 YEAR

1-4 years

5-19 years

20-60 years

>60 years

PREGNANT
WOMEN

Preventive care

Neonatal care and
screening (Vit K,
anemia, TSH),
immunizations, well
child care
Well child care,
immunizations,
anemia screening
Well child care,
immunizations,
anemia screening
Cardiovascular and
renal disease risk
screening, cervical and
breast cancer
screening
Cardiovascular and
renal disease risk
screening, cervical and
breast cancer
screening
High risk screening,
STD, prenatal care

Primary care
(basic
medical
consultations,
procedures
and
diagnostic
tests)

All

Secondary care
(specialist care,
hospitalizations)

TYPE OF BENEFIT
Tertiary Catastrophic
care
care

All

All

Cataract and
strabismus
surgery,
herniorraphy,
appendectomy,
cholecystectomy,
orthopedics,
rehabilitation
services and
procedures

Not
covered

Same as above
plus obstetric
care

Obstetric
care

46

Treatment with
radiotherapy
and
chemotherapy
for cancer,
dialysis and
organ transplant
for renal failure,
Surgical
treatment of
heart,
cerebrovascular,
neurological
and congenital
conditions,
treatment of
major trauma,
intensive care
unit, hip and
knee
replacement,
major burns,
treatment for
AIDS

Medications

All
medications
in national
formulary

Transportation

For
referrals,
catastrophic
care cases

Excluded
interventions

Aesthetic
surgery
Infertility
treatment
Treatment for
sleep disorders
Organ
transplants
(except renal,
heart, chornea
and bone
marrow)
Psychotherapy
and
psychoanalysis
Treatments for
end stage
disease

+EE<C;@L!'*!-DBEDC<CHG!D=!H?<!414,/3!1C;<L!7C;!414,/3!49DF<!-7A9IA7H@DCG!
!
FST^!L[[PYOTc!OP^N]TMP^!_SP!NZX[ZYPY_^!ZQ!E>E69A!TYOPc%!OP_LTW^!_SP!TYOPc!
TYQZ]XL_TZY!LaLTWLMWP!TY!PLNS!SZ`^PSZWO!^`]aPd%!LYO!Pc[WLTY^!SZb!bP!NLWN`WL_P!E>E69A!
^NZ]P^!TY!PLNS!OL_L!^Z`]NP'!
!
&$!-DBEDC<CHG!D=!H?<!414,/3!1C;<L!
5^!Pc[WLTYPO!TY!_SP!_Pc_!ZQ!_SP![L[P]%!Z`]!^_`Od!QZN`^P^!ZY!_SP!Z]TRTYLW!`]MLY!E>E69A!
TYOPc!FSP]P!L]P!QZ`]!RPYP]LW!_d[P^!ZQ!TYQZ]XL_TZY!`^PO!TY!NLWN`WL_TYR!_SP!E>E69A!TYOPc3!#5$!
S`XLY!NL[T_LW%!PX[WZdP]!NSL]LN_P]T^_TN^%!LYO!MPYPQT_^4!#6$!OPXZR]L[STN^%!TYNZXP%!LYO!WLMZ]!
QZ]NP![L]_TNT[L_TZY4!#7$!SZ`^TYR!NSL]LN_P]T^_TN^4!LYO!#8$!LNNP^^!_Z![`MWTN!`_TWT_TP^'!!FSP!TYOPc!
T^!NZX[Z^PO!ZQ!*-!NZX[ZYPY_^!LN]Z^^!_SP^P!NL_PRZ]TP^'!!;Z]!PLNS!NZX[ZYPY_%!]P^[ZYOPY_^!L]P!
NL_PRZ]TePO!LNNZ]OTYR!_Z!X`_`LWWd!PcNW`^TaP%!NZWWPN_TaPWd!PcSL`^_TaP![ZWdNSZ_ZXZ`^!]P^[ZY^P!
NL_PRZ]TP^'!!9LNS!]P^[ZY^P!NL_PRZ]d!QZ]!PLNS!NZX[ZYPY_!NZ]]P^[ZYO^!_Z!L!bPTRS_!Z]!g[ZTY_^%h!
LYO!TYOPc!^NZ]P^!L]P!NLWN`WL_PO!Md!^`XXTYR!LN]Z^^![ZTY_^'!!ENZ]P^!]LYRP!MP_bPPY!)!LYO!*))4!
STRSP]!^NZ]P^!OPYZ_P!STRSP]!^ZNTZ&PNZYZXTN!^_L_`^'!
FSP!^[PNTQTN!NZX[ZYPY_^!ZQ!_SP!TYOPc!L]P3!
!
"2#!9UNDO!4DQLTDM1!6NQMPYHR!4KDRDFTHRLSTLFS!DOG!3HOHILTS!
& #*$!9O`NL_TZYLW!L__LTYXPY_!ZQ!_SP!SZ`^PSZWO!SPLO!
& #+$!@PLY!ENSZZWTYR!QZ]!SZ`^PSZWO!XPXMP]^!_bPWaP!dPL]^!ZWO!LYO!ZWOP]!
& #,$!;T]X!^TeP!LYO![]ZaT^TZY!ZQ!EZNTLW!EPN`]T_d!MPYPQT_^!QZ]!_SP!SZ`^PSZWO!SPLO!
!
"3#!5HNPJRDQKLFS$!;OFPNH$!DOG!<DEPR!7PRFH!?DRTLFLQDTLPO!
& #-$!C]Z[Z]_TZY!ZQ!NSTWO]PY!^Tc!dPL]^!ZWO!LYO!`YOP]!#L^!^SL]P!ZQ!NSTWO]PY!`YOP]!LRP!
PTRS_PPY$!
& #.$!C]Z[Z]_TZY!ZQ!SZ`^PSZWO!XPXMP]^!PX[WZdPO!#L^!L!^SL]P!ZQ!_SZ^P!ZWOP]!_SLY!
_bPWaP$!
& #/$!CP]!NL[T_L!TYNZXP!TYOPcPO!_Z!_SP!XTYTX`X!bLRP!#LWW!_d[P^!ZQ!TYNZXP!L]P!
NZ`Y_PO$!
!
"4#!9PUSLOJ!4KDRDFTHRLSTLFS!
& #0$!A`XMP]!ZQ!]ZZX^![P]![P]^ZY!
& #1$!C]TXL]d!bLWW!XL_P]TLW!
& #2$!C]TXL]d!]ZZQ!XL_P]TLW!
& #*)$!C]TXL]d!QWZZ]!XL_P]TLW!
& #**$!A`XMP]!ZQ!L[[WTLYNP^!#LXZYR!_SZ^P!ZY!L![]P&OP_P]XTYPO!WT^_$!
!
"5#!2FFHSS!TP!?UEMLF!ATLMLTLHS!
& #*+$!IL_P]!^Z`]NP!
& #*,$!EPbLRP!OT^[Z^LW!
& #*-$!<L]MLRP!OT^[Z^LW!
!
'$!414,/3!-DBEDC<CHG!+J7@A78A<!@C!/79?!0DIG<?DA;!4IFJ<M!
!
B`]!LYLWd^P^!`^P!_SP!+)),!97H!LYO!_SP!+)).!8=E'!!FSP!_LMWP!MPWZb!^SZb^!bSTNS!
E>E69A!NZX[ZYPY_^!L]P!LaLTWLMWP!TY!PLNS!^`]aPd'!

!

!

47

!
57F@78A<!
9O`NL_TZYLW!5__LTYXPY_!
9X[WZdXPY_!E_L_`^!
EZNTLW!EPN`]T_d!6PYPQT_^!
=PLW_S!>Y^`]LYNP!
CPY^TZY!
;T]X!ETeP!#A`XMP]!ZQ!9X[WZdPP^$!
5RP!
>YNZXP!
A`XMP]!ZQ!DZZX^!
C]TXL]d!ILWW!@L_P]TLW!
C]TXL]d!DZZQ!@L_P]TLW!
C]TXL]d!;WZZ]!@L_P]TLW!
A`XMP]!ZQ!5[[WTLYNP^!
FH!
DPQ]TRP]L_Z]!
5T]!7ZYOT_TZYP]!
6WPYOP]!
IL^STYR!@LNSTYP!
IL_P]!EZ`]NP!
EPbLRP!8T^[Z^LW!
<L]MLRP!8T^[Z^LW!

.04!'%%)!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
!!
5aLTWLMWP!
AZ_!5aLTWLMWP!
AZ_!5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
AZ_!LaLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
AZ_!LaLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
!!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!

/-5!'%%(!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
!!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
AZ_!LaLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
!!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!
5aLTWLMWP!

!
@Z^_!E>E69A!NZX[ZYPY_^!L]P!LaLTWLMWP!TY!_SP!SZ`^PSZWO!^`]aPd^!bP!`^P!TY!Z`]![]TXL]d!
LYLWd^P^!#YPL]Wd!LWW!TY!_SP!+)),!97H!LYO!_SP!R]PL_!XLUZ]T_d!TY!_SP!+)).!8=E$'!!;Z]!XT^^TYR!
NZX[ZYPY_^%!bP!`^P!LY!Z]OP]PO![]ZMT_![]ZNPO`]P!_Z![]POTN_!_SP!XZ^_!WTVPWd!]P^[ZY^P!NL_PRZ]d!
QZ]!PLNS!XT^^TYR!NZX[ZYPY_!`^TYR!L!WL]RP!Y`XMP]!ZQ!ZM^P]aLMWP!SZ`^PSZWO!NSL]LN_P]T^_TN^'!!
FSP!^PN_TZY!MPWZb!OP^N]TMP^!SZb!bP![P]QZ]XPO!Z`]!E>E69A!^NZ]P!NLWN`WL_TZY^'!
!
($!414,/3!49DF<!-7A9IA7H@DCG!
>Y!_ST^!^PN_TZY!bP!]P[Z]_!E>E69A!TYOPc!bPTRS_^!QZ]!PLNS!]P^[ZY^P!NL_PRZ]d!QZ]!PLNS!
NZX[ZYPY_!LYO!OP^N]TMP!SZb!bP!TX[`_P!^NZ]P^!QZ]!NZX[ZYPY_^!YZ_!]P[]P^PY_PO!TY!Z`]!
SZ`^PSZWO!^`]aPd^'!!E>E69A!TYOPc!^NZ]P^!L]P!_SPY!NLWN`WL_PO!Md!^`XXTYR!bPTRS_^!Z]![ZTY_^!
LN]Z^^!LWW!NZX[ZYPY_^'!!!
!
5'!=`XLY!7L[T_LW4!9X[WZdP]!7SL]LN_P]T^_TN^!LYO!6PYPQT_^ !
!
(&!6GUFDTLPODM!DTTDLONHOT!PI!TKH!KPUSHKPMG!KHDG!
!
*!
AZ!PO`NL_TZY!
)!
+!
EZXP!PWPXPY_L]d!
*'/+,2!
,!
7ZX[WP_P!PWPXPY_L]d!
,'--,.!
-!
EZXP!^PNZYOL]d!
.')),2!
.!
7ZX[WP_P!^PNZYOL]d!
0',-,-!
/!
EZXP!ZQ!STRSP]!PO`NL_TZY!
2'01,,!
0!
7ZX[WP_P!STRSP]!PO`NL_TZY!
**'.-/!
1!
<]LO`L_P!^_`OTP^!
*+'-1)/!
!
!

!

48

FZ!NZX[`_P!PO`NL_TZYLW!L__LTYXPY_%!bP!`^P!TYQZ]XL_TZY!ZQ!WPaPW!ZQ!^NSZZWTYR!NZX[WP_PO!LYO!
Y`XMP]!ZQ!dPL]^!ZQ!^NSZZWTYR'!!?PaPW^!ZQ!^NSZZWTYR!NZ]]P^[ZYO!_Z!_SP!QZWWZbTYR!Y`XMP]!ZQ!
dPL]^!ZQ!PO`NL_TZY3!!
! 7ZX[WP_P!PWPXPY_L]d!^NSZZW3!.!dPL]^!
! 7ZX[WP_P!^PNZYOL]d!PO`NL_TZY3!**!dPL]^!
! 7ZX[WP_P!STRSP]!PO`NL_TZY3!*/!dPL]^!
! <]LO`L_P!^_`OTP^3!*/!Z]!XZ]P!dPL]^!
E`QQTNTPY_!TYQZ]XL_TZY!ZY!WPaPW!LYO!dPL]^!ZQ!^NSZZWTYR!T^!LaLTWLMWP!_Z!NZX[`_P!_ST^!aL]TLMWP!TY!
LWW!SZ`^PSZWO!^`]aPd^'!!
!
)&!=HDO!@FKPPMLOJ!IPR!KPUSHKPMG!NHNEHRS!TWHMVH!YHDRS!PMG!DOG!PMGHR!
!
*!
)!dPL]^!
)!
+!
6P_bPPY!)!LYO!-!dPL]^!
*'/.0!
,!
6P_bPPY!-!LYO!.!dPL]^!
+'22-0!
-!
6P_bPPY!.!LYO!*)!dPL]^!
-'2/2!
.!
6P_bPPY!*)!LYO!**!dPL]^!
0'/,10!
/!
6P_bPPY!**!LYO!*.!dPL]^!
2'--+.!
0!
6P_bPPY!*.!LYO!*/!dPL]^!
*)'/2!
1!
*/!dPL]^!Z]!XZ]P!
**'*,2/!
!
G^TYR!_SP!NZOTYR!^NSPXP!OP^N]TMPO!QZ]!NLWN`WL_TYR!PO`NL_TZYLW!L__LTYXPY_!QZ]!_SP!SZ`^PSZWO!
SPLO%!bP!NLWN`WL_P!XPLY!dPL]^!ZQ!^NSZZWTYR!QZ]!LWW!SZ`^PSZWO!XPXMP]^!*+!LYO!ZWOP]'!
E`QQTNTPY_!TYQZ]XL_TZY!T^!LaLTWLMWP!_Z!NZX[`_P!_ST^!aL]TLMWP!TY!LWW!SZ`^PSZWO!^`]aPd^'!!
!
*&!7LRN!SLZH!DOG!QRPVLSLPO!PI!@PFLDM!@HFURLTY!EHOHILTS!IPR!TKH!KPUSHKPMG!KHDG!
!
IT_SZ`_!MPYPQT_^!LYO!PT_SP]!bZ]V^!LWZYP!Z]!OZP^!YZ_!
*!
bZ]V!
)!
IT_SZ`_!MPYPQT_^!LYO!bZ]V^!TY!QT]X!bT_S!+!_Z!2!
+!
PX[WZdPP^!
*'*//!
IT_SZ`_!MPYPQT_^!LYO!bZ]V^!TY!QT]X!bT_S!*)!Z]!XZ]P!
,!
PX[WZdPP^!
+'/.-.!
IT_S!MPYPQT_^!LYO!PT_SP]!bZ]V^!LWZYP!Z]!OZP^!YZ_!
-!
bZ]V!
,'2.,2!
IT_SZ`_!MPYPQT_^!LYO!bZ]V^!TY!QT]X!bT_S!+!_Z!2!
.!
PX[WZdPP^!
.'1-+0!
IT_SZ`_!MPYPQT_^!LYO!bZ]V^!TY!QT]X!bT_S!*)!Z]!XZ]P!
/!
PX[WZdPP^!
/'20*1!
!
5^^TRYTYR!]P^[ZY^P!NL_PRZ]TP^!QZ]!_ST^!TYOPc!NZX[ZYPY_!]P\`T]P^!TYQZ]XL_TZY!LMZ`_!
PX[WZdXPY_!^_L_`^%!^ZNTLW!^PN`]T_d!MPYPQT_^!#SPLW_S!TY^`]LYNP!LYO![PY^TZY!MPYPQT_^$%!LYO!QT]X!
^TeP3!
! 6NQMPYNHOT!STDTUS!T^!LaLTWLMWP!TY!LWW!SZ`^PSZWO!^`]aPd^'!
! 7LRN!SLZH!T^!YZ_!LaLTWLMWP!TY!_SP!+)).!8=E'!!IP!_SP]PQZ]P!`^P!Z]OP]PO![]ZMT_!XZOPW^!_Z!
[]POTN_!_SP![]ZMLMTWT_d!ZQ!QLWWTYR!TY_Z!PLNS!ZQ!_SP!_S]PP!QT]X!^TeP!NL_PRZ]TP^!#*!PX[WZdPP%!
+&2!PX[WZdPP^%!*)!Z]!XZ]P!PX[WZdPP^$'!!IP!_SPY!^PWPN_!_SP!NL_PRZ]d!bT_S!_SP!STRSP^_!
[]POTN_PO![]ZMLMTWT_d'!!FZ!ZM_LTY![L]LXP_]TN!P^_TXL_P^!ZQ!_SP!]PWL_TZY^ST[!MP_bPPY!L!
aL]TP_d!ZQ!ZM^P]aLMWP!SZ`^PSZWO!NSL]LN_P]T^_TN^!#OPXZR]L[STN!NSL]LN_P]T^_TN^%!PO`NL_TZY%!

!

!

49

!

LYO!]PRTZYLW!NZY_]ZW^!LXZYR!`]MLY!]P^TOPY_^$!LYO!QT]X!^TeP%!bP!P^_TXL_P!_SP^P!Z]OP]PO!
[]ZMT_!XZOPW^!`^TYR!_SP!+)),!97H!
@PFLDM!@HFURLTY!EHOHILTS!NZY^T^_!ZQ!_bZ!NZX[ZYPY_^3!SPLW_S!TY^`]LYNP!MPYPQT_^!LYO![PY^TZY!
MPYPQT_^3!
& 9HDMTK!;OSURDOFH!3HOHILTS&!=PLW_S!TY^`]LYNP!^_L_`^!T^!U`ORPO!TY!PLNS!SZ`^PSZWO!
^`]aPd!TY!_SP!QZWWZbTYR!bLd3!
64B!)''*"!=L^!SPLW_S!TY^`]LYNP!TQ!LQQTWTL_PO!bT_S!g>EE%h!g7LUL!OP!C]PaT^TZY%h!
gL]Xd([ZWTNPh!TY^`]LYNP!^NSPXP%!g9NZ[P_]ZWh!^NSPXP%!_SP!gPO`NL_TZYLW!^d^_PXh!
^NSPXP%!Z]!LY!g9CE!i!OTQQP]PY_!_Z!>EE!Z]!7LUL!OP!C]PaT^TZY'h!!FSZ^P!bT_S!
TY^`]LYNP!_S]Z`RS!LY!g5DEh!Z]!g9X[]P^L!^ZWTOL]TLh!L]P!PcNW`OPO' !
59@!)'',"!=L^!SPLW_S!TY^`]LYNP!TQ!LQQTWTL_PO!bT_S!g>EE%h!g9CE%h!gC`MWTN!
5RPYNd%h!gL]Xd([ZWTNPh!TY^`]LYNP!^NSPXP%!g9NZ[P_]ZWh!^NSPXP%!_SP!
gPO`NL_TZYLW!^d^_PXh^NSPXP%!Z]!g;ZYNZW[`P]_Z^'h!!FSZ^P!bT_S!TY^`]LYNP!
_S]Z`RS!LY!g5DEh!L]P!PcNW`OPO'!
& ?HOSLPO!3HOHILTS&!CPY^TZY!MPYPQT_^!L]P!U`ORPO!LNNZ]OTYR!_Z!LQQTWTL_TZY!bT_S!_SP![`MWTN!
Z]![]TaL_P![PY^TZY!^d^_PX'!FST^!TYQZ]XL_TZY!T^!LaLTWLMWP!TY!_SP!+)),!97H!M`_!YZ_!TY!
_SP!+)).!8=E'!

!
>Y!_SP!+)),!97H%!EZNTLW!EPN`]T_d!MPYPQT_^!L]P!U`ORPO!LNNZ]OTYR!_Z!SLaTYR!SPLW_S!TY^`]LYNP!
LYO(Z]![PY^TZY!MPYPQT_^'!!>Y!_SP!+)).!8=E%!EZNTLW!EPN`]T_d!MPYPQT_^!L]P!U`ORPO!LNNZ]OTYR!_Z!
SPLW_S!TY^`]LYNP!MPYPQT_^'!
!
#6$!8PXZR]L[STN^%!>YNZXP%!LYO!?LMZ]!;Z]NP!CL]_TNT[L_TZY !
!
"+#!?RPQPRTLPO!PI!FKLMGRHO!SLX!YHDRS!PMG!DOG!UOGHR!"DS!SKDRH!PI!FKLMGRHO!UOGHR!DJH!HLJKTHHO#!
!
*!
<]PL_P]!_SLY!)'/.!
)!
+!
;]ZX!)!_Z!)'/.!
)'++,0!
,!
KP]Z!
*'-0/*!
!
E`QQTNTPY_!TYQZ]XL_TZY!T^!LaLTWLMWP!_Z!NZX[`_P!_ST^!aL]TLMWP!TY!LWW!SZ`^PSZWO!^`]aPd^'!
!
",#!?RPQPRTLPO!PI!KPUSHKPMG!NHNEHRS!HNQMPYHG!"DS!D!SKDRH!PI!TKPSH!PMGHR!TKDO!TWHMVH#!
!
*!
?P^^!_SLY!)',)!
)!
+!
;]ZX!)',)!_Z!)'/)!
)'/0*0!
,!
;]ZX!)'/)!_Z!)'2)!
*'0,2!
-!
<]PL_P]!_SLY!)'2)!
-')*-2!
!
;Z]!NZY^_]`N_TYR!_ST^![]Z[Z]_TZY%!PX[WZdXPY_!T^!OPQTYPO!L^!SLaTYR!bZ]VPO!TY!_SP![]PNPOTYR!
bPPV%!YZ_!SLaTYR!bZ]VPO!M`_!SLaTYR!]PR`WL]!UZM%!Z]!]PNPTaTYR![LdXPY_!QZ]!bZ]VTYR!XZ]P!_SLY!
ZYP!SZ`]'!!E`QQTNTPY_!TYQZ]XL_TZY!T^!LaLTWLMWP!_Z!NZX[`_P!_ST^!aL]TLMWP!TY!LWW!SZ`^PSZWO!
^`]aPd^'!
!

!

!

50

"-#!?HR!FDQLTD!LOFPNH!LOGHXHG!TP!TKH!NLOLNUN!WDJH!"DMM!TYQHS!PI!LOFPNH!DRH!FPUOTHG#!
!
*!
G[!_Z!!)'*.!
)!
+!
5MZaP!)'*.!`[!_Z!)'+.!
)'1-0/!
,!
5MZaP!)'+.!`[!_Z!)',.!
+'*1+1!
-!
5MZaP!)',.!`[!_Z!)'.)!
,'.,/+!
.!
5MZaP!)'.)!`[!_Z!)'0.!
.',/,/!
/!
5MZaP!)'0.!`[!_Z!*'))!
0')1+0!
0!
5MZaP!*'))!`[!_Z!*'+.!
1'+-12!
1!
5MZaP!*'+.!`[!_Z!*'.)!
2'-1.,!
2!
5MZaP!*'.)!`[!_Z!+'))!
*)'+)21!
*)! 5MZaP!+'))!`[!_Z!,'))!
**',222!
**! 5MZaP!,'))!`[!_Z!-'))!
*,')10+!
*+! 5MZaP!-'))!
*,'0,01!
!
FZ!NLWN`WL_P![P]!NL[T_L!TYNZXP!QZ]!L!QLXTWd%!bP!OPQTYP!TYNZXP!_Z!TYNW`OP!WLMZ]!TYNZXP!Q]ZX!
[]TXL]d!LYO!^PNZYOL]d!UZM^!#MZ_S!QZ]!_SP!PX[WZdPO!LYO!^PWQ&PX[WZdPO$!LYO![PY^TZY!MPYPQT_^!
QZ]!]P_T]PP^'!!>Y&VTYO!^`M^TOP^!L]P!PcNW`OPO'!!IP!ZM_LTYPO!YZXTYLW!XTYTX`X!bLRP!
TYQZ]XL_TZY!#^`XXL]TePO!MPWZb$!Q]ZX!FSP!7ZWZXMTLY!7PY_]LW!6LYVf^! =POHTDRY!DOG!
7LODOFLDM!@TDTLSTLFS3!
!
2@C@BIB!K7><!"@C!
6<7F!
-DADB8@7C!E<GDG#!
+)),!
,,+%)))')!
+)).!
,1*%.))')!
!
>YNZXP!aL]TLMWP^!L]P!LaLTWLMWP!ZYWd!TY!_SP!+)),!97H'!!;Z]!_SP!+)).!8=E%!bP!`^P!Z]OP]PO!
[]ZMT_!XZOPW^!_Z![]POTN_!_SP![]ZMLMTWT_d!ZQ!QLWWTYR!TY_Z!PLNS!ZQ!*+!OT^N]P_P!NL_PRZ]TP^4!bP!_SPY!
^PWPN_!_SP!NL_PRZ]d!bT_S!_SP!STRSP^_![]POTN_PO![]ZMLMTWT_d'!!FZ!ZM_LTY![L]LXP_]TN!P^_TXL_P^!ZQ!
_SP!]PWL_TZY^ST[!MP_bPPY!L!aL]TP_d!ZQ!ZM^P]aLMWP!SZ`^PSZWO!NSL]LN_P]T^_TN^!#OPXZR]L[STN!
NSL]LN_P]T^_TN^%!PO`NL_TZY%!LYO!]PRTZYLW!NZY_]ZW^!LXZYR!`]MLY!]P^TOPY_^$!LYO!QT]X!^TeP%!bP!
P^_TXL_P!_SP^P!Z]OP]PO![]ZMT_!XZOPW^!`^TYR!_SP!+)),!97H'!!!
!
#7$!=Z`^TYR!7SL]LN_P]T^_TN^!
!
".#!>UNEHR!PI!RPPNS!QHR!QHRSPO!
!
*!
?P^^!_SLY!)'+)!
)!
+!
)'+)!_Z!)',)!
)'..1-!
,!
)',)!_Z!)'-)!
*'/.,.!
-!
)'-)!_Z!)'0)!
+'.0+0!
.!
)'0)!_Z!*'))!
-',11/!
/!
*'))!_Z!-'))!
/'))-+!
0!
<]PL_P]!_SLY!-'))!
1',1+1!
!
FZ!L^^TRY!]P^[ZY^P!NL_PRZ]TP^!QZ]!_ST^!TYOPc!NZX[ZYPY_%!]ZZX^!L]P!OPQTYPO!L^!]ZZX^!
PcNW`^TaPWd!`^PO!Md!SZ`^PSZWO!XPXMP]^!#TYNW`OTYR!WTaTYR!]ZZX^!M`_!PcNW`OTYR!VT_NSPY^%!
ML_S]ZZX^%!RL]LRP^%!LYO!]ZZX^!`^PO!QZ]!M`^TYP^^$'!FST^!TYQZ]XL_TZY!T^!LaLTWLMWP!TY!_SP!+)),!
97H'!!;Z]!_SP!+)).!8=E%!bP!`^P!Y`XMP]!ZQ!]ZZX^!`^PO!Md!SZ`^PSZWO!XPXMP]^!QZ]!^WPP[TYR'!

!

!

51

"/#!?RLNDRY!WDMM!NDTHRLDM!
!
*!
IT_SZ`_!bLWW^!Z]!bT_S!MLXMZZ!Z]!Z_SP]!Z]RLYTN!XL_P]TLW^!
)!
+!
KTYN%!NWZ_S%!NL]OMZL]O%!NLY^!
)'+-0,!
,!
DLb!bZZO!
+')+)0!
-!
@`O!LYO!NLYP!bLWW!
-'1.1/!
.!
5OZMP%!bTOP!X`O!bLWW!
/'+1-.!
/!
6WZNV%!M]TNV^%!^_ZYP%![]PQLM]TNL_PO!XL_P]TLW%![ZWT^SPO!bZZO! 0'0,+*!
!
>YQZ]XL_TZY!ZY!bLWW!XL_P]TLW!T^!LaLTWLMWP!TY!MZ_S!_SP!+)),!97H!LYO!_SP!+)).!8=E'!!
!
"0#!?RLNDRY!RPPI!NDTHRLDM!
!
*!
E_]Lb!Z]![LWX!WPLaP^!
)!
DPNdNWPO!SZ`^PSZWO!XL_P]TLW^!#NL]OMZL]O%!NLY^%!
+!
M`]WL[!^LNV^%!P_N$!
+'*)-,!
,!
KTYN%!L^MP^_Z^%!NPXPY_%!bT_SZ`_!NPTWTYR!
,'0002!
-!
7WLd!_TWP%!eTYN%!L^MP^_Z^%!NPXPY_%!bT_S!NPTWTYR!
.')20,!
!
>YQZ]XL_TZY!ZY![]TXL]d!]ZZQ!XL_P]TLW!T^!LaLTWLMWP!ZYWd!TY!_SP!*220!97H'!!IP!_SP]PQZ]P!`^P!
[L]LXP_]TN!P^_TXL_P^!ZQ!_SP!]PWL_TZY^ST[!MP_bPPY!ZM^P]aLMWP!NSL]LN_P]T^_TN^!#Y`XMP]!ZQ!
]ZZX^%!QWZZ]!XL_P]TLW!LYO!]PRTZYLW!O`XXTP^!LXZYR!`]MLY!SZ`^PSZWO^$!LYO!]ZZQ!XL_P]TLW!
ZM_LTYPO!Q]ZX!LY!Z]OP]PO![]ZMT_!XZOPW!QT_!bT_S!_SP!*220!97H!_Z![]POTN_!_SP![]ZMLMTWT_d!ZQ!
QLWWTYR!TY_Z!PLNS!]ZZQ!XL_P]TLW!NL_PRZ]d!^SZbY!LMZaP'!!IP!L^^TRY!_SP!NL_PRZ]d!bT_S!_SP!
STRSP^_![]POTN_PO![]ZMLMTWT_d'!!!
!
"('#!?RLNDRY!IMPPR!NDTHRLDM!
!
*!
8T]_!
)!
+!
DLb!bZZO%!MZL]O^!
+'2),0!
,!
7PXPY_!
,'/2/0!
-!
;WZZ]!_TWP!#NWLd%!aTYdW$%!M]TNV!Z]![LaTYR!_TWP!
.'10*+!
.!
ILWW!_Z!bLWW!NL][P_%!XL]MWP%![ZWT^SPO!bZZO!
/'12*.!
!
E`QQTNTPY_!TYQZ]XL_TZY!T^!LaLTWLMWP!_Z!NZX[`_P!_ST^!aL]TLMWP!TY!LWW!SZ`^PSZWO!^`]aPd^'!!!
!
"((#!>UNEHR!PI!DQQMLDOFHS!"DNPOJ!TKPSH!PO!D!QRH%GHTHRNLOHG!MLST#!
!
*!
AZ!L[[WTLYNP^!
)!
+!
*&,!ML^TN!L[[WTLYNP^!ML^TN^!
+'*-,.!
,!
-!ML^TN!L[[WTLYNP^!bT_SZ`_!WL`YO]d!XLNSTYP!
,')0/,!
-!
,!Z]!XZ]P!ML^TN!L[[WTLYNP^!bT_S!WL`YO]d!XLNSTYP!
-'0*2-!
!
;Z]!_ST^!E>E69A!TYOPc!NZX[ZYPY_%!QZ`]!L[[WTLYNP^!L]P!NZY^TOP]PO!gML^TNh!#FH^%!
]PQ]TRP]L_Z]^%!MWPYOP]^%!LYO!LT]!NZYOT_TZYP]^$!LYO!L!bL^STYR(WL`YO]d!XLNSTYP!T^!_]PL_PO!
^P[L]L_PWd!L^!^SZbY!TY!_SP!_LMWP!LMZaP'!!5WW!YPNP^^L]d!TYQZ]XL_TZY!LMZ`_!L[[WTLYNP^!T^![]P^PY_!
TY!MZ_S!_SP!+)),!97H!LYO!_SP!+)).!8=E'!!!
!

!

!

52

#8$!5NNP^^!_Z!C`MWTN!G_TWT_TP^!
!
"()#!CDTHR!SPURFH!
!
*!
DTaP]!Z]!^[]TYR!
)!
+!
C`MWTN!QZ`Y_LTY!Z]!Z_SP]!^Z`]NP!
*'*/)/!
,!
IPWW!bT_SZ`_!bL_P]![`X[%!NZY_LTYP]!Z]!]LTY!bL_P]!
+'/-20!
-!
IPWW!bT_S!bL_P]![`X[!
-'/),0!
.!
7ZY_LTYP]!_]`NV!
/'*/2,!
/!
5\`PO`N_!
0'+..-!
!
5WW!YPNP^^L]d!TYQZ]XL_TZY!QZ]!L^^TRYTYR!]P^[ZY^P!NL_PRZ]TP^!T^!LaLTWLMWP!TY!_SP!+)),!97H'!!!!
>Y!_SP!+)).!8=E%!bP!NWL^^TQd!gMZ__WPO!bL_P]h!L^!gL\`PO`N_'h!!
!
"(*#!@HWDJH!GLSQPSDM!
!
*!
AZ!^PbLRP!
)!
+!
?L_]TYP!
+'-.*2!
,!
FZTWP_!bT_SZ`_!NZYYPN_TZY!_Z!^PbP]!Z]!^P[_TN!_LYV!
,',,+,!
-!
FZTWP_!bT_S!NZYYPN_TZY!_Z!^P[_TN!_LYV!
,'2/*.!
.!
FZTWP_!bT_S!NZYYPN_TZY!_Z!^PbP]!
/'1,)/!
!
>YQZ]XL_TZY!ZY!^PbLRP!OT^[Z^LW!T^!LaLTWLMWP!TY!LWW!SZ`^PSZWO!^`]aPd^%!M`_!TY!_SP!+)).!8=E%!
^ZXP!XTYZ]!NZOTYR!L^^`X[_TZY^!bP]P!YPNP^^L]d'!!!!>Y!_SP!+)).!8=E%!bP!NZOP!MZ_S!
g_]LOT_TZYLW![T_!_ZTWP_h!LYO!g_]LOT_TZYLW!_ZTWP_!_Z!^PL(]TaP]h!L^!gWL_]TYP'h!
!
"(+#!8DREDJH!GLSQPSDM!
!
*!
JL]O%!WZ_%!]TaP]%!P_N'!
)!
+!
?ZNLW!NZY_LTYP]!Z]![`MWTN!_]L^SNLY!
+'*+2*!
,!
CTNVPO!`[!Md![`MWTN!^P]aTNP^!
,'+0)*!
!
>YQZ]XL_TZY!ZY!RL]MLRP!OT^[Z^LW!T^!LaLTWLMWP!TY!MZ_S!_SP!+)).!8=E!LYO!_SP!+)),!97H'!
!

!

!

53

Appendix 3: Sample Density by Simulated SISBEN Score
The figure in this appendix plots histograms of simulated SISBEN scores relative to
county-specific eligibility thresholds. Using the ECV 2003, density in the distribution of
relative SISBEN scores evolves smoothly across local thresholds. There are some spikes in
density at other scores (-3, 5, and 7 for example) that we presume to be idiosyncratic noise. 1
In the DHS 2005, we observe similar spikes, but one of them coincides with relative score
-1. The magnitude is comparable to those at other scores (4 and 8, for example) as well as
spikes in the ECV 2003. Given balance on observable characteristics across the eligibility
threshold (shown in Table 2) as well as the fact that county-specific thresholds were not
stipulated or even known ex ante, we believe that it is unlikely that simulated SISBEN
scores are manipulated. We also predict values for more index components when
constructing simulated scores in the DHS 2005 than in the ECV 2003.2

1

We omit observations with values of exactly zero because our estimation of county-specific eligibility
thresholds (producing the best fit between eligibility and actual insurance coverage (Chay, McEwan, and
Urquiola 2005)) mechanically yields differential density.
2
In the 2005 DHS, we predict values for two SISBEN components: firm size and per-capita income
(variables measuring these components are available in the 2003 ECV). Additionally, response categories in
the 2005 DHS are coarser for four other SISBEN components: social security, number of rooms, water
source, and sewage disposal. See Appendix 2 for more details.

54

55

56

57

58

APPENDIX 5 TABLE 1:
ROBUSTNESS OF RISK PROTECTION AND PORTFOLIO CHOICE RESULTS
Panel A: Risk Protection
Individual
Outpatient
Medical
Spending

Variability of
Individual
Inpatient
Medical
Spending

Variability of
Individual
Outpatient
Medical
Spending

-58,870*

3,562

-67,499.38**

167.57

[33,263]

[2,702]

[32,906]

[2,417]

Bandwidth 3

-46,961*

703.76

-55,322.91**

-3,073.60

[26,813]

[3,950.72]

[26,608]

[3,923]

Bandwidth 4

-62,449**

2,544

-71,069.15**

-1,334.10

[28,967]

[3,248]

[28,582]

[3,226]

-150,905

10,029

-159,204.24

6,722.59

[107,544]

[7,035]

[105,502]

[7,159]

-83,857*

-93.44

-91,866.62**

-3,628.60

[44,116]

[6,397]

[43,437]

[6,269]

-41,990

-1,483

-50,532.50

-5,146.52

[31,578]

[5,657]

[31,467]

[5,610]

-53,932*

4,128

-62,293.76**

824.61

[30,187]

[2,752]

[29,554]

[2,5534]

-43,836*

1,634

-52,273.19**

-2,133.27

[24,405]

[3,608]

[24,152]

[3,549]

-64,384**

4,071

-73,063.09**

166.82

[31,236]

[2,666]

[30,615]

[2,601]

-61,031

-1,996

-70,053.43*

-5,454.59

[39,242]

[6,662]

[38,960]

[6,619]

-44,811

-56.44

-53,497.76*

-3,782.96

[28,071]

[4,774]

[27,960]

[4,734]

-61,590**

1,343

-70,361.82**

-2,539.67

[30,746]

[4,778]

[30,455]

[4,753]

-88,119

-120.65

-96,820.11

-3,434.45

Model:

Bandwidth 2

Bandwidth 2 with Higher Order SISBEN Polynomial

Bandwidth 3 with Higher Order SISBEN Polynomial

Bandwidth 4 with Higher Order SISBEN Polynomial

Bandwidth 2 with SISBEN×Eligible Interactions

Bandwidth 3 with SISBEN×Eligible Interactions

Bandwidth 4 with SISBEN×Eligible Interactions

Bandwidth 2 without County Fixed Effects

Bandwidth 3 without County Fixed Effects

Bandwidth 4 without County Fixed Effects

Bandwidth 2 Local Linear Regression

Bandwidth 3 Local Linear Regression

Bandwidth 4 Local Linear Regression

Data Source

Individual
Inpatient
Medical
Spending

[65,068]

[6,598]

[64,134]

[6,482]

-59,699

155.77

-68,314.38*

-3,393.91

[37,781]

[4,914]

[37,423]

[4,810]

-52,402

855.97

-61,162.26*

-2,798.77

[32,325]

[4,294]

[32,082]

[4,198]

ECV

ECV

ECV

ECV

Individual
Education
Spending

Household
Education
Spending

Panel B: Portfolio Choice
Model:

Bandwidth 2

Bandwidth 3

Bandwidth 4

Bandwidth 2 with Higher Order SISBEN Polynomial

Bandwidth 3 with Higher Order SISBEN Polynomial

Bandwidth 4 with Higher Order SISBEN Polynomial

Bandwidth 2 with SISBEN×Eligible Interactions

Bandwidth 3 with SISBEN×Eligible Interactions

Bandwidth 4 with SISBEN×Eligible Interactions

Bandwidth 2 without County Fixed Effects

Bandwidth 3 without County Fixed Effects

Bandwidth 4 without County Fixed Effects

Bandwidth 2 Local Linear Regression

Bandwidth 3 Local Linear Regression

Bandwidth 4 Local Linear Regression

Data Source

Total Spending Total Monthly
on Food
Expenditure

Has Car

Has Radio

-341.68

30,366

32,136

-33,826

-0.01

0.15

[3,781]

[25,055]

[103,540]

[278,060]

[0.05]

[0.14]

2,599

28,059

-1,495

-320,415

0.02

0.09

[5,408]

[28,1908]

[92,076]

[351,586]

[0.04]

[0.11]

2,613

25,670

18,654

-348,373

0.03

0.03

[5,186]

[30,120]

[85,054]

[372,119]

[0.04]

[0.12]

-7,023

7,150

3,136

-776,577*

-0.01

0.15

[7,529]

[24,022]

[209,963]

[445,614]

[0.05]

[0.14]

-2,350

27,095

27,129

-362,101

-0.02

0.12

[3,918]

[28,643]

[125,891]

[372,691]

[0.04]

[0.11]

1,842

28,281

14,132

-319,591

0.02

0.11

[4,851]

[28,097]

[93,018]

[340,240

[0.04]

[0.10]

-1,384

30,593

32,790

-63,185

0.01

0.16

[3,754]

[25,749]

[101,536]

[287,655]

[0.03]

[0.11]

1,884

25,782

-837.43

-326,491

0.02

0.08

[5,357]

[28,574]

[99,064]

[363,209]

[0.04]

[0.10]

2,243

24,374

27,751

-230,269

0.03

0.03

[5,129]

[30,313]

[95,376]

[343,713]

[0.04]

[0.12]

3,595

40,950*

-76.00

7,924

0.01

0.18

[3,556]

[24,025]

[109,894]

[378,659]

[0.04]

[0.12]

4,882

31,351

-5,734

-315,118

0.03

0.09

[5,094]

[26,704]

[100,300]

[379,380]

[0.04]

[0.12]

4,495

29,234

8,948

-466,629

0.03

0.06

[5,335]

[29,591]

[97,637]

[386,631]

[0.04]

[0.14]

8,457

60,037

-29,196

-365,953

0.01

0.14

[7,815]

[45,284]

[157,519]

[2,984,775]

[0.042]

[0.121]

7,512

50,717

-10,243

-202,306

0.02

0.12

[7,113]

[39,165]

[130,782]

[4,347,890]

[0.035]

[0.109]

7,619

46,440

3,082

-238,253

0.02

0.09

[7,174]

[37,423]

[128,102]

[459,354]

[0.034]

[0.118]

ECV

ECV

ECV

ECV

DHS

DHS

Individual-level “urban” data used from the 2003 ECV and 2005 DHS. Dependent variables are shown at the top of each column; all estimates are 2SLS estimates for enrollment in
the Subsidized Regime (SR), instrumenting for SR enrollment using simulated eligibility. The first three rows report estimates using samples of individuals within two, three, and
four SISBEN index points of county-specific eligibility thresholds (respectively). The fourth through sixth rows control for squared, cubic, and fourth power terms of SISBEN scores
using samples of individuals within two, three, and four SISBEN index points of county-specific eligibility thresholds (respectively). The seventh through ninth rows include
interactions between SISBEN scores and an indicator variable for eligibility according to our calculations. The tenth through twelfth rows do not condition on county fixed effects and
use samples of individuals within two, three, and four SISBEN index points of county-specific eligibility thresholds (respectively). The thirteenth through fifteenth rows report nonparametric local linear regression estimates obtained through the following process. First, local linear regression functions (with triangle kernels) are used to estimate conditional
means (conditioning only on SISBEN_diff) of outcome variables on either side of the eligibility threshold. Second, this estimation process is repeated for enrollment in the SR.
Finally, Wald statistics are constructed using differences in outcome variable means on either side of the threshold as numerators and the difference in SR enrollment means on either
side of the threshold as the denominator; 250 bootstrap replications are used to estimate standard errors. All specifications otherwise include SISBEN score, distance from the countyspecific threshold, estrato dummy variables, and county fixed effects. Standard errors (clustered by household) are shown in brackets below each estimate. *p<0.10, **p<0.05,
***p<0.01.

59

APPENDIX 5 TABLE 2:
ROBUSTNESS OF USE OF PREVENTIVE MEDICAL CARE AND HEALTH STATUS RESULTS
Use of Preventive Care
Health Status (Children)

Model:

Bandwidth 2

Bandwidth 3

Bandwidth 4

Bandwidth 2 with Higher Order SISBEN Polynomial

Bandwidth 3 with Higher Order SISBEN Polynomial

Bandwidth 4 with Higher Order SISBEN Polynomial

Bandwidth 2 with SISBEN×Eligible Interactions

Bandwidth 3 with SISBEN×Eligible Interactions

Bandwidth 4 with SISBEN×Eligible Interactions

Bandwidth 2 without County Fixed Effects

Bandwidth 3 without County Fixed Effects

Bandwidth 4 without County Fixed Effects

Bandwidth 2 Local Linear Regression

Bandwidth 3 Local Linear Regression

Bandwidth 4 Local Linear Regression

Data Source

Preventive
Physician
Visit

Number of
Growth Dev.
Checks Last
Year

0.29***

1.50**

-1.40**

-0.18

-0.06

0.26

[0.11]

[0.69]

[0.65]

[0.17]

[0.18]

[0.29]

0.20**

1.43**

-0.96

-0.12

-0.14

-0.08

[0.10]

[0.68]

[0.74]

[0.18]

[0.17]

[0.28]

0.24**

1.43**

-1.52*

-0.23

-0.25

0.05

[0.09]

[0.66]

[0.91]

[0.18]

[0.18]

[0.30]

Child Days Cough, Fever, Any Health
Lost to Illness
Diarrhea
Problem

Birthweight
(KG)

0.40

1.66**

-1.00

-0.46*

-0.20

-0.13

[0.29]

[0.83]

[0.66]

[0.24]

[0.23]

[0.36]

0.48***

1.33*

-1.13*

-0.21

-0.07

0.31

[0.15]

[0.78]

[0.62]

[0.16]

[0.17]

[0.28]

0.26**

1.76**

-1.06

-0.16

-0.14

0.02

[0.11]

[0.75]

[0.68]

[0.19]

[0.19]

[0.29]

0.27**

1.51**

-1.40**

-0.19

-0.06

0.27

[0.10]

[0.68]

[0.63]

[0.17]

[0.18]

[0.29]

0.21**

1.39**

-0.90

-0.11

-0.14

-0.09

[0.09]

[0.68]

[0.71]

[0.18]

[0.17]

[0.28]

0.23**

1.43**

-1.52*

-0.23

-0.25

0.05

[0.10]

[0.66]

[0.90]

[0.18]

[0.18]

[0.30]

0.46***

1.56**

-1.57***

-0.25*

-0.19

0.23

[0.12]

[0.60]

[0.57]

[0.15]

[0.15]

[0.25]

0.32***

1.55**

-1.48**

-0.19

-0.20

-0.14

[0.10]

[0.61]

[0.63]

[0.16]

[0.16]

[0.26]

0.31***

1.44**

-1.72**

-0.29*

-0.33*

0.01

[0.09]

[0.60]

[0.73]

[0.17]

[0.17]

[0.25]

0.72**

1.68**

-1.26**

-0.39**

-0.30*

0.03

[0.36]

[0.708]

[0.533]

[0.170]

[0.174]

[0.310]

0.55**

1.50**

-1.44***

-0.28*

-0.23

0.03

[0.22]

[0.635]

[0.554]

[0.150]

[0.154]

[0.275]

0.45**

1.51***

-1.54***

-0.27*

-0.27*

-0.02

[0.18]

[0.583]

[0.578]

[0.150]

[0.155]

[0.271]

ECV

DHS

DHS

DHS

DHS

DHS

Individual-level “urban” data used from the 2003 ECV and 2005 DHS. Dependent variables are shown at the top of each column; all estimates are 2SLS estimates for
enrollment in the Subsidized Regime (SR), instrumenting for SR enrollment using simulated eligibility. The first three rows report estimates using samples of individuals
within two, three, and four SISBEN index points of county-specific eligibility thresholds (respectively). The fourth through sixth rows control for squared, cubic, and
fourth power terms of SISBEN scores using samples of individuals within two, three, and four SISBEN index points of county-specific eligibility thresholds
(respectively). The seventh through ninth rows include interactions between SISBEN scores and an indicator variable for eligibility according to our calculations. The
tenth through twelfth rows do not condition on county fixed effects and use samples of individuals within two, three, and four SISBEN index points of county-specific
eligibility thresholds (respectively). The thirteenth through fifteenth rows report non-parametric local linear regression estimates obtained through the following process.
First, local linear regression functions (with triangle kernels) are used to estimate conditional means (conditioning only on SISBEN_diff) of outcome variables on either
side of the eligibility threshold. Second, this estimation process is repeated for enrollment in the SR. Finally, Wald statistics are constructed using differences in
outcome variable means on either side of the threshold as numerators and the difference in SR enrollment means on either side of the threshold as the denominator; 250
bootstrap replications are used to estimate standard errors. All specifications otherwise include SISBEN score, distance from the county-specific threshold, estrato
dummy variables, and county fixed effects. Standard errors (clustered by household) are shown in brackets below each estimate. *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

60

APPENDIX 5 TABLE 3:
ROBUSTNESS OF USE OF CURATIVE MEDICAL CARE RESULTS

Curative Use
Curative Use
among
Medical Visit
(Not
Children (Not for Chronic
Conditonal on
Conditional on
Disease
Health Status)
Health Status)

Model:

Bandwidth 2

Bandwidth 3

Bandwidth 4

Bandwidth 2 with Higher Order SISBEN Polynomial

Bandwidth 3 with Higher Order SISBEN Polynomial

Bandwidth 4 with Higher Order SISBEN Polynomial

Bandwidth 2 with SISBEN×Eligible Interactions

Bandwidth 3 with SISBEN×Eligible Interactions

Bandwidth 4 with SISBEN×Eligible Interactions

Bandwidth 2 without County Fixed Effects

Bandwidth 3 without County Fixed Effects

Bandwidth 4 without County Fixed Effects

Bandwidth 2 Local Linear Regression

Bandwidth 3 Local Linear Regression

Bandwidth 4 Local Linear Regression

Data Source

Hospital Stay

0.13**

-0.00

0.51*

-0.04

[0.05]

[0.16]

[0.28]

[0.11]

0.15***

-0.01

0.26

-0.05

[0.03]

[0.16]

[0.27]

[0.07]

0.16***

-0.11

0.60**

-0.03

[0.04]

[0.16]

[0.27]

[0.07]

0.23**

-0.10

1.79

-0.08

[0.10]

[0.23]

[1.59]

[0.28]

0.18***

0.03

0.83

-0.07

[0.06]

[0.17]

[0.53]

[0.16]

0.14***

0.05

0.21

-0.03

[0.04]

[0.18]

[0.18]

[0.08]

0.12**

-0.00

0.56**

-0.03

[0.05]

[0.16]

[0.28]

[0.12]

0.15***

-0.00

0.28

-0.04

[0.03]

[0.16]

[0.28]

[0.08]

0.16***

-0.11

0.60**

-0.03

[0.04]

[0.16]

[0.30]

[0.08]

0.14**

-0.13

0.41**

-0.00

[0.06]

[0.16]

[0.19]

[0.11]

0.14***

-0.21

0.22

-0.01

[0.03]

[0.20]

[0.19]

[0.07]

0.16***

-0.19

0.55***

0.00

[0.04]

[0.15]

[0.19]

[0.07]

0.13**

-0.19

0.99

0.01

[0.06]

[0.184]

[0.61]

[0.17]

0.13***

-0.16

0.55

0.00

[0.04]

[0.154]

[0.79]

[0.11]

0.14***

-0.17

0.48

0.01

[0.04]

[0.142]

[0.42]

[0.09]

ECV

DHS

ECV

ECV

Individual-level “urban” data used from the 2003 ECV and 2005 DHS. Dependent variables are shown at the top of each column; all estimates are
2SLS estimates for enrollment in the Subsidized Regime (SR), instrumenting for SR enrollment using simulated eligibility. The first three rows report
estimates using samples of individuals within two, three, and four SISBEN index points of county-specific eligibility thresholds (respectively). The
fourth through sixth rows control for squared, cubic, and fourth power terms of SISBEN scores using samples of individuals within two, three, and
four SISBEN index points of county-specific eligibility thresholds (respectively). The seventh through ninth rows include interactions between
SISBEN scores and an indicator variable for eligibility according to our calculations. The tenth through twelfth rows do not condition on county fixed
effects and use samples of individuals within two, three, and four SISBEN index points of county-specific eligibility thresholds (respectively). The
thirteenth through fifteenth rows report non-parametric local linear regression estimates obtained through the following process. First, local linear
regression functions (with triangle kernels) are used to estimate conditional means (conditioning only on SISBEN_diff) of outcome variables on either
side of the eligibility threshold. Second, this estimation process is repeated for enrollment in the SR. Finally, Wald statistics are constructed using
differences in outcome variable means on either side of the threshold as numerators and the difference in SR enrollment means on either side of the
threshold as the denominator; 250 bootstrap replications are used to estimate standard errors. All specifications otherwise include SISBEN score,
distance from the county-specific threshold, estrato dummy variables, and county fixed effects. Standard errors (clustered by household) are shown in
brackets below each estimate. *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

61

APPENDIX 5 TABLE 4:
ROBUSTNESS OF BEHAVIORAL DISORTION RESULTS (EX ANTE MORAL HAZARD)

Drank Alcohol
during
Pregnancy

Months
Breastfed as
Child

Folic Acid
During
Pregnancy

Bandwidth 2

-0.10
[0.11]

-0.23
[5.36]

0.10
[0.18]

Bandwidth 3

0.01
[0.10]

-0.71
[4.41]

0.16
[0.16]

Bandwidth 4

-0.01
[0.10]

0.84
[3.97]

0.05
[0.17]

Bandwidth 2 with Higher Order SISBEN Polynomial

-0.11
[0.12]

0.14
[6.72]

0.05
[0.18]

Bandwidth 3 with Higher Order SISBEN Polynomial

-0.03
[0.12]

-0.44
[5.11]

0.06
[0.18]

Bandwidth 4 with Higher Order SISBEN Polynomial

-0.03
[0.10]

-1.80
[4.95]

0.16
[0.17]

Bandwidth 2 with SISBEN×Eligible Interactions

-0.10
[0.11]

-0.24
[5.37]

0.10
[0.18]

Bandwidth 3 with SISBEN×Eligible Interactions

0.01
[0.10]

-0.47
[4.43]

0.16
[0.16]

Bandwidth 4 with SISBEN×Eligible Interactions

-0.00
[0.10]

0.90
[3.98]

0.05
[0.17]

Bandwidth 2 without County Fixed Effects

-0.12
[0.11]

3.54
[4.39]

0.18
[0.18]

Bandwidth 3 without County Fixed Effects

-0.02
[0.10]

3.14
[4.25]

0.16
[0.15]

Bandwidth 4 without County Fixed Effects

-0.03
[0.10]

3.37
[3.76]

0.09
[0.16]

Bandwidth 2 Local Linear Regression

-0.13
[0.116]

5.13
[4.766]

0.18
[0.199]

Bandwidth 3 Local Linear Regression

-0.05
[0.102]

4.44
[4.254]

0.16
[0.171]

Bandwidth 4 Local Linear Regression

-0.04
[0.099]

3.86
[3.786]

0.15
[0.159]

DHS

DHS

DHS

Model:

Data Source

Individual-level “urban” data used from the 2003 ECV and 2005 DHS. Dependent variables are shown at the top of each column;
all estimates are 2SLS estimates for enrollment in the Subsidized Regime (SR), instrumenting for SR enrollment using simulated
eligibility. The first three rows report estimates using samples of individuals within two, three, and four SISBEN index points of
county-specific eligibility thresholds (respectively). The fourth through sixth rows control for squared, cubic, and fourth power
terms of SISBEN scores using samples of individuals within two, three, and four SISBEN index points of county-specific eligibility
thresholds (respectively). The seventh through ninth rows include interactions between SISBEN scores and an indicator variable for
eligibility according to our calculations. The tenth through twelfth rows do not condition on county fixed effects and use samples of
individuals within two, three, and four SISBEN index points of county-specific eligibility thresholds (respectively). The thirteenth
through fifteenth rows report non-parametric local linear regression estimates obtained through the following process. First, local
linear regression functions (with triangle kernels) are used to estimate conditional means (conditioning only on SISBEN_diff) of
outcome variables on either side of the eligibility threshold. Second, this estimation process is repeated for enrollment in the SR.
Finally, Wald statistics are constructed using differences in outcome variable means on either side of the threshold as numerators
and the difference in SR enrollment means on either side of the threshold as the denominator; 250 bootstrap replications are used to
estimate standard errors. All specifications otherwise include SISBEN score, distance from the county-specific threshold, estrato
dummy variables, and county fixed effects. Standard errors (clustered by household) are shown in brackets below each estimate.
*p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

62

APPENDIX 6 TABLE 1:
HETEROGENEITY BY ABSOLUTE SISBEN SCORE: RISK PROTECTION AND PORTFOLIO CHOICE
Panel A: Risk Protection

Outcome:

Enrolled Subsidiado

(Enrolled Subsidiado)*SISBEN

SISBEN

SISBEN_diff

Individual
Inpatient
Medical
Spending

Individual
Outpatient
Medical
Spending

Variability of Variability of
Individual
Individual
Inpatient
Outpatient
Medical
Medical
Spending
Spending

-14,444

-12,516

-20,924.11

-16,609.78

[186,361]

[21,894]

[183,706]

[19,330]

-989

358

-1,036.95

373.37

[4,137]

[518]

[4,069]

[458]

2,265

-555.27**

2,318.25

-524.03**

[1,989]

[262]

[1,951]

[232]

-5,029.91

629.25** -5,074.36

650.77**

[3,217]

[315]

[3,218]

[276]

-58953*
0.08

3,585
0.23

-67586.74**
0.04

191.89
0.94

Observations

4,219

4,218

4,219

4,218

Data Source

ECV

ECV

ECV

ECV

Individual
Education
Spending

Household
Education
Spending

Total
Spending on
Food

Total
Monthly
Expenditure

Effect of being enrolled in subsidiado at score 45
P-value of hypothesis that the above effect is null

Panel B: Portfolio Choice
Outcome:

Enrolled Subsidiado

(Enrolled Subsidiado)*SISBEN

SISBEN

SISBEN_diff

Has Car

Has Radio

-2,431

-273,304*

997,617

-6778852

0.09

0.89

[23,319]

[162,446]

[732,788]

[5,532,992]

[0.25]

[1.28]

46

6,759*

-21,423

147,659

-0.00

-0.02

[593]

[3,952]

[16,055]

[123,948]

[0.01]

[0.03]

255

-2,786

3,117

-239,413***

-0.00

-0.01

[361]

[2,043]

[6,940]

[64,369]

[0.00]

[0.01]

-311

1,670

14,831

193,184***

0.01

0.05***

[299]

[1,490]

[13,758]

[40,664]

[0.01]

[0.01]

Effect of being enrolled in subsidiado at score 45
P-value of hypothesis that the above effect is null

-347
0.92

30833
0.12

33589
0.75

-134205
0.68

0.02
0.60

0.19*
0.08

Observations

3,567

4,222

4,096

966

3,334

3,334

Data Source

ECV

ECV

ECV

ECV

DHS

DHS

Individual-level “urban” data for those within two SISBEN index points of county-specific eligibility thresholds from the 2003 ECV and 2005
DHS. Dependent variables are shown at the top of each column. The first two rows shows 2SLS estimates for enrollment in the Subsidized
Regime (SR) and its interaction with simulated SISBEN score, instrumenting both using simulated eligibility and its interaction with simulated
SISBEN score. The third row shows the coefficient associated with simulated SISBEN score, and the fourth row shows the coefficient associated
with distance from the the county-specific threshold. The fifth row shows the effect of being enrolled in SR for those with a SISBEN score of 45,
computed as the coefficient associated with Enrolled Subsidiado -first row- summed to the multiplication of 45 with the coefficient associated
with (Enrolled Subsidiado)*SISBEN -second row- The sixth row shows the P-value that this effect is null. The seventh row shows the number of
observations. All specifications include estrato dummy variables, and county fixed effects. Standard errors (clustered by county) are shown in
brackets below each estimate. *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

63

APPENDIX 6 TABLE 2:
HETEROGENEITY BY ABSOLUTE SISBEN SCORE: USE OF PREVENTIVE MEDICAL CARE AND HEALTH STATUS
Use of Preventive Care

Outcome:

Enrolled Subsidiado

(Enrolled Subsidiado)*SISBEN

SISBEN

SISBEN_diff

Preventive
Physician
Visit

Number of
Growth Dev.
Checks Last
Year

Health Status (Children)
Child Days
Lost to Illness

Cough,
Fever,
Diarrhea

Any Health
Problem

Birthweight
(KG)

0.72

6.47

4.59

-0.38

0.27

-1.43

[0.82]

[5.41]

[4.47]

[2.03]

[1.63]

[2.25]

-0.01

-0.11

-0.13

0.00

-0.01

0.04

[0.02]

[0.12]

[0.10]

[0.04]

[0.04]

[0.05]

-0.02**

-0.02

0.08

0.01

0.00

-0.11***

[0.01]

[0.06]

[0.05]

[0.01]

[0.01]

[0.04]

0.06***

0.07

-0.04

-0.02

0.00

0.13***

[0.01]

[0.11]

[0.09]

[0.03]

[0.02]

[0.05]

0.29***
0.01

1.66***
0.01

-1.21**
0.05

-0.19
0.27

-0.05
0.74

0.20
0.46

Observations

4,222

1,167

1,161

1,167

1,161

897

Data Source

ECV

DHS

DHS

DHS

DHS

DHS

Effect of being enrolled in subsidiado at score 45
P-value of hypothesis that the above effect is null

Individual-level “urban” data for those within two SISBEN index points of county-specific eligibility thresholds from the 2003 ECV and 2005 DHS.
Dependent variables are shown at the top of each column. The first two rows shows 2SLS estimates for enrollment in the Subsidized Regime (SR)
and its interaction with simulated SISBEN score, instrumenting both using simulated eligibility and its interaction with simulated SISBEN score. The
third row shows the coefficient associated with simulated SISBEN score, and the fourth row shows the coefficient associated with distance from the
the county-specific threshold. The fifth row shows the effect of being enrolled in SR for those with a SISBEN score of 45, computed as the coefficient
associated with Enrolled Subsidiado -first row- summed to the multiplication of 45 with the coefficient associated with (Enrolled
Subsidiado)*SISBEN -second row- The sixth row shows the P-value that this effect is null. The seventh row shows the number of observations. All
specifications include estrato dummy variables, and county fixed effects. Standard errors (clustered by county) are shown in brackets below each
estimate. *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

64

APPENDIX 6 TABLE 3:
HETEROGENEITY BY ABSOLUTE SISBEN SCORE: USE OF CURATIVE MEDICAL CARE

Outcome:

Curative Use
Curative Use
among
Medical Visit
(Not
Children (Not
for Chronic Hospital Stay
Conditonal on Conditional
Disease
Health Status) on Health
Status)

Enrolled Subsidiado

-0.46
[0.45]

1.07
[1.45]

2.67*
[1.39]

0.44
[0.68]

(Enrolled Subsidiado)*SISBEN

0.01
[0.01]

-0.02
[0.03]

-0.05
[0.03]

-0.01
[0.02]

-0.01**
[0.01]

0.05***
[0.01]

0.12***
[0.03]

0.00
[0.01]

SISBEN_diff

0.01
[0.01]

-0.04*
[0.02]

-0.06**
[0.03]

0.00
[0.01]

Effect of being enrolled in subsidiado at score 45
P-value of hypothesis that the above effect is null

0.13**
0.035

0.03
0.85

0.64***
0.01

-0.04
0.70

Observations

4,222

1,161

564

4,222

Data Source

ECV

DHS

ECV

ECV

SISBEN

Individual-level “urban” data for those within two SISBEN index points of county-specific eligibility thresholds
from the 2003 ECV and 2005 DHS. Dependent variables are shown at the top of each column. The first two rows
shows 2SLS estimates for enrollment in the Subsidized Regime (SR) and its interaction with simulated SISBEN
score, instrumenting both using simulated eligibility and its interaction with simulated SISBEN score. The third
row shows the coefficient associated with simulated SISBEN score, and the fourth row shows the coefficient
associated with distance from the the county-specific threshold. The fifth row shows the effect of being enrolled in
SR for those with a SISBEN score of 45, computed as the coefficient associated with Enrolled Subsidiado -first
row- summed to the multiplication of 45 with the coefficient associated with (Enrolled Subsidiado)*SISBEN second row- The sixth row shows the P-value that this effect is null. The seventh row shows the number of
observations. All specifications include estrato dummy variables, and county fixed effects. Standard errors
(clustered by county) are shown in brackets below each estimate. *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

65

APPENDIX 6 TABLE 4:
HETEROGENEITY BY ABSOLUTE SISBEN SCORE: BEHAVIORAL DISTORTIONS EX ANTE MORAL HAZARD
Ex-Ante Moral Hazard

Outcome:

Enrolled Subsidiado

(Enrolled Subsidiado)*SISBEN

Drank
Alcohol
during
Pregnancy

Months
Breastfed as
Child

Folic Acid
During
Pregnancy

-0.22

47.45

-1.00

[0.92]

[35.54]

[1.75]

0.00

-1.04

0.02

[0.02]

[0.79]

[0.04]

-0.00**

0.57
[0.38]

0.05***

[0.00]

-0.02

-0.30

-0.06**

[0.02]

[0.70]

[0.03]

Effect of being enrolled in subsidiado at score 45
P-value of hypothesis that the above effect is null

-0.11
0.31

0.87
0.87

0.07
0.68

Observations

998

946

988

Data Source

DHS

DHS

DHS

SISBEN

SISBEN_diff

[0.00]

Individual-level “urban” data for those within two SISBEN index points of county-specific
eligibility thresholds from the 2003 ECV and 2005 DHS. Dependent variables are shown at the
top of each column. The first two rows shows 2SLS estimates for enrollment in the Subsidized
Regime (SR) and its interaction with simulated SISBEN score, instrumenting both using simulated
eligibility and its interaction with simulated SISBEN score. The third row shows the coefficient
associated with simulated SISBEN score, and the fourth row shows the coefficient associated with
distance from the the county-specific threshold. The fifth row shows the effect of being enrolled in
SR for those with a SISBEN score of 45, computed as the coefficient associated with Enrolled
Subsidiado -first row- summed to the multiplication of 45 with the coefficient associated with
(Enrolled Subsidiado)*SISBEN -second row- The sixth row shows the P-value that this effect is
null. The seventh row shows the number of observations. All specifications include estrato dummy
variables, and county fixed effects. Standard errors (clustered by county) are shown in brackets
below each estimate. *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

66

