                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 CAN LEARNABILITY SAVE NEW-KEYNESIAN MODELS?

                                         John H. Cochrane

                                       Working Paper 15459
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15459


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2009




I thank Larry Christiano, George Evans, and Bennett McCallum for comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by John H. Cochrane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Can Learnability Save New-Keynesian Models?
John H. Cochrane
NBER Working Paper No. 15459
October 2009
JEL No. E0

                                             ABSTRACT

Bennett McCallum (2009), applying Evans and Honkapohja's (2001) results, argues that "learnability"
can save New-Keynesian models from their indeterminacies. He claims the unique bounded equilibrium
is learnable, and the explosive equilibria are not. However, he assumes that agents can directly observe
the monetary policy shock. Reversing this assumption, I find the opposite result: the bounded equilibrium
is not learnable and the unbounded equilibria are learnable. More generally, I argue that a threat by
the Fed to move to an "unlearnable" equilibrium for all but one value of inflation is a poor foundation
for choosing the bounded equilibrium of a New-Keynesian model.


John H. Cochrane
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
john.cochrane@gsb.uchicago.edu
                          Can Learnability Save New-Keynesian Models?


   Bennett McCallum (2009), extending a long literature, argues that “learnability” can save New-
Keynesian models from their indeterminacies.
    McCallum and I agree on the most important points. Standard New-Keynesian Taylor-Rule
models have multiple, economically valid solutions. There is no reason in standard economics to
pick only the unique locally-bounded solution. If you want to throw out the other solutions, you
need to add some new principle. “Learnabilty” is, potentially, an extra principle that could do the
trick.
    However, I don’t think “learnability” does, in fact, solve the problem, at least as expressed
in this paper. First, I think McCallum went wrong in applying Evans and Honkapohja’s (2001)
results. He assumed that the monetary policy shock is directly observable. Agents need to observe
it, not recover it by running regressions. Removing that assumption reverses the result: Under
the Taylor Principle, the unique locally bounded equilibrium is, in fact, the only one that is not
learnable. The explosive equilibria are learnable.
   Second, even if the learnability results hold, I still don’t think the result provides a satisfactory
model of inflation determination. Is inflation really determined at a given value because for any
other value the Fed threatens to take us to a valid but “unlearnable” equilibrium? Why should we
care about such a threat?

Model setup
   For space and clarity, I will concentrate entirely on the simple model, presented on McCallum’s
p. 4-5 with learnability results on p. 12, and I’ll use McCallum’s notation. To recap, the model
consists of a “Fisher equation” coming from consumer’s first order conditions,

                                               Rt = Et πt+1 ,

and a Taylor rule, expressing the central bank’s behavior,
                                                  1
                                         Rt =       πt + et                                         (1)
                                                  a
                                          et    = ρet−1 + εt .

(I leave out constants in both equations.) Eliminating the nominal interest rate Rt , the equilibrium
condition is
                                         πt = aEt πt+1 + ut .                                      (2)
where
                                                ut ≡ −aet .

    Assume that 1/a > 1, following the Taylor principle. The equilibria of this model are any
inflation path that solves the diﬀerence equation
                                                 1
                                       πt+1 =      πt + et + δt+1 ,                                 (3)
                                                 a
where δt+1 is any random variable with Et δt+1 = 0. This arbitrariness of δ indexes the multiplicity
of equilibrium inflation paths.

                                                     2
      It’s useful to rewrite the equilibrium condition as1
                                                   1
                             (πt+1 − ψut+1 ) =       (πt − ψut ) + aψεt+1 + δt+1                  (4)
                                                   a
where
                                                           1
                                                  ψ≡           .
                                                        1 − ρa
Now it is easy to see that there is a “unique locally bounded” equilibrium,

                                                    πt = ψut .                                    (5)

Equivalently, in this equilibrium the variable δt that indexes equilibria jumps around with the
monetary policy shock as
                                           δt = −aψεt .                                     (6)

      Given a choice of equilibrium at date t, expected future inflation follows
                                                              1
                                       Et πt+j − ψρj+1 ut =      (πt − ψut )
                                                              aj
Thus, the equilibrium (5)-(6) is the only one not expected to explode (unique locally bounded).
But, as we agree, nothing yet rules out nominal explosions.

McCallum: the locally bounded equilibrium is learnable
   Now, suppose agents don’t know ψ and instead “estimate the relationship πt = ψ1t ut .” (ψ1
means estimated, ψ1t means the estimated value at time t.)
   The simplest “learnability” criterion is this: If you woke up in the equilibrium πt = ψut , and
you didn’t know ψ, could you (one individual) learn it from data on ψt and ut ? In this case, there is
no error term in the regression. You would know ψ after one data point. I’ll call this circumstance
an “individually learnable” equilibrium, and that is certainly true here.
    McCallum and Evans and Honkapohja study “convergence,” a more subtle concept of learnabil-
ity. Here, we suppose that nobody knows the parameter ψ, but they guess it and update. When
nobody knows ψ, the economy will potentially be in a diﬀerent equilibrium, and everybody might
“learn” the wrong lessons, in such a way never to end up at the right equilibrium. The ability of an
equilibrium to be individually learnable is (I think) necessary for convergence, but not suﬃcient.
  1

                                                             ³           ´
                                            1                         1        1
                     (πt+1 − ψut+1 )    =     (πt − ψut ) − ψ ut+1 − ut − ut + δt+1
                                            a                         a       a
                                            1                               1
                     (πt+1 − ψut+1 )    =     (πt − ψut ) − ψut+1 + (ψ − 1) ut + δt+1
                                            a                       µ       a    ¶
                                            1                            1         1
                     (πt+1 − ψut+1 )    =     (πt − ψut ) − ψut+1 +           −1     ut + δt+1
                                            a                         1 − ρa       a
                                            1
                     (πt+1 − ψut+1 )    =     (πt − ψut ) − ψut+1 + ψρut + δt+1
                                            a
                                            1
                     (πt+1 − ψut+1 )    =     (πt − ψut ) + ψaεt+1 + δt+1
                                            a




                                                         3
    This example also converges, as follows. If people start with a guess ψ1t , and the Fed just
follows the usual rule (1), then from (2), equilibrium inflation is

                         πt = aEt πt+1 + ut = aψ1t ρut + ut = (1 + ρaψ1t ) ut

In addition, suppose people update slowly, waiting a period to form a new guess from the perfectly-
measured relation they just observed,

                                         ψ1t+1 = 1 + ρaψ1t .                                       (7)

Iterating forward, this sequence of guesses leads to

                                             lim ψ1t = ψ.
                                            t→∞

Though there are smarter things people could do, which converge faster, this establishes that agents
can learn with very simple rules.
    (McCallum assumes that people run linear regressions. He establishes convergence with least-
squares learning by applying Evans and Honkapohja’s results, i.e. “Clearly the learnability condi-
tions analogous to (15a)-(15c) are that the 1 × 1 matrices a, ρ, and aρ all have eigenvalues with
real parts less than 1.” The result is the same, but can’t be reproduced in the compact manner of
this example.)
    McCallum also claims that the non locally-bounded equilibria are not learnable in “analogous
fashion.” This is important, of course: if all equilibria are learnable, then learnability doesn’t help
us to narrow them down. Though I disagree with the result, there are more important issues to
settle.

Observable shocks and the opposite result
   There is a deeper problem with McCallum’s approach: He assumes that ut is directly observable.
To run a regression of πt on ut , you need data on ut ! ut = −et /a is the monetary policy shock.
We don’t usually think that agents can observe it directly.
    Can’t agents learn the monetary policy shock by running regressions, i.e. infer et from obser-
vations of Rt and πt and the policy rule
                                                   1
                                            Rt =     πt + et ?                                     (8)
                                                   a
Alas, no. To measure et in this way, you need to know a. And agents can’t learn a. If they try
to run this as a regression, the fail because the right hand variable is perfectly correlated with the
error term: The bounded-equilibrium value of πt is
                                                      ψ
                                          πt = ψut = − et .
                                                      a

   More generally, the observables in this model are (Rt , πt ). Since ut follows an AR(1) and the
bounded equilibrium is πt = ψut , the observables in the bounded equilibrium follow the laws of
motion

                                          πt = ρπt−1 + vt                                          (9)
                                         Rt = ρπt ,                                               (10)

                                                    4
where vt is a regression error. This is what agents can see and learn. And the parameter a does not
appear. a is not identified from the equilibrium dynamics of the bounded equilibrium. (This is the
major point of Cochrane 2007.) There is absolutely no way for agents to learn a even individually,
and hence there is no way for them to measure ut . Equation (10) shows that the regression of Rt
on πt measures ρ, not 1/a.
    In sum, to run McCallum’s “learnability” regression of πt on ut , agents need to be given, “from
introspection or divine revelation,” direct observation of the monetary policy shock et or prior
knowledge of the parameter a. Without that assumption, I have the opposite result: the bounded
equilibrium is not learnable.
    As another way to see the point, suppose that the Fed follows a policy that violates the Taylor
principle,
                                         Rt = ρπt ; ρ < 1
Now, the equilibrium dynamics are
                                          πt+1 = ρπt + δt+1
There are multiple bounded equilibria this time. But the equilibrium dynamics (9) and (10) are
exactly the same as in this case. There is no way for an agent to learn whether he lives in the Taylor
rule, unique bounded equilibrium world with 1/a > 1 or in this multiple-equilibrium, indeterminate
world, by running any regressions.
    The converse result holds for the explosive solutions. These solutions follow equilibrium dy-
namics
                                               1
                                       πt+1 = πt + et + δt+1 .
                                               a
As before, πt and et are potentially correlated, so an OLS regression of πt+1 on πt is biased in a
finite sample. However, now πt is an explosive process, while et and δt+1 are stationary. Thus,
the regression coeﬃcient of πt+1 on πt converges to 1/a! The explosive solutions are individually
learnable. I don’t know if the explosive solutions converge, but neither I nor McCallum cares about
this extra step — we don’t want these anyway, though for diﬀerent reasons.
   In sum, once we remove the assumption that agents can see the monetary policy shock directly, I
reverse McCallum’s main claimed results: the bounded equilibrium is not learnable and the explosive
equilibria are learnable (at least individually).

A subtle trap
    Now, agents can learn the law of motion (9) of the bounded equilibrium and hence make correct
forecasts Et πt+j = ρj πt . It is easy to conclude that this equilibrium is therefore learnable, despite
the fact that agents cannot learn a or observe ut .
   This is a mistake. The whole point of this class of models is that knowledge of the bounded-
equilibrium dynamics is not enough. Agents must know that alternative equilibria will lead to
explosions. Equivalently, they must know that only one value of inflation today πt is consistent
with “anchored” long run expectations limj→∞ Et πt+j . They must know they are in the Taylor
world with 1/a > 1 not the observationally equivalent world with 1/a = ρ < 1. If agents form
expectations based on the equilibrium law of motion Et πt+j = ρj πt then any value of inflation today
can be an equilibrium. Much of Woodford’s (2003) Interest and Prices is dedicated to this point.
So much new-Keynesian writing is devoted to communicating (by means other than regressions)
the Fed’s commitments to the Taylor rule that I don’t think it’s necessary to go on.


                                                   5
    I think more generally this is where McCallum’s analysis goes wrong. When discussing learn-
ability in general, on p. 7, he sets up a system with endogenous variables x and exogenous variables
z, which follow

                                 xt = AEt xt+1 + Cxt−1 + Dzt
                                 zt = Rzt−1 + εt

(These are McCallum’s equations (10) and (11).) He then considers “fundamental solutions of form

                                        xt = Ωxt−1 + Γzt .

and he writes “for RE to prevail, agents need to have their expectations based on accurate quanti-
tative knowledge of Ω and Γ, what the agents need to learn about is the system’s [equilibrium] law
of motion.”
   That’s not enough in a New-Keynesian model. For the New Keynesian equilibrium to form
and be locally unique, agents must know A as well, and they cannot learn that from the bounded
equilibrium of this model.
    McCallum could really have helped us by showing how learning works, and how equilibria are
formed, in the simple New-Keynesian model. As above, when agents forecast based on past values
of endogenous variables, all the forward-looking components so vital to the bounded equilibrium of
the New-Keynesian model vanish. All McCallum does is map into Evans and Honkapohja’s general
framework, but it’s not clear that framework applies to this problem.

Even so, would it work?
   Even if McCallum’s learnability results (and those of related authors, such as Woodford (2003))
were correct, I don’t think they would solve the fundamental problem of multiple equilibria in
new-Keynesian models.
    How does the Taylor rule work? The Fed, undergraduate textbooks, and everyone’s op-eds say
that it stabilizes the economy, introducing an eigenvalue less than one. If inflation rises, the Fed
raises interest rates, and this lowers “demand,” which lowers future inflation.
   The standard New-Keynesian model logic, as presented here, works in the opposite way. The
Taylor rule destabilizes the economy. If inflation rises, the Fed commits to raise future inflation,
and leads us oﬀ to nominal explosions. Ruling out such explosions, inflation must be where the
Fed wants it to be in the first place. Alas, as McCallum and I agree, the “ruling this out” part
stood on shaky ground. Nothing in economics rules out such a hyperinflation, and words such as
Woodford’s (2003, p. 128) are hardly reassuring :

        “The equilibrium ... is nonetheless locally unique, which may be enough to allow
     expectations to coordinate upon that equilibrium rather than on one of the others.”

   I think the non-learnability of the bounded solution puts it on shakier ground still — there is
no way for agents to learn of the Fed’s hyperinflationary threats from time-series. They would
have to learn it from Fed pronouncements — and the Fed is pronouncing exactly the opposite.
(Conversely, the learnability of the unbounded solutions is pretty obvious — if we observe a Fed-
induced hyperinflation, you can learn the Fed’s reaction speed pretty quickly.)
   But suppose I’m wrong — suppose the bounded solution is learnable and the unbounded ones
are not. McCallum is then saying that inflation is determinate at one particular value because

                                                 6
the Fed, by explosive reaction, threatens for any other initial value to take us to an equilibrium
that is “unlearnable.” This does not sound like a threat that will strike fear in Wall Street’s heart,
and “coordinate expectations” on anything other than confusion. (Compare it, for example to
the severe and explicit threats in Atkeson, Chari, and Kehoe (2009).) In the centuries-long search
for the price-level anchor in a fiat-money economy, is the threat to take us to an “unlearnable”
equilibrium for all but one initial value really the answer? .




                                                  7
  References

Atkeson, Andrew, V. V. Chari, and Patrick J. Kehoe, 2009, “Sophisticated Monetary Policies,”
    Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Cochrane, John H., 2007, “Identification with Taylor Rules: A Critical Review” Manuscript,
    University of Chicago.

Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja, 2001, Learning and Expectations in Macroeconomics,
    Princeton: Princeton University Press.

McCallum, Bennett T., 2009, “Inflation Determination with Taylor Rules: Is the New-Keynesian
   Analysis Critically Flawed?” Manuscript, Carnegie Mellon University; Revision of NBER
   Working Paper 14534, Forthcoming Journal of Monetary Economics.

Woodford, Michael, 2003, Interest and Prices, Princeton: Princeton University Press




                                              8
