NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCENTIVES AND CREATIVITY:
EVIDENCE FROM THE ACADEMIC LIFE SCIENCES
Pierre Azoulay
Joshua S. Graff Zivin
Gustavo Manso
Working Paper 15466
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15466

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2009

Send correspondence to pazoulay@mit.edu. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the
Kauffman Foundation and the National Science Foundation through its SciSIP Program (Award SBE-0738142).
We thank Thomas Cech, Peter Cebon, Purnell Choppin, David Clayton, Nico Lacetera, Antoinette
Schoar, Scott Stern, Jerry Thursby, Heidi Williams, and two anonymous referees for useful comments
and suggestions. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Pierre Azoulay, Joshua S. Graff Zivin, and Gustavo Manso. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Incentives and Creativity: Evidence from the Academic Life Sciences
Pierre Azoulay, Joshua S. Graff Zivin, and Gustavo Manso
NBER Working Paper No. 15466
October 2009, Revised January 2011
JEL No. O31,O32
ABSTRACT
Despite its presumed role as an engine of economic growth, we know surprisingly little about the drivers
of scientific creativity. In this paper, we exploit key differences across funding streams within the
academic life sciences to estimate the impact of incentives on the rate and direction of scientific exploration.
Specifically, we study the careers of investigators of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI),
which tolerates early failure, rewards long-term success, and gives its appointees great freedom to
experiment; and grantees from the National Institute of Health, which are subject to short review cycles,
pre-defined deliverables, and renewal policies unforgiving of failure. Using a combination of propensity-score
weighting and difference-in-differences estimation strategies, we find that HHMI investigators produce
high- impact papers at a much higher rate than a control group of similarly-accomplished NIH-funded
scientists. Moreover, the direction of their research changes in ways that suggest the program induces
them to explore novel lines of inquiry.
Pierre Azoulay
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-482
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
pazoulay@mit.edu
Joshua S. Graff Zivin
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, MC 0519
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
jgraffzivin@ucsd.edu

Gustavo Manso
MIT
Sloan School
manso@mit.edu

In 1980, a scientist from the University of Utah, Mario Capecchi, applied for a grant at
the National Institutes of Health (NIH). The application contained three projects. The NIH
peer-reviewers liked the first two projects, which were building on Capecchi’s past research
efforts, but they were unanimously negative in their appraisal of the third project, in which
he proposed to develop gene targeting in mammalian cells. They deemed the probability
that the newly introduced DNA would ever find its matching sequence within the host
genome vanishingly small, and the experiments not worthy of pursuit. The NIH funded
the grant despite this misgiving, but strongly recommended that Capecchi drop the third
project. In his retelling of the story, the scientist writes that despite this unambiguous
advice, he chose to put almost all his efforts into the third project: “It was a big gamble.
Had I failed to obtain strong supporting data within the designated time frame, our NIH
funding would have come to an abrupt end and we would not be talking about gene targeting
today” (Capecchi 2008). Fortunately, within four years, Capecchi and his team obtained
strong evidence for the feasibility of gene targeting in mammalian cells, and in 1984 the
grant was renewed enthusiastically. Dispelling any doubt that he had misinterpreted the
feedback from reviewers in 1980, the critique for the 1984 competitive renewal started, “We
are glad that you didn’t follow our advice.” The story does not stop there. In September
2007, Capecchi shared the Nobel prize for developing the techniques to make knockout mice
with Oliver Smithies and Martin Evans. Such mice have allowed scientists to learn the roles
of thousands of mammalian genes and provided laboratory models of human afflictions in
which to test potential therapies.
Across all of the social sciences, researchers often model the creative process as the cumulative, interactive recombination of existing bits of knowledge in novel ways (Weitzman
1998; Burt 2004; Simonton 2004). But the combinatoric metaphor does not speak directly to
the important trade-off illustrated by the anecdote above. Some discoveries are incremental
in nature, and reflect the fine-tuning of previously available technologies, or the exploitation
of established scientific trajectories. Others are more radical and require the exploration
of new, untested approaches. Both forms of innovation are valuable, but we still have a
poor understanding of what drives radical innovation. One view is that radical innovation

1

happens by accident. From Archimedes’ eureka moment to Newton’s otherworldly contemplation interrupted by the fall of an apple, luck (and sometimes talent) play an essential
role in lay theories of breakthrough innovation. Of course, if luck and talent exhaust the
list of ingredients necessary to produce breakthroughs, then there is little for economists to
contribute.
In the anecdote reported above, the scientist was undeterred by his peers’ advice to
“play it safe,” and eventually saw his bold ideas prevail. If incentives play an important
role in the production of novel ideas, this heroic story might be atypical. In this paper,
we provide empirical evidence that nuanced features of incentive schemes embodied in the
design of research contracts exert a profound influence on the subsequent development of
breakthrough ideas. The challenge is to find a setting in which (1) radical innovation is
a key concern; (2) agents are at risk of receiving different incentive schemes; and (3) it is
possible to measure innovative output and to distinguish between incremental and radical
ideas. We argue that the academic life sciences in the United States provides an excellent
testing ground.
Specifically, we study the careers of researchers who can be funded through two very
distinct mechanisms: investigator-initiated R01 grants from the NIH, or support from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) through its investigator program. HHMI, a nonprofit medical research organization, plays a powerful role in advancing biomedical research
and science education in the United States. The Institute commits almost $700 million a
year — a larger amount than the NSF biological sciences program, for example. HHMI’s
stated goal is to “push the boundaries of knowledge” in some of the most important areas
of biological research. To do so, the HHMI program has adopted practices that according
to Manso (2010) should provide strong incentives for breakthrough scientific discoveries: the
award cycles are long (five years, and typically renewed at least once); the review process
provides detailed, high-quality feedback to the researcher; and the program selects “people,
not projects,” which allows (and in fact encourages) the quick reallocation of resources to

2

new approaches when the initial ones are not fruitful.1 This stands in sharp contrast with
the incentives faced by life scientists funded by the NIH. The typical R01 grant cycle lasts
only three years, and renewal is not very forgiving of failure. Feedback on performance is
limited in its depth. Importantly, the NIH funds projects with clearly defined deliverables,
not individual scientists, which could increase the costs of experimentation.
The contrast between the HHMI and NIH grant mechanisms naturally leads to the question of whether HHMI-style incentives result in a higher rate of production of particularly
valuable ideas. Three significant hurdles must be overcome to answer this question.
First, we need to identify a group of NIH-funded scientists that are appropriate controls
for the researchers selected into the HHMI program. Given the high degree of accomplishment exhibited by HHMI investigators at the time of their appointment, a random sample
of scientists of the same age, working in the same fields, would not be appropriate. In the
absence of a plausible source of exogenous variation for HHMI appointment, we estimate the
treatment effect of the program by contrasting HHMI-funded scientists’ output with that of
a group of NIH-funded scientists who focus their research on the same subfields of the life
sciences as HHMI investigators, and received prestigious early career prizes. Furthermore,
using an in-depth understanding of the HHMI appointment process, we cull from this control
group scientists who look similar to the HHMI investigators on the observable factors that
we know to be relevant for selection into the HHMI program.
Second, we must be able to distinguish particularly creative contributions from incremental advances. While we investigate the effect of the program on the raw number of original
research articles published, the bulk of our analysis focuses on the number of publications
that fall into different quantiles of the vintage-specific, article-level distribution of citations
(see Figure 1): top quartile, top five percentiles, and top percentile. We also use these
scientists’ own citation impact in the pre-appointment period to ask whether they often outperform their most heavily-cited paper, and conversely, whether they often publish articles
who garner less citations than their least cited article. Another prong in our attempt to mea1

Though not part of Manso’s (2010) initial analysis, we extend his model in the Appendix to show that
providing the researcher greater latitude in her search activities encourages exploration.

3

sure creativity is to measure explorative behavior directly. Specifically, we examine whether
the research agenda of HHMI investigators changes after their appointment; we measure the
novelty (both relative to the universe of published research and to the scientists themselves)
of the keywords tagging their publications; and we also assess whether the impact of their
research broadens, as inferred by the range of journals that cite it.
Third, we need to ascertain whether it is the incentive features of the program that
explain its effects, or some alternative mechanism, such as increased resources, ascription
dynamics (whereby HHMI investigators get cited more due to their enhanced status), peer
effects, or the sorting of talented trainees into HHMI-supported labs. We tackle these issues
(to the extent possible) in the discussion.
Our results provide support for the hypothesis that appropriately designed incentives
stimulate exploration. In particular, we find that the effect of selection into the HHMI
program increases as we examine higher quantiles of the distribution of citations. Relative
to Early Career Prize Winners (ECPWs), our preferred econometric estimates imply that the
program increases overall publication output by 39%; the magnitude jumps to 96% when
focusing on the number of publications in the top percentile of the citation distribution.
Success is also more frequent among HHMI investigators when assessed with respect to
scientists’ own citation impact prior to appointment, rather than relative to a universal
citation benchmark. Symmetrically, we also uncover robust evidence that HHMI-supported
scientists “flop” more often than ECPWs: they publish 35% more articles that fail to clear the
(vintage-adjusted) citation bar of their least well cited pre-appointment work. This provides
suggestive evidence that HHMI investigators are not simply rising stars annointed by the
program. Rather, they appear to place more risky scientific bets after their appointment, as
theory would suggest.
We bolster the case for the exploration hypothesis by focusing on various attributes of
these scientists’ research agenda. We show that the work of HHMI investigators is characterized by more novel keywords than controls. These keywords are also more likely to change

4

after their HHMI appointment. Moreover, their research is cited by a more diverse set of
journals, both relative to controls and to the pre-appointment period.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we present the theoretical motivation for our hypothesis. Section 2 describes the construction of the sample and
presents descriptive statistics. Section 3 lays out our econometric methodology. Section 4
reports and discusses the results of the analysis. Section 5 concludes.

1

Theoretical Background

The bulk of the literature on incentives for innovation has focused on the problems inherent to
the measurement and contractability of output that plagues most innovative activities. For
example, Holmström (1989) observes that most innovation projects are risky, unpredictable,
long-term, labor-intensive, and idiosyncratic. In such settings, performance measures are
likely to be extremely noisy, and contracting particularly challenging. This leads him to
see virtue in the adoption of low-powered incentives when creativity is what is required of
the agent, for salary is less likely to distort the agent’s attention away from the less-easily
measurable tasks that compete for her attention. This view stands in sharp contrast with
the standard prescription to adopt piece rates whenever agent’s individual contributions
are easy to measure, such as in the case of the windshield installers studied by Lazear
(2000). A substantial body of experimental and field research in psychology reaches a similar
conclusion, but for different reasons: the worry is that pay-for-performance might encourage
the repetition of what has worked in the past, at the expense of the exploration of untested
approaches (Amabile 1996).
In a recent paper, Manso (2010) explicitly models the innovation process as the result
of learning through experimentation. In this setting, the trade-off between the exploitation
of well-known approaches and the exploration of new untested approaches first emphasized
by March (1991) arises naturally. The main insight of his contribution is that the optimal
incentive scheme to motivate exploration exhibits substantial tolerance for early failure and
rewards for long-term success. Tolerance for early failure allows the agent to explore in the

5

early stages of the contractual relationship without incurring the usual negative consequences
of lower pay or termination. At the same time, reward for long-term success prevents the
agent from shirking early on and induces the agent to explore new ideas that will allow him
to perform well in the long-run. The principal can more effectively motivate exploration if
he can commit not to terminate an agent after poor short-term performance, even if it is
ex-post efficient for the principal to do so. Another important ingredient of Manso’s model
is timely feedback on performance. Providing information to the agent about how well he is
doing allows the agent to explore more efficiently, reducing the costs of experimentation. An
agent who does not get feedback on performance may waste more time on unfruitful ideas.
Empirical evidence on the effects of long-term incentives is scant. Most relevant to the
findings presented below is Lerner and Wulf’s (2007) study of corporate R&D lab heads.
They show that higher levels of deferred compensation are associated with the production of
more heavily cited patents, while short-term incentives bear no relationship to firm innovative
performance. In a similar vein, Tian and Wang (2010) show that start-up firms backed by
more failure-tolerant venture capitalists are more innovative ex-post. The present paper
presents the first systematic attempt to isolate, in a field setting, the effect of the bundle of
incentive practices identified by Manso (2010) on exploration and creativity at the individual
level (see Ederer and Manso [2010] for experimental evidence with a similar flavor). We
believe that the academic life sciences in the United States provide an appropriate setting,
first and foremost because it provides naturally-occurring variation in incentives that closely
matches the contrast between pay-for-performance and exploration-type schemes emphasized
by Manso (2010).
Most academic life scientists must rely on grants from the National Institutes of Health
(NIH), the largest public funder of biomedical research in the United States. With an annual
budget of $28.4 billion in 2007, support from the NIH dwarfs that available from other public
or private funders, including the National Science Foundation ($6 billion in 2007) or the
American Cancer Society ($147 million in 2007). The most common type of NIH grant for
investigator-initiated projects is the R01 grant. In 2007, their average amount was $225,000
in annual direct costs, and the awards last for a typical three to five years before coming
6

up for renewal (see Figure 2). The NIH “study sections,” or peer-review panels in charge of
allocating awards, are notoriously risk-averse and often insist on a great deal of preliminary
evidence before deciding to fund a project. This often leads researchers to resubmit their
applications several times and to multiply the number of applications, taking time away from
productive research activities. It is an often-heard complaint among academic biomedical
researchers that study sections’ prickliness encourages them to pursue relatively safe avenues
that build directly on previous results, at the expense of truly exploratory research (Kaplan
2005; Kolata 2009; McKnight 2009).
An alternative funding mechanism is provided by the investigator program of the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI). This program “urges its researchers to take risks, to explore unproven avenues, to embrace the unknown – even if it means uncertainty or the chance
of failure.” 2 New appointments are based on nominations from research institutions; once
selected, researchers continue to be based at their institutions, typically leading a research
group of 10 to 25 students, postdoctoral associates and technicians. In its stated policies,
HHMI departs in striking fashion from NIH’s funding practices, in ways that should bring
incentives in line with the type of schemes suggested by Manso (2010). HHMI Investigators
are initially appointed for 5 years,3 and in the case of termination, there is a two-year phasedown period during which the researcher continues to be funded, allowing her to search for
other sources of funding without having to close down her lab.
Moreover, HHMI investigators appear to share the perception that their first appointment review is rather lax, with reviewers more interested in making sure that they have
taken on new projects with uncertain payoffs, rather than insisting on achievements. Below,
we validate this perception by showing that the second review is much more sensitive to
performance than the first. The review process is also streamlined, lasting a mere six weeks.
Investigators are asked to submit a packet containing their five most notable papers in the
past five years, along with a short research proposal for the next five years. In contrast, NIH
2

See http://www.hhmi.org/research/investigators/
Appointment lengths have varied over the history of the program, more detailed information will be
provided in the data section.
3

7

grants take at a minimum three months to be reviewed, and success typically depends upon
a rather exhaustive list of accomplishments by the primary research team members.
Since HHMI researchers publish 29 articles on average in the five years that follow their
initial appointment (the median is 25), constraining their renewal packet to contain only five
papers ensures that only what they see as their most meaningful achievements matters for
the renewal decision. The review process culminates in an oral defense in front of an elite
panel especially convened for the occasion. The reviewers must not be HHMI researchers,
and are of very high caliber (e.g., members of the National Academies). The richness of the
feedback is yet another point of departure between HHMI and NIH practices. Besides the
intensity and quality of the advice generated by the review process, HHMI-funded scientists
participate in annual science meetings during which they can interact with other HHMI
investigators. This gives them access to a deep level of critique, encouragement, ideas,
and potential collaborations. While NIH-funded researchers receive a critique of their grant
applications, these vary widely in quality and depth. Furthermore, the federal agency does
not provide any meaningful feedback between review cycles.
Finally, an important distinction between the two sources of funding is the unit of selection. The NIH funds specific projects. Applicants need to map out experiments far into the
future, and have limited flexibility to change course between funding cycles. Together with
study sections’ insistence on preliminary results, this has led many NIH grantees to submit
research that is already quite developed. In contrast, HHMI insists on funding “people, not
projects.” This allows HHMI researchers to quickly reallocate effort and resources away from
avenues that do not bear fruit. The economics literature (e.g., Aghion, Dewatripont, and
Stein 2008) views unfettered control over one’s research agenda as the key distinguishing
feature of innovative activities performed in academia (relative to the private sector). Variation in the unit of selection reminds us that the degree of effective control experienced by
academic researchers often depends on the arcane details of funding mechanisms. Though
not part of Manso’s (2010) initial analysis, we extend his model in the Appendix to show
that providing the researcher greater latitude in her search activities encourages exploration.
Table 1 summarizes the main differences between the two sources of funding.
8

2

Data and Sample Characteristics

This section provides a detailed description of the process through which the data used in
the econometric analysis were assembled. In order, we describe (1) the Howard Hughes
Medical Investigator sample; (2) the set of control investigators against which the HHMI
scientists will be compared; and (3) our metrics of scientific creativity. We also present
relevant descriptive statistics.

2.1

HHMI Sample

We begin with a basic description of the criteria necessary for nomination and appointment as
an HHMI investigator. To be eligible, a scientist must be tenured or on the tenure-track at a
major research university, academic medical center, or research institute. The subfields of the
life sciences of interest to HHMI investigators are quite broad, but have tended to concentrate
on cell and molecular biology, neurobiology, immunology, and biochemistry. Career-stage
considerations have varied over time although HHMI typically has not appointed scientists
until they have had enough independent experience so that their work can be distinguished
from that of their postdoctoral or graduate school adviser.
Upon receipt of nominations from participating institutions, HHMI empanels a jury that
reviews these nominations in two sequential steps. In a first step, the number of nominees
is whittled down to a manageable number, mostly based on observable characteristics. For
example, NIH-funded investigators have an advantage because the panel of judges interprets
receipt of federal grants as a signal of management ability. The jury also looks for evidence
that the nominee has stepped out of the shadow cast by his/her mentors: an independent
research agenda, and a “big hit,” i.e., a high-impact publication in which the mentor’s name
does not appear on the coauthorship list. In a second step, each remaining nominee’s credentials and future plans are given an in-depth qualitative look.4 Finally, until recently,
4

While an input into this process is a letter grade, the review does not provide a continuous score that
could be used in a regression discontinuity-type framework. Moreover, the cutoff that separates successful
from unsuccessful nominees is endogenous in the sense that it depends on the overall quality of the applicant
pool.

9

appointment contracts varied in their initial length. Assistant Investigators (Assistant Professors in their home institution) were appointed for three years; Associate Investigators, for
five years; and Investigators, for seven years.5
Our analysis focuses on HHMI investigators appointed in 1993, 1994, and 1995. We
exclude the three researchers that withdrew from the program voluntarily, leaving us with a
sample of 73 scientists.6

2.2

Control Sample: Early Career Prize Winners

In the absence of information on the runners-up of the HHMI competitions, we must rely
on observable characteristics to create viable control groups. The main challenge is that
HHMI investigators are extremely accomplished at the time of their appointment. Controls
should not only be well-matched with HHMI investigators in terms of fields, age, gender, and
host institutions; their accomplishments should also be comparable at baseline. Our control
group is drawn from early career prize winners in the life sciences.
The Pew, Searle, Beckman, Packard, and Rita Allen Scholarships are early-career prizes
that target scientists in the same life science subfields and similar research institutions as
HHMI. Every year, these charitable trusts provide seed funding to around 60 life scientists
in the first two years of their independent careers. These scholarships are among the most
prestigious accolades that young researchers can receive as they are building a laboratory,
but they differ from HHMI investigatorships in one essential respect: they are structured
as one-time grants (e.g., $60,000 a year over 4 years for the Pew Scholarship; $80,000 a
year for 3 years for the Searle Scholarship, etc.). These amounts are relatively small, roughly
corresponding to 35% of a typical NIH R01 grant. As a result, these scholars must still attract
5

In our sample, these categories respectively account 15%, 70%, and 15% of the total number of scientists
in the treatment group. Of course, such variation raises the specter that appointment length might be
endogenous. In fact, the length of the initial term is purely a function of the scientist’s academic rank in
his/her home institution.
6
One accepted a top administrative position in his/her university (HHMI rules prevent investigators to
hold major administrative posts), one moved to an institution that has no relationship with HHMI. Yet
another wished to move to a different institution during his/her first appointment. To prevent the eruption
of bidding wars over HHMI investigators, the Institute forces such investigators to resign their appointment.

10

grants from other funding sources (especially NIH) if they intend to further their independent
research career. After a screen to eliminate investigators whose age place them outside the
age range of the treatment group, and a second screen to exclude researchers working in
idiosyncratic fields, we are left with 393 scientists awarded one of these scholarships.
Before presenting descriptive statistics, it is useful to discuss broad features of the control
group that will influence the interpretation of the treatment effect. The process that results
in the selection of HHMIs and controls is very similar. In both cases, an elite jury of senior
scientists is given the mission to identify individuals with an impressive track record as
well as exceptional promise; in particular, they are not asked to evaluate the merits of an
individual project. The main difference between these programs is that ECPWs are selected
at the very start of their independent career, when it is difficult to distinguish their output
from that of their postdoctoral mentor. In contrast, the modal HHMI investigator stands at
the cusp of the tenure decision when s/he is appointed. As a result, there is more variability
in the expected performance of ECPW scholars than is the case among HHMI investigators,
but as we will show, it is possible to cull from this group a subsample of scientists whose
characteristics match well those of HHMI scientists at baseline.

2.3

Measuring Scientific Creativity

Creativity is a loaded term. The wikipedia entry informs us that more than 60 different
definitions can be found in the psychological literature, none of which is particularly authoritative. Furthermore, there exists no agreed-upon measurement metrics or techniques to
measure creative outputs.
The perspective adopted in this paper is very pragmatic, and guided by the constraints
put on us by the availability of data. Amabile (1996) suggests that while innovation “begins
with creative ideas...creativity by individuals and teams is a starting point for innovation; the
first is a necessary but not sufficient condition for the second.” While we certainly agree with
this view at a conceptual level, the measurement of scientific productivity — an already wellestablished discipline — makes it hard to recognize this nuance. A crucial development in

11

the bibliometric literature has been the use of citation information to adjust raw publication
counts for quality. Such an approach is not entirely satisfying here, as both “humdrum”
and “breakthrough” research generate publications and citations. Moreover, some types of
publications, like review articles, tend to generate a number of citations not commensurate
with their degree of originality. It has long been noted that the distributions of publications
and citations at the individual level is extremely skewed, and typically follows a power law
(Lotka 1926). The distribution of citations at the article level exhibits even more skewness.
In this paper, we make use of the wide variation in impact across the publications of a
given scientist to compute measures of creative output. Specifically, we sum the number of
distinct contributions that fall into the higher quantiles (top quartile, top five percentiles,
or top percentile) of the article-level distribution of citations, for an individual scientist in a
given time period.
One practical hurdle is truncation: older articles have had more time to be cited, and
hence are more likely to reach the tail of the citation distribution. To overcome this issue, we
compute a different empirical cumulative distribution function in each year.7 For example,
in the life sciences broadly defined, an article published in 1980 would require at least 98
citations to fall into the top five percentiles of the distribution; an article published in 1990,
94 citations; and an article published in 2000, only 57 citations (this is illustrated in Figure 1).
With these empirical distributions in hand, it becomes meaningful to count the number of
articles that fall, for example, in the top percentile over a scientist’s career. Counting the
number of contributions that fall “in the tail” is predicated on the idea that exploration is
more likely to result in high-impact publications, relative to exploitation.8 We also assess
impact relative to each scientist’s own pre-appointment citation performance. Because there
is not enough data to estimate individual, vintage-specific citation distributions, we use the
entire corpus of work published up until the year of appointment (1993, 1994, or 1995) to
7

We thank Stefan Wuchty and Ben Jones from Northwestern University for performing these computations.
8
We exclude review articles, editorials, and letters from the set when computing these measures. We also
eliminate articles with more than 20 authors.

12

compute the citation quantile corresponding to each scientist’s most heavily-cited article.
We then count the number of times a scientist exceeds this level after appointment.
We rely on two additional metrics of scientific excellence. We tabulate elections to the
National Academy of Sciences. We also measure the number of students and fellows trained
in a scientist’s lab that go on to win a Pew, Searle, Beckman, Packard, or Rita Allen
scholarship.9
HHMI appointments might also fatten the left-hand tail of the outcome distribution,
since pushing the boundaries of one’s field is a riskier endeavor than cruising along an
already-established scientific trajectory. To test this prediction, we compute the number of
contributions that fall in the bottom quartile of the vintage-specific, article-level distribution
of citations (about three citations or less).10 We also count the number of times each scientist underperforms, relative to the pre-appointment article corresponding to his/her lowest
citation quantile. Since HHMI investigators remain eligible for NIH grants, we also examine
how funding outcomes change following appointment, relative to ECPW controls. In particular, our data enables us to separate whether funding levels differ because of a change in
application behavior, or because HHMIs’ grant applications are scored differently by NIH’s
review panels in the post-appointment regime.
Finally, explorative behavior should have implications for the direction of research endeavors, independently of the success or failure of the associated projects. To investigate
this issue, we construct a battery of measures designed to capture potential changes in the
scientists’ research trajectories. Most of these measures use MeSH keywords as an essential
input.11 First, we calculate the average age of MeSH keywords for the published research of
every scientist in the sample, separately for each year of their independent career. A keyword
is said to be born the first year it appears in any paper indexed by PubMed. This measure
9

We do not emphasize the results pertaining to these outcomes, because they seem particularly subject
to alternative interpretations: NAS members are elected, and the large contingent of HHMI investigators
among the incumbent membership might skew the results in favor of the treated scientists; similarly, it is
plausible that better students match with HHMI PIs after their appointment.
10
Too few investigators exit science altogether to make exit a useful indicator of failure.
11
MeSH is the National Library of Medicine’s controlled vocabulary thesaurus; it consists of sets of terms
naming descriptors in a hierarchical structure that permits searching at various levels of specificity. There
are 24,767 descriptors in the 2008 MeSH.

13

captures the extent to which a scientist’s research is novel relative to the world’s research
frontier. Equally important is to document the extent to which scientists place new scientific bets in the post-appointment period (1995-2006) relative to the pre appointment-period
(1986-1994).12 We do so by (a) computing the degree of overlap in MeSH keywords corresponding to articles published in both periods; computing the Herfindahl index of MeSH
keywords in both periods (a proxy for variety in topic choice); and (c) computing one minus
the Herfindahl index of citing journal diversity in both periods (a measure of impact breadth,
rather than impact depth as with the citation quantiles). If HHMI investigators are induced
to explore novel approaches following their appointment, we would expect this behavior to
be reflected in these measures.

2.4

Descriptive Statistics

For each scientist, we gathered employment and basic demographic data from CVs, sometimes complemented by Who’s Who profiles or faculty web pages. We record the following
information: degrees (MD, PhD, or MD/PhD); year of graduation; mentors during graduate
school or post-doctoral fellowship; gender; and department(s).
We obtain publication and citation data from PubMed and Thomson Scientific’s Web of
Science, respectively. Funding information stems from NIH’s Compound Applicant Grant
File (CGAF), and is available for the entire length of these scientists’ career. In contrast,
grant applications and their associated priority scores (the “grades” awarded to applications
by NIH review panels) are available solely for years 2003 through 2008.
Finally, we categorize the type of laboratory run by each scientist into four broad types:
macromolecular labs, cellular labs, organismal labs, and translational labs. For the first
three types, the taxonomy is based on the level of analysis at which most of the research
is performed in the lab. Some scientists work mostly at the molecular level (i.e., in test
tubes). This type of research does not require living cells, and includes fields such as molecular biology, biochemistry, and structural biology. Others do most of their research at the
12

For investigators appointed in 1993 (resp. 1995), the “after” period begins in 1994 (resp. 1996).

14

cellular level (i.e., in petri dishes), and ask questions that require living cells. Prominent
subfields include subcellular trafficking, cell morphology, cell motility, and some aspects of
cell signaling. Yet others work with model organisms (mice, flies, monkeys, worms, etc.),
asking questions that require, if not a whole organism, at least the interaction of multiple
cells. The translational label is given to labs run by physician-scientists whose research have
both a laboratory and a clinical component.
HHMI and control samples at baseline. Table 2 presents baseline descriptive statistics.
Approximately 37% of the HHMI sample is female, versus 20% of the ECPW sample. They
are of the same career age on average, but better funded than ECPW scholars at baseline
($1.45 million vs. $1.10 million on average). In terms of raw publication output, the pattern
is very similar, with HHMI investigators leading ECPW scholars. The breadth of impact and
diversity of topics studied by these scientists appears similar for both groups of scientists.
ECPWs and HHMIs appear to be drawn from a similar set of academic employers in a
dimension relevant for HHMI appointment: the number of slots allocated to their institution
at the nomination stage.
Of course, these averages tell only part of the story. Figure 3A plots the distribution
of baseline publications in the Top 5% of the citation distribution. Note that we are only
including here publications for which the scientist is the senior author, i.e., where s/he
appears in last position on the authorship list. The distribution for ECPW scholars appears
significantly more skewed than that for HHMI investigators. Similarly, Figure 3B plots the
distribution of NIH funding at baseline for treatment and control scientists; the shapes of
these distributions are very similar.
In summary, characteristics that determine selection into the HHMI program are not
especially well-balanced at baseline between treatment and control scientists. However, the
region of common support is wide, indicating that it should be possible to create “synthetic”
control scientists that will be good matches for HHMI investigators on these important
dimensions.

15

Career achievement. While the differences between treatment and control samples are
relatively modest at baseline, their magnitude increases when we examine achievements over
the entire career. In Table 3 we see that HHMI scientists publish many more papers than
ECPW scientists, with this output of higher quality, regardless of the quantile threshold
one chooses to focus on. Of course, these accomplishments should be viewed in light of
HHMIs’ funding advantage: while they have garnered less resources from NIH by the end
of the sample period than ECPW scholars, they also benefit from HHMI’s relatively lavish
research budgets. In fact, HHMI scientists apply less for R01 grants than controls who
have no alternative sources of funding: 3.2 vs. 5.1 applications on average between 2003
and 2008. On the other hand, conditional on applying, these same applications are judged
more harshly by NIH study sections, since they are associated with higher priority scores.13
Among our “direct” measures of explorative behavior, only the average level of normalized
keyword overlap appears to be lower for HHMIs, compared with ECPW controls in these
univariate comparisons.
When we focus on discrete career accolades, we observe an even greater contrast between
HHMI and control scientists. Approximately a third of the HHMI investigators are elected
members of the National Academy of Sciences, versus 4.1% for the control sample. Our 73
HHMI investigators collectively train 83 future early career prize winners (an average of 1.13
per scientist), whereas the control investigators are mentors to 90 such “young superstars”
(an average of 0.23 per scientist).

3

Econometric Considerations

In order to estimate the treatment effect of the HHMI investigator program, we must confront a basic identification problem: appointments are driven by expectations about the
creative potential of scientists, and selected investigators might have experienced very similar outcomes had they not been appointed. As a result, traditional econometric techniques,
which assume that assignment into the program is random, cannot recover causal effects.
13

Priority scores vary between 100 and 500, with lower scores indicating applications with a higher chance
of funding.

16

Propensity-score weighting. As an attempt to overcome this challenge, we estimate the
effects of the program using inverse probability of treatment weighted estimation (Robins and
Rotnitzky 1995; Hirano and Imbens 2001; Busso, DiNardo, and McCrary 2008). Suppose we
have a random sample of size N . For each individual i in this sample, let T REATi indicate
whether s/he received treatment. Using the counterfactual outcome notation (e.g., Rubin
1974), let yi1 be the value of the outcome y that would have been observed had i received
treatment, and yi0 the value of the outcome had i been assigned to the control arm of the
experiment. In addition, we will assume that we observe a vector of covariates denoted by
X = (W, Z). The variables included in W are assumed to be strictly exogenous; in contrast,
the vector Z includes pre-treatment variables such as lagged outcomes.
For each individual i, the treatment effect is yi1 − yi0 . For the population as a whole,
we are interested in two distinct estimands, the Average Treatment Effect (ATE) and the
Average Treatment Effect on the Treated (ATT). Formally:
β AT E = E[yi1 − yi0 ]
β AT T = E[yi1 − yi0 |T REATi = 1]
While ATE elucidates what would be the average effect of treatment for an individual picked
at random from the population, ATT measures the average effect for the subpopulation that
is likely to receive treatment. The difficulty in identifying these coefficients is identical,
however: for a given individual, we observe y 1 or y 0 , but never both.
Following Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983), we make the “selection on observables” or
unconfoundedness assumption:
T REAT q (y 1 ; y 0 ; Z)|X
where the q sign denotes statistical independence. Let the propensity score, the conditional
probability of treatment, be denoted by p(x) = P rob(T REATi = 1|Xi = x); further, we
assume that 0 < p(x) < 1. These admittedly strong assumptions enable the identification
of ATE and ATT; the two effects can be recovered by a two-step procedure relying on a

17

first-step estimate of the propensity score p̂(x). In the second step, the outcome equation
0

yi = β0 + β1 Wi + β2 T REATi + εi

(1)

is estimated by weighted least squares or weighted maximum likelihood (depending on the
type of dependent variable), where the weights are simple functions of the estimated propensity score:
wiAT E =

T REATi 1 − T REATi
+
p̂(xi )
1 − p̂(xi )

wiAT T =T REATi + (1 − T REATi ) ·

p̂(xi )
1 − p̂(xi )

In order to develop the intuition for this weighting strategy, we examine the formula
corresponding to wAT E a bit more closely. Each factor in the denominator is the probability
that an individual received her own observed treatment, conditional on her past history
of “prognosis factors” for treatment. Suppose that all relevant variables are observed and
included in X. Then, weighting effectively creates a pseudo-population in which X no longer
predicts selection into treatment and the causal association between treatment and outcome
is the same as in the original population.14
Assessing unconfoundedness. Propensity-score weighting relies on the assumption that
selection into treatment occurs solely on the basis of factors observed by the econometrician.
This will appear to many readers as a strong assumption — one that is unlikely to be literally
true. Despite the strength of the assumption, we consider it a useful starting point. Past
research in the program evaluation literature has shown that techniques that assume selection
on observables perform well (in the sense of replicating an experimental benchmark) when
(1) researchers use a rich list of covariates to model the probability of treatment; (2) units are
drawn from similar labor markets, and (3) outcomes are measured in the same way for both
treatment and control groups (Dehejia and Waba 2002; Smith and Todd 2005). Conditions
(2) and (3) are trivially satisfied here, but one might wonder about condition (1), namely the
extent to which the analysis accounts for the relevant determinants of HHMI appointment.
14

One might worry about statistical inference, since the weights used as inputs to estimate the outcome
equation are themselves estimated. In contrast to two-step selection correction methods, the standard errors
obtained in this case are conservative (Wooldridge, 2002).

18

Through interviews with HHMI senior administrators, we have sought to identify the
criteria that increase the odds of appointments, conditional on being nominated. As described earlier, the Institute appears focused on making sure that its new investigators have
stepped out of the shadow cast by their graduate school or postdoctoral mentors. They also
want to ensure that these investigators have the leadership and managerial skills required
to run a successful laboratory, and interpret receipt of NIH funding as a important signal
of possessing these skills. In practice, we capture the “stepping out” criteria by counting
the number of last-authored, high-impact contributions the scientist has made since the beginning of his/her independent career.15 We proxy PI leadership skills with an measure of
cumulative R01 NIH funding at baseline. Of course, our selection equation also includes
important demographic characteristics, such as gender, laboratory type, degree, and career
age.
Semi-Parametric Difference in Differences. An alternative methodology is to rely on
within-scientist variation to identify the program’s treatment effect. Scientist fixed effects
purge estimates from any influence of unobserved heterogeneity that is constant over time.
However, for difference-in-differences (DD) estimation to be valid, it must be the case that
the average outcome for the treated and control groups would have followed parallel paths
over time in the absence of treatment. This assumption is implausible if pretreatment characteristics that are thought to be associated with the dynamics of the outcome variable are
unbalanced between treatment and control units. Below, we provide strong evidence that selection into the program is influenced by transitory shocks to scientific opportunities: HHMI
scientists have higher output in the years immediately preceding their appointment.
In such a case, Abadie (2005) proposes a semiparametric difference-in-differences (SDD)
estimator that combines the advantages of adjustment for observed heterogeneity with differencing. The idea is to apply propensity score reweighting not to the levels of outcome y
as above, but to the differences in outcome between the post- and pre-treatment periods.
15
A robust social norm in the life sciences systematically assigns last authorship to the principal investigator, first authorship to the junior author who was responsible for the actual conduct of the investigation,
and apportions the remaining credit to authors in the middle of the authorship list, generally as a decreasing
function of the distance from the extremities of the list.

19

Under some additional regularity conditions, the Average Treatment Effect on the Treated
(ATT) is identified and can be recovered by weighting y post − y pre using:
wiSDD =

T REATi − p̂(xi )
π · (1 − p̂(xi ))

where π denotes the unconditional odds of treatment P rob(T REATi = 1). Intuitively, the
weights create a pseudo-population of untreated scientists that follow similar dynamics to the
treated group in the pre-treatment period. The SDD estimator then subtracts the change in
outcomes for treated scientists with the change in outcome for this pseudo-population of control scientists. Inference is performed using a non-parametric pairwise bootstrap procedure
with 500 replications.
The SDD estimates are still vulnerable to the critique that time-varying sources of unobserved heterogeneity could bias the effects, but they greatly narrow the scope of selection
concerns. Because they rely on within-scientist variation, fixed personality differences that
impact the creative potential of individual scientists (such as conscientiousness [Charlton
2009] or desire for intellectual challenge [Sauermann and Cohen 2008]) do not jeopardize a
causal interpretation of the effect of HHMI appointment. Rather, one might worry that the
appointment committee is able to recognize and select for “exploratory tendencies” before
they manifest themselves in the researcher’s published work. If this were the case, these latent explorers might have branched out in new directions even in the absence of their HHMI
appointment. Though we cannot rule out this possibility, we take solace in the fact that
ECPW scholars and HHMIs are very well-matched at baseline along the dimensions of topic
novelty and citation breadth, dimensions that we argue are good proxies for exploration.
Furthermore, ECPW scholars are selected through a very similar process at an earlier career
stage; given that the same individuals, or at least the same type of individuals often serve
on these panels, it is unlikely that the HHMI committee is more skilled at identifying those
scientists that are “itching to branch out.”

20

4

Results

Our presentation of results is organized in three sets of tables. Table 4 pertains solely to
HHMI investigators, and validates empirically some of the purported distinctive features of
the program. Table 5 presents evidence on the determinants of HHMI appointment. Finally,
Tables 6, 7, and 8 present estimates of the program’s effects.
HHMI appointments: rhetoric and practice. We begin by validating our claims about
the terms of the HHMI investigator award. The unconditional probability of termination at
the end of the first appointment term is 15.5%, versus 28.33% at the end of the second appointment term (conditional on being renewed once). However, our contention that the first
review is laxer than the second has implications for the conditional probability of first and
second reappointment. Specifically, if the perception of the program’s administrators and
investigators is accurate, the probability of second reappointment should be more responsive to achievements during the preceding term than the probability of first reappointment.
Table 4 provides evidence consistent with this hypothesis. It reports estimates from logit
models of reappointment as explained by various indicators of achievement during the preceding term. We find a consistent pattern, regardless of the achievement variable on the
right-hand side: higher achievement significantly increases the likelihood of renewal at the
end of the second term, but not at the end of the first term. Moreover, the marginal effect for
blockbuster papers produced in the previous period is twice as large as the marginal effect
for total publication output. This is consistent with the idea that HHMI review panels care
more about whether investigators “transform their fields” than they care about counting
lines on their CVs.
From these results, we conclude that the HHMI program conforms both in its stated and
actual practices with the features that Manso (2010) predicts should encourage exploration.
Determinants of HHMI appointment. We now turn to the observable determinants of
selection into the HHMI program (Table 5). We present the results from logit specifications
that include demographic characteristics as controls, as well as cumulative NIH funding at

21

baseline, and achievements as PI in the pre-appointment period. Among the demographic
characteristics, the only consistent pattern is the higher appointment probability of female
scientists. Consistent with the qualitative evidence on the selection process, we find that
the number of “hit papers” at baseline is highly predictive of appointment. In contrast, the
level of funding appears to play no role in the odds of selection. Using the most saturated
model of selection (column 5), we find that the region of common support excludes 4 HHMI
investigators whose superlative record of achievement prior to appointment makes them
difficult to compare to any member of the control group. Conversely, 45 early career prize
winners have a very low predicted probability of appointment, mostly because they do not
produce an impactful paper after they set up their lab. In all that follows, we have excluded
from the estimation sample these 49 scientists. This ensures the validity of the common
support assumption, which is necessary to identify the average treatment effect (ATE) or
the average treatment on the treated (ATT) using inverse probability of treatment-weighted
estimation. The final sample contains information on 417 scientists (69 HHMIs and 348
controls).
Effects of HHMI appointment on citation impact. The first four lines of Table 6
report the effect of the program on the rate of publication output falling in distinct citation
quantile bins: all publications, publications in the top quartile, in the top five percentiles, and
in the top percentile. For each outcome variable, we present five coefficients corresponding
to different ways of assessing the program’s effects. The first column reports naive crosssectional results, which ignore the selection process. The second and third columns weight
the outcome equations by the inverse probability of treatment so as to recover the Average
Treatment Effect (ATE), and the Average Treatment Effect on the Treated (ATT) under
unconfoundedness. The fourth column reports simple conditional fixed effects estimates, a
naive difference-in-differences (DD). Finally, the fifth column reports results corresponding
to semi-parametric difference-in-differences (SDD) estimates as in Abadie (2005). Since the
SDD estimator adjusts the treatment effect for selection on observables while purging the
estimates of time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity, it is our preferred specification.

22

Following a long-standing tradition in the study of scientific and technical change, the
cross-sectional, ATE, ATT, and DD effects are estimated on the full panel using quasimaximum likelihood Poisson.16 In contrast, the SDD effects stem from a two-step procedure
detailed in Appendix III.
The naive cross-sectional estimate is always the largest in magnitude, and using propensityscore weighting reduces the magnitude of the effect by approximately a third. In contrast,
the DD estimate is systematically lower than the SDD estimate, as is possible if HHMIs
and controls are on different output trends even before appointment. The magnitudes of the
effects are large. For instance, the SDD estimates imply that the HHMI program increases
the rate at which appointed scientists produce publications by e.333 − 1 = 39%; the figure
for papers in the Top 5% of the citation distribution is 55%; and for papers in the Top 1%,
a 97% increase. The observed pattern is that the program has a bigger effect on the upper
tail of the distribution of accomplishments, regardless of the estimation method used.
Figure 4 display the time path of the average publication count (Panel A) and “Top 5%”
outcome (Panel B), for HHMIs and ECPWs separately. While computing the averages, we
weight each control scientist’s outcome by his/her inverse probability of being selected into
the program, while leaving the treated scientists’ outcomes unchanged. Loosely, Figures 4A
and 4B provide a graphical intuition for the SDD estimates: they correspond to the difference
between the change in outcomes for the HHMIs and for a pseudo-population of control
scientists matched on observables. A necessary condition for the plausibility of this exercise
is that the treated and control groups display parallel output trends prior to the appointment
event. This appears to be the case here.
Interestingly, for three years after appointment, the outcomes for treated and control
scientists continue to track each other closely. Figure 4B even suggests that the control
group (appropriately selected on observables) briefly outpaces the treatment group following the appointment, consistent with Manso’s (2010) theory which predicts both slower and
16

Because the Poisson model is in the linear exponential family, the coefficient estimates remain consistent
as long as the mean of the dependent variable is correctly specified (Wooldridge 1996; Santos Silva and
Tenreyro 2006). Further, robust standard errors are consistent even if the underlying data generating process
is not Poisson.

23

more variable returns under an exploration incentive scheme. This difference is not statistically significant, however, which is perhaps unsurprising given our sample’s relatively small
size.17 HHMIs’ output begins to diverge from that of ECPW’s only four to five years after
appointment, and this divergence is more marked in Panel B.
Effects of HHMI appointment on Failure. It seems intuitive that exploration would
lead scientists to “strike out” more often. Measuring failure is difficult, since it might lead
researchers to abort projects altogether. Here we ask whether HHMIs produce more papers
of little import, relative to controls. To answer this question, we examine whether HHMI
appointment increases the rate of publications that fall in the bottom quartile of citations.
Relative to ECPW scholars, HHMIs indeed fail more often, regardless of estimation method;
some of these estimates are large in magnitude, but they are also imprecisely estimated.
The lack of statistical significance is not terribly surprising since relatively few of the papers
produced by these elite scientists will fail to garner the three citations that correspond to
the 25th percentile of the citation distribution in most years.
An alternative approach is to use these scientists’ own citation impact prior to appointment to assess their performance in the post-appointment regime, rather than a universal
citation benchmark as above. The corresponding results are displayed in the last two lines
of Table 6. The coefficient estimates pertain to the HHMI treatment effect in cross sectional
comparisons where the rates of “hit” and “flop” publications are modeled using QML Poisson. To compute the number of hits, we count the number of times each scientist publishes
a paper whose citation quantile places it above the highest citation quantile of any article
published prior to appointment. Symmetrically, the number of flops is computed by counting
the number of times each scientist publishes a paper whose citation quantile places it below
17

We have explored the hypothesis of a temporary, post-appointment slowdown qualitatively by asking
eight current and former HHMI investigators about the “retooling” necessary to take advantage of the
freedom afforded by HHMI. This idea resonated with these scientists, but it also seems clear that these
lags are very heterogeneous across labs. Some of them mentioned waiting until their first renewal before
branching out; others were clearly itching to begin new projects, for example by focusing on a new disease
(autism vs. Huntington’s), model organism (mice vs. yeast), or discipline (chemistry vs. cell biology). Still
others describe a less deliberate exploration process whereby the logic of their traditional research projects
opened up novel opportunities, which they could more easily take advantage of as HHMI investigators.

24

the lowest citation quantile of any article published prior to appointment (further details are
provided in Appendix IV). Since we use citation data for the entire pre-appointment period
to compute individual citation benchmarks, there are no DD and SDD specification for these
two outcomes.
We find robust statistical evidence that HHMI appointment increases the frequency of
both hits and flops. We focus on the latter result since an increased rate of failure under an
exploration incentive scheme is a strong prediction of the theory. It is also more challenging
to reconcile with the view that HHMI simply picks extraordinarily talented scientists and
then takes credit for their accomplishments. Of course, we cannot rule out a more nuanced
selection story whereby the elite scientists who serve as judges in HHMI competitions are
skilled at identifying scientists destined to push the scientific frontier outward.
Effects of HHMI appointment on NIH grant outcomes. In Table 7, we document
a negative association between HHMI appointment and NIH funding, which holds both in
the cross-sectional and the within-scientist dimension of the data. This effect corresponds in
large part to a mechanical substitution of HHMI resources for traditional NIH funding: the
number of R01 grant applications by HHMI investigators is, on average, only about 60% of
the corresponding number for ECPW scholars. But application behavior does not on its own
explain the decline in NIH funding; conditional on applying, applications from HHMI scientists receive higher priority scores (i.e., are judged more harshly by study sections). When
combined with the results pertaining to citation impact, this evidence supports the view
that the punctiliousness of the NIH peer-review process crowds out scientific exploration.18
Effects of HHMI appointment on the direction of research. So far, our presentation
of results has conflated intensity of exploration with the rate at which tail outcomes are
produced. But taken literally, the Manso (2010) model does not predict that “pay-for-future
performance” incentives will result in better outcomes; it simply asserts that agents subject
to those incentives will increase their rates of exploration, relative to agents who receive piece
18
More prosaically, they might put less effort in preparing these proposals, since they benefit from the
safety of Hughes funding.

25

rates. This is the hypothesis we examine in Table 8. Choosing less traveled scientific avenues
could also leave trails in the content of what scientists publish, and in particular affect the
keywords that tag their publications. We first focus on whether HHMI investigators are
prone to define the scientific frontier, by examining the vintage of the MeSH keywords in
their output. In our analysis, a keyword is born the earliest year in which it appears in any
publication indexed by PubMED. We then compute the average age of all keywords or all
keyword pairs in each scientist’s yearly output. Table 8 shows that HHMIs indeed tackle
more novel topics; the coefficient estimates are negative regardless of estimation method.
Next, we ask whether evidence exists that HHMIs alter the direction of their scientific
trajectory following their appointment. We first examine the program’s effect on the number of unique publication keywords that overlap between the set of articles published in the
“before period” (1986-1994) and the “after” period (1998-2006). This measure is then normalized by the number of unique keyword used in the after period. For each control group,
we report both the results of a “naı̈ve” specification, and the results of two specifications
which incorporate inverse probability of treatment weights corresponding to ATE and ATT,
respectively. Since the dependent variable is a proportion, we estimate these model using
the quasi-maximum likelihood fractional logit estimator of Papke and Wooldridge (1996).
Relative to ECPW scholars, HHMIs exhibit unambiguously lower overlap in keyword use.
The effects are statistically significant, and imply that HHMI appointment is associated with
about a 10% lower rate of overlap.
Our last test focuses on the breadth — rather than the depth — of impact for these
scientists’s publications. To do so, we examine the journals in which citing articles appear,
and compute the Herfindahl of journal concentration H. We find that HHMI’s exhibit higher
levels of (1 − H) in the post-appointment period, i.e., their work is cited by more diverse
set of journals than the articles published by ECPWs. Overall, the results in Table 8 are
consistent with the idea that HHMIs broaden their research agenda in the post-appointment
period, a necessary condition for exploration.

26

Incentives vs. alternative mechanisms. Even if our estimates of HHMI appointments’
treatment effects can be given a causal interpretation, ascribing them to the program’s
incentive features requires an interpretive leap.
First, we are unable to ascertain the extent to which the program increases productivity,
rather than output. A quick glance at the descriptive statistics suffices to show that, per
dollar of funding, HHMI investigators do not publish more papers than researchers funded by
the NIH. Of course, if the supply of genuinely creative ideas is very inelastic, then publications
per dollar of funding will not adequately measure researchers’ productivity.19 We also note
that the results pertaining to the diversity of experimentation are less vulnerable to this
critique, since they essentially hold output constant.
Second, the prestige conferred by HHMI appointment might have independent effects on
scientists’ achievements, either by increasing exposure to their research, or through a dynamic
of ascription that has long been the focus of sociologists of science (Merton 1968). Azoulay,
Stuart, and Wang (2010) provide estimates of the HHMI investigator program’s “anointment
effects” by examining whether appointment shifts the citation rate of articles written in the
pre-appointment period; their evidence points to effects of very modest magnitude. As such,
an interpretation of our results that emphasizes the status benefits of HHMI appointment
appears unwarranted.
Third, collaboration between scientists in the treatment and control groups might threaten
the validity of the comparisons drawn in the analysis. Fifty nine out of the seventy three
HHMI investigators have at least one control collaborator; 10 have five or more. However,
peer effects from coauthorship (e.g., Azoulay, Graff Zivin, and Wang 2010), which enhance
the accomplishments of the control group, would tend to dampen the magnitudes of the
effects estimated above.
A more subtle reinterpretation of our main results is that “explorer types” are more likely
to seek HHMI appointment. A sorting process in this vein would imply that the freedom
19

In a recent paper, Jacob and Lefgren (2007) estimate that the elasticity of citations with respect to
NIH R01 grant funding is quite small in magnitude, and often insignificantly different from 0. Given the
regression-discontinuity design followed in their paper, it would be hazardous to import their estimate for
the analysis of the scientist population analyzed in the present study.

27

and long-term funding bundled with HHMI appointment have real effects, even if they do
not really induce behavioral changes in the treated group. However, a peculiar feature of
the HHMI appointment process is that candidates do not apply, but rather are nominated
by their universities who are endowed by HHMI with a very limited number of nomination
slots. This casts doubt on the sorting interpretation at the principal investigator level. It
is altogether more likely (and also more feasible) for talented postdoctoral researchers and
graduate students with idiosyncratic tastes for exploration to sort themselves into HHMIfunded labs. The fact that HHMI labs train a much higher number of young scientists who
go on to win early career prizes is consistent with a sorting process at the level of trainees.
In summary, we argue the differences observed between HHMI investigators and controls
are likely to be driven by the program’s distinct incentive features, as opposed to other
potential effects of HHMI appointment.

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we exploit key differences across funding streams within the academic life
sciences to examine the impact of incentives embodied in research contracts on the rate
of scientific exploration. We find that selection into the HHMI investigator program —
which rewards long-term success, encourages intellectual experimentation, and provides rich
feedback to its appointees — leads to higher levels of breakthrough innovation, compared
with NIH funding — which is characterized by short grant cycles, pre-defined deliverables,
and unforgiving renewal policies. Moreover, the magnitudes of these effects are quite large.
Our findings are important for at least two reasons. First, they demonstrate the impact of
nuanced features of research contracts for the rate and direction of scientific progress. Given
the prominent role that scientific change is presumed to play in the process of economic
growth (e.g., Mokyr 2002), this has important implications for the organization of public
and private research institutions. Second, they offer empirical support for the theoretical
model developed by Manso (2010), and as such may provide insights relevant to a wider

28

set of industries that rely on creative professionals, ranging from advertising and computer
programming to leadership roles at the upper echelons of the corporate world.
Finally, our results should not be interpreted as a critique of NIH and its funding policies.
While “exploration” incentive contracts appear to stimulate creativity in this setting, it is
unclear how easily, and at what cost, the program could be scaled up. Only scientists showing
exceptional promise are eligible for HHMI appointment, and our results may not generalize to
the overall population of scientists eligible for grant funding, which include gifted individuals
as well as those with more modest talent. Moreover, HHMI provides detailed evaluation and
feedback to its investigators. The richness of this feedback consumes a great deal of resources,
particularly the time of the elite scientists that serve on review panels, and its quality might
degrade if the program was expanded drastically.
It is also vital to recognize that NIH operates under political constraints that a private
foundation like HHMI can safely ignore. For instance, all public research agencies need to
spread their support across many institutions, including those of lesser renown. Similarly,
supporting individual projects, rather than individual scientists, introduces a level of impersonality in the funding decisions that may make them easier to defend vis-a-vis congressional
appropriators.
Much more could be done to explore the impacts of contract design on research output in
this setting. For example, do the quality of peers at these investigators’ institution temper or
magnify these effects? Do the effects of exploration-style incentives exhibit hysteresis, i.e., do
they lead scientists to be more creative under more conventional contractual arrangements?
Answering these questions are the next steps of our research agenda.

29

References
Abadie, Alberto. 2005. “Semiparametric Difference-in-Differences Estimators.” Review of Economic
Studies 72(1): 1–19.
Aghion, Philippe, Mathias Dewatripont, and Jeremy C. Stein. 2008. “Academic Freedom, Private Sector
Focus, and the Process of Innovation.” RAND Journal of Economics 39(3): 617–35.
Amabile, Teresa M. 1996. Creativity in Context. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Azoulay, Pierre, Andrew Stellman, and Joshua Graff Zivin. 2006. “PublicationHarvester: An Open-Source
Software Tool for Science Policy Research.” Research Policy, 35(7): 970-974.
Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua Graff Zivin, and Jialan Wang. 2010. “Superstar Extinction.” Quartely Journal of
Economics 125(2): 549-589.
Azoulay, Pierre, Toby Stuart, and Yanbo Wang. 2010. Matthew: Effect or Fable? Working Paper, MIT
Sloan School of Management.
Burt, Ronald S. 2004. “Structural Holes and Good Ideas.” American Journal of Sociology 110(2): 349–99.
Busso, Matias, John DiNardo, and Justin McCrary. 2008. Finite Sample Properties of Semiparametric
Estimators of Average Treatment Effects. Working Paper, University of Michigan.
Capecchi, Mario R. 2008. Response. Science 319(5865): 900-1.
Charlton, Bruce G. 2009. “Why Are Modern Scientists so Dull? How Science Selects for Perseverance and
Sociability at the Expense of Intelligence and Creativity.” Medical Hypotheses 72(3): 237-243.
Dehejia, Rajeev H. and Sadek Wahba. 2002. “Propensity Score-Matching Methods for Nonexperimental
Causal Studies.” Review of Economics and Statistics 84(1): 151-61.
Ederer, Florian and Gustavo Manso. 2010. “Is Pay-for-Performance Detrimental to Innovation?” Working
Paper, MIT Sloan School of Management.
Hirano, Keisuke and Guido W. Imbens. 2001. “Estimation of Causal Effects using Propensity Score
Weighting: An Application to Data on Right Heart Catherization.” Health Services & Outcomes Research
Methodology 2(3-4): 259-278.
Holmström, Bengt. 1989. “Agency Costs and Innovation.” Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization 12(3): 305-327.
Jacob, Brian and Lars Lefgren. 2007. The Impact of Research Grant Funding on Research Productivity.
NBER Working Paper #13519.
Kaplan, David. 2005. “How to Improve Peer Review at NIH.” The Scientist 19(17): 10.
Kolata, Gina. 2009. “Grant System Leads Cancer Researchers to Play it Safe.” The New York Times,
June 28.
Lazear, Edward. 2000. “Performance Pay and Productivity.” American Economic Review 90(5): 1346-1361.

30

Lerner, Josh and Julie Wulf. 2007. “Innovation and Incentives: Evidence from Corporate R&D.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 89(4): 634–644.
Lotka, Alfred J. 1926. “The Frequency Distribution of Scientific Productivity.” Journal of the Washington
Academy of Sciences 16(12): 317-323.
Manso, Gustavo. 2010. “Motivating Innovation.” Forthcoming, Journal of Finance.
March, James G. 1991. “Exploration and Exploitation in Organizational Learning.” Organization Science
2(1): 71-87.
McKnight, Steven L. 2009. “Unconventional Wisdom.” Cell 138(5): 817-819.
Merton, Robert K. 1968. “The Matthew Effect in Science.” Science 159(3810): 56-63.
Mokyr, Joel. 2002. The Gifts of Athena. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Papke, Leslie E. and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. 1996. “Econometric Methods for Fractional Responses with
an Application to 401(k) Plan participation Rates.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 11(6): 619–632.
Robins, James M., and Andrea Rotnitzky. 1995. Semiparametric Efficiency in Multivariate Regression
Models with Missing Data. Journal of the American Statistical Association 90(429): 122- 129.
Rosenbaum, Paul R. and Donald B. Rubin. 1983. “The Central Role of the Propensity Score in
Observational Studies for Causal Effects.” Biometrika 70(1): 41-55.
Rubin, Donald B. 1974. “Characterizing the Estimation of Parameters in Incomplete-Data Problems.”
Journal of the American Statistical Association 69(346): 467-474.
Santos Silva, J.M.C. and Silvana Tenreyro. 2006. “The Log of Gravity.” The Review of Economics and
Statistics 88(4): 641-658.
Sauermann, Henry and Wesley M. Cohen. 2008. What Makes Them Tick? Employee Motives and Firm
Innovation. NBER Working Paper #14443.
Simonton, Dean Keith. 2004. Creativity in Science: Chance, Logic, Genius, and Zeitgeist. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Smith, Jeffrey A. and Petra E. Todd. 2005. “Does Matching Overcome LaLonde’s Critique of
Nonexperimental Estimators?” Journal of Econometrics 125(1-2): 305-353.
Tian, Xuan and Tracy Yue Wang. 2010. “Tolerance for Failure and Corporate Innovation.” Working
Paper, Indiana University.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 1996. Quasi-Likelihood Methods for Count Data. pp. 352-406 in Handbook of
Applied Econometrics, Vol. 2. M.H. Pesaran and P. Schmidt (eds.). Oxford: Blackwell.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2002. “Inverse Probability Weighted M-Estimators for Sample Selection, Attrition,
and Stratification.” Portuguese Economic Journal 1(2): 117–139.

31

Figure 1
Measuring the Tail of the Distribution of Citations
250

Top 1%
Top 5%
Top 25%

Number of Citations

200

Top 50%

150

100

50

0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Selected Quantiles
Article-level Distribution of Citations

Notes: Selected quantiles (0.50, 0.25, 0.05, & 0.01) for the vintage-specific empirical distribution of the
number of citations at the article level. These quantiles were computed in early 2008 using the
universe of all articles indexed by ISI/Web of Science that appeared in life science journals.

Figure 2
Length of NIH R01 Grants vs. HHMI Appointments
NIH R01 Grantees

HHMIs

0.70

Proportion of Scientists

0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
2 years

4 years
3 years

6 years
5 years

3 years

7 years
5 years

Time to Renewal or Reappointment

Notes: NIH tabulations stem from the Compound Grant Applicant File (CGAF). The grants considered are R01
and equivalent whose first cycle began later than 1970, but earlier than 2002.

32

Figure 3
Baseline Comparisons between HHMI and Control Scientists
A. Number of “Hits” as PI
Early Career Prize Winners

HHMIs

Early Career Prize Winners

30

HHMIs

150

Number of Scientists

200

Number of Scientists

B. NIH Funding

150
20

100

20

15

100

10
50
5

10
50
0

0
0

0

2

4

6

8

0

2

4

6

8

0
0

10

20

30

0

10

20

Cumulative NIH Funding at Baseline

30

in $ millions, deflated by the Biomed. R&D PPI, base year=2006
The amounts exclude NIH center grants (P01, M01, U01, etc.)

Nb. of Last-Authored Articles in the Top 5% of the Citation Distribution

Notes: To compute baseline article counts, we focus on articles in which the scientist appears in last position on the authorship list, because this is the set that
clearly identifies both treated and controls as principal investigators in the pre-appointment period. To compute NIH funding totals, we exclude research
center grants because these grants are less likely to correspond to individual effort; in some cases, deans or department chairs serve as pro-forma PIs on
such grants, making it a less useful measure for our purposes.

33

Figure 4
Dynamics of HHMI Appointment on “Hits”
A. All Publications

B. Publications in the Top 5%
3.50

6.00

3.00

5.00

2.50
4.00

2.00
3.00

1.50
2.00

1.00
1.00

0.50

HHMIs

0.00
-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

Early Career Prize Winners
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

HHMIs

0.00
11

-6

Wghtd. Mean Number of Pubs.

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

Early Career Prize Winners
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Wghtd. Mean Number of Pubs. in Top 5% of the Citation Distribution

Notes: The dashed blue and solid red lines in the above plots correspond to the average yearly number of articles for early career prize winners and HHMIs,
respectively. The averages for the control scientists are weighted by each researcher’s inverse probability of treatment, where the weights are computed
using fitted values of the logit specification. Panel A displays our results for total publications (regardless of impact), whereas Panel B restricts the
outcome data to “hits” (publications that fall in the top five percentiles of the vintage-specific article-level distribution of citations).

34

Table 1
Comparison Between the Two Sources of Funding
NIH R01 Grants

HHMI Investigator Program

3-year funding

5-year funding

first review is similar to any other review

first review is rather lax

funds dry up upon non-renewal

two-year phase-down upon non-renewal

some feedback in the renewal process

feedback from renowned scientists

funding is for a particular project

“people, not projects”

35

Table 2
Descriptive Statistics – Baseline
Mean

Median

Std. Dev

Min.

Max.

1983.689
0.199
0.076
0.799
0.125
0.232
0.394
0.265
0.104
2.179
$1,106,790
40.001
99.202
24.775
0.647
18.718
9.647
3.712
23.376
0.963

1984
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
2
$676,249
36
100
20
0
15
8
3
23
1

3.738
0.400
0.265
0.401
0.331
0.422
0.489
0.441
0.305
1.296
$1,375,588
24.352
2.748
20.764
1.410
14.146
7.822
3.875
2.808
0.020

1974
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
62
2
0
0
0
0
18
0.837

1991
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
8
$11,634,552
100
100
200
15
123
51
27
35
0.992

1983.723
0.369
0.082
0.753
0.164
0.288
0.329
0.274
0.110
2.194
$1,502,810
33.626
99.762
32.657
0.627
26.866
16.910
8.478
22.824
0.965

1984
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
2
1,005,176
28
100
23
0
19
13
5
23
1

4.002
0.486
0.274
0.431
0.370
0.453
0.470
0.446
0.313
1.222
$1,768,341
23.197
0.847
27.399
0.902
23.398
16.889
10.224
2.253
0.018

1974
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
93
3
0
3
1
0
17
.921

1991
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
8
$7,852,110
89
100
172
4
148
119
73
29
.992

Controls (N=393)
Degree Year
Female
MD
PhD
MD/PhD
Macromolecular
Cellular
Organismal
Translational
Nb. of Nomination Slots
Cum. NIH Funding
Highest Citation Quantile
Lowest Citation Quantile
Cum. Nb. of Pubs.
Cum. Nb. of Pubs. in the Bttm. 25%
Cum. Nb. of Pubs. in the Top 25%
Cum. Nb. of Pubs. in the Top 5%
Cum. Nb. of Pubs. in the Top 1%
Average MeSH Age
Citing Journal Diversity, 1986-1994

HHMIs (N=73)
Degree Year
Female
MD
PhD
MD/PhD
Macromolecular
Cellular
Organismal
Translational
Nb. of Nomination Slots
Cum. NIH Funding
Highest Citation Quantile
Lowest Citation Quantile
Cum. Nb. of Pubs.
Cum. Nb. of Pubs. in the Bttm. 25%
Cum. Nb. of Pubs. in the Top 25%
Cum. Nb. of Pubs. in the Top 5%
Cum. Nb. of Pubs. in the Top 1%
Average MeSH Age
Citing Journal Diversity, 1986-1994

36

Table 3
Descriptive Statistics – Career Achievement
Mean
Early Career Prize Winners (N=393)
Early Career Prize Winners Trained
Nobel Prize Winner
Elected NAS Member
Career Nb. of Articles
Career Nb. of Citations
Career Nb. of Articles in the Top 25%
Career Nb. of Articles in the Top 5%
Career Nb. of Articles in the Top 1%
Number of Post-Appointment ‘Hits’
Number of Post-Appointment ‘Flops’
Career NIH Funding
Number of R01 Grant Apps., 2003-2008
Avg. Priority Score, 2003-2008
Citing Journal Diversity, 1995-2006
Normalized MeSH Kwd. Overlap

Median

Std. Dev

Min.

Max.

0.229
0.003
0.041
65.003
4,489
47.952
22.214
7.926
4.087
3.448
$5,229,193
5.119
161.842
0.968
0.104

0
0
0
53
3,504
40
18
6
2
2
$4,805,193
4
158
1
0

0.630
0.050
0.198
43.444
3,489
30.829
15.760
7.410
6.150
5.287
$3,458,834
3.339
36.637
0.025
0.062

0
0
0
11
242
7
0
0
1
0
$160,249
1.000
100.000
0.667
0

1
1
1
314
21,448
212
96
38
69
41
$23,350,194
23.000
283.000
0.992
0.462

1.137
0.014
0.329
95.521
10,550
78.219
45.562
21.014
5.967
3.483
$4,331,909
3.217
178.289
0.975
0.085

0
0
0
83
6,672
69
38
16
4
1
$3,587,172
2
173
1
0

2.388
0.117
0.473
56.126
14,542
48.843
33.863
21.270
8.663
5.890
$3,368,619
2.358
33.405
0.013
0.037

0
0
0
17
798
10
4
0
1
0
$0
1.000
111.500
0.921
0

1
1
1
321
117,401
284
224
144
62
32
$15,917,327
10.000
326.000
0.993
0.188

HHMIs (N=73)
Early Career Prize Winners Trained
Nobel Prize Winner
Elected NAS Member
Career Nb. of Articles
Career Nb. of Citations
Career Nb. of Articles in the Top 25%
Career Nb. of Articles in the Top 5%
Career Nb. of Articles in the Top 1%
Number of Post-Appointment ‘Hits’
Number of Post-Appointment ‘Flops’
Career NIH Funding
Number of R01 Grant Apps., 2003-2008
Avg. Priority Score, 2003-2008
Citing Journal Diversity, 1995-2006
Normalized MeSH Kwd. Overlap

37

Table 4
Sensitivity of HHMI Reappointment to Scientific Output

Pubs
in the Elapsed Period
Pubs in the Top 25%
in the Previous Period
Pubs in the Top 5%
in the Elapsed Period
Pubs in the Top 1%
in the Elapsed Period
Female
Associate
Full
Nb. Scientists
Log Quasi-Likl.
Pseudo-R2

First
Reappt.
(1a)

Second
Reappt.
(1b)

-0.001
(0.001)

0.024**
(0.005)

0.039
(0.100)
0.028
(0.100)
0.070
(0.114)
71
-27.497
0.102

0.022
(0.114)
0.096
(0.104)
0.001
(0.146)
60
-19.841
0.338

First
Reappt.
(2a)

Second
Reappt.
(2b)

-0.002
(0.002)

0.027**
(0.007)

0.040
(0.102)
0.029
(0.100)
0.066
(0.112)
71
-27.653
0.097

0.035
(0.115)
0.076
(0.117)
-0.026
(0.192)
60
-21.251
0.291

First
Reappt.
(3a)

Second
Reappt.
(3b)

-0.003
(0.003)

0.027**
(0.010)

0.036
(0.105)
0.023
(0.097)
0.059
(0.110)
71
-27.674
0.096

0.053
(0.121)
0.128
(0.121)
0.074
(0.206)
60
-24.150
0.194

First
Reappt.
(4a)

Second
Reappt.
(4b)

-0.003
(0.006)
0.045
(0.107)
0.027
(0.099)
0.057
(0.110)
71
-27.895
0.089

0.053**
(0.020)
0.086
(0.119)
0.153
(0.119)
0.098
(0.213)
60
-24.176
0.193

Note: The dependent variable is the probability of being reappointed, whether at the end of the first term (Models 1a, 2a, 3a, & 4a), or at the end
of the second term (Models 1b, 2b, 3b, & 4b), among 71 HHMI investigators who did not terminate their appointment voluntarily. The
sample relevant to specifications 1b, 2b, 3b, & 4b comprises only 60 observations since 11 investigators were either not renewed at the end of
the first appointment period, or resigned their posts voluntarily. Estimates correspond to marginal effects from logit specifications, with
robust standard errors in parentheses.
†
p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.

38

Table 5
Determinants of Selection into the HHMI Program
Cum. Nb. of Pubs as PI

(1)
0.006**
(0.002)

(2)

(3)

0.013**
(0.002)

Cum. Nb. Pubs in Top 25% as PI

0.023**
(0.004)

Cum. Nb. Pubs in Top 5% as PI
Cum. Nb. Pubs in Top 1% as PI
NIH Funding
Female
PhD
MD/PhD
Nb. of Nomination Slots
Macromolecular Lab
Organismal Lab
Translational Lab
Pseudo-R2
Nb. of Scientists

(4)

0.004
(0.024)
0.121**
(0.036)
-0.082
(0.087)
-0.048
(0.082)
-0.010
(0.014)
-0.039
(0.043)
0.002
(0.046)
-0.014
(0.085)
0.074
466

-0.018
(0.019)
0.123**
(0.035)
-0.078
(0.096)
-0.053
(0.087)
-0.011
(0.013)
-0.041
(0.042)
0.004
(0.045)
-0.005
(0.087)
0.111
466

-0.015
(0.018)
0.119**
(0.034)
-0.058
(0.104)
-0.022
(0.092)
-0.008
(0.012)
-0.024
(0.041)
0.002
(0.044)
0.008
(0.090)
0.143
466

0.039**
(0.008)
-0.001
(0.015)
0.122**
(0.034)
-0.032
(0.100)
0.007
(0.089)
-0.006
(0.012)
-0.030
(0.042)
-0.004
(0.044)
0.013
(0.083)
0.133
466

(5)
0.002
(0.014)
0.003
(0.006)
0.015†
(0.008)
0.033**
(0.009)
-0.021
(0.022)
0.125**
(0.034)
-0.049
(0.110)
-0.017
(0.097)
-0.007
(0.012)
-0.028
(0.042)
0.001
(0.044)
0.010
(0.090)
0.160
466

Note: The dependent variable is the probability of being appointed as an HHMI investigator. Estimates correspond to marginal
effects from logit specifications, with robust standard errors in parentheses. Achievement at baseline is measured as the
cumulative number of publications that fall in a particular citation bin, considering only these articles in which the scientist
appears in last position on the authorship list, i.e., is clearly identified as the principal investigator of a laboratory. All
models also include year of highest degree indicator variables (coefficients not reported).
†
p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.

39

Table 6
Effects of HHMI Appointment on Citation Impact (N=417 scientists)
Bechmark

Achievement Metric
All Pubs
Top 25%

Universal
Article-level Citation
Distribution

Top 5%
Top 1%
Bttm. 25%

Relative to Self
Citation Impact
Pre-Appointment

Number of ‘Hits’
Number of ‘Flops’

“Naïve”
X-Sect.

ATE

ATT

DD

SDD

0.419**
(0.076)
0.514**
(0.079)
0.733**
(0.093)
0.964**
(0.133)
0.181
(0.128)
0.401**
(0.125)
0.341*
(0.146)

0.235**
(0.078)
0.297**
(0.085)
0.482**
(0.111)
0.663**
(0.138)
0.094
(0.131)
0.299*
(0.128)
0.272*
(0.121)

0.227*
(0.088)
0.305**
(0.087)
0.510**
(0.102)
0.817**
(0.133)
0.154
(0.135)
0.356**
(0.128)
0.317†
(0.162)

0.178*
(0.072)
0.212**
(0.074)
0.293**
(0.108)
0.363*
(0.148)
0.187
(0.292)

0.333**
(0.109)
0.268*
(0.114)
0.439**
(0.161)
0.678**
(0.240)
0.155
(0.887)

Note: The first five lines of the table pertain to the analysis of citation impact using the total number of citations for the universe of all articles in the life sciences
field, as coded by ISI/Web of Science. Each coefficient corresponds to the treatment effect of HHMI appointment in a specification that regresses output on
treatment status, five age indicator variables (5 to 10 years of career age, 10 to 15 years, 15 to 20 years, 20 to 25 years, and 25 years and more of career age),
and year indicator variables in all models. The cross-sectional models (corresponding to the first three columns) also include three lab indicator variables, a
gender indicator variable, and two degree type indicator variables (coefficients not reported). Estimates derive from QML Poisson estimation, with robust
standard errors in parentheses, clustered around scientist (X-section, ATE, ATT, and DD columns); bootstrapped standard errors are reported for the semiparametric diff-in-diffs estimates. All specifications except the naïve cross-sections and the plain diffs-in-diffs include regression weights computed using fitted
values for the probability of HHMI appointment estimated in Table 5. The weights differ depending on whether ATT or ATE is the effect of interest, and
whether the focus is on generating a between-scientist comparison (ATE & ATT columns), or a within-scientist comparison (SDD column). See section 3 in
the text for more details.
The last two lines of the table use each scientist’s own citation impact in the pre-appointment period as a benchmark. We code the highest (resp. lowest)
quantile of the article-level citation distribution for any article published by each scientist prior to appointment. We then compute the number of hits (resp.
flops) for each scientist by counting the number of articles whose citation quantile place them above (resp. below) this level in the post-appointment period.
The corresponding specifications also include year of highest degree indicator variables, three lab type indicator variables, a gender indicator variable, two
degree type indicator variables as well as the pre-appointment highest or lowest pre-appointment quantile mentioned above. Because we use the whole preappointment citation data to calculate the benchmark, there are no DD or SDD specifications when assessing citation impact relative to the scientists’ own
prior performance.
†

p < 0.10, * p < 0.05,

**

p < 0.01.

40

Table 7
Effects of HHMI Appointment on NIH Funding
Depndt. Variable
NIH Funding ($)
Nb. of R01 Apps.
Avg. Priority Score for R01
Nb. of Scientists

“Naïve”
X-Sect.

ATE

ATT

DD

SDD

-0.404**
(0.095)
-0.521**
(0.122)
-0.077**
(0.029)
417

-0.549**
(0.099)
-0.603**
(0.126)
-0.075**
(0.025)
417

-0.497**
(0.094)
-0.486**
(0.122)
-0.057†
(0.032)
417

-0.546**
(0.105)

-0.426**
(0.115)

417

417

Note: Each coefficient corresponds to the treatment effect of HHMI appointment in a specification that
regresses the dependent variable on treatment status, five age indicator variables (5 to 10 years of
career age, 10 to 15 years, 15 to 20 years, 20 to 25 years, and 25 years and more of career age), and
year indicator variables. The cross-sectional models (corresponding to the first three columns) also
include three lab indicator variables, a gender indicator variable, and two degree type indicator
variables (coefficients not reported). Estimates derive from QML Poisson estimation, with robust
standard errors in parentheses, clustered around scientist (X-section, ATE, ATT, and DD columns);
bootstrapped standard errors are reported for the semi-parametric diff-in-diffs estimates. All
specifications except the naïve cross-sections and the plain diffs-in-diffs include regression weights
computed using fitted values for the probability of HHMI appointment estimated in Table 9. The
weights differ depending on whether ATT or ATE is the effect of interest, and whether the focus is on
generating a between-scientist comparison (ATE & ATT columns), or a within-scientist comparison
(SDD column). Since grant application data is only available for the period 2003-2008, the
determinants of application rates and priority scores are estimated using a single cross-section that
pools together all of the data for the corresponding period. See section 3 in the text for more details.
†

p < 0.10, * p < 0.05,

**

p < 0.01.

41

Table 8
Effects of HHMI Appointment on the Direction of Research
Impacy of Treatment on:

Depndt. Variable

X-Sect.
**

Topic Novelty

Avg. MeSH Keyword Age

Change in Research Direction

Normalized MeSH Keyword Overlap

Breadth of Impact

Citing Journal Diversity Index

Nb. of Scientists

-0.028
(0.009)
-0.258**
(0.060)
0.223**
(0.071)
417

ATE
-0.014
(0.009)
-0.206**
(0.058)
0.192**
(0.060)
417

ATT
†

-0.016
(0.009)
-0.259**
(0.059)
0.231**
(0.073)
417

DD

SDD

-0.020
(0.013)

-0.027*
(0.013)

417

417

Note: For the analysis of the determinants of topic novelty, each coefficient corresponds to the treatment effect of HHMI appointment in a specification that
regresses measures of scientific novelty on treatment status, five age indicator variables (5 to 10 years of career age, 10 to 15 years, 15 to 20 years, 20
to 25 years, and 25 years and more of career age), and year indicator variables in all models. The cross-sectional models (corresponding to the first
three columns) also include three lab indicator variables, a gender indicator variable, and two degree type indicator variables (coefficients not
reported). Estimates derive from QML Poisson estimation, with robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered around scientist (X-section, ATE,
ATT, and DD columns); bootstrapped standard errors are reported for the semi-parametric diff-in-diffs estimates.
For the other two outcomes (keyword overlap and diversity of citing journals), each coefficient corresponds to the treatment effect of HHMI
appointment on various measures of an investigator’s scientific direction in the “after period” (1995-2006). All models include as independent variables
year of highest degree indicator variables, three lab type indicator variables, a gender indicator variable, and two degree type indicator variables
(coefficients not reported). Also included is an offset for the dependent variable in the “before period” (1986-1994). Because all of the dependent
variable are bounded inclusively by 0 and 1, estimates stem from a QML fractional logit procedure (Papke & Wooldridge 1996), with robust standard
errors in parentheses.
All specifications except the naïve cross-sections and the plain diff-in-diffs include regression weights computed using fitted values for the probability of
HHMI appointment estimated in Table 5. The weights differ depending on whether ATT or ATE is the effect of interest; and whether the focus is on
generating a between-scientist comparison (ATE & ATT columns), or a within-scientist comparison (SDD column). See section 3 in the text for more
details.
†

p < 0.10, * p < 0.05,

**

p < 0.01.

42

Appendix I
Funding People vs. Funding Specific Projects
We develop a simple model to contrast the “specific project” and the “people, not projects” approaches to
scientific funding. The researcher lives for two periods. In each period, she chooses a project i ∈ I, producing
output S (“success”) with a probability pi or output F (“failure”) with probability 1 − pi . The probability pi
of success when the researcher chooses project i may be unknown. To obtain information about pi , she must
engage in experimentation. We let E[pi ] denote the unconditional expectation of pi , E[pi |S, j] denote the
conditional expectation of pi given a success on project j, and E[pi |F, j] denote the conditional expectation
of pi given a failure on project j.
When the researcher chooses project i ∈ I, she only learns about the probability pi , so that
E[pj ] = E[pj |S, i] = E[pj |F, i]

for

j 6= i.

The central concern that arises is the tension between exploration of new ideas and the exploitation of
already existing ideas along conventional lines (March, 1991). To focus on the tension between exploration
and exploitation, we assume that in each period the researcher chooses between two projects. Project 1, the
“conventional” research project, has a known probability p1 of success, such that
p1 = E[p1 ] = E[p1 |S, 1] = E[p1 |F, 1].
Project 2, the innovative research project, has an unknown probability p2 of success such that
E[p2 |F, 2] < E[p2 ] < E[p2 |S, 2].
We assume that the innovative research project is of an exploratory nature. This means that when the
researcher experiments with the innovative research project, she is initially not as likely to succeed as when
she treads a well-trodden path, as is the case with the conventional research project. However, if she succeeds
with the innovative project, she updates her beliefs about p2 , so that choosing the innovative project becomes
perceived as superior to choosing the conventional project. This is captured by:
E[p2 ] < p1 < E[p2 |S, 2].

(1)

The researcher is risk-neutral and has a discount factor normalized to one. Her objective function R assigns
some weight α to the outcome produced by his research as well as some weight to her private preferences
between the two projects. These private preferences are represented with a cost ci that is incurred by the
researcher whenever she pursues project i. The researcher thus chooses an action plan hi kj i to maximize her
total expected payoff
R(hi kj i) = {E[pi ]S + (1 − E[pi ])F − ci }
+ E[pi ] {E[pj |S, i]S + (1 − E[pj |S, i])F − cj }
+ (1 − E[pi ]) {E[pk |F, i]S + (1 − E[pk |F, i])F − ck } (2)
where i is the first-period action, j is the second-period action in case of success in the first period, and k
is the second-period action in case of failure in the first period. We assume that the researcher gets enough
funding to perform research during the two periods. We consider two funding mechanisms: the “specific
project” approach and the “people, not projects” approach.
The “Specific Project” approach. Under this approach the researcher must choose one project to submit
for funding and must work on that project during the two periods. Two action plans need to be considered:

43

h1 11 i and h2 22 i. If the researcher chooses action plan h1 11 i his total expected payoff is
R(h1 11 i) = {E[p1 ]S + (1 − E[p1 ])F − c1 }
+ E[p1 ] {E[p1 ]S + (1 − E[p1 ])F − c1 }
+ (1 − E[p1 ]) {E[p1 ]S + (1 − E[p1 ])F − c1 } (3)
If the researcher chooses action plan h2 22 i his total expected payoff is
R(h2 22 i) = {E[p2 ]S + (1 − E[p2 ])F − c2 }
+ E[p2 ] {E[p2 |S, 2]S + (1 − E[p2 |S, 2])F − c2 }
+ (1 − E[p2 ]) {E[p2 |F, 2]S + (1 − E[p2 |F, 2])F − c2 } (4)
From Bayes’ rule, the payoff R(h2 22 i) is higher than the payoff R(h1 11 i) if and only if
α(E[p2 ] − p1 )(S − F ) ≥ (c2 − c1 ).

(5)

The “People, not Projects” approach. Under this approach, the researcher can choose any of the two
projects in each period. Two action plans need to be considered: h1 11 i, and action plan h2 21 i. If the researcher
chooses action plan h1 11 i, her total expected payoff is
R(h1 11 i) = {E[p1 ]S + (1 − E[p1 ])F − c1 }
+ E[p1 ] {E[p1 ]S + (1 − E[p1 ])F − c1 }
+ (1 − E[p1 ]) {E[p1 ]S + (1 − E[p1 ])F − c1 } (6)
If the researcher chooses action plan h2 21 i, her total expected payoff is
R(h2 21 i) = {E[p2 ]S + (1 − E[p2 ])F − c2 }
+ E[p2 ] {E[p2 |S, 2]S + (1 − E[p2 |S, 2])F − c2 }
+ (1 − E[p2 ]) {E[p1 ]S + (1 − E[p1 ])F − c1 } (7)
The payoff R(h2 21 i) is higher than R(h1 11 i) if and only if
α{(E[p2 ](E[p2 |S, 2] − p1 ) + (E[p2 ] − p1 )}(S − F ) ≥ (1 + E[p2 ])(c2 − c1 )

(8)

The following proposition contrasts exploration under “specific project” funding and “people, not projects”
funding.
Proposition 1 If the agent explores under “specific project” funding, he also explores under “people, not
projects” funding. However, there are situations in which the agent explores under “people, not projects”
funding, but exploits under “specific project” funding.
Proof The first statement follows from the fact that (5) implies (8). For the second statement, we construct
the following example. If c2 > c1 , (5) implies that the agent never explores under the “specific project”
approach. However, from (8), if the payoff from exploration is sufficiently high, the agent will explore under
the “people, not projects” approach.

44

Appendix II
Career & Output Data
For every scientist in the control or treatment group, we collected career information from three sources:
original CVs/NIH biosketches; Who’s Who profiles, and Google searches. In practice, the combination of
these approaches enabled us to find employment and demographic data for all the investigators considered in
the paper. Matching these individuals with NIH grant information is not challenging since both full names
and institutional affiliations can be used. Getting a precise tally of publications at the individual level is
more involved. We will describe this process using as an example Mario Capecchi, the Nobel Prize winner
(and HHMI) mentioned in the introduction.
The matching process begins with the creation of a customized PubMED search query for each scientist.
In the case of Capecchi, the query is (("capecchi mr"[au] OR "capecchi m"[au]) NOT 7816017[pmid]
AND 1966:2006[dp]), and it returns 122 original publications (the query also returns 19 letters, editorials, interviews, reviews, etc., which we ignore). The process of harvesting bibliomes from PubMED using
name variations and queries as inputs is facilitated by the use of PubHarvester, a software program we
specifically designed for this purpose (Azoulay, Stellman, and Graff Zivin 2006).
Capecchi’s PubMED query accounts for his inconsistent use of the middle initial, but is otherwise quite
simple. For other scientists, queries might factor in their inconsistent use of the suffix “Jr.,” or name
variations coincident with changes in marital status. For yet many others with frequent names, the queries are
more involved, and make use of CV information such as scientific keywords, institutional affiliation, frequent
coauthors’ names, etc. This degree of labor-intensive customization ensures that a scientist’s bibliome
excludes publications belonging to homonymous scientists.

Appendix III
Estimation Procedure for the Semiparametric DD Estimates
The ATE, ATT, and DD effects stem from panel specifications; the sample size is equal to the total number
of independent career years for each scientist(N × T = 8, 767 or N × T = 3, 832, depending on the control
group). The procedure followed to estimate the SDD effects is slightly different. We first regress the various
measures of output on calendar year and age indicator variables using the full panel, and compute the
residuals εit . In a second step, we sum the residuals corresponding to the pre-appointment (1986-1994) and
post-appointment (1998-2006) periods separately for each scientist. In the final step, the SDD effects are
P1994
P2006
obtained by regressing t=1986 εit − t=1998 εit on treatment status, weighting these differences as described
in section 3. Note that the sample size corresponds in this case to the number of scientists (N = 466 or
N = 165, depending on the control group), not the number of scientist-year observations.

Appendix IV
Scientist-Specific Citation Benchmarks
We illustrate the computation of the number of hits and flops using the example of Iva Greenwald, an
HHMI investigator from Columbia University. Prior to 1994 (the year of her appointment), her publication
with the highest citation quantile is an article which appeared in the journal Cell in 1993 (341 citations as

45

of the end of 2008, which places it in the top percentile of the article-level distribution). Conversely, her
publication with the lowest citation quantile is an article which appeared in the journal Molecular & Cellular
Biology, also in 1993. It garnered only 11 citations, which places it at the 52nd percentile of the distribution.
Between 1995 and 2006, Greenwald published three more publications in the top percentile of the citation
distribution, given their vintage. And she published three more publications which fell in the 32nd , 44th ,
and 50th percentile of the distribution in the years they were published. As a result, both the number of
“hits,” and that of “flops,” is equal to three for this investigator.
Estimation. Since we use the entire pre-appointment data to compute citation benchmarks specific to each
individual scientist, we can only analyze the effect of HHMI appointment on these measures of impact using
the cross-sectional dimension of the data, collapsing all post-appointment years into a single observation for
each scientist. For the number of flops, the equation we estimate can be written


0
(9)
E [F LOP Si |Xi ] = exp β0 + β1 HHM Ii + β2 Zi + β3 M IN QN T Li + φ(SCIEN T IST AGEi )
where HHM I denotes the treatment effect, the variables in Z include degree type, lab type, and gender
indicator variables, M IN QN T L is the citation quantile corresponding to scientist i’s least impactful article
published prior to appointment,i and φ(SCIEN T IST AGEi ) is a flexible function of scientist i’s career age
— in practice a full set of indicator variables for the different years in which our scientists received their
highest degree. Estimation proceeds by quasi-maximum likelihood. In some of the specifications, the data
is weighted to reflect each scientist’s inverse probability to be appointed to the program, as explained in
section 3.

i
In the case of hits, the corresponding specification includes M AX QN T L — the citation quantile corresponding to scientist i’s most impactful article published prior to appointment — as an independent variable.

46

