                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  CAN OWNING A HOME HEDGE THE RISK OF MOVING?

                                            Todd M. Sinai
                                         Nicholas S. Souleles

                                        Working Paper 15462
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15462


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2009




We are grateful to Dimo Primatov for helpful research assistance and seminar participants at the National
Bureau of Economic Research, Stanford University, the University of Amsterdam, and Wharton for
useful feedback. Sinai thanks the Research Sponsors Program of the Zell-Lurie Real Estate Center
at Wharton for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Todd M. Sinai and Nicholas S. Souleles. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Can Owning a Home Hedge the Risk of Moving?
Todd M. Sinai and Nicholas S. Souleles
NBER Working Paper No. 15462
October 2009
JEL No. E21,G11,G12,J61,R21,R23,R31

                                              ABSTRACT

Conventional wisdom holds that one of the riskiest aspects of owning a house is the uncertainty surrounding
its sale price, especially if one moves to another housing market. However, households who sell a
house typically buy another house, whose purchase price is also uncertain. We show that for such
households, home owning often hedges their net exposure to housing market risk, because their sale
price covaries positively with house prices in their likely new market. That expected covariance is
much higher than previously recognized because there is considerable heterogeneity across city pairs
in how much house prices covary and households tend to move between the highly correlated housing
markets. Taking these two considerations into account increases the estimated median expected correlation
in real house price growth across MSAs from 0.35 to 0.60. Moreover, we show that households’ decisions
whether to own or rent are sensitive to this “moving-hedge” value. We find that the likelihood of home
owning for a mobile household is more than one percentage point higher when the expected house
price covariance rises by 38 percent (one standard deviation). This effect attenuates as a household’s
probability of moving diminishes and thus the moving-hedge value declines.


Todd M. Sinai
University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School
1465 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
sinai@wharton.upenn.edu

Nicholas S. Souleles
Finance Department
The Wharton School
2300 SH-DH
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
souleles@wharton.upenn.edu
       Conventional wisdom holds that one of the riskiest aspects of owning a house is the

uncertainty surrounding its sale price, especially if one moves to another housing market. It is

now well appreciated that house prices can be quite volatile. Between the end of 2005 and the

end of 2008, real house prices fell by more than 31 percent, according to the Case-Shiller 10-city

composite house price index. Over the prior five years, real house prices in the same cities rose

by almost 73 percent. Similarly, after real house prices rose substantially during the 1980s, they

fell by 26 percent between 1990 and 1997.

       Historically, analysts have concluded that this volatility in house prices makes home

owning risky. Since the primary residence comprises about two-thirds of the median

homeowner’s assets (2004 Survey of Consumer Finances), a gain or a loss on a house could have

a sizeable effect on a household’s balance sheet. In addition, nearly 45 percent of households

move within a five-year period and one-fifth of such households leave their metropolitan area. A

loss on a house could impair their ability to purchase their next house. These are some of the

reasons Case et al. (1993) argue for using house price derivatives to help households offset house

price volatility. Similarly, in some cities home equity insurance products have been created,

enabling households to guarantee (for a fee) that their house values will not fall below some

threshold. [Caplin et al. (2003)]

       In this paper, we show that for many households home owning is not as risky as

conventionally assumed. Households who expect to sell their house will still have to live

somewhere afterwards and the cost of that subsequent housing is uncertain. For many home

owners, the sale price of their current house positively commoves with the purchase price of their

next house, reducing the expected volatility in the net cost of selling one house and buying

another. In effect, owning a house provides a hedge against the uncertain purchase price of a




                                                1
future house. By contrast, a household who rents avoids the uncertainty from selling its home

but leaves itself unhedged against the volatility of future housing costs after moving.

        A few recent papers have recognized that it is the sale price net of the subsequent

purchase price, rather than the sale price alone, that matters for housing risk. [Ortalo-Magne and

Rady (2002), Sinai and Souleles (2005), Han (2008)] However, these papers – along with

conventional wisdom – assume that the correlation in house prices across housing markets is

low, which implies that owning a house provides a poor hedge against future housing costs for

households who face some chance of moving to a different market. The literature has instead

emphasized that home owning can be a good hedge against buying a larger house in the same

market.1

        While it is correct that house prices do not covary much when one considers the U.S. as a

whole, that unconditional average masks two important factors. First, there is considerable

heterogeneity across city pairs within the U.S. in how much their house prices covary, ranging

from negative covariances to very highly positive covariances. Second, households do not move

to random locations; instead, they tend to move between highly covarying housing markets. Our

first contribution is to show that because of these two considerations, for many households the

expected covariance in house prices – where the expectation is weighted by the household’s own

probabilities of moving to each other location – is quite high. For example, the simple

unweighted median correlation in house price growth across U.S. metropolitan statistical areas

1
  The benefit of home owning as a hedge against future house price risk in other cities is generally undeveloped in
prior research. Ortalo-Magne and Rady (2002) illustrate in a simple theoretical model that house prices in one
period hedge prices in the next period if the prices covary across the periods, but provide no empirical evidence on
the magnitude or effect of the hedge. Sinai and Souleles (2005) show theoretically how sale price risk depends on
the covariance between house prices in the current and future housing markets, but their primary empirical focus is
on how home owning hedges against volatility in housing costs within a given housing market. Han (2008)
distinguishes within- and out-of-state moves in a structural model of housing consumption using the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics. However, she does not know where households move if they move out of state, so she does not
estimate cross-state covariances. Cocco (2000) considers hedging the cost of trading up to a larger house within the
same housing market, by liquidity constrained households.


                                                         2
(MSAs) is 0.35. When we account for where households are likely to move, the baseline

effective correlation faced by the median household rises substantially, to 0.60. The 75th

percentile household enjoys an even higher correlation, of 0.89.

         Because households’ effective expected covariances are quite high, owning a house can

provide a valuable hedge against house price risk, especially for households who are likely to

move. This includes households who do not know exactly where they are going to move. As

long as they are likely to move to positively covarying markets, home owning helps hedge their

expected purchase price risk.2

         Our second contribution is to show that households’ tenure decisions (to rent versus own)

appear to be sensitive to this “moving-hedge” benefit of owning. We bring three sources of

variation to bear on this issue. First, the typical household across different MSAs may have a

bigger, smaller, or even negative hedging benefit of home owning depending on the variance of

house prices in the local MSA and their covariances with prices in other MSAs. Second, within

an MSA, households differ in their expected covariances because they differ in their likelihoods

of moving to each of the other MSAs. Third, the effect of the expected house price covariance

should be attenuated for households who, for demographic reasons, appear unlikely to move in

the near future. Households who do not anticipate moving have little need for a hedge against

future house prices, and thus differences in the potential moving-hedge benefit of owning should

have little effect on their tenure decisions.




2
  In order to highlight how the risk of home owning is affected by the house’s moving-hedge properties, we abstract
from the effect of housing finance on household risk. Financing any volatile asset with high leverage creates risk, a
topic which has been considered at length in prior research. For example, for leveraged, liquidity-constrained
households, downturns in prices can lead to lock-in and more volatile consumption and prices. [Chan (2001), Stein
(1995), Genesove and Mayer (1997, 2001), Hurst and Stafford (2004), Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005), Li and
Yao (2007)]


                                                         3
       We use household-level data on homeownership and moving probabilities, and MSA-

level estimates of house price variances and covariances, to identify the effect of expected house

price covariances on homeownership decisions. We use demographic characteristics such as

age, marital status, and occupation to impute the probability of moving for each household. We

impute the odds of a household moving to specific MSAs, conditional on moving at all, by

applying the actual geographic distribution of moves by other households in similar industry or

age categories in the originating MSA. This combination of MSA and household level variation

enables us to identify the effect of expected house price covariances on homeownership

decisions while controlling separately for MSA and household characteristics.

       Overall, we find that for a household with an average expected length-of-stay in the

house, the likelihood of home owning increases by 0.6 percentage points when the expected

covariance rises by one standard deviation. This effect is larger for households with a higher

likelihood of moving to another MSA. A household who is imputed to have a one-in-three

chance of moving would have a 1 to 2 percentage point higher likelihood of home owning if

faced with a one standard deviation increase in expected covariance. The results are robust to

different ways of imputing the likelihood of a household’s moving to the various MSAs, such as

instrumenting for the actual moving patterns of households with the patterns we would predict if

households moved based on the distribution of their industry’s employment or their occupations

across MSAs.

       In the next section, we present a simple theoretical framework to illustrate the moving-

hedge benefit of owning and to motivate our empirical tests. In Section 2, we estimate

households’ effective covariances between house price growth in their current markets and in

their expected future markets, and explain why conventional wisdom has assumed those




                                                4
covariances are low when they are actually quite high. Section 3 describes the various data

sources we use. The empirical identification strategy and results are presented in Section 4.

Section 5 briefly concludes.



1.      Theoretical framework

        In this section, we illustrate how owning a house can hedge against the house price risk

from future moves. This illustration will also provide guidance for the empirical tests that

follow. Our exposition generally follows Sinai and Souleles (2005). To simplify, and focus

attention on the moving-hedge benefit of owning, we abstract from some other important issues,

such as leverage and down payment requirements, taxes, and moving costs, which would operate

in addition to the hedging benefit. (Such issues will be taken into account in our empirical work.)

        Since our focus is on how owning a house in one city can hedge against house price

volatility in the next city, we will consider a representative household who initially lives in some

city, A,and then moves to another city, B. To simplify, we assume that the household knows with

certainty that it will live in A, and then in B, for N years each, after which it will die. (In our

empirical work, we will recognize that N can vary across households, with some expecting to not

move very often and others expecting to move more frequently, and that there are multiple

destination cities to which households could move.) At birth, labeled year 0, the household

chooses whether to be a homeowner in both locations or a renter in both locations.3 The

household chooses its tenure mode to maximize its expected utility of wealth net of total housing

costs, or equivalently to minimize its total risk-adjusted housing costs.

3
  The desired quantity of housing services is normalized to be one unit in each location. For convenience, rental
units and owner-occupied units, in fixed supply and together equal to the number of households, both provide one
unit of housing services. The results below can be generalized to allow the services from an owner-occupied house
to exceed those from renting, perhaps due to agency problems. Additional extensions are discussed in Sinai and
Souleles (2005).


                                                        5
        The cost of obtaining a year’s worth of housing services is the rent, denoted by ~
                                                                                         rt A in city

A in year t, and ~
                 rt B in city B. The tildes denote that the rent in year t is not known at time zero,

because rents fluctuate due to shocks to underlying housing demand and supply. To allow for

correlation in rents (and, endogenously, in house prices) across cities, we assume that rents in the

two locations follow correlated AR(1) processes: rnA   A  rnA1  k ( nA   nB ) and

rnB   B  rnB1  k (  nA   nB ) , where φ[0,1] measures the persistence of rents, A and B

measure the expected level or growth rate of rents (depending on φ), and the shocks A and B

are independently distributed IID(0,2A) and IID(0,2B).  parameterizes the spatial correlation in

rents (and in house prices) across the two locations, with =0 implying independence and =1

implying perfect correlation. To control the total magnitude of housing shocks incurred as 

varies, the scaling constant  can be set to 1/(1+2)1/2. For simplicity in this exposition, we will

set the persistence term φ to 0. We find similar qualitative results with the more realistic

assumption of φ>0. [Case and Shiller (1989)]

        From a homeowner’s perspective, the lifetime ex post cost of owning, discounted to year

                     
                     ~     ~           ~
                                        
0, is CO  P0A   N PNB  PNA   2 N P2BN . The P0A term is the initial purchase price in city A,

                                            ~
which is known at time 0. In the last term, P2BN is the uncertain residual value of the house in B

at the time of death. It is discounted since death occurs 2N years in the future. Our emphasis in
                                      ~     ~
                                                   
this paper is on the middle term,  N PNB  PNA , which is the difference between the sale price of

the house in A at time N and the purchase price of the house in B at time N.

        For renters, the ex post cost of renting is the present value of the annual rents paid:

            N 1           2 N 1
C R  r0A    n ~
                  rn A           n   ~
                                        rnB .
            n 1           n N




                                                        6
        Sinai and Souleles (2005) derive house prices in this setting assuming they endogenously

adjust to leave households indifferent between owning and renting. The resulting price in city A,

  A
P0 , can be expressed as the expected present value of future rents, PV ( r0A ) , plus the total risk

premium the household is willing to pay to own rather than to rent:

  A                         ( R   O )    N ( RB   OB )
P0      PV ( r0A )                                         .              (1)
                              1 N            1 N

In the second term, the risk premium for owning,  O , measures the risk associated with the

                                                                         A
cost CO of owning, which in equilibrium reduces the price P0 in equation (1), ceteris paribus.

The risk premium for renting,  R , measures the risk associated with the cost C R of renting. Since

owning avoids this risk,  R increases P0 , ceteris paribus. P0A also capitalizes B  ( RB   OB ) ,
                                                        A




a net risk premium for renting versus owning in B that in equilibrium P0A inherits from house

prices in B.

        For owners,  O measures the total house price risk from the three future housing

transactions; i.e., the sale of the first house in A, and the purchase price and subsequent sale price

of the second house in B:

        
O 
        2
               2N
                       2 (1   ) 2 s 2A  s B2    4 N s B2  ,       (2)


where s 2A  var( rA ) and s B2  var( rB ) are the variance of rents in cities A and B, respectively, and

 is household risk aversion. Since house prices are endogenously related to rents (as in eq. (1)),




                                                                  7
house price volatility follows from rent volatility. Thus we can use s 2A and s B2 to measure the

underlying housing market volatility.4

            In the final term in eq. (2), sB2 reflects the risk associated with the sale of the house in B,

discounted by ( 2 N ) 2 since it takes place in year 2N.

            The first term in eq. (2) reflects the net risk from the sell-in-A and buy-in-B transactions

in year N, i.e. the risk associated with the difference between the purchase price and sale

          ~
                
                ~
                            
proceeds, PNB  PNA . The net risk depends on the correlation  between house prices in A and B.

The part of the first term inside the brackets can be written as  2 N f (  )s A2  s B2  , with


    f (  )   2 (1   ) 2 
                                 1   2 . If prices in the two markets are uncorrelated, with ρ=0, then
                                 1 2

    f (  )  1 , so the net risk from the two transactions is simply the sum of the risks of the

                                           
individual transactions s 2A  sB2 , appropriately discounted. But as the two markets become

increasingly correlated, the net risk declines. That is, owning the house in A helps to hedge

against the uncertainty of the purchase in B. In the polar case when ρ=1, then f () =0, and so

the sale and subsequent purchase are expected to fully wash each other out. By contrast, if the

prices in the two markets are perfectly negatively correlated, with ρ=−1, then f () =2, and the

net risk is twice as large as the sum of the individual risks.

            Since f () is monotonically decreasing in , in our empirical work it will be useful to

use the approximation

4
    If >0, the variance of observed rents in a given city includes the contribution of the underlying housing market
shocks  from the other city as well: s 2A   2 ( A2   2 B 2 ) and sB2   2 ( B 2   2 A2 ) . In the symmetric case with
 A2   B 2   2 , then s 2A  sB 2   2 , independent of  . With =0 in eq. (2), the price risks come from the
contemporaneous rent shocks: NA on PNA, NB on PNB, and 2NB on P2NB. With >0, the prices would also include
the persistent effect of the preceding rent shocks. [See Sinai and Souleles (2005).]


                                                                8
          
O 
          2
                  2N
                          cov( A, B )   4 N s B2  ,              (3)


where cov( A, B ) is the covariance of rents (and prices) in A and B. The risk premium from

owning should decline with this covariance.

         For renters, uncertainty comes from not having locked-in the future price of housing

services, so the risk of renting is proportional to the discounted sum of the corresponding rent

shocks:

          2 N 1 2 n     2 N 1    
 R       s A    s B2   2 n  .                              (4)
        2  n 1            nN      

         Turning to the remaining terms in eq. (1), the net risk premium in B that is capitalized

        A
into P0 analogously depends on the net risk of owning versus renting while living in B:


(  BR  OB ) 
                      2  N 1 n
                      sB   
                     2  n 1
                                    2   N 2  .               (5)
                                                    

Finally, the present value of expected rents in A increases with the trend A:

                            
PV ( r0 A )   r0 A   A                                           (6)
                          1  

                                                                                       A
         Generalizing this framework to a setting with heterogeneous households, P0 can be

thought of as reflecting a household’s latent demand for owning. If the household’s willingness-

to-pay is above the market-clearing house price determined by the marginal homebuyer, the

household would own, otherwise it would rent. In our empirical work, we observe the own/rent

decision but not latent demand. We will control nonparametrically for differences across MSAs

in the clearing prices for houses, by including MSA × year fixed effects, and will allow for

heterogeneity across households (in particular in N and ). This approach allows us to map our




                                                            9
empirical results on the determinants of the tenure decision to inferences about the latent demand

for home ownership.

           This framework yields several empirical predictions. First, as the covariance in house

prices between cities A and B rises, a household living in A should be more likely to own its

house. By equation (3), the risk of owning declines with the covariance, because the house acts

                                      A
as a hedge. Thus the price P0 and the demand for owning should increase with the covariance,

ceteris paribus.

           Second, that hedging value should diminish as the likelihood of moving falls. As a

household’s expected length-of-stay, N, in city A increases, the net price risk in eq. (3) is

expected to occur further in the future and thus is discounted more heavily. That is, in making its

tenure decision a household who expects to be mobile (small N) should be more sensitive to the

moving-hedge benefit of owning, since its move will occur sooner and thus the net price risk will

be larger in present value. Conversely, a household who expects it will never move has no need

to worry about future housing markets. Thus the demand for owning should decline with the

interaction of N and cov(A,B).5

           These cross-market implications operate in addition to the within-market implications

already empirically established in Sinai and Souleles (2005). The key implication they tested is

that the effect of local rent volatility s 2A on demand generally increases with the horizon (N).

Households with longer expected horizons are exposed to a larger number of rent shocks (in  R ),



5
    These results generalize to the case when >0. First, P0 A still increases with , ∂P0 A /∂ρ >0. This is because ∂0/∂ρ
remains negative, and ( RB   OB ) is independent of  given s 2 B . When >0, R is no longer independent of , but
∂R/∂ρ is positive. That is, a higher covariance also increases the amount of rent risk, which reinforces (though for
realistic parameters is quantitatively smaller than) the effect of the reduced price risk due to ∂0/∂ρ<0. Second, ∂P0 A
/∂ρ generally declines with N (i.e., the interaction term ∂2P0 A /∂ρ∂N <0) for realistic parameters and N not too small
(N>3).


                                                             10
whereas the expected sale price risk (in O ) comes further in the future and hence is discounted

more heavily. Thus the demand for owning should increase with the interaction of N and      s 2A   – an

implication that Sinai and Souleles confirm empirically. Here we focus instead on the cross-

market implications described above.



2.     The covariance of house prices across MSAs

       The previous section established that the value of owning a house as a hedge against

future moving depends on how much house prices covary across housing markets. Most analysts

have concluded that there is little covariance in prices across markets because the national

average covariance (equally weighting MSAs) is fairly low. However, that simple average

masks three important factors that together often cause the effective covariance faced by

households to be quite high. First, there is considerable heterogeneity across housing markets in

their covariances with other housing markets. The national average covariance obscures this

heterogeneity. Second, households do not move at random. Instead, they are more likely to

move among more highly covarying housing markets. The framework in Section 1 assumed that

households knew with certainty that they would move from city A to city B. In practice, there

are a number of cities to which a given household might move with some probability. For that

household, the value of the moving hedge depends upon its expected covariance, the probability-

weighted average of the covariances of house prices in its current market with house prices in

each of its other possible subsequent housing markets. Because of the systematic moving, the

average household’s expected covariance is higher than the average covariance across MSAs

(equally- or population-weighted).




                                                11
         Third, the distribution of the expected covariances is skewed, with a longer lower tail.

Because of this, the median household’s expected covariance is even higher than that of the

average household. That is, while many households have high expected covariances, a minority

has very low expected covariances, which lowers the average.

         The heterogeneity across and within housing markets can be seen in Figure 1, which

graphs each MSA’s distribution of house price correlations, for a subsample of the largest

MSAs.6 We compute the correlations in real annual growth in the OFHEO constant-quality

MSA-level house price index over the 1980 to 2005 time period. The OFHEO index is

computed using repeat sales of single-family houses with conforming mortgages. While the

index is widely believed to understate effective house price volatility because it fails to take into

account differences in liquidity between housing booms and busts, it is available for a long

period for many different MSAs, making it the best data set available for our purposes.

         In Figure 1, each vertical grey/black bar represents a metropolitan area. The bottom of

each bar is set at the fifth percentile of the MSA’s house price correlations with each of the other

MSAs, where each MSA is equally weighted and the correlation of an MSA with itself (which

would equal one) is excluded. Moving up a bar, the bar turns from grey to black at the 25th

percentile, then from black to grey at the 75th percentile, and the grey portion ends at the 95th

percentile. Thus the black part of the bar covers the interquartile range of correlations across

MSAs, and the entire grey/black bar covers the 5th percentile to the 95th percentile.

         The first thing to note in Figure 1 is that there is substantial heterogeneity across MSAs in

their house price correlations with the rest of the country, since the bars for some MSAs start and

end higher than the others. For example, consider the distribution of correlations {ATL,j}


6
 The figure uses the correlation rather than the covariance because the former is easier to interpret visually. The
conclusions are the same using the covariance.


                                                          12
between house prices in Atlanta (the first city in the figure) and each of the other cities j. The 5th

percentile correlation is −0.05, and the 95th percentile correlation is 0.73. By contrast, for Austin

the corresponding percentiles are lower, −0.40 and 0.54. San Antonio has the lowest 5th and 95th

percentiles, ranging from −0.50 to 0.47. The highest among the 5th percentiles of correlations is

in Miami (0.13), and the highest of the 95th percentiles is in New York (0.94).

        While the 5th through the 95th percentile correlations always overlap across cities, some

of the interquartile ranges (the black bars) do not overlap. In Atlanta, the interquartile range of

the correlations runs from 0.27 to 0.50, which does not overlap at all with the interquartile range

in Austin, which runs from −0.22 to 0.17.

        The second interesting fact apparent in Figure 1 is that the within-MSA heterogeneity in

correlations (with other MSAs) also varies considerably across MSAs. This can be seen by the

length of the grey and black bars. MSAs whose bars are stretched out relative to the other MSAs

have more heterogeneity in their correlations, being relatively uncorrelated with some other

MSAs and relatively highly correlated with others. For example, New York has a -0.22

correlation with its 5th percentile correlation city, but a 0.94 correlation with its 95th percentile

city. There is relatively less heterogeneity within Minneapolis, where the corresponding

correlations range from 0.12 (5th percentile) to 0.68 (95th percentile). There is also significant

heterogeneity in the sizes of the interquartile ranges. The widest interquartile range is in Salt

Lake City, which spans from -0.18 to 0.33. The narrowest range is in Minneapolis. However,

the cities with the widest 5th to 95th percentile ranges are not necessarily the same ones with the

widest interquartile ranges. For example, New York’s interquartile range runs from 0.12 to 0.53,

about the same as Nashville, even though Nashville’s 5th to 95th range is much tighter. San




                                                   13
Jose’s interquartile range is fairly tight at 0.15 to 0.38, even though the 5th to 95th percentile

range is middle-of-the-road.

         In Figure 2, we take into account where households are likely to move, by weighting the

correlations by the probability of moving. In this figure, we use data from the U.S. Department

of the Treasury’s County-to-County Migration Patterns to impute a household’s likelihood of

moving from a given MSA to each other MSA. The Treasury data uses the addresses listed on

tax returns to determine whether a household moved. It aggregates the gross flows across

counties and reports, for each county pair, the number of tax returns annually in which the

taxpayers moved from the origination county to the destination county. We aggregated the

counties into MSAs, and for each MSA computed the fraction of its taxpaying households who

move to each of the other MSAs. We use the resulting fractions to measure the probabilities of

any household in the MSA making the corresponding transition. These moving-shares are the

weights for computing the distributions in Figure 2. Note that the figure considers only out-of-

MSA moves.

         When we weight by where households typically move, it becomes clear that most

households face much higher effective correlations than indicated in the first figure, because

households are more likely to move to more highly correlated MSAs. In Figure 2, the

distributions of correlations shift upwards in nearly every MSA.7 In many MSAs the top of the

black bar shifts up near the top of the grey bar. This implies that the entire top quartile of

correlations for these MSAs is close to one. (It is impossible to obtain a correlation of exactly


7
  The exceptions are minor and tend to occur in cities where there are relatively few high-correlation destinations.
Every reported percentile cutoff increases once we weight by the moving probabilities, except: Chicago’s 75th and
95th percentiles decline from 0.70 to 0.67 and 0.81 to 0.75, respectively; Indianapolis’ 95 percentile declines from
0.80 to 0.79; Phoenix’s 75th percentile declines from 0.49 to 0.47; and Salt Lake City’s 95th percentile declines from
0.55 to 0.51. Even in those cities, the rest of the distribution shifts upward considerably. For example, Chicago’s
median correlation rises from 0.55 to 0.63; Indianapolis’ 75th percentile rises from 0.49 to 0.59; Phoenix’s median
rises from 0.37 to 0.42; and Salt Lake City’s 75th percentile rises from 0.33 to 0.51.


                                                         14
one in our data since we exclude within-MSA moves and no MSAs are perfectly correlated with

each other.)

           For example, in New York, the 75th percentile correlation shifts up to 0.95 from 0.53 in

Figure 1, and the 25th percentile shifts to 0.50 from 0.12. In Miami and Detroit, the correlation is

expected to be at least 0.66 three-quarters of the time. In most cities, even the 5th percentile

correlation rises considerably. In New York, it increases to 0.31 from −0.22. Similarly large

shifts of the entire probability distribution occur in San Francisco, Dallas, and Philadelphia,

among others.

           Not every metro area experiences such a sizeable shift in their correlation distributions

after weighting. Atlanta and Phoenix, for example, change relatively little. Also, in many MSAs

the 5th percentile correlation remains fairly low or negative. While those MSAs still exhibit an

overall upwards shift in their distributions, the top three quartiles of the distributions shift by

more than the bottom quartiles, as in Austin or Seattle.

           To illustrate how high the effective expected correlations in real annual house price

growth can be, Table 1 presents the distributions of the correlations across MSA-pairs. To

convert the raw correlations to expected correlations, we weight each MSA-pair observation by

the imputed probability of a household moving between those two MSAs. For comparison, the

first column of Table 1 assumes that households have an equal probability of moving across any

MSA-pair. This column corresponds to Figure 1 with all MSAs pooled together. In the equally-

weighted case, the average pairwise correlation is just 0.34.8 However, 25 percent of the MSA-

pairs have correlations of at least 0.54. Column (2) uses population-weighted correlations, where

the odds of a household moving to an MSA, conditional on moving at all, is proportional to that

MSA’s share of the total population in all MSAs. This assumption makes little difference
8
    We use equal weights for consistency with prior research. See, for example, Glaeser and Gyourko (2006).


                                                          15
relative to column (1): The median correlation rises from 0.35 to 0.39 and the 95th percentile

correlation rises from 0.82 to 0.86.

        The expected correlation in house price growth rises considerably across the distribution

when we recognize that households tend to move between highly covarying MSAs. In column

(3), we weight the MSA-pair correlations by the actual rate at which households moved between

them, computed using the Treasury’s county-to-county migration data described above. This

column corresponds to Figure 2. Using such migration weights, the average correlation rises to

0.57 from 0.34 in column (1), and the median correlation rises to 0.60 from 0.35. An even more

striking finding is that the 75th percentile correlation rises from 0.54 to 0.89 – i.e., 25 percent of

household moves are between MSAs that have correlations in annual house price growth of 0.89

or above. Even the lower end of the distribution has remarkably high correlations. The 25th

percentile correlation in column (3), 0.34, is about the same as the median correlation in column

(1).

        Overall, accounting for where households actually move when constructing expected

correlations shifts the entire distribution of expected correlations to the right. This conclusion is

confirmed by the bottom panel of Table 1 which reports various summary statistics for the

(within-MSA) distribution of correlations. When MSA-pairs are weighted by migration flows,

the difference between the 95th and 75th percentile correlations within each MSA shrinks

dramatically, from 0.26 in column (1) to 0.08 in column (3), because the distribution is capped at

1.0 as it shifts to the right. Thus, the 75th percentile value rises considerably, but the 95th

percentile cannot rise by as much. However, neither the interquartile range nor the difference

between the 25th and 5th percentiles changes much between columns (1) and (3), indicating that

the other points in the distribution increase in near-lockstep.




                                                  16
         The next three columns of Table 1 show that the propensity to move between highly-

covarying MSAs is not driven by relative house price changes in those markets. In the fourth

column, we adjust the cross-MSA mobility rates by regressing the moving rate between a MSA-

pair in a given year on the difference between the two MSAs in annual house price growth over

the prior year, that difference squared, and a constant term. We then use the residuals from that

regression, plus the constant term, as the moving weights.9 The basic pattern of results is little

changed from the one using the unadjusted moving rates, in the third column. The median

expected covariance is 0.58 and the 95th percentile is 0.96. Although the 75th percentile

covariance drops from 0.89 to 0.79, it is still considerably larger than for the unweighted or

population-weighted moves in the first two columns.

         In the fifth and sixth columns, we check whether the moving patterns are different in

periods of house price growth or decline. They do not appear to be. The fifth column restricts

the sample to MSAs in years where they had experienced positive nominal house price growth

(“booms”). The sixth column restricts the sample to MSAs in years where they did not (“busts”).

In both cases, the basic pattern of results is little changed from column (3).

         Finally, we also compute correlations in five-year house price growth rates, rather than

annual growth rates, to try to more closely match the average household’s holding period. As in

column (3), we use raw household mobility patterns as the weights in forming expected

correlations. The distribution of expected correlations, reported in the last column, rises across

the board since using the longer-difference growth rates reduces the effect of high-frequency

fluctuations or noise in house prices. 75 percent of households have house price correlations of

9
  This is akin to setting the price differences between the two MSAs to zero. Negative predicted moving rates are
truncated at zero. While the estimated coefficients on the price difference terms are statistically significant and of an
intuitive sign – households are less likely to move to an MSA whose price growth was higher than their own, and
that effect accelerates as the price growth gap gets bigger – the magnitude is economically small and the R-squared
is just 0.0013.


                                                          17
at least 0.44, 50 percent have correlations of at least 0.74, and 25 percent of households have

correlations of 0.94 or more. Our ability to compute growth rates over even longer horizons is

limited because of the length of the sample. However, the distribution using 10-year growth

rates in house prices looks very similar to that reported in the last column of Table 1.

       The reason that the expected correlation in house price growth rises when we account for

households’ moving tendencies is that the relation between household moves and house price

correlation is skewed. The set of city pairs with high gross migration flows includes mostly city

pairs with high price correlations, whereas the city pairs with low gross migration flows include

both low and high correlation pairs. This pattern can be seen in Figure 3, which graphs the

kernel density of the correlations in annual house price growth among various subsets of the

18,090 pairs of the 135 cities. The solid black line restricts the sample to the 4,812 city pairs

that, according to the Treasury data, experienced no (gross) migration. A few of these pairs had

correlations below −0.5, some had correlations of nearly 1, and the peak of the distribution is

around 0.3. The dashed line shows the kernel density of the correlations for the remaining city

pairs that experience positive gross migration. This distribution is slightly to the right of the

distribution for city pairs with no migration, so on average households who move migrate

between more highly correlated housing markets, but the overall difference is small. By

contrast, the dotted line considers only those city pairs (A,B) where, of the households who

moved out of city A, at least 1 percent moved to city B. One percent of moving households is a

high moving rate, since most city pairs have few moves. The distribution of correlations shifts

considerably to the right. That rightward shift is even more pronounced for the dash-dot line,

which restricts the set of city pairs to those where the rate of moving out of A to B was at least




                                                 18
2.5 percent. These last two kernel densities indicate that the rate of moving is high mainly

between high-correlation city pairs.

        The patterns in Figure 3 explain the differences between Figures 1 and 2. When city

pairs are equally weighted, the distribution of correlations looks like the solid and dashed lines.

But when city pairs are weighted by the probability of a household moving between the two

cities, the pairs represented by the solid line get no weight, while the pairs represented by the

dotted and dash-dot distributions get significant weight. This reweighting shifts the mass of the

correlation distribution (in most cities) to the right.

        Investigating why MSAs have correlated house price growth rates – or why households

tend to move between MSAs with correlated housing markets – is beyond the scope of this

paper. Indeed, the value, to an individual household, of owning a house as a hedge against

moving risk is separable from the reasons for the correlation or the potential move. For example,

one possible reason for moving is that the shocks that induce the correlation in prices also induce

labor market flows. That is, cities that are similar enough for households to want to move

between are also likely to share the same economic fundamentals, leading to a correlation in their

housing markets. Another possible reason is that cities with correlated house prices are demand

substitutes. [McDuff 2008] In either case, for an individual household, owning a house still

helps hedge the purchase price risk in the city that is moved to. Nonetheless, in our empirical

section, below, we will confirm this conclusion by using exogenous predictors of cross-MSA

mobility to form expected correlations and covariances.



3.      Data




                                                   19
        We use household level data from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 waves of the Integrated

Public Use Microsample of the U.S. Census (IPUMS) as our base data set. The IPUMS is a

representative cross-section sample of U.S. residents drawn from the decennial Census. It is

well-suited for our purpose because it has many observations (in the 5 percent sample that we

use, there are nearly 38 million person-level observations total in the three waves), contains

MSA identifiers, reports whether households own their homes, and contains a host of household-

level income and demographic characteristics that we use as controls. We construct two

subsamples using this data, using the procedure outlined in Appendix Table C. Both subsamples

are restricted to household heads age 25 and over, among other conditions. One sample, which

we call the ‘migration’ subsample, excludes the households from the 1980 Census that due to the

design of that year’s Census were not asked about prior residences. After these restrictions, 10.3

million household-level observations remain. The other sample, which we call the ‘regression’

sample, excludes households who either do not live in an MSA or live in MSAs that are not

covered in our other data sets (as well as other, relatively minor, sample restrictions), for a net

total of 4.2 million household-level observations.

        The main variables of interest – the expected covariances (cov), rent risks (s2r), and

expected lengths-of-stay (N) – need to be imputed into the IPUMS. The expected covariance for

a household living in MSA k is comprised of two parts: the vector of house price covariances

between MSA k and the other MSAs, and the probability weights that a given household living

in MSA k would apply to the likelihood of moving to each of the other MSAs:

E cov(PA , PB ) k , g   wk ,l , g cov(Pk , Pl ) . The house price covariance vector, cov( Pk , Pl ) , is
                        l


constructed by computing the covariance of real annual house price growth over the 1980 – 2002

period based on the OFHEO index described earlier.



                                                       20
       We use several different approaches to estimate the moving weights, wk ,l , g . The IPUMS

reports households’ current MSA of residence and their MSA of residence five years earlier.

Using the migration sample, we construct the average annual rate of moving from each MSA to

each of the other MSAs conditional on moving out of the origin MSA, weighting the

observations by the IPUMS household weights. We also repeat the exercise allowing the MSA-

to-MSA moving matrix to differ by group, g. As groups, we use the Census’s 381 detailed

industries (1990 definition) as well as the Census’s 243 detailed occupations (1990 definition).

When we allow the weights to vary by MSA and group, E cov( PA , PB ) k , g varies both across and

within MSAs.

       We construct expected horizon and rent volatility in the same manner as Sinai and

Souleles (2005). We proxy for the expected horizon with the probability of not moving, imputed

using exogenous demographic characteristics. The IPUMS reports whether a household has

moved in the last year. To generate the expected probability of moving, we take the average rate

of moving over the last year in the age (in 10-year bins) × marital status × occupation cell that

matches the household in question (excluding the household from the cell). We subtract that

average from one to obtain the probability of staying, P(stay). This is our inverse proxy for the

expected horizon N. In the regression analysis, we will control separately for age, marital status,

and occupation in the vector of demographic controls, so the probability of staying will be

identified from households having a different mobility profile over their lifetimes depending on

their marital status and occupation.

       To estimate rent volatility, we use data from REIS, a commercial real estate data provider

that has surveyed ‘Class A’ apartment buildings in 44 major markets between 1980 and the

present. We use their measure of average effective rents by MSA, deflated using the CPI less



                                                21
shelter. To estimate the volatility, we de-trend the log annual average real rent in each MSA and

compute the standard deviation of the deviations from the trend between 1980 and 2002. By

using logs, the standard deviation is calculated as a percent of the rent and so the measured rent

risk is not affected by the level or average growth rate of rents.



4.      Estimation strategy and results

        We wish to estimate the following regression, for household i in MSA k at time t:

        OWN i ,k ,t   0  1 f ( s r ) k   2 g ( N ) i   3 f ( s r ) k  g ( N ) i 
         4 E cov(PA , PB )  i ,k   5 E cov( PA , PB ) 
                                1                               1
                                2                               2
                                                                    i ,k    g(N )i             (5)
        X i  Z k ,t   t   i ,k ,t ,

where ‘OWN’ is an indicator variable for home ownership, s r is the measure of the local rent

volatility, N is the imputed probability of not moving (P(stay)), and E cov( PA , PB ) 2 is the square
                                                                                             1




root of the household’s expected covariance. The remaining variables are controls: X is a vector

of household-level characteristics, Z controls for time-varying MSA-level characteristics, and ζ is

a vector of year dummies. We will estimate equation (5) using OLS and linear IV.

        The main predictions from the framework in Section 1 are that  3  0 ,  4  0 , and

 5  0 . The tests of  4  0 and  5  0 are novel to this paper, while  3  0 was tested in Sinai

and Souleles (2005) using a different data set. The framework in Section 1 also shows that the

probability of owning should increase with the horizon N, which implies that β2>0. In practice

the coefficient on the uninteracted horizon term can also pick up the effects of other factors

affecting the probability of owning, such as fixed costs being amortized over longer stays, and so

we will not emphasize β2. Also, we will include MSA × year dummies, which will subsume the

effect of β1, the coefficient on the uninteracted rent volatility.



                                                              22
       Most of our empirical focus will be on identifying the estimates of  4 and  5 . One way

to identify  4 , the effect of the expected covariance on the decision to own, is to make use of the

fact that different types of households within each MSA can have different weights applied to the

MSA × MSA house price covariance matrix, reflecting their different probabilities of moving to

different MSAs. This yields variation in expected covariances within and across MSA. Since

we allow the moving weights to differ by industry or occupation groups, the resulting variation is

at the industry × MSA or the occupation × MSA level. Thus we can include MSA × year

dummies and a complete set of industry or occupation dummies, and still identify  4 . If we

assume instead that all households within an MSA have the same probabilities of moving to the

other MSAs,  4 cannot be separately identified from the MSA × year fixed effects.

       To illustrate, we could compare the homeownership rates of electricians and lawyers in

Philadelphia since those two industry groups, despite living in the same MSA, are likely to move

to different cities and thus have different expected covariances. We can then compare the

difference in the two groups’ homeownership rates to the difference in homeownership rates in

the same two industry groups in another city, such as Seattle, who themselves have different

expected covariances. The fact that households may be on average more likely to own their

houses in Seattle or Philadelphia is absorbed with MSA × year dummies. Any capitalization of

the value of the moving hedge into house prices is also captured by these fixed effects. Average

differences in homeownership rates across industries can be controlled for with industry

dummies. Thus our estimate of  4 would be identified by industry × MSA variation. Our

identification strategy generalizes this example to all MSAs and all industries. We also try a

similar strategy using occupation groups rather than industries. We allow for general non-




                                                 23
independence of the standard errors within industry × MSA × year (or occupation × MSA ×

year) groups by clustering the standard errors.

        We can identify  5 separately from  4 , since  5 is the coefficient on the interaction

between the probability of staying (N) and the E cov( PA , PB )2 term. Whether or not the
                                                                      1




expected covariance term alone is distinguishable from unobserved MSA heterogeneity, the

probability of staying varies across households i based on their demographic characteristics, so

E cov( PA , PB )2 i ,k  g( N )i varies by household within MSA. The same logic applies to the
                 1




identification of  3 , the coefficient on f ( s r ) k  g ( N ) i , since the interaction of the MSA level

rent variance and the group-level probability of staying provides MSA × group variation.

        In addition to the variables of interest, in all regressions we control for standard

household-level covariates: The (uninteracted) imputed P(stay), log real family income, age

dummies (in 10-year bins), indicator variables for marital status (single, married, widowed, and

divorced), education dummies (less than high school, high school, some college, and completed

college), 381 occupation dummies, and the probability of moving within the MSA conditional on

moving. We add 243 industry dummies when we use industry for the group g in forming the

moving weights. MSA-level covariates and aggregate time series effects are subsumed by the

MSA × year fixed effects, which we include in all specifications.

        As a baseline, the first column of Table 2 uses the average MSA-to-MSA mobility rates

by occupation to construct the moving probabilities, so E cov( PA , PB )2 varies both across and
                                                                                 1




within MSAs. The predictions of the framework from Section 1 are supported by the data. In

column (1), the first row reports the effect of the expected price covariance on the likelihood of

owning and the second row reports how the effect differs as the probability of staying increases.




                                                     24
Because the specification includes an interaction term with P(stay), the coefficient in the first

row can be interpreted as the effect of the covariance for the polar case household who expects to

move right away. We find that such a household is more likely to own when the covariance is

greater, as predicted. The estimated coefficient  4 of 2.042 (0.252 standard error) implies that a

one standard deviation increase in the square root of the expected covariance (0.015 on a base of

0.041) would yield a 3.1 percent increase in the probability of home ownership (2.04 × 0.015).

This represents a sizeable increase in the ownership rate (the average is 65.4 percent), though a

small fraction of the cross-sectional standard deviation in the likelihood of owning (the standard

deviation is 47.6 percent). However, this extrapolation to an expected horizon of zero years is

well outside of the variation in the sample.

        To assess the effect for households with a longer expected horizon, we need to turn to the
                                             1

interaction term, P(stay) x E cov( PA , PB ) , in the second row. The negative coefficient  5 of
                                             2




−2.039 (0.283) implies that the effect of the price covariance on the probability of owning

attenuates as a household’s expected horizon increases and the value of the moving-hedge falls,

again as predicted. Since the estimated coefficient on the interaction term is of similar

magnitude but opposite sign to the coefficient on E cov( PA , PB ) 2 , the net effect of higher
                                                                      1




covariance declines to effectively zero for the polar case household who is imputed to never

move, i.e. whose P(stay)=1. This result, too, is consistent with the framework in Section 1, since

non-movers have no need for a moving hedge. To be precise, the estimates show that

households with short expected durations and high expected covariances are more likely to own

their houses than otherwise equivalent households with short expected durations and low

expected covariances in the same MSA and year. As the expected duration increases, the gap in

the probability of ownership declines to zero.


                                                  25
         We can combine the estimates for these two polar cases to estimate the effect of a one

standard deviation higher expected covariance on the probability of owning for households with

an intermediate expected duration. For a household with the lowest expected horizon in the

sample, two years (imputed P(stay)=0.5), a one standard deviation higher expected covariance

raises the probability of owning by 1.6 percentage points (0.2 percentage points standard error),

which is a large and significant effect. Households with a longer, five-year expected horizon

(with P(stay)=0.8, approximately the sample average), are 0.63 percentage points (0.15) more

likely to own a house when the expected covariance rises by one standard deviation. By the time

households have a one-in-ten chance of moving in any given year (P(stay)=0.9), the effect on the

probability of owning approaches zero (0.32 percentage points) and is barely statistically

significant (a standard error of 0.16).

         In the third row of Table 2, the effect of rent volatility in the current MSA on the

likelihood of owning becomes more positive as the horizon increases, since the coefficient on the

interaction term, P(stay) × s r , is positive. This interaction effect was one of the main empirical

results in Sinai and Souleles (2005), and it is robust throughout all the specifications in this

paper.

         We include P(stay) separately to control for expected horizon and related factors like the

fixed costs of buying or selling a house. The estimated coefficient is positive as expected:

households with longer expected lengths of stay on average are more likely to own.

         The second column of Table 2 reports the estimated coefficients when we impute the

pattern of where households expect to move based on industry groups and MSA. The results are

very similar to those using occupation groups.




                                                  26
       In the third column, we eliminate the within-MSA group-based variation by imputing

mobility based on where other households in the same MSA move. Because the weighting

matrix in this specification varies only by MSA, the estimated coefficients on the uninteracted

expected covariance (and rent volatility) term cannot be identified separately from the

unobserved MSA-level heterogeneity that is absorbed by MSA × year effects. In this case, only

the interaction terms with expected horizon (P(stay)) can be identified, since they vary by MSA

× household. Despite the difference in the source of variation, the estimated coefficients on the

interaction terms are very close to those in columns (1) and (2).

       The last two columns of Table 2, by leaving out the interaction term P(stay) ×

E cov( PA , PB ) 2 , provides the average effect of the expected covariance on home owning, across
                1




households of all expected durations. These estimates are identified solely from the within-MSA

variation (by occupation or industry) and are not dependent on the P(stay) imputation. Because

E cov( PA , PB ) 2 in this specification is not interacted with P(stay), the estimated elasticity
                1




corresponds to the household with the average expected length-of-stay in the sample, which is

about five years (P(stay)=0.80). The estimated coefficient in the top row of column (4) is 0.367

(0.99), which suggests that if the expected covariance were to rise by one standard deviation, the

probability of home owning would go up by 0.367 × 0.015, or almost 0.6 percentage points.

Similar results are found using industry groups in column (5).

       One potential complication is that if households are constrained to move primarily to

where they can afford to move, they might have to move to markets that have correlated house

price changes. If this effect happens to be stronger when the homeownership rate is higher, it

could potentially spuriously link the probability of owning with the expected covariance, since

our measure of expected covariance is constructed using actual moves. However, there is little



                                                   27
reason to think that this effect would be stronger within MSAs for the industries or occupations

that have a higher homeownership rate, and so it should not affect our analysis.10

         To confirm that this mechanism isn’t driving the results, we instrument for our measure

of expected covariance with a covariance constructed using mobility weights intended to proxy

for where a household would like to move if it were unconstrained. For this robustness check,

we assume that, conditional on moving, households would like to move to those cities where

other households in their current occupation or industry tend to locate. In particular, we impute

household i’s (currently living in MSA k) probability of moving to MSA l as simply the share of

household i’s occupation (or industry) in MSA l relative to all other MSAs excluding k. (E.g.,

the instrument is constructed such that, if a large fraction of the nation’s lawyers live in

Philadelphia, then lawyers in other cities have a proportionally higher probability of moving to

Philadelphia.) This set of probabilities differs by occupation (industry) within an MSA, but most

of the variation in this instrument is across occupations (industries), not across MSAs. However,

when those moving probabilities are used to weight the MSA covariance vectors, which differ

across MSAs, the resulting expected covariance instrument varies both within and across MSAs.

(The first stages of the IV regressions are reported in Appendix Table B.)

         The results of this IV strategy are reported in Table 3. The specification in column (1)

corresponds to the first column of Table 2, except now we instrument for the expected

covariance using the weighted covariance described above that assumes that households move

according to the distribution of their occupation shares, which varies by occupation × MSA. To

instrument for P(stay) × E cov( PA , PB ) 2 , we interact P(stay) with the expected covariance
                                                1




10
  The theoretical argument of this paper does not require that a household’s moving between markets be
unconstrained. If a household knows in advance that, when it moves, it would need to move to a housing market
where house prices had covaried positively, it should take that into account when making its initial house purchase
decision. This is why we address just the empirical implications of this potential mechanism.


                                                         28
instrument. Since P(stay) is imputed using exogenous household demographics, we do not need

an instrument for it.

        The IV-estimated coefficients on E cov( PA , PB ) 2 and its interaction with P(stay) nearly
                                                              1




double relative to the OLS estimates in Table 2, to 4.209 (1.271) for the expected covariance and

−3.813 (0.387) for the interaction term. Despite the larger standard errors, the IV coefficients

remain statistically significant. Since the estimates continue to be close in magnitude with

opposite signs, at every expected length-of-stay the estimated effect of higher expected

covariance on the probability of homeownership is about twice what was found in Table 2. As

expected, those households who we impute would never move still have no differential response

to changes in expected covariance. For households with P(stay)=0.5, a one standard deviation

greater expected covariance leads to a nearly 4 percentage point increase in the probability of

home owning. At the sample average P(stay), 0.8, the same increase in expected covariance

would raise the probability of owning by just under 2 percentage points. Despite the statistical

significance of the individual reported coefficients, for levels of P(stay) observed in the data, the

combined effect of E cov( PA , PB ) 2 and E cov( PA , PB ) 2 × P(stay) becomes statistically
                                      1                      1




indistinguishable from zero when instrumenting.

        Column (2) of Table 3 uses industry groups rather than occupation to construct the

instrument. The estimated coefficients on E cov( PA , PB ) 2 and E cov( PA , PB ) 2 × P(stay) are
                                                                  1                    1




slightly smaller in absolute value than in column (1), yet still statistically significant. Their

combined effects are also statistically different from zero as long as P(stay) is lower than 0.65.

At P(stay)=0.5, a one standard deviation greater expected covariance leads to a 3 percentage

point increase in the probability of owning.




                                                   29
       Column (3) uses just the MSA-level variation to construct the expected covariance, and

for the instrument uses the occupation distribution of the MSA to construct where the MSA

residents on average would move to. As in Table 1, the level effect of expected covariance

cannot be identified in this particular specification. However, the interaction term has the same

estimated magnitude as in columns (1) and (2), with about a 50 percent smaller standard error.

In sum, the interaction term remains consistently significantly and economically negative, even

across all the IV specifications. Thus we can reject the null hypothesis of no attenuation (with

expected horizon) of the effect of the moving hedge on the probability of owning on average

over the sample.



5.     Conclusion

       This paper established two novel results. First, because households tend to move among

correlated housing markets, the effective covariance of house prices across housing markets is

much higher than analysts have previously assumed. We find that half of households’ moves in

the U.S., excluding within-MSA moving, are between MSAs with correlations in annual real

house price growth rates of 0.60 or greater, and 25 percent are between MSAs with more than a

0.89 correlation. When five-year house price growth rates are used, the median correlation rises

to 0.74.

       Second, households’ tenure decisions appear to be sensitive to the moving-hedge benefit

of home owning. Households with higher expected covariances between house prices in their

current market and their possible future markets are more likely to own. This effect attenuates

with a household’s expected length of stay in the house: less mobile households place less

weight on future housing markets than do more mobile households. For a household who is




                                                30
likely to move in the next two years, having a one standard deviation higher expected covariance

leads to a 2 to 4 percentage point higher homeownership rate. That relationship diminishes with

the expected length of stay in the house and is indistinguishable from zero for households who

appear unlikely to move. The results are robust to instrumenting for the expected covariances by

assuming households move proportionally to their industry shares.

        The analysis in this paper suggests that the natural hedge provided by owning a house

may be quite valuable, and for many households home owning (absent leverage) may actually

reduce the risk of the total lifetime cost of obtaining housing services. As noted in Sinai and

Souleles (2005), home owners who expect never to move are in effect hedged against housing

cost risk, since they locked in their housing costs with their initial house purchase. In this paper,

we find that even home owners who expect to sell their house and move to another market may

be partially hedged, because the volatility in their current house price often undoes the volatility

in the price of their next house, reducing their lifetime risk on net. By contrast, renters are

exposed to volatility in housing costs in both their current market and any future markets they

might move to.

        The argument that households should manage the uncertainty of their total lifetime

housing costs, not the volatility of their current house price, has important implications for

evaluating the efficacy of various methods of controlling households’ housing risk, including

house price derivatives. For most households, the positive expected covariance between house

prices in their current city and prices in possible future cities provides at least a partial hedge

against house price risk when they move. Because of that, households who use housing

derivatives to lock in the sale price of their current house may actually unhedge themselves by

reducing the covariance to zero. Instead, households would need to obtain a more complex




                                                  31
portfolio of derivatives that would hedge their total housing costs, including their future housing

costs in different markets. This important distinction is neglected in analyses that implicitly

assume that the covariances between the current and potential future housing markets are low

(e.g., Case et al. (1993), Geltner et al. (1995), Shiller (2008), Voicu (2007)).11

        This analysis may help explain why the house price futures market has failed to take off.

[Shiller (2008)] It may simply be less expensive, easier, and nearly as effective to hedge by

owning a home. While the natural hedge provided by owning a house is, in most cases, a partial

one, providing a supplemental financial hedge against total housing risk might be complex. This

analysis may also help explain why there are so few long-term leases in the U.S. [Genesove

(1999)] A long-term lease avoids rent risk and leaves the sale price risk with the landlord. But

for many mobile households there is a potential benefit of retaining exposure to the sale price, as

a hedge against the uncertainty of the cost of future housing services.

        Lastly, the results in this paper suggest that, for many households, the marginal

propensity to consume out of changes in house prices could be small. To illustrate, if an increase

in house prices reflects the fact that a household’s implicit short position in future housing costs

has become commensurately more expensive, then the household’s real wealth is effectively

unchanged by the housing capital gains. Unless the capital gains alleviate liquidity/collateral

constraints, the consumption response should accordingly be small. Prior research emphasized

this argument for home owners with long expected stays in their current housing markets. [Sinai

and Souleles (2005), Campbell and Cocco (2007)] In this paper, the high expected house price

covariances that we find imply that even home owners with short expected stays in their current

housing markets can face similarly small real wealth effects as home owners with long horizons.

11
  de Jong et al. (2007) point out another reason that housing derivatives might provide a poor hedge is that MSA-
level house price indices do not explain much of the variation in individual house prices. This point applies to
within-MSA moves as well.


                                                        32
That is, the high covariances effectively lengthen the horizon of households that are likely

movers, and so the wealth effect from a change in house prices will often be largely offset by

changes in housing costs in both current and expected future housing markets. These results can

help explain the small marginal propensities to consume out of housing wealth found by

Calomiris et al (2009), Attanasio et al (2009), and by Campbell and Cocco (2007) for young

homeowners, and suggest that the main channels for housing wealth effects on non-housing

consumption would have to be through affecting collateral or liquidity constraints. [Lustig and

Van Nieuweburgh (2005), Ortalo-Magné and Rady (2006)]




                                                33
                                         References

Attanasio, Orazio, Laura Blow, Robert Hamilton, and Andrew Leicester. 2009. ‘Booms and
       Busts: Consumption, House Prices and Expectations.’ Economica, 76, 20-50.

Calomiris, Charles, Stanley Longhofer, and William Miles. 2009. ‘The (Mythical?) Housing
      Wealth Effect.’ NBER Working Paper #15075, June.

Caplin, Andrew, William Goetzmann, Eric Hangen, Barry Nalebuff, Elisabeth Prentice, John
       Rodkin, Matthew Spiegel and Tom Skinner. 2003. ‘Home Equity Insurance: A Pilot
       Project,’ Working Paper No. ysm372, Yale School of Management, Yale University.

Case, Karl, and Robert Shiller. 1989. ‘The Efficiency of the Market for Single-Family Homes.’
       American Economic Review, 79 (1), 125-137.

Case, Karl, Robert Shiller, and Allan Weiss. 1993. ‘Index-Based Futures and Options Markets in
       Real Estate,’ Journal of Portfolio Management, 19(2), 83-92.

Chan, Sewin. 2001. ‘Spatial Lock-In: Do Falling House Prices Constrain Residential Mobility?’
       Journal of Urban Economics, 49(3), 567-586.

Cocco, Joao. 2000. ‘Hedging House Price Risk with Incomplete Markets,’ paper presented at the
       American Finance Association 2001 Meetings, New Orleans.

Davidoff, Thomas. 2006. ‘Labor Income, Housing Prices and Homeownership,’ Journal of
      Urban Economics, 59(2), 209-235.

De Jong, Frank, Joost Driessen, and Otto Van Hemert. 2007. ‘Hedging House Price Risk:
      Portfolio Choice with Housing Futures,’ mimeo, New York University.

Geltner, David, Norman Miller, and Jean Snavely. 1995. ‘We Need a Fourth Asset Class:
       HEITs,’ Real Estate Finance, 12(2), 71-81.

Genesove, David. 1999. ‘The Nominal Rigidity of Apartment Rents,’ Working Paper No. 7137,
      National Bureau of Economic Research.

Genesove, David and Christopher Mayer. 1997. ‘Equity and Time to Sale in the Real Estate
      Market,’ The American Economic Review, 87(3), 255-69.

Genesove, David and Christopher Mayer. 2001. ‘Loss Aversion and Seller Behavior: Evidence
      from the Housing Market,’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4), 1233-1260.

Glaeser, Edward and Joseph Gyourko. 2006. ‘Housing Dynamics,’ Working Paper No. 12787,
       National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                              34
Han, Lu. 2008. ‘The Effects of House Price Uncertainty on Housing Demand: Empirical
      Evidence from the U.S. Housing Markets,’ Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Hurst, Erik and Frank Stafford. 2004. ‘Home Is Where the Equity Is: Mortgage Refinancing and
       Household Consumption,’ Journal of Money, Credit & Banking, 36(6), 985-1014.

Li, Wenli and Rui Yao. 2007. ‘The Life-Cycle Effects of House Price Changes,’ Journal of
      Money, Credit and Banking, 39(6), 1375-1409.

Lustig, Hanno and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. 2005. ‘Housing Collateral, Consumption Insurance,
        and Risk Premia: An Empirical Perspective,’ Journal of Finance, 60(3), 1167-1219.

Meese, Richard and Nancy Wallace. 1994. ‘Testing the Present Value Relation for Housing
       Prices: Should I Leave my House in San Francisco?,’ Journal of Urban Economics, 35,
       245-266.

Ortalo-Magné, Francois and Sven Rady. 2002. ‘Tenure Choice and the Riskiness of Non-
       Housing Consumption,’ Journal of Housing Economics, 11, 266-279.

----------. 2006. ‘Housing Market Dynamics: On the contribution of income shocks and credit
         constraints.’ Review of Economic Studies, 73, 459-485.

Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia
      Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. 2008. Integrated Public Use Microdata
      Series: Version 4.0. Minneapolis: Minnesota Population Center.

Shiller, Robert. 2008. ‘Derivatives Markets for Home Prices,’ Working Paper No. 13962,
        National Bureau of Economic Research.

Sinai, Todd and Nicholas Souleles. 2005. ‘Owner Occupied Housing as a Hedge Against Rent
        Risk,’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2), 763-789.

Stein, Jeremy. 1995. ‘Prices and Trading Volume in the Housing Market: A Model with
        Downpayment Effects,’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 379-406.

Voicu, Cristian. 2007. ‘Optimal Portfolios with Housing Derivatives,’ mimeo, Harvard Business
       School.




                                             35
                              Table 1: Distributions of correlations in house price growth across MSAs

                                                                                                                          Five-year
Correlation:                                          One-year growth rates of real house prices
                                                                                                                         growth rates
                                                                                        Migration weighted
                                                                            Conditional
                                                              Average         on house                                    Average
                                            Population        migration     price growth      During                      migration
Weighting scheme:           Unweighted       weighted           rates        differences      booms      During busts       rates
Average                         0.34           0.37              0.57           0.55           0.59           0.56           0.64
5th percentile                 -0.17           -0.16            -0.02          -0.004          0.04          -0.05           -0.06
25th percentile                 0.15           0.18              0.34           0.36           0.44           0.32           0.44
50th percentile                 0.35           0.39              0.60           0.58           0.64           0.60           0.74
75th percentile                 0.54           0.58              0.89           0.79           0.80           0.84           0.94
95th percentile                 0.82           0.86              0.97           0.96           0.96           0.97           0.99

Average difference:
                                0.26           0.23              0.08           0.14           0.12           0.15           0.07
95th−75th percentile
Average interquartile
                                0.37           0.35              0.37           0.20           0.16           0.15           0.41
range
Average difference:
                                  0.27           0.27           0.33             0.39           0.31            0.33             0.45
25th−5th percentile
Notes: This table reports the distribution of weighted average house price growth correlations across MSAs. MSA k’s weighted
average correlation is between its real house price growth and that in all other MSAs, with weights varied as listed in the table.
Correlations are constant over time within MSA pairs, but the weights can vary over time. A ‘boom’ is an MSA x year when nominal
house price growth in MSA k was positive; a ‘bust’ is an MSA x year when nominal house price growth was negative or zero.



                                                                   36
                 Table 2: The relationship between expected house price covariance
                                and the probability of owning (OLS)

                                   (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)
                                  2.042       1.950                    0.367       0.298
      E[cov(PA,PB)]½
                                 (0.252)     (0.265)                  (0.099)     (0.115)
      P(stay)i ×                  -2.039      -2.016     -2.135
      E[cov(PA,PB)]½             (0.283)     (0.292)     (0.151)
                                  2.430       2.468       2.464        1.856       1.902
      P(stay)i × sr
                                 (0.140)     (0.152)     (0.081)      (0.130)     (0.143)
                                  0.887       0.870       0.889        0.838       0.821
      P(stay)i
                                 (0.019)     (0.019)     (0.010)      (0.017)     (0.016)
      Probability weights        MSA x        MSA x                   MSA x        MSA x
                                                          MSA
      for E[cov(PA,PB)]:       occupation    Industry               occupation    Industry
      MSA × year
                                   Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes
      dummies?
      Adjusted
                                 0.2965      0.2993      0.2964       0.2965      0.2993
      R-squared
                                 MSA x        MSA x                   MSA x        MSA x
      Clustering of standard
                                 year x       year x      None        year x       year x
      errors
                               occupation    industry               occupation    industry

Notes: N = 3,326,113. Sample period covers the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses. The
dependent variable is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the respondent owns its
home and zero if the respondent rents. The probability of staying (not moving), P(stay), is
imputed using occupation × marital status × age category cells. The square root of the expected
covariance of house prices, E[cov(PA,PB)]½, is a moving-probability weighted average of the
covariances between the MSA of residence and possible future MSAs. The standard deviation of
detrended log rent, sr, is a MSA (k) characteristic and is subsumed by the MSA x year dummies.
The standard deviations and covariances are not time-varying. All regressions include as
covariates: MSA × year dummies, age dummies, occupation dummies, marital status dummies,
education dummies, log real family income, and the share of moving households who remain in
the MSA. Columns (2) and (5) add a detailed set of industry dummies.




                                                37
               Table 3: The relationship between expected house price covariance
                               and the probability of owning (IV)

                                          (1)              (2)              (3)
                                         4.209            3.757
            E[cov(PA,PB)]½
                                        (1.271)          (0.743)
            P(stay)i ×                  -3.813           -3.741           -3.718
            E[cov(PA,PB)]½              (0.387)          (0.377)          (0.162)
                                         2.911            2.946            2.908
            P(stay)i × sr
                                        (0.155)          (0.171)          (0.083)
                                         0.930            0.912            0.927
            P(stay)i
                                        (0.021)          (0.021)          (0.010)
            Probability weights       MSA x               MSA x
                                                                           MSA
            for E[cov(PA,PB)]:       Occupation          Industry
            MSA × year
                                         Yes               Yes             Yes
            dummies?
                                       MSA x              MSA x          MSA x
            Instrument?              Occupation          Industry      Occupation
                                     instrument         instrument     instrument
            Adjusted
                                        0.2965            0.2993          0.2964
            R-squared
            Clustering of           MSA x year x       MSA x year x
                                                                           none
            standard errors          Occupation          industry

Notes: N = 3,326,113. Sample period covers the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses. The
dependent variable is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the respondent owns its
home and zero if the respondent rents. The probability of staying, P(stay), is imputed using
occupation × marital status × age category cells. The square root of the expected covariance of
house prices, E[cov(PA,PB)]½, is a moving-probability weighted average of the covariances
between the MSA of residence and possible future MSAs. The standard deviation of detrended
log rent, sr, is a MSA (k) characteristic and is subsumed by the MSA x year dummies. The
standard deviations and covariances are not time-varying. The instrument replaces the actual
moving rates between MSAs with each destination MSA’s share of the occupation (industry).
All regressions include as covariates: MSA × year dummies, age dummies, occupation dummies,
marital status dummies, education dummies, log real family income, and the share of moving
households who remain in the MSA. Column (2) adds a detailed set of industry dummies.




                                                  38
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure 2:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Figure 1:


                                                        Correlation, annual growth rate                                                                                                                                                                                   Correlation, annual growth rate
                                                         -.5       0       .5       1                                                                                                                                                                                      -.5       0       .5       1

                                              Atlanta                                                                                                                                                                                                           Atlanta
                                               Austin                                                                                                                                                                                                            Austin
                                           Baltimore                                                                                                                                                                                                         Baltimore
                                              Boston                                                                                                                                                                                                            Boston
                                            Charlotte                                                                                                                                                                                                         Charlotte
                                             Chicago                                                                                                                                                                                                           Chicago
                                           Cincinnati                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cincinnati
                                           Cleveland                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cleveland
                                          Columbus                                                                                                                                                                                                          Columbus
                                               Dallas                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dallas
                                              Denver                                                                                                                                                                                                            Denver
                                              Detroit                                                                                                                                                                                                           Detroit
                               District of Columbia                                                                                                                                                                                              District of Columbia
                                   Fort Lauderdale                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fort Lauderdale
                                          Fort Worth                                                                                                                                                                                                        Fort Worth
                                            Houston                                                                                                                                                                                                           Houston
                                        Indianapolis                                                                                                                                                                                                      Indianapolis
                                        Jacksonville                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jacksonville
                                        Kansas City                                                                                                                                                                                                       Kansas City
                                          Las Vegas                                                                                                                                                                                                         Las Vegas




     Interquartile range
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Interquartile range




39
                                       Los Angeles                                                                                                                                                                                                       Los Angeles
                                            Memphis                                                                                                                                                                                                           Memphis
                                               Miami                                                                                                                                                                                                             Miami
                                          Milwaukee                                                                                                                                                                                                         Milwaukee
                                        Minneapolis                                                                                                                                                                                                       Minneapolis
                                            Nashville                                                                                                                                                                                                         Nashville
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (unweighted)




                                           New York                                                                                                                                                                                                          New York
                                Oakland-East Bay                                                                                                                                                                                                  Oakland-East Bay
                                             Orlando                                                                                                                                                                                                           Orlando
                                        Palm Beach                                                                                                                                                                                                        Palm Beach
                                        Philadelphia                                                                                                                                                                                                      Philadelphia
                                             Phoenix                                                                                                                                                                                                           Phoenix
                                          Pittsburgh                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pittsburgh
                                            Portland                                                                                                                                                                                                          Portland
                                          Richmond                                                                                                                                                                                                          Richmond
                                        Sacramento                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sacramento
                                     Salt Lake City                                                                                                                                                                                                    Salt Lake City
                                        San Antonio                                                                                                                                                                                                       San Antonio
                                          San Diego                                                                                                                                                                                                         San Diego
                                                                                          (weighted by IRS migration flows to identified MSAs)
                                     San Francisco                                                                                                                                                                                                     San Francisco




     5th - 95th percentile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5th - 95th percentile




                                           San Jose                                                                                                                                                                                                          San Jose
                                              Seattle                                                                                                                                                                                                           Seattle
                                            St. Louis                                                                                                                                                                                                         St. Louis
                             Tampa-St. Petersburg                                                                                                                                                                                              Tampa-St. Petersburg
                                                                                                                                                 Distribution of Correlation in House Price Growth Rates
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Distribution of Correlation in House Price Growth Rates
Figure 3: The distributions of house price growth correlations across housing markets,
                               by probability of moving


       2
       1.5
    density
      1.5
       0




              -.5                0                         .5                   1
                             Correlation in one-year price growth

                              P(move)=0                  P(move)>0
                              P(move)>0.01               P(move)>0.025




                                          40
                           Appendix Table A: Summary Statistics

                Variable                         Mean             Standard Deviation
Own                                              0.654                  0.476
Probability of staying                           0.810                  0.113
SD(real rent growth)                             0.068                  0.028
SQRT(IPUMS MSA × industry-weighted
                                                 0.041                  0.015
average price covariance) – actual
SQRT(IPUMS MSA × industry-weighted
                                                 0.038                  0.011
average price covariance) – imputed
Average annual rent ($2000)                     10,290                  3,738
Average house price ($2000)                     170,235                87,066
Rent growth rate (real)                          0.011                  0.008
Price growth rate (real)                         0.017                 0.013
Age                                               44.0                   11.1
Family income ($2000)                           64,534                 58,857
Fraction married                                  0.64                   0.48
Fraction widowed                                  0.05                   0.21
Fraction divorced                                 0.19                   0.39
Fraction with less than high school ed.           0.16                   0.37
Fraction with high school diploma                 0.28                   0.45
Fraction who attended some college                0.26                   0.44
Fraction with college diploma                     0.30                   0.46
Share of moves that are within-MSA                0.75                   0.04




                                           41
                                   Appendix Table B: First stages of the IV regressions (Table 3)

          Column of Table 3:                     (1)                               (2)                         (3)
                                   P(stay)i ×                            P(stay)i ×                         P(stay)i ×
          Original covariate                       E[cov(PA,PB)]½                      E[cov(PA,PB)]½
                                E[cov(PA,PB)]½                        E[cov(PA,PB)]½                     E[cov(PA,PB)]½
          Constructed               -0.950              0.324            -0.681            0.393             -0.614
          E[cov(PA,PB)]½           (0.0003)            (0.002)           (0.002)          (0.002)            (0.001)
          P(stay)i ×
                                     1.173              0.067             1.217            0.027              1.166
          constructed
                                   (0.0002)            (0.002)           (0.001)          (0.001)            (0.001)
          E[cov(PA,PB)]½
          Adjusted
                                    0.9984             0.9520            0.9558           0.9628             0.9651
          R-squared

          Probability weights                                                                               MSA x
                                       MSA x Occupation                      MSA x Industry
          for E[cov(PA,PB)]:                                                                               Occupation

                                                                                                            MSA x
          Instrument?                  MSA x Occupation                      MSA x Industry
                                                                                                           Occupation
          Clustering of
                                    MSA x year x occupation               MSA x year x industry               none
          standard errors

Notes: N = 3,326,113. Sample period covers the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses. The covariance of house prices is a probability-
weighted average of the covariances between the MSA of residence and possible future MSAs. The dependent variable is the
expected covariance weighted by the actual probability of staying (not moving). The instrument replaces the actual moving rates with
each destination MSA’s share of the industry or occupation group. The probability of staying is imputed using occupation × marital
status × age category cells. The standard deviations and covariance are not time-varying. All regressions include MSA × year
dummies, P(stay), the standard deviation of real rents, age dummies, occupation dummies, marital status dummies, education
dummies, log real family income, the share of moving households who remain in the MSA, and a detailed set of industry dummies.




                                                                 42
                            Appendix Table C: IPUMS Data Construction


                                                      Observations          Observations
                                                        deleted                 left
Starting observations                                                        37,925,632
Exclude age<25                                         14,159,970            23,765,662
Keep only heads of household                           10,670,270            13,095,392
Keep only single-family households                      877,100              12,218,292
Drop if were military households 5 years prior           61,092              12,157,200
Drop if were in college 5 years prior                   192,144              11,965,056

Migration sample:
    Starting observations                                                    11,965,056
    Not asked about prior residence in 1980
                                                       1,626,943             10,338,113
    Census

Regression sample:
    Starting observations                                                    11,965,056
    Cannot match MSA to REIS or HPI data1              6,765,722             5,199,334
    Exclude MSAs with incomplete HPI data2               41,261              5,158,073
    Missing log(family income)                           64,204              5,093,869
    Unable to impute P(stay)                              494                5,093,375
    Missing sd(rent)                                    764,579              4,328,796
  Cannot impute out-of-town moves                        22,830              4,281,924
  Cannot impute expected moves based on
                                                         32,019              4,249,905
occupation or industry shares
  Drop if P(stay)<=0.5                                   21,292              4,228,613
    Final sample:                                                            4,228,613
    Sample with age<=65:                                                     3,326,113

1
 Reasons for a lack of a match are either that the household did not live in an MSA that was
identified in the IPUMS data or the identified MSA could not be matched to the MSAs contained
both in the REIS and HPI data. 2MSAs with incomplete HPI data are Greenville, SC and New
Haven, CT.



                                                 43
