NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVESTMENTS IN PHARMACEUTICALS BEFORE AND AFTER TRIPS
Margaret Kyle
Anita McGahan
Working Paper 15468
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15468

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2009

Intan Hamdan-Livramento and Walter Park generously shared their data on country-level patent protection.
We also thank Ashish Arora, Joel Baum, Iain Cockburn, Mercedes Delgado, Pierre Dubois, Kira Fabrizio,
Martin Fleming, Rebecca Henderson, Francesco Lissoni, Keith Maskus, Yi Qian, LG Thomas and
Hannu Wager; participants in the Academy of Management, Atlanta Competitive Advantage Conference,
DRUID, Duke Strategy Conference, MIT BPS Conference, Wharton Technology Conference, Markets
for Technology Conference and NBER Summer Institute; and participants in seminars at Bocconi
University, HEC Lausanne, the University of Illinois, the University of St. Andrews and the Stanford
SIEPR Center for comments and discussions. All errors remain our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Margaret Kyle and Anita McGahan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Investments in Pharmaceuticals Before and After TRIPS
Margaret Kyle and Anita McGahan
NBER Working Paper No. 15468
October 2009
JEL No. F13,I11,L65,O34
ABSTRACT
We examine the relationship between patent protection for pharmaceuticals and investment in development
of new drugs. Patent protection has increased around the world as a consequence of the TRIPS Agreement,
which specifies minimum levels of intellectual property protection for members of the World Trade
Organization. It is generally argued that patents are critical for pharmaceutical research efforts, and
so greater patent protection in developing and least-developed countries might result in greater effort
by pharmaceutical firms to develop drugs that are especially needed in those countries. Since patents
also have the potential to reduce access to treatments through higher prices, it is imperative to assess
whether the benefits of increased incentives have materialized in research on diseases that particularly
affect the poor. We find that patent protection is associated with increases in research and development
(R&D) effort when adopted in high income countries. However, the introduction of patents in developing
countries has not been followed by greater investment. Particularly for diseases that primarily affect
the poorest countries, our results suggest that alternative mechanisms for inducing R&D may be more
appropriate than patents.

Margaret Kyle
Toulouse School of Economics
21 allèe de Brienne
31000 Toulouse
France
margaret.kyle@tse-fr.eu
Anita McGahan
University of Toronto
105 St George
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
Canada
amcgahan@rotman.utoronto.ca

2

I.

Introduction
Intellectual property (IP) protection has expanded to most countries over recent decades, driven by

the establishment of the World Trade Organization (WTO). Countries can attain membership in the WTO
only by adopting minimum levels of copyright, trademark and patent protection as specified by the WTO’s
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, known as the TRIPS Agreement. In
general, IP protection involves a tradeoff between dynamic efficiency (associated with incentives for
innovation) and static efficiency (tied to access to innovation). The extension of patents on pharmaceuticals
has been especially controversial for developing and least-developed countries, where access to treatments is
already limited. We examine the effect of increased global IP rights on incentives for innovation, and in
particular on the development of treatments for diseases that are most prevalent in relatively poor countries.
The 1994 TRIPS Agreement requires WTO members to introduce and enforce IP protection.
Developing countries have resisted granting patents on pharmaceuticals due to concerns about short run
costs: because patents eliminate generic competition for treatments during their terms, patents potentially lead
to higher prices and thus reduced patient access. However, if patents create incentives to develop drugs for
conditions that are prevalent in developing countries, then patents may be tolerable in developing countries
despite the static inefficiency.
This paper tests for these dynamic benefits by examining research and development (R&D) in the
form of clinical trial activity over time at the disease level. As patent protection is extended to countries with a
population affected by a disease, then we should observe more R&D effort expended on that disease if patent
protection is effective in inducing R&D. If, instead, patents are ineffective at inducing R&D on so-called
“neglected” diseases, then no response in R&D effort would occur with the extension of patents to poor
countries. Disease prevalence varies across countries, and countries complied with TRIPS at different times.
We exploit cross-sectional variation over time in the adoption of TRIPS and the potential market size of
diseases to estimate the relationship between R&D effort and patent protection, and to examine whether this
relationship is uniform across diseases and countries.
The results indicate that, in general, R&D effort is positively associated with the sizes of markets in
which patent protection applies. However, the relationship between patent protection and R&D effort varies
by country income level. There is a strong association between pharmaceutical patents and R&D effort for
diseases that are prevalent in high income countries. Poorer countries can benefit from such R&D effort
when they are affected by those same diseases, but the establishment of patent protection in poorer countries
is not linked to greater R&D effort for diseases that have no market in developed countries. In other words,
the introduction of patent protection has not been followed by an increase in R&D on diseases that primarily
affect the world’s poor. Lanjouw & Cockburn (2001) concluded “[i]t is too early to tell…” the effect of TRIPS

3
on “new pills for poor people” (p. 287) in 2001. Using different measures and a longer period of observation,
this study finds that TRIPS had yet to yield those pills as of 2006.
The results suggest that the tradeoff between incentives for innovation (i.e., dynamic efficiency) and
access to treatments (i.e., static efficiency) is quite different for rich countries than for the developing world. It
is important to note that this paper examines only some potential gains from TRIPS for developing and leastdeveloped countries rather than attempting a comprehensive assessment of all benefits and costs of the
policies. We find few gains for poorer countries, however. While important in developed countries, patents do
not appear to increase innovation incentives elsewhere. Alternative mechanisms to induce innovation may be
more appropriate, particularly for neglected diseases.
In the next section, we discuss the TRIPS Agreement and its requirements in more detail. Section III
outlines the theoretical underpinnings to our empirical approach, which we describe in Section IV. We explain
our data sources and measures in Section V and present results in Section VI. Section VII concludes.
II.

The TRIPS Agreement
The WTO, including the TRIPS Agreement, was established in 1994 during the Uruguay Round of

the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. Countries could not join the WTO without adopting TRIPS,
which established minimum levels of copyright, trademark, industrial design, trade secret, and patent
protection, and thus affected firms in a range of industries. The rationale was that all WTO members should
offer similar intellectual-property protection to facilitate trade. By adopting and enforcing laws that protect
intellectual property, member countries would cultivate and promote commerce. Intellectual property rights
would integrate developing and least-developed countries into the global economy by reducing the risks to
established multinational corporations of operating in these economies, as well as by enabling technology
transfer and by enhancing incentives to sell goods with proprietary intellectual content in these markets.
TRIPS specifies minimum levels of intellectual property protection and enforcement as well as
dispute resolution procedures when a member state is accused of failing to comply with the agreement. The
minimum term of patent protection is now 20 years, and member states must grant patents for both products
and processes in most areas of technology, including pharmaceuticals. Penalties for infringement must be
sufficient to deter violations. The WTO dispute resolution procedures may result in sanctions against a
member state in violation of the agreement.
According to the WTO, TRIPS “attempts to strike a balance between the long term social objective
of providing incentives for future inventions and creation, and the short term objective of allowing people to
use existing inventions and creations….Intellectual property protection encourages inventors and creators
because they can expect to earn some future benefits from their creativity. This encourages new inventions,

4
such as new drugs, whose development costs can sometimes be extremely high, so private rights also bring
social benefits” (WTO Fact Sheet 2006).
Since discussions over TRIPS began, the Agreement has been controversial. The major controversy is
over whether the right balance was struck, particularly in the case of patent protection for pharmaceuticals.
Proponents of the TRIPS policy noted that the prospect of higher profitability resulting from IP protection
would induce additional research on neglected diseases, or those that primarily affect poorer countries. Others
noted that patents could allow firms to increase prices and reduce access to treatments and pointed in
particular to the case of HIV treatments (Westerhaus and Castro 2006, Cohen 2006, Outterson 2009).1 The
original agreement included a number of exceptions for poorer countries, and TRIPS has been revised several
times in response to concerns about the effects of patents in developing and least-developed countries. In
addition to formal revisions, the interpretation of TRIPS, compliance and enforcement have changed over
time and affected how TRIPS is implemented in practice (Correa 2001).2
Because compliance with TRIPS constituted a major change in IP rights in many countries, TRIPS
provides specific deadlines for compliance that vary according to the income level or development status of a
member state. According to the WTO:
“When the WTO agreements took effect on 1 January 1995, developed countries were given one year
to ensure that their laws and practices conform with the TRIPS agreement. Developing countries and
(under certain conditions) transition economies were given five years, until 2000. Least-developed
countries have 11 years, until 2006 — now extended to 2016 for pharmaceutical patents.
“If a developing country did not provide product patent protection in a particular area of technology
when the TRIPS Agreement came into force (1 January 1995), it had up to 10 years to introduce the
protection. But for pharmaceutical and agricultural chemical products, the country had to accept the
filing of patent applications from the beginning of the transitional period, though the patent did not
need to be granted until the end of this period. If the government allowed the relevant pharmaceutical
or agricultural chemical to be marketed during the transition period, it had to — subject to certain
conditions — provide an exclusive marketing right for the product for five years, or until a product
patent was granted, whichever was shorter.”
(http://www.wto.org/english/theWTO_e/whatis_e/tif_e/agrm7_e.htm)

1

Many other papers discuss aspects of this controversy. Among many others, these include Cohen and Illingworth
(2003), Kohler (2007), Li (2008), Taubman (2008), Chaudhuri et al (2006) and Lanjouw (2003).
2
For example, Brazil now requires issuance of a compulsory license prior to parallel importing (Oliveira et al (2004)).

5
The WTO uses the United Nations’ definition of least-developed countries for the purpose of establishing
compliance deadlines. All other WTO members identified themselves as either developing or developed upon
applying for WTO membership. New members joining after 1995 were generally required to implement
TRIPS immediately as part of their ascension agreements with the WTO, and could not use a transition
period. Appendix B provides a list of WTO members and their compliance dates. Figure 1 shows how TRIPS
compliance changed over time across countries with different income levels (as defined by the World Bank
for 1995).
In addition to different deadlines for countries of lower income levels, TRIPS included other
exemptions that had the effect of weakening patent protection for pharmaceutical products in some
situations. The “Bolar provision” allows a patented invention to be used in the process of conducting research
on new drugs as well as in obtaining marketing approval for generic drugs prior to patent expiration. This
provision has been invoked in the United States, Canada, Europe, India, and recently, China, as well as in
other countries. Another exemption, granted under the Doha Declaration in 2002, allows countries that meet
certain criteria to issue a compulsory license as long as the licensed products are manufactured for domestic
use only (i.e., not for export), and with “reasonable” compensation to the patent holder.3 Interpreting the
Doha policy has proven challenging, however, because TRIPS and subsequent revisions specify neither what
constitutes a national health emergency nor how a reasonable payment should be calculated. Compulsory
licenses have so far been rare and mainly issued on drugs for treating HIV (in Thailand, Brazil, Malaysia,
Indonesia, South Africa, Zambia and Mozambique among others) despite the health costs associated with the
HIV epidemic in other countries of sub-Saharan Africa. Nonetheless, the threat of compulsory licenses may
be an important influence on pharmaceutical distribution in these countries. Where compulsory licenses have
been issued, they too have been controversial, particularly in the case of Brazil and Thailand. For example, in
response to Thailand’s decision to issue a compulsory license on a hypertension drug as well as an HIV
treatment, Abbott Laboratories (whose patent on the HIV treatment Kaletra was at issue) announced that it
would no longer supply Thailand with any products. The US Trade Representative then put Thailand on its
Priority Watch List and the WHO cautioned Thailand to improve its relationship with pharmaceutical firms.
The discussion over compulsory licenses highlighted that such orders may have little effect on national health
in less wealthy countries when complementary institutions such as clinics and pharmacies for administering
pharmaceuticals are absent. Furthermore, the compulsion to issue a license is meaningless in the absence of
local manufacturers to which the license could be assigned (Westerhaus and Castro 2006). This last concern
was addressed in 2003, when the WTO agreed on exceptions to rules that restricted trade in compulsory
licensed products. After 2003, member states that declared a national health emergency and ordered a

3 See “Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health,” available at
http://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/minist_e/min01_e/mindecl_trips_e.htm

6
compulsory license could import those products from generic manufacturers located elsewhere if they lacked
domestic manufacturing capacity.
III.

Theoretical development
We assume that pharmaceutical firms seek to maximize profits, and form expectations about the

profit that may be eventually obtained if the R&D leads to a successfully commercialized product when they
make R&D investments. We focus on three factors that influence expected profits: intellectual property
protection, the size of potential markets, and wealth in potential markets. IP protection and wealth are related
to the price a firm expects to charge, and potential market size is related to the quantity a firm expects to sell.
The role of patent protection
The development of new pharmaceuticals is an expensive and lengthy process. DiMasi et al. (2004)
estimated that developing a new drug during the 1990s cost about $400-500 million, and the time required
from project inception to the commercial introduction of a new drug is 4-10 years. Though there is debate
over the proper way to account for the required investment (DiMasi et al. 2005), there is no dispute that the
fixed costs of drug development are very large relative to the marginal costs of production, and that there is a
high failure rate of development projects. In contrast, the cost of imitating a pharmaceutical innovation tends
to be relatively small (Grabowski 2002). IP protection, particularly in the form of patents, provides a means
for innovators to earn a return on their investments in R&D by granting a legal monopoly that normally
allows firms to charge higher prices than possible when facing competition.
While not the only mechanism for inducing innovation, patents are considered of particular
importance in the pharmaceutical sector relative to other industries (Cohen et al 2000) because of the high
fixed cost of drug development. As pharmaceutical researchers allocate resources between research projects,
they consider the tradeoffs associated with the potential for return in the global market. It is challenging to
isolate the effect of a single country’s change in patent protection on R&D investments because decisions to
invest in R&D on a particular condition are usually influenced by global conditions. As a result, direct tests of
the link between patent protection and R&D investment in pharmaceuticals are rare. Sakakibara and
Branstetter (2001) found little change in R&D attributable to a change in Japanese patent law in 1988. Qian
(2007) studied pharmaceutical patent changes in a cross-section of (mostly developed) countries between 1978
and 2002 and concluded that domestic R&D did not increase due to a strengthening of patent protection
alone. Rather, the effect of patent protection was moderated by a country’s level of economic development.
However, Lichtenberg and Waldfogel (2003) found that the 1983 Orphan Drug Act in the United States,
which increased the period of patent protection for drugs to treat rare conditions, stimulated the development

7
of drugs for such diseases. We complement these studies by offering additional evidence on the response in
global pharmaceutical R&D to the extension of patent protection to a large set of countries under TRIPS.
The role of market size
Economic theory predicts that profit-maximizing firms seek to amortize fixed costs over the sale of
many units. Given the fixed R&D costs of developing a new drug, larger potential markets will tend to be
more attractive, all else equal. There is ample empirical evidence of the relationship between market size and
drug development. Ward and Dranove (1995) associated a 10 percent increase in demand for care in a
therapeutic area with a 5-8 percent increase in R&D spending. The Lichtenberg and Waldfogel (2003) paper
mentioned previously linked market size to R&D investment; indeed, this link – and the absence of
investment in treatments for rare conditions – was the basis for the Orphan Drug Act in the US. Finkelstein
(2004) examined the response of pharmaceutical firms to the implementation of US federal policies that
required childhood vaccination against six diseases. This paper found that research firms responded to the
dramatic increase in expected demand by doubling the number of drugs in clinical trials. Acemoglu and Linn
(2004) studied the relationship between market size and drug launches in the US, finding an increase of 1% in
market size leads to a 4% increase in the number of new drugs introduced. Thus, the projected size of the
market is an important factor in decisions to invest in pharmaceutical R&D.
The role of income
Economic theory predicts that the profit-maximizing markup (Lerner index) of a price-discriminating
monopolist is the inverse of the demand elasticity in a market. Typically, the greater the percentage of income
required to purchase a good, the more elastic the demand. Consumers of pharmaceuticals in developed
countries are likely to have lower demand elasticity than those in poorer countries in part because of their
higher incomes and in part because patients in poorer countries may pay out-of-pocket instead of through
insurance. Given that the marginal costs of drug production may not vary extensively by country, the
difference in elasticity implies that, all else equal, pharmaceutical firms distributing patent-protected therapies
should charge higher prices per patient in developed countries than in developing countries. With such
pricing, the share of a pharmaceutical firm’s profits from developed countries may be much higher than from
developing countries, even before accounting for differences in the number of patients eligible for treatment.
This is consistent with the fact that members of the trade association PhRMA derive more than 80% of their
revenues from sales in the US, Canada, Europe and Japan.
For diseases that affect patients in countries of all income levels, the higher mark-ups that are optimal
in developed countries may enable firms to recoup R&D investments, and thus allow firms to sell in the rest

8
of the world at prices greater than only marginal costs.4 Extending patent protection to more countries can
increase expected profits. The higher the income level of the country adopting stronger patents, the greater
the increase in expected profit and thus the greater the incentive to invest in R&D.5
In the case of treatments for diseases that afflict relatively few patients in developed countries, namely
the “neglected” diseases, a firm must recoup its R&D investment solely through sales to developing and leastdeveloped countries. In many countries, the best viable price may be close to (or even below) marginal cost,
even for a firm with patent protection and monopoly pricing power; if so, then firms cannot recoup their
R&D investments. As noted in other work (e.g., Kremer 2002, Danzon and Towse 2003), patent protection
may therefore not be sufficient to induce R&D investment in the case of treatments with a limited market in
developed countries. For this reason, Kremer has proposed the use of alternative incentive mechanisms such
as advance market commitments (AMCs).
To summarize, we expect R&D investments in pharmaceuticals to depend on the strength of patent
protection, the expected size of the total potential market for a treatment, and the income level in the
countries for which the drug is intended. TRIPS had the effect of changing the strength of patent protection
in countries with different disease patterns and with different income levels. R&D investment should increase
with the degree of patent protection for diseases whose market is global, and more so for relatively wealthy
countries. However, patent protection may not affect incentives for R&D investment in diseases with markets
in only poor countries where patients cannot afford to pay a significant markup over marginal cost. In the
following section, we specify an empirical test for these hypotheses.
IV. Empirical methods
Our empirical strategy is to examine R&D efforts at the disease level, exploiting changes in both
patent protection and disease patterns that varied over time and across countries. We are particularly
interested in the effect of patent protection on R&D efforts for neglected diseases and its interaction with the
income level of countries that strengthen their patent laws. We start with a basic model relating R&D effort
and potential market size, and subsequently decompose potential market size by disease type, patent
protection and income levels. Descriptions of our measures of each are in the next section.
The unit of analysis throughout is a disease-year. We begin by estimating the relationship between
yearly R&D investment in a disease area and the total potential market size of the disease. That is,
4

In practice, there is mixed evidence that pharmaceutical firms charge substantially lower prices in developing countries
(see Maskus (2001)). There are many possible explanations for this, which this paper does not address. However,
differences in prices are an important element of the TRIPS debate because of concerns that high prices in developing
countries are the result of patent protection.
5 Other policies may, of course, also play a role. The use of price controls may constrain pricing and reduce expected
profits, even for high-income countries. Stringent regulatory requirements for launching a drug may contribute to
country-specific fixed costs.

9
Ydt = α 0 + α 1M dt + ΑX dt + εdt

(1)

where Ydt is a measure of R&D effort in disease d in year t, Mdt is a measure of potential market size disease d
in year t, and X is a vector of controls, such as measures of the availability of substitute products and year
fixed effects. We expect a positive coefficient on Mdt, i.e. that α1 > 0.
Next, we decompose potential market size by disease type to explore whether R&D effort responded
differently to global diseases than to neglected diseases (precise definitions of global and neglected diseases are
provided in the following subsection). We estimate the following equation:

Ydt = β0 +β1Mdt * Global+β 2 Mdt * Neglected+ΒXdt +εdt

(2)

where Global = 1 if disease d is a global disease, Neglected = 1 if disease d is a neglected disease and other
variables are defined as above. While global diseases clearly have a higher level of R&D effort, β1 and β2
reflect the change in R&D associated with a change in potential market size. Subsequent specifications
investigate the source of the difference between β1 and β2, if any.
One such source may be that neglected diseases primarily affect countries that historically lacked
patent protection. If this is the main driver of the difference in R&D effort, then we should observe no
difference between R&D effort for neglected and global diseases with patent-protected markets. In addition,
R&D effort for neglected diseases should increase more for expanded patent-protected markets than for
markets without IP. The TRIPS policy “experiment” allows us to examine this by estimating:

Ydt = γ 0 + γ1Mdt * Global * IPt + γ 2 Mdt * Global* NoIPt
+γ 3 Mdt * Neglected* IPt + γ 4 Mdt * Neglected* NoIPt + ΒXdt + εdt

(3)

Mdt*Global*IPt is the total potential market size of disease d in year t across all countries with IP, where
disease d is a global disease; Mdt*Global*NoIPt is the total potential market size of a global disease d in year t
across all countries without IP; and so on. The difference between γ3 and γ4 reflects how effective TRIPS has
been at inducing R&D for neglected diseases.
Patent protection may not induce R&D on either global or neglected diseases in less wealthy
countries if the ability of patients to pay is extremely low. Our final specification evaluates the impact of
patent protection across both disease types and the level of income of countries affected by a particular
disease:

10
Ydt = η0 + η1Mdt * Global* IPt * High+ η 2 Mdt * Global* NoIPt * High
+η3 Mdt * Global* IPt * UpperMiddle+ η4 Mdt * Global* NoIPt * UpperMiddle
+η5 Mdt * Global* IPt * LowerMiddle+ η6 Mdt * Global* NoIPt * LowerMiddle
+η7 Mdt * Global* IPt * Low + η8 Mdt * Global* NoIPt * Low
+η9 Mdt * Neglected* IPt * High+ η10 Mdt * Neglected* NoIPt * High
(4)
+η11Mdt * Neglected* IPt * UpperMiddle+ η12 Mdt * Neglected* NoIPt * UpperMiddle
+η13 Mdt * Neglected* IPt * LowerMiddle+ η14 Mdt * Neglected* NoIPt * LowerMiddle
+η15 Mdt * Neglected* IPt * Low + η16 Mdt * Neglected* NoIPt * Low
+ΝXdt + εdt
Mdt*Global*IPt*High is the total potential market size of global disease d in year t across high income
countries with IP. Mdt*Global*NoIPt*High is the total potential market size of global disease d in year t across
high income countries without IP. Similarly, Mdt*Neglected*IPt*UpperMiddle is the total potential market size
of neglected disease d in year t across upper middle income countries with IP, etc. We expect that patent
protection has a smaller effect on profits in poorer countries than in rich countries and therefore a smaller
effect on R&D incentives, so that η1 > η3 > η5 > η7 and η9 > η11 > η13 > η15. A market for a global disease
may exist in relatively rich countries, and thus there may be a positive effect of patent protection in poorer
countries on profits and R&D effort on global diseases, implying that η5 > η6 and η7 > η9. For neglected
diseases, however, we expect η13 = η14 = 0 and η15 = η16 = 0: patent protection in countries where patients
have very low ability to pay does not affect profits or induce R&D effort.
A concern is that patent protection is an endogenous policy choice. Historically, countries have
adopted IP protection in response to demands from domestic innovators, or after achieving a rather high level
of development (Qian 2007). We argue that in the case of TRIPS, developing and least-developed countries
were clearly resistant to adopting or strengthening IP protection and did so only because they expected large
benefits of membership in the WTO. Another recent paper examining the TRIPS agreement concluded “the
Agreement's implementation is an external factor, not entirely influenced by the country's level of economic
development…[Changes in IP due to TRIPS] can be used as a natural experiment to understand how IPR
influences economic activities and behaviors” (Hamdan-Livramento 2009). However, if resistant countries
also adopted policies aimed at undermining patent protection or pricing power (such as widespread use of
compulsory licensing or stringent price controls) or failed to enforce patent laws, our results may understate
the effect of IP protection on R&D efforts. We interpret our results in light of this possibility.
V. Data and measures
The analysis depends on information about R&D efforts over time and by disease, measures of
potential market size (assessed as disease prevalence) over time and across countries, and country-level factors

11
such as IP law and income level. Sources and the construction of variables are described below. Table 1
provides summary statistics. Our final dataset spans 17 years (1990-2006).
R&D effort
Our measure of R&D effort is the number of new clinical trials initiated by the industry in a year for a
specific disease. These trials constitute the majority of R&D expenditures in the industry. Ideally, our measure
of R&D effort would be research expenditures by disease and by year. Unfortunately, publicly traded firms
generally do not report R&D spending by disease and, furthermore, many pharmaceutical firms are not
publicly traded and do not disclose any financial information about their spending on R&D. Despite the
limitations, we believe that the information we employ about the number of clinical trials is among the most
comprehensive available on early-stage R&D projects by disease and by year. Our source is the R&D Focus
database managed by IMS. Typically used by pharmaceutical firms to monitor the research activities of
competitors, R&D Focus provides a history of all projects known to be in development from the mid-1980s
through the present. This includes projects that failed in clinical trials, those that were successfully launched,
and those that continue in development. Each record is a pharmaceutical project and may be associated with
multiple indications and multiple firms. The history of the project’s progression through each stage of
development is compiled by IMS from patent and regulatory filings, presentations at medical conferences,
press releases, and information disclosed to financial analysts.
To capture early R&D efforts, we focus on the first stage of human clinical testing, i.e. Phase I trials.6
Because our dependent variable Ydt is a count of new Phase I trials in disease d in year t, we estimate
regressions as negative binomials. We trim the dependent variable to 75 (less than 1% of our observations
have a value above this). The information in the IMS database also allows us to construct a count of existing
treatments for each disease in 1990, which we use as a control for competition.
Disease prevalence and type
We proxy for “potential market size,” or disease-level demand, using the number of people dying
from a disease by country and year. The WHO publishes the number of deaths attributed to a disease as
recorded by national civil registration systems on an annual basis. A better measure would account for how a
disease affects quality of life. One such measure is the disability-adjusted life year (DALY), though this has
been controversial because it incorporates subjective judgments about disease severity.7 DALYs are available
from the WHO for only a single cross-section, so using this measure would ignore changes over time in

6

We have also performed the same analysis on later stages of clinical development and obtained similar results.
Earlier versions of this paper used this single cross-section of DALYs to measure market size. While results presented
here are largely consistent with our previous findings, we decided the advantages of the time variation provided in the
mortality data outweighed those of DALYs.
7

12
disease prevalence or severity. In our regressions, we define potential market size as the log of the sum of all
deaths from disease d across all countries (or subset of countries, depending on the specification) in year t.
We faced two main challenges in using the WHO Mortality Data. First, the coverage of the dataset is
not comprehensive. For example, all data might be missing for a particular country in a particular year or even
in several years; coverage of China is not complete, and there is no information on some least-developed
countries such as Afghanistan, Malawi and Madagascar. To the extent possible, we used multiple imputation
techniques to deal with the missing values and correct standard errors. However, we are likely to
underestimate deaths in the poorest countries. Countries may also use different practices in coding deaths.
Another challenge involved matching disease definitions from the WHO with those in the R&D Focus
database. The WHO uses the International Classification of Diseases (ICD) codes, while R&D Focus
provides indications and therapeutic classifications for each drug development project. For each indication in
the R&D Focus database, we identified a likely ICD code using medical dictionaries. The most detailed ICD
codes in the WHO Mortality Data were not available for a sufficient number of countries or years and were
often too specific to match to R&D Focus indications. We use instead a condensed list of 84 categories of
diseases or conditions that covers everything in the WHO mortality data except “external causes” that are not
typically addressed with pharmaceutical therapies, such as car accidents, falls, and intentional self-harm. These
diseases are listed in Appendix A.8
We categorize a disease as “neglected” using Table 1 of Moran et al. (2009). Moran et al. (2009) used
a three-step filter to identify neglected diseases: first, the disease must disproportionately affect developing
countries; second, new treatments are needed; and finally, no commercial market is thought to exist. These
conditions are also those for which more than 90% of diagnosed deaths occur in developing or leastdeveloped countries over the period of our study, and include HIV, tuberculosis, malaria, river blindness and
leprosy. Even developed countries experience some incidence of some neglected diseases, but at much lower
rates than poorer countries. The list of neglected diseases generated by this categorization includes all the
neglected tropical diseases identified by the WHO as well as those considered by Lanjouw and Cockburn
(2001).
Global diseases affect countries of all income levels, and include cardiovascular conditions,
neurological disorders, and cancer. Questions arise about whether HIV is a global or neglected disease. Moran
et al. (2009) and the WHO consider HIV a neglected disease, although HIV affects large numbers of people in
developed countries as well. While many treatments for HIV now exist, not all are well-suited for use in
developing countries or, in particular, for children (who constitute a much larger fraction of HIV patients
8

The WHO relies on reports of cause of death from each country. Countries report cause of death using either ICD9 or
ICD10 codes during our sample period. However, the WHO cautions that due to differences in reporting across
countries, it may not be appropriate to make inter-country comparisons. The WHO also provides data that has been
corrected for use in such comparisons (the Global Burden of Disease data), but this is available for a single cross section
only. Our results are robust to using this data.

13
outside developed countries than in developed countries). HIV qualifies as a “neglected” disease if there are
insufficient incentives to develop appropriate treatments for developing countries, which now report a greater
need for 3rd and 4th line therapies. In our main analysis, we consider HIV as a neglected disease, but in
robustness checks, we run analyses that first classify HIV as a global disease and then drop HIV from the
data. Overall, our results are robust to the alternative classification of HIV as a global disease.
IP measures and other country information
The WTO established a timetable for compliance with TRIPS. We use these rules, described in
Section II, to estimate the dates of compliance for every country. Original WTO members that self-identified
as “developed” are considered compliant in 1995. For self-identified developing countries that were WTO
members in 1995, we code the year of compliance as 2000. WTO member countries identified as “leastdeveloped” according to the United Nations were required to comply by January 1, 2005, with the deadline
extended until January 1, 2006 and even further during the Doha round to 2016. Thus, for least-developed
countries, we assume that compliance will occur only in 2016. For all other countries that joined after 1995,
we code compliance as the date of membership unless we found different information about the compliance
date on the WTO website.9
Measuring TRIPS compliance using the WTO rules has several drawbacks. First among them is that,
while a country may claim to comply with TRIPS, its enforcement of patent and other IP protections may be
in doubt. We check for robustness using two alternative measures of patent protection and enforcement.
Walter Park kindly shared his updated index of IP protection and enforcement compliance, which he has used
in a number of published analyses (see, e.g., Ginarte and Park 1997). This measure is more nuanced than our
TRIPS dummy variable, but it is not available for 40 countries in our dataset and is available only at 5 year
intervals. The Ginarte-Park index has separate elements for chemical patents and for enforcement; we use
both the existence of chemical patents and strong enforcement to create a dummy variable indicating whether
a country has chemical/pharmaceutical patent protection and enforces patent laws.10 For developed countries
that joined the WTO in 1995 and for which the Ginarte-Park index indicated the presence and enforcement
of pharmaceutical patents in 1990, we adjusted our TRIPS dummy variable to indicate compliance as of 1990.
This avoids characterizing the membership of the United States in the WTO as requiring a major shift in IP
law. Recent work by Hamdan-Livramento (2009) investigates in much greater detail the state of patent law
and enforcement in 53 developing countries, and the author generously shared his index of TRIPS compliance
with us. This analysis was especially relevant because the investigated developing countries encompassed the
majority for which IP laws changed after TRIPS. We use the components of the index related to

9 The WTO lists a few countries that joined after 1995 with transition periods that expired in 1999. See
http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/tripfq_e.htm
10 The results are robust to the use of other elements of the Ginarte-Park index.

14
pharmaceutical patents and enforcement, where available. For countries not covered by the HamdanLivramento index, we use our initial measure of TRIPS compliance.
There are a number of differences across these three measures of IP laws and enforcement. Appendix
B contains the list of countries used in our analysis, the year of compliance required by the WTO, the first
year of both pharmaceutical patents and enforcement according to the Ginarte-Park index and the first year of
both pharmaceutical patents and enforcement according to the Hamdan-Livramento index.11 A limitation on
all the measures of IP compliance is that they do not capture expectations that firms may have about the state
of future patent protection in a country. Since drug development is a lengthy process, firms may make
investment decisions based on whether they believe a country will afford intellectual property protection some
years in the future, providing a measure of time for the R&D to yield a commercialized product. In other
words, an influential factor in decisions about R&D may be a country’s intention to adopt patent protection as
a condition of WTO membership rather than the precise timing of compliance. Even in these situations, the
compliance date is likely to be critical both because of the resolution of uncertainty about intentions to
implement IP mechanisms and because, after the date of compliance, firms have remedy for IP violations via
the WTO dispute resolution process.
Another important factor influencing R&D decisions for which we cannot account relates to the
forecasted possibility of compulsory licensing. Firms may be reluctant to invest in R&D for diseases that are
likely to be the subject of compulsory licensing. While few such licenses were issued during our sample period
(which ends in 2006), our failure to account for these expectations would lead us to underestimate the impact
of “true” patent protection. However, even if these expectations had shaped R&D decisions, our models
would accurately reflect the overall effect of TRIPS given its various exemptions.
We use the World Bank’s World Development Indicators dataset for information on country income
levels. The World Bank categorizes countries as high income, upper middle income, lower middle income and
low income. We report the 1995 income level for each country listed in Appendix B. Because the unit of
analysis is the disease-year rather than the country, we are limited in our ability to control for many additional
geographic factors that might influence pricing and volumes. Among the omitted variables that concern us are
the location of potential patients within each country and the presence or absence of complementary
institutions such as hospitals, clinics and pharmacies. Unfortunately, even the country information is
incomplete for large numbers of countries, and especially for developing and least-developed countries.
Because we are interested in these countries, we use a very parsimonious set of controls.

We researched the history of disputes for each WTO member and explored other sources of data on IP laws and
enforcement such as the US Trade Representative’s Watch List and Priority Watch List. We did not incorporate the ad
hoc information we obtained about compliance and enforcement because the Watch List is available only after 2000 and
the set of countries included is skewed towards those engaged in significant trade with the US (Canada and Italy, for
example, appear on the Watch List in some years).
11

15
The models include a series of year dummy variables to account for broad changes in the health
environment over time. Note that not all low income countries are least-developed countries as defined by the
United Nations, and therefore some introduced patent protection during our sample period (see Appendix B).
VI.

Results
Our baseline results from estimating equations 1-4 are presented in Table 2, with robustness checks

in Tables 3-5 and a summary of the robustness checks in Table 6. The dependent variable in all specifications
is the number of drug development projects for disease d entering Phase I clinical trials in year t. The
regressions are estimated as negative binomials (Poisson models were rejected due to overdispersion). All
specifications include year fixed effects and a control for the number of treatments available for disease d in
1990. Standard errors, which are in parentheses below the coefficients, are clustered by disease and corrected
for use of multiple imputation to deal with missing values for disease data.
For our baseline specifications, we define IPt using WTO rules for TRIPS compliance and categorize
HIV as a neglected disease. Column 1 corresponds to equation 1, column 2 to equation 2, and so on. As
expected, R&D effort is positively associated with overall potential market size (α1 = 0.057 with a standard
error of 0.002). If we separate diseases into global and neglected, the coefficients on both measures of
potential market size are also positive and statistically significant (0.034 and 0.028, respectively). R&D effort in
the aggregate and for both global and neglected diseases is positively related to increases in the number of
potential patients. However, the coefficients on global and neglected disease market sizes are statistically
different from each other.
Our main focus is the source of the difference between the R&D response to global and neglected
diseases. One possibility, which we cannot test directly, is that drug development is more expensive for
neglected diseases than for global diseases, which might mean that the potential market size for a neglected
disease would have to be greater than for a global disease to induce an equivalent amount of R&D effort.
Another possible explanation is that neglected diseases primarily affect countries that have had weak patent
systems historically, which may lead investing organizations to hesitate in committing R&D out of concern
than patents will not be enforced. We address this in column 3, which decomposes market size not only by
disease type but also by prevalence in countries with or without TRIPS-compliant patent systems. The
difference between γ1 and γ2 reflects the relationship between the adoption of IP and R&D efforts for global
diseases, and the difference between γ3 and γ4 does likewise for neglected diseases. For both types of diseases,
there is a strong positive association between TRIPS compliance and R&D effort, with R&D more responsive
to IP-protected market size for global diseases than for neglected diseases. Thus, we find that IP protection is
associated with increased R&D effort for both types of diseases, but there remains a statistically significant

16
difference between the response to IP-protected market size for global diseases and IP-protected neglected
diseases.
In Section III, we noted that patent protection may not lead to greater expected profits in countries
where most patients are unable to pay even the marginal cost of treatment. Our final specification, which
estimates equation 4, separates potential market size by disease type, existence of patent protection and the
income level of those afflicted. By separating countries by income level, the analysis allows for differences in
the relationships between TRIPS compliance and R&D effort based on projections of ability to pay. As
expected, we find the greatest increment to R&D effort associated with increases in potential market size in
high income countries with patent protection. This relationship holds for both global and neglected diseases:
the coefficients η1 and η9 are 0.353 and 0.342, respectively, and both are statistically significant. In high
income countries – where ability to pay is less likely to be blunted by poverty and the absence of
complementary services such as clinics, personnel, etc., -- the adoption of patent protection seems to induce
research on diseases that are prevalent in the population. The relationship does not hold for less wealthy
countries, regardless of patent protection. In other words, R&D effort is not associated with the
implementation of TRIPS in lower income countries. None of the coefficients on potential market size
outside of the high income category are positive or significantly greater than zero. These results suggest that
while patent protection is effective at inducing R&D for diseases prevalent in high income countries, it is not
sufficient for diseases that have no market outside the developing world. The difference between R&D effort
directed at global diseases and neglected diseases is driven mainly by the difference in income of those
affected, rather than a difference in patent protection alone.
We re-ran our analysis to check the robustness of our results across different definitions and
measures. A summary of the tests of coefficients in equation 4 across these many specifications is presented in
Table 6. Tables 3, 4, and 5 report the details of the regressions. In Table 3, we report on regressions that allow
for a lag in the response of R&D to the extension of patent protection. We conduct this test because our
baseline model assumes that firms can respond immediately to the introduction of patent protection by
initiating Phase I trials. If preclinical research is required, the Phase I response may be delayed by several
years. Table 3 contains the results of specifications identical to those in Table 2, except that market size is
lagged by three years to allow for preclinical testing.12 The results are similar to those in the main model.
Although we observe a statistically significant coefficient on IP-protected market size for global diseases in
middle income countries, the coefficients for neglected disease market size remain insignificant.
Table 4 estimates equation 4 using alternative definitions of IPt. Column 1 is our baseline
specification, using WTO rules for TRIPS compliance. Column 2 uses the Ginarte-Park definition, and
Column 3 uses the Hamdan-Livramento definition. While some of the parameter estimates differ across

12

We experimented with different lags and found similar results.

17
specifications (which is expected, since we noted variation across these measures in Section V), the overall
pattern remains. No coefficient on market size is significantly greater than zero outside of the high income
category, though the difference between IP and no IP is positive for the lower middle income group.
We examine the sensitivity of results to the classification of HIV in Table 5. The first column again
contains our baseline results in which HIV is classified as a neglected disease. Column 2 classifies HIV as
global, and Column 3 excludes HIV from the analysis. Once again, we find the same pattern of coefficients
across income types with one important difference. While the coefficients η1 and η2 (market size for the high
income category for global and neglected diseases) are quite similar when HIV is defined as neglected, there is
a wide gap between them in columns 2 and 3. This result arises from the fact that HIV is the most prevalent
“neglected disease” in rich countries, which means that and significant R&D, both public and private, has
been invested to address it. Unfortunately, available measures of R&D effort are not sufficiently nuanced to
capture differences across projects in dosage formulations or combinations best suited to developing or leastdeveloped countries (such as pediatric and heat-stable presentations), and thus we cannot test formally for
differences in R&D investments for HIV targeted at higher and lower income countries.
Although we have reported many robustness checks in this paper, it is important to qualify our
findings in several ways. One concern is the potential endogeneity of IP protection and enforcement. It may
be that countries only adopt and enforce patent laws when they have achieved a minimum level of income and
development. In practice, developing and least-developed countries have often attempted to delay and weaken
the requirements of TRIPS, and ultimately implemented the policy to achieve other benefits from WTO
membership. We find only weak evidence that IP rights have an impact in developing and least-developed
countries, but this may reflect an unwillingness to enforce these rights and understate the real effect of strong,
enforceable patents.
More generally, expectations about future policies related to profitability and IP rights, which are not
observed, are important to incentives. Price controls are an example of a policy (widespread in developed
countries) that could dampen profits even in the presence of patents. The use of compulsory licensing is
another, and this is not restricted to developing and least-developed countries. For example, the Canadian
government once extensively issued compulsory licenses (although prior to TRIPS). Even in the US, in 2001
the government considered compulsory licenses for Cipro, a treatment for anthrax, and in 2005 on Tamiflu, a
treatment for avian influenza.13 If governments are expected to issue compulsory licenses for some drugs,
R&D investment choices may reflect these expectations. As noted previously, few compulsory licenses were
issued during our sample period. However, the option of compulsory licenses is an important aspect of how
TRIPS compliance affects R&D incentives, and the use of price regulation is not addressed by TRIPS at all.

13

“Pressure Rises on Producer of a Flu Drug,” New York Times, October 11, 2005.

18
Thus, while we may underestimate the impact of “true” patent protection, our results should still accurately
reflect the impact of TRIPS in particular.
Another concern is that our data source may not reflect all research activities. For example, IMS may
focus on the activities of firms more intensively than on the activities of universities, foundations, and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in assembling its R&D Focus data. If this bias in coverage exists, we
would underestimate the number of projects underway. If universities and other nonprofits are more likely to
focus on neglected diseases and are sensitive to the IP environment, then we might be biased towards finding
less effort on such diseases. However, this is unlikely to be a major problem for several reasons. First, we
compared the IMS R&D Focus coverage to two competing databases from PJB Publications and Thomson
Scientific. The coverage of IMS included firms located in a larger set of countries than the other two. Second,
about 17% of the organizations covered by IMS R&D Focus are universities, foundations, or other non-profit
organizations. Third, the controversy over TRIPS and increased attention to the burden of disease in the
developing world – through the Gates Foundation or the Clinton Health Initiative, for example – may have
made all types of organizations more likely to “advertise” and disclose their R&D activities directed at
neglected diseases, which may cause an upward bias in our estimate of the impact of patent protection. It
should be noted that increased funding from these NGOs and others may also have stimulated additional
R&D for neglected diseases, but this should be unrelated to the presence of patent protection (many NGOs
oppose patent protection, in fact).
The WHO Mortality Data is a compilation of information provided by each member country, which
may vary in quality. In particular, the prevalence of HIV appears to be understated in many developing and
least-developed countries.14 Omitting HIV from our sample does not change the qualitative results, however.
In addition, an earlier version of this paper yielded similar findings based on the WHO’s Global Burden of
Disease dataset. Ultimately, we used the WHO Mortality Data because it includes time-series variation as well
as more specific disease categories. Our results using the Global Burden of Disease dataset are consistent with
those presented here from the Mortality Data.
VII.

Conclusion
This paper examines how R&D investment in pharmaceuticals has changed with the adoption of the

TRIPS Agreement. Particularly in the case of patents for pharmaceutical treatments, TRIPS involves a
tradeoff between dynamic efficiency, i.e. incentives for R&D investment, and static inefficiency, i.e. access to
drugs. An important issue for developing and least-developed countries is whether the introduction of patent
protection for drugs has led to an increase in R&D effort to treat diseases that are especially prevalent there.

14

An AIDS-related death may be coded as a death from pneumonia, for example.

19
We conclude that patent protection in developing and least-developed countries does not appear to
have created incentives for investment in new treatments for diseases that primarily affect poorer countries.
R&D on neglected diseases is not associated with increases in the potential market size in low-income
countries, whether or not those markets provided patent protection. This is not to claim that patents are
irrelevant: patent protection is associated with greater R&D investment in diseases that affect high income
countries, and the treatments developed as a result may benefit people in poorer countries too. The existence
of a market in rich countries allows firms to recover their R&D investments. Consequently, global diseases –
those present in countries of all income levels – attract research effort. However, patent protection is not
sufficient to induce R&D for diseases that have no significant potential market in high-income countries. If
those affected, or their governments, lack the ability to pay prices much higher than the marginal cost of
producing treatments, firms are unable to recoup the fixed costs of R&D regardless of the level of patent
protection.
Our study focuses on only one possible effect of the introduction of IP rights. Importantly, we do
not tackle the issue of whether access to treatments in developing countries decreased, or how investments in
health-delivery systems in developing countries may have changed in response to TRIPS implementation.
Other possible effects include an increase in technology transfer to developing countries and greater
incentives for domestic R&D activity. WTO membership, possible only with the adoption of TRIPS, may
have provided other benefits to developing countries that we do not consider here.
The results of this research suggest that alternative mechanisms for inducing R&D effort on
neglected diseases may be more effective than the extension of patent protection alone. Recently, such
mechanisms have received increased attention from policy makers and other organizations. For example, the
first advance market commitment for a pneumococcal vaccine was established in 2007 by GAVI. The US
introduced a system of priority review vouchers targeted at neglected diseases in 2007. In 2008, UNITAID
proposed the use of a patent pool for pediatric HIV treatments. We hope that such efforts will soon yield new
treatments for diseases that principally affect patients in less wealthy countries.

20
References
Acemoglu, D. and J. Linn (2004), “Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence from the Pharmaceutical
Industry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (August), pp. 1049-1090.
Chaudhuri, S., P. Goldberg and P. Jia (2006), “Estimating the Effects of Global Patent Protection in
Pharmaceuticals: A Case Study of Quinilones in India,” American Economic Review 96(5).
Cohen, J.C. and Illingsworth, P. (2003), “The Dilemma of Intellectual Property Rights for Pharmaceuticals:
The Tension Between Insuring Access Of the Poor to Medicines and Committing to International
Agreements,” Developing World Bioethics 3:1 (May), pp. 27-48.
Cohen, J.C. (2006), “Expanding Drug Access in Brazil: Lessons for Latin America and Canada,” Canadian
Journal of Public Health 97:6, pp. I15-18.
Cohen, W., R. Nelson and J. Walsh (2000), “Protecting their Intellectual Assets: Appropriability Conditions
and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or Not),” NBER Working Paper 7552.
Correa, C. (2001), “Review of the TRIPS Agreement: Fostering the Transfer of Technology to Developing
Countries,” Third World Network: Trade and Development Series No. 13.
DiMasi, J., H. Grabowski and J. Vernon (2004), “R&D costs and returns by therapeutic category,” Drug
Information Journal 38(3):211-23.
DiMasi, J., R. Hansen, and H. Grabowski (2005), “Reply: setting the record straight on setting the record
straight: response to the Light and Warburton rejoinder,” Journal of Health Economics 24(5):1049-53
Finkelstein, A. (2004), “Static and Dynamic Effects of Health Policy: Evidence from the Vaccine Industry,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(2): 527-564.
Ginarte, J. and W. Park (1997), "Determinants of Patent Rights: A Cross-National Study," Research Policy 26(3),
pp. 283-301.
Grabowski, H. (2002), “Patents, Innovation and Access to New Pharmaceuticals,” Journal of International
Economic Law 2002 5(4):849-860.
Hamdan-Livramento, I. M. (2009), “How compliant are developing countries with their TRIPS obligations?”
CEMI Working Paper 2009-001.
Kohler, J.C. (2007), “Reflections On Pills and Poverty,” Canadian Pharmacists Journal 140:6 (NovemberDecember), pp. 378-382.
Kremer, M. (2002), “Pharmaceuticals and the Developing World,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 16(4), pp. 6790.
Lanjouw, J. (2003), “Intellectual Property and the Availability of Pharmaceuticals in Poor Countries,”
Innovation Policy and the Economy 3, pp. 91-129.
Lanjouw, J. and I. Cockburn (2001), “New Pills for Poor People? Empirical Evidence After GATT,” World
Development 29:2, pp. 265-89

21
Li, X. (2008), “The Impact of Higher Standards in Patent Protection for Pharmaceutical Industries under the
TRIPS Agreement – A Comparative Study of China and India,” World Economy 31:10 (Oct), p. 1367-1382.
Lichtenberg, F. and J. Waldfogel (2003), “Does Misery Love Company? Evidence from Pharmaceutical
Markets Before and After the Orphan Drug Act,” NBER Working Paper 9750.
Maskus, K. (2001), “Parallel Imports in Pharmaceuticals: Implications for Competition and Prices in
Developing Countries,” report to the World Trade Organization.
Moran M, Guzman J, Ropars A-L, McDonald A, Jameson N, et al. (2009), “Neglected disease research and
development: How much are we really spending?” PLoS Med 6(2): e1000030. doi:10.1371/
journal.pmed.1000030.
Outterson, K. (2009), “Disease Based Limitations On Compulsory Licenses Under Articles 31 and 31BIS,”
Boston University School of Law Working Paper 09-26 (May 20).
Qian, Y. (2007), “Do National Patent Laws Stimulate Domestic Innovation in a Global
Patenting Environment? A Cross-Country Analysis of Pharmaceutical Patent Protection, 1978-2002,” Review of
Economics and Statistics 89: 3
Ward, M. and D. Dranove (1995), "The Vertical Chain of Research and Development in the Pharmaceutical
Industry," Economic Inquiry 33(1), pp. 70-87.
Westerhaus, M. and A. Castro (2006), “How Do Intellectual Property Law and International Trade
Agreements Affect Access to Antiretroviral Therapy?” PLoS Medicine 3:8 (August), pp. 1230-6,
www.plosmedicine.org
World Trade Organization (2006), TRIPS and Pharmaceutical Patents Fact Sheet, available at
http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/tripsfactsheet_pharma_2006_e.pdf.

22
Table 1: Summary statistics
Number of countries
Number of diseases
Number of years

192
84
17
N
Mean StdDev Min Max
Phase I starts (all)
1428 8.086
17.704
0
229
Phase I starts (trimmed)
1428 7.386
12.479
0
75
Ln(Total Ln(Deaths) (1000s))
1428 10.296
2.486 3.022 14.910
Ln(Deaths)*global disease
1428 9.141
3.810 2.079 14.910
Ln(Deaths)*neglected disease
1428 3.224
2.821 2.079 13.162
Ln(Deaths)*IP*global disease
1428 8.539
4.043 1.386 14.910
Ln(Deaths)*IP*neglected disease
1428 2.444
2.746 1.386 13.030
Ln(Deaths)*no IP*global disease
1428 6.389
3.941 1.386 14.358
Ln(Deaths)*no IP*neglected disease
1428 2.246
2.430 1.386 12.647
Ln(Deaths)*high income*IP*global
1428 7.716
4.464 0.000 13.980
Ln(Deaths)*high income*IP*neglected
1428 1.072
2.835 0.000 12.354
Ln(Deaths)*high income*no IP*global
1428 3.135
3.759 0.000 11.297
Ln(Deaths)*high income*no IP*neglected
1428 0.427
1.606 0.000 9.741
Ln(Deaths)*upper middle income*IP*global
1428 5.417
4.021 0.000 12.476
Ln(Deaths)*upper middle income*IP*neglected
1428 0.735
2.207 0.000 11.242
Ln(Deaths)*upper middle income*no IP*global
1428 4.074
4.485 0.000 12.284
Ln(Deaths)*upper middle income*no IP*neglected 1428 0.701
2.338 0.000 11.241
Ln(Deaths)*lower middle income*IP*global
1428 5.190
4.781 0.000 14.183
Ln(Deaths)*lower middle income*IP*neglected
1428 0.808
2.535 0.000 12.029
Ln(Deaths)*lower middle income*no IP*global
1428 5.061
4.396 0.000 14.055
Ln(Deaths)*lower middle income*no IP*neglected 1428 0.850
2.542 0.000 12.039
Ln(Deaths)*low income*IP*global
1428 3.669
3.754 0.000 12.523
Ln(Deaths)*low income*IP*neglected
1428 0.580
1.941 0.000 10.418
Ln(Deaths)*low income*no IP*global
1428 4.652
3.561 0.000 12.473
Ln(Deaths)*low income*no IP*neglected
1428 0.767
2.240 0.000 10.886

The unit of observation is a disease-year. Summary statistics are calculated for HIV defined as a neglected
disease and IP protection as TRIPS compliant. Multiple imputation methods were used to complete missing
observations on deaths.

23
Table 2: Negative binomial regressions of Y = number of new Phase I trials in disease-year
Variable
Eq. 1
Eq. 2
Eq. 3
Eq. 4
Ln(Total Deaths)
0.035**
(0.003)
Ln(Deaths)*global disease
0.034**
(0.003)
Ln(Deaths)*neglected disease
0.029**
(0.004)
Ln(Deaths)*IP*global disease
0.068**
(0.006)
Ln(Deaths)*IP*neglected disease
0.057**
(0.008)
Ln(Deaths)*no IP*global disease
-0.007
(0.007)
Ln(Deaths)*no IP*neglected disease
-0.005
(0.009)
Ln(Deaths)*high income*IP*global
0.357**
(0.030)
Ln(Deaths)*high income*IP*neglected
0.294**
(0.049)
Ln(Deaths)*high income*no IP*global
0.086*
(0.048)
Ln(Deaths)*high income*no IP*neglected
-0.168**
(0.076)
Ln(Deaths)*upper middle income*IP*global
-0.050**
(0.020)
Ln(Deaths)*upper middle income*IP*neglected
0.074
(0.171)
Ln(Deaths)*upper middle income*no IP*global
-0.111**
(0.049)
Ln(Deaths)*upper middle income*no IP*neglected
0.007
(0.089)
Ln(Deaths)*lower middle income*IP*global
0.026
(0.045)
Ln(Deaths)*lower middle income*IP*neglected
-0.000
(0.218)
Ln(Deaths)*lower middle income*no IP*global
-0.046
(0.043)
Ln(Deaths)*lower middle income*no IP*neglected
0.190*
(0.101)
Ln(Deaths)*low income*IP*global
-0.048
(0.034)
Ln(Deaths)*low income*IP*neglected
-0.083

24

Ln(Deaths)*low income*no IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*low income*no IP*neglected
Treatments in 1990
Intercept
Number of Observations Used
Log likelihood

0.056**
(0.002)
-1.57**
(0.217)
1428
19218.1

(0.129)
-0.031
(0.025)
-0.230**
(0.056)
0.056**
0.058**
0.051**
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
-1.50**
-0.601** -2.20**
(0.220)
(0.259)
(0.316)
1428
1428
1428
19220.1 19241.5 19387.4

* = significant at 5%, ** = significant at 1%. Standard errors are clustered by disease and adjusted for use of
multiple imputation. Year fixed effects are included in all specifications.

25
Table 3: Robustness to lagged measures of market size
Variable
Ln(Total Deaths)
Ln(Deaths)*global disease
Ln(Deaths)*neglected disease
Ln(Deaths)*IP*global disease
Ln(Deaths)*IP*neglected disease
Ln(Deaths)*no IP*global disease
Ln(Deaths)*no IP*neglected disease
Ln(Deaths)*high income*IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*high income*IP*neglected
Ln(Deaths)*high income*no IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*high income*no IP*neglected
Ln(Deaths)*upper middle income*IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*upper middle income*IP*neglected
Ln(Deaths)*upper middle income*no IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*upper middle income*no IP*neglected
Ln(Deaths)*lower middle income*IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*lower middle income*IP*neglected
Ln(Deaths)*lower middle income*no IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*lower middle income*no IP*neglected
Ln(Deaths)*low income*IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*low income*IP*neglected

Eq. 1
0.057**
(0.002)

Eq. 2

Eq. 3

Eq. 4

0.034**
(0.002)
0.028**
(0.004)
0.065**
(0.006)
0.055**
(0.009)
0.003
(0.006)
0.002
(0.009)
0.353**
(0.033)
0.342**
(0.060)
0.145**
(0.043)
-0.142*
(0.073)
-0.019
(0.016)
-0.042
(0.176)
-0.162**
(0.045)
-0.207**
(0.087)
0.024
(0.045)
0.088
(0.206)
-0.078
(0.047)
0.411**
(0.105)
-0.037
(0.042)
-0.113

26

Ln(Deaths)*low income*no IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*low income*no IP*neglected
Treatments in 1990
Intercept
Number of Observations Used
Log likelihood

0.035**
(0.002)
-1.58**
(0.213)
1428
19222.9

0.057**
(0.002)
-1.52**
(0.216)
1428
19225.3

0.059**
(0.002)
-0.936**
(0.246)
1428
19237.8

(0.119)
-0.028
(0.023)
-0.349**
(0.058)
0.049**
(0.002)
-2.01**
(0.291)
1428
19400.6

* = significant at 5%, ** = significant at 1%. Standard errors are clustered by disease and adjusted for use of
multiple imputation. Year fixed effects are included in all specifications.

27
Table 4: Robustness to IP definition
Variable
Ln(Deaths)*high income*IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*high income*IP*neglected
Ln(Deaths)*high income*no IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*high income*no IP*neglected
Ln(Deaths)*upper middle income*IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*upper middle income*IP*neglected
Ln(Deaths)*upper middle income*no IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*upper middle income*no IP*neglected
Ln(Deaths)*lower middle income*IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*lower middle income*IP*neglected
Ln(Deaths)*lower middle income*no IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*lower middle income*no IP*neglected
Ln(Deaths)*low income*IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*low income*IP*neglected
Ln(Deaths)*low income*no IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*low income*no IP*neglected
Treatments in 1990
Intercept
Number of Observations Used
Log likelihood

TRIPS

Hamdan

0.357**
(0.030)
0.294**
(0.049)
0.086*
(0.048)
-0.168**
(0.076)
-0.050**
(0.020)
0.074
(0.171)
-0.111**
(0.049)
0.007
(0.089)
0.026
(0.045)
-0.000
(0.218)
-0.046
(0.043)
0.190*
(0.101)
-0.048
(0.034)
-0.083
(0.129)
-0.031
(0.025)
-0.230**
(0.056)
0.051**
(0.002)
-2.20**
(0.316)
1428
19387.4

0.481**
(0.051)
0.224
(0.183)
0.145**
(0.061)
-0.101
(0.185)
-0.051**
(0.019)
-0.016
(0.084)
0.039
(0.052)
-0.086
(0.088)
-0.009
(0.033)
0.009
(0.089)
-0.468**
(0.056)
0.291*
(0.143)
0.009
(0.022)
-0.063
(0.051)
0.026
(0.028)
-0.270**
(0.072)
0.050**
(0.002)
-1.62**
(0.291)
1428
19430.1

GinartePark
0.418**
(0.033)
0.223**
(0.051)
0.027
(0.031)
-0.047
(0.060)
-0.058**
(0.021)
0.049
(0.139)
-0.038
(0.040)
-0.023
(0.055)
0.015
(0.058)
0.103
(0.175)
-0.140**
(0.039)
0.160*
(0.079)
0.002
(0.036)
-0.215**
(0.075)
-0.029
(0.024)
-0.165*
(0.077)
0.052**
(0.002)
-2.11**
(0.302)
1428
19394.9

* = significant at 5%, ** = significant at 1%. Standard errors are clustered by disease and adjusted for use of
multiple imputation. Year fixed effects are included in all specifications.

28
Table 5: Robustness to HIV classification
Variable
Ln(Deaths)*high income*IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*high income*IP*neglected
Ln(Deaths)*high income*no IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*high income*no IP*neglected
Ln(Deaths)*upper middle income*IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*upper middle income*IP*neglected
Ln(Deaths)*upper middle income*no IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*upper middle income*no IP*neglected
Ln(Deaths)*lower middle income*IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*lower middle income*IP*neglected
Ln(Deaths)*lower middle income*no IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*lower middle income*no IP*neglected
Ln(Deaths)*low income*IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*low income*IP*neglected
Ln(Deaths)*low income*no IP*global
Ln(Deaths)*low income*no IP*neglected
Treatments in 1990
Intercept
Number of Observations Used
Log likelihood

Neglected
0.357**
(0.030)
0.294**
(0.049)
0.086*
(0.048)
-0.168**
(0.076)
-0.050**
(0.020)
0.074
(0.171)
-0.111**
(0.049)
0.007
(0.089)
0.026
(0.045)
-0.000
(0.218)
-0.046
(0.043)
0.190*
(0.101)
-0.048
(0.034)
-0.083
(0.129)
-0.031
(0.025)
-0.230**
(0.056)
0.051**
(0.002)
-2.20**
(0.316)
1428
19387.4

Global
0.397**
(0.030)
0.215**
(0.072)
0.035
(0.043)
-0.272**
(0.095)
-0.056**
(0.020)
0.087
(0.178)
-0.051
(0.045)
0.035
(0.091)
0.012
(0.044)
0.090
(0.260)
-0.048
(0.042)
0.145
(0.115)
-0.057*
(0.031)
-0.209
(0.204)
-0.050**
(0.023)
-0.022
(0.089)
0.051**
(0.002)
-2.55**
(0.323)
1428
19392.0

Omitted
0.380**
(0.030)
0.218**
(0.071)
0.069
(0.048)
-0.267**
(0.095)
-0.052**
(0.020)
0.086
(0.176)
-0.103**
(0.050)
0.028
(0.091)
0.012
(0.045)
0.090
(0.257)
-0.042
(0.043)
0.135
(0.116)
-0.050
(0.034)
-0.211
(0.203)
-0.027
(0.025)
-0.020
(0.089)
0.051**
(0.002)
-2.44**
(0.330)
1411
18970.2

* = significant at 5%, ** = significant at 1%. Standard errors are clustered by disease and adjusted for use of
multiple imputation. Year fixed effects are included in all specifications.

Table 6: Summary of tests of coefficients
IP vs no IP, high income, neglected
IP vs. no IP, high income, global
Global vs. neglected, high income, IP
Global vs. neglected, high income, no IP
IP vs no IP, upper middle income, neglected
IP vs. no IP, upper middle income, global
Global vs. neglected, upper middle income, IP
Global vs. neglected, upper middle income, no IP
IP vs no IP, lower middle income, neglected
IP vs. no IP, lower middle income, global
Global vs. neglected, lower middle income, IP
Global vs. neglected, lower middle income, no IP
IP vs no IP, low income, neglected
IP vs. no IP, low income, global
Global vs. neglected, low income, IP
Global vs. neglected, low income, no IP

Baseline
0.47**
0.26**
0.04
0.25**
0.05
0.09
-0.11
-0.14
-0.16
0.06
0.08
-0.14
0.15
0.01
-0.03
0.10

Lagged
market size
0.52**
0.21**
-0.00
0.30**
0.13
0.16**
0.03
0.00
-0.25
0.13**
-0.00
-0.39**
0.24
0.01
-0.00
0.22**

GinartePark
0.21
0.30**
0.28*
0.20
0.02
-0.11*
-0.01
0.12
-0.16
0.55**
-0.01
-0.73**
0.23**
0.00
0.00
0.24**

Hamden
0.33**
0.42**
0.18**
0.09
0.05
-0.05
-0.09
0.01
-0.07
0.19**
-0.01
-0.29**
-0.00
0.04
0.11
0.06

HIV as
global
0.43**
0.32**
0.19**
0.30**
0.06
0.04
-0.13
-0.11
-0.05
0.04
0.01
-0.09
-0.16
0.02
0.04
-0.14

* = significant at 5%, ** = significant at 1%. Wald tests of coefficients corresponding to Equation 4 for various specifications.

Excluding
HIV
0.43**
0.29**
0.18**
0.31**
0.07
0.07
-0.12
-0.13
-0.04
0.04
0.01
-0.08
-0.17
0.00
0.04
-0.13

Appendix A: Disease list; * indicates a neglected disease category
Cause of death
Certain
infectious and
parasitic
diseases

Neoplasms

ICD10 codes
Cholera*
Diarrhoea and gastroenteritis of
presumed infectious origin
Other intestinal infectious
diseases (includes typhoid)*
Respiratory tuberculosis*
Other tuberculosis*
Plague
Tetanus
Diphtheria
Whooping cough
Meningococcal infection
Septicaemia
Infections with a predominantly
sexual mode of transmission
Acute poliomyelitis
Rabies
Yellow fever
Other arthropod-borne viral
fevers and viral haemorrhagic
fevers*
Measles
Viral hepatitis
Human immunodeficiency virus
[HIV] disease*
Malaria*
Leishmaniasis*
Trypanosomiasis*
Schistosomiasis
Remainder of certain infectious
and parasitic diseases (includes
leprosy, trachoma and Buruli
ulcer)*
Malignant neoplasm of lip, oral
cavity and pharynx
Malignant neoplasm of
oesophagus
Malignant neoplasm of stomach
Malignant neoplasm of colon,
rectum and anus
Malignant neoplasm of liver and
intrahepatic bile ducts
Malignant neoplasm of pancreas
Malignant neoplasm of larynx
Malignant neoplasm of trachea,
bronchus and lung
Malignant melanoma of skin
Malignant neoplasm of breast

A00
A09
A01-A08
A15-A16
A17-A19
A20
A33-A35
A36
A37
A39
A40-A41
A50-A64
A80
A82
A95
A90-A94, A96-A99
B05
B15-B19
B20-B24
B50-B54
B55
B56-B57
B65
A21-A32, A38, A42-A49, A65-A79, A81, A83A89, B00-B04, B06-B09, B25-B49, B58-B64,
B66-B94, B99
C00-C14
C15
C16
C18-C21
C22
C25
C32
C33-C34
C43
C50

31
Malignant neoplasm of cervix
uteri
Malignant neoplasm of other
and unspecified parts of uterus
Malignant neoplasm of ovary
Malignant neoplasm of prostate
Malignant neoplasm of bladder
Malignant neoplasm of
meninges, brain and other parts
of central nervous system
Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
Multiple myeloma and
malignant plasma cell
neoplasms
Leukaemia
Remainder of malignant
neoplasms

Diseases of the
blood and bloodforming organs
and certain
disorders
involving the
immune
mechanism
Endocrine,
nutritional and
metabolic
diseases

Diseases of the
nervous system

Diseases of the
circulatory
system

Remainder of neoplasms
Anaemias
Remainder of diseases of the
blood and blood-forming
organs and certain disorders
involving the immune
mechanism

C53
C54-C55
C56
C61
C67
C70-C72
C82-C85
C90
C91-C95
C17, C23-C24, C26-C31, C37-C41, C44-C49,
C51-C52, C57-C60, C62-C66,C68-C69,C73C81,C88,C96-C97
D00-D48
D50-D64
D65-D89

Diabetes mellitus
Malnutrition
Remainder of endocrine,
nutritional and metabolic
diseases
Mental and behavioural
disorders
Mental and behavioural
disorders due to psychoactive
substance use
Remainder of mental and
behavioural disorders
Meningitis*
Alzheimer's disease
Remainder of diseases of the
nervous system
Diseases of the eye and adnexa
Diseases of the ear and mastoid
process

E10-E14
E40-E46
E00-E07, E15-E34, E50-E88

Acute rheumatic fever and
chronic rheumatic heart
diseases*
Hypertensive diseases
Ischaemic heart diseases
Other heart diseases
Cerebrovascular diseases

I00-I09

F01-F99
F10-F19
F20-F99
G00, G03
G30
G04-G25, G31-G98
H00-H57
H60-H93

I10-I13
I20-I25
I26-I51
I60-I69

32

Diseases of the
respiratory
system

Diseases of the
digestive system

Diseases of the
genitourinary
system
Pregnancy,
childbirth and
the puerperium

Atherosclerosis
Remainder of diseases of the
circulatory system
Influenza
Pneumonia*
Other acute lower respiratory
infections
Chronic lower respiratory
diseases
Remainder of diseases of the
respiratory system
Gastric and duodenal ulcer
Diseases of the liver
Remainder of diseases of the
digestive system
Diseases of the skin and
subcutaneous tissue
Diseases of the musculoskeletal
system and connective tissue
Glomerular and renal tubulointerstitial diseases
Remainder of diseases of the
genitourinary system
Pregnancy with abortive
outcome
Other direct obstetric deaths
Indirect obstetric deaths
Remainder of pregnancy,
childbirth and the puerperium
Certain conditions originating in
the perinatal period
Congenital malformations,
deformations and chromosomal
abnormalities

I70
I71-I99
J10-J11
J12-J18
J20-J22
J40-J47
J00-J06, J30-J39, J60-J98
K25-K27
K70-K76
K00-K22, K28-K66, K80-K92
L00-L98
M00-M99

N00-N15
N17-N98
O00-O07
O10-O92
O98-O99
O95-O97
P00-P96
Q00-Q99

Appendix B: Country list
Country name
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Andorra
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Aruba
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas, The
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bermuda
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon

1995 Income
Level (World
Bank)
Lower
Lower
Lower Middle
High
Lower
Upper Middle
Upper Middle
Lower
High
High
High
Lower
High
Upper Middle
Lower
Upper Middle
Lower Middle
High
Lower Middle
Lower
High
Lower
Lower Middle
Lower
Lower Middle
Upper Middle
High
Lower Middle
Lower
Lower
Lower
Lower

Self-designation to
WTO
Least developed

Least developed
Developing
Developing

Developing
Least developed
Developing

Developing
Least developed
Least developed
Developing
Developing
Developing
Developing
Least developed
Least developed
Least developed
Developing

WTO status
Observer
Member
Observer
Observer
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Observer
Observer
Member
Member
Member
Observer
Member
Member
Member
Observer
Member
Observer
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member

Year of WTO
membership

Year of TRIPS
compliance

2000

2000

Hamden Year

Ginarte-Park
Year

1985
1996
1995
1995
2003

2016
2000
2000
2003

*

1995
1995

1995
1995

1995
1995
1995

2000
2016
2000

*

1995
1995
1996

1995
2000
2016

2000

1995

2000

2000

1995

1995
1995
1995
1996
1995
1995
2004
1995

2000
2000
2000
1996
2016
2016
2016
2000

2001

2000
2000

1996

2000

1990
1985

*

1985
*

2000
*
*
*

34

Country name
Canada
Cape Verde
Cayman Islands
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Congo, Rep.
Costa Rica
Côte d'Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep.
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia, The

1995 Income
Level (World
Bank)
High
Lower Middle
High
Lower
Lower
Upper Middle
Lower
Lower Middle
Lower
Lower
Lower
Lower Middle
Lower
Upper Middle
Lower Middle
High
Upper Middle
High
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
Lower
Lower
Lower Middle
Lower
Lower Middle
High
High
Upper Middle
Lower

Self-designation to
WTO
Least developed
Least developed
Least developed
Developing
Developing
Developing
Least developed
Least developed
Developing
Developing
Developing
Developing
Developing

Least developed
Developing
Developing
Developing
Developing
Least developed
Least developed
Developing
Least developed
Developing

Developing
Least developed

WTO status
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Observer
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Observer
Member
Observer
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member

Year of WTO
membership
1995
2008

Year of TRIPS
compliance
1995
2016

1995
1996
1995
2001
1995

2016
2016
2000
2001
2000

1997
1997
1995
1995
2000
1995
1995
1995
1995
1995
1995
1995
1996
1995
1995

2016
2000
2000
2000
2000
2000
2000
1995
1995
2016
2000
2000
2000
2000
2000

1999

2000

1996
1995
1995
1995
1996

2000
1995
1995
2000
2016

Hamden Year

Ginarte-Park
Year
1990

2005
2000

*
*
2000
2005
1995

2000
2000

*
*
*
*

*
*
1985
*

2006

*

*
1995
*
1995

*
*
1995
1985
*

35

Country name
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea, Dem. Rep.
Korea, Rep.
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao PDR
Latvia
Lebanon

1995 Income
Level (World
Bank)
Lower
High
Lower
Upper Middle
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
Lower
Lower
Lower
Lower
Lower
Upper Middle
High
Lower
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
High
High
High
Lower Middle
High
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
Lower
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
High
High
Lower
Lower
Lower Middle
Lower Middle

Self-designation to
WTO

Developing
Developing
Developing
Least developed
Least developed
Developing
Least developed
Developing

Developing
Developing

Developing
Developing

Developing
Least developed
Developing
Developing
Least developed

WTO status
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Observer
Observer
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Observer
Member

Member
Member
Member
Observer
Member
Observer

Year of WTO
membership
2000
1995
1995
1995
1996
1995
1995
1995
1995
1996
1995
1995
1995
1995
1995

Year of TRIPS
compliance
2000
1995
2000
1995
2000
2000
2016
2016
2000
2016
2000
1995
1995
2000
2000

1995
1995
1995
1995
1995
2000

1995
2000
1995
2000
1995
2000

1995

2000

2001

2005

1995
1995
1998

2000
2000
1998

1998

1985

1999

1999

Hamden Year

2003

2000

*
1999

2005
1997

*

Ginarte-Park
Year
1985
1995
1990
*
2005

*
*
2000
1995
*
2005
2000

1995
1985
1985
*
1985
2000

36

Country name
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macao, China
Macedonia, FYR
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman

1995 Income
Level (World
Bank)
Lower Middle
Lower
Upper Middle
Lower Middle
High
High
Lower Middle
Lower
Lower
Upper Middle
Lower Middle
Lower
Upper Middle
Lower Middle
Lower
Upper Middle
Upper Middle
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
High
Lower
Lower Middle
Lower
Lower
Lower Middle
Lower
High
High
Lower
Lower
Lower
High
Upper Middle

Self-designation to
WTO
Least developed
Least developed

WTO status
Member

Year of WTO
membership
1995

Year of TRIPS
compliance
2016

Least developed
Least developed
Developing
Least developed
Least developed
Developing

2001
1995
1995
2003
1995
1995
1995
1995
1995
1995

2001
1995
2000
2003
2016
2016
2000
2016
2016
2000

Least developed
Developing
Developing

Member
Member
Member

1995
1995
1995

2016
2000
2000

Member

2001

2001

Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member

1997
1995
1995
1995
1995
2004
1995
1995
1995
1996
1995
1995
2000

1997
2000
2016
2016
2000
2016
1995
1995
2000
2016
2000
1995
2000

Developing
Least developed
Least developed
Developing
Least developed

Developing
Least developed
Developing

Ginarte-Park
Year
*

Observer
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member

Developing

Hamden Year

1995
1995

*
*
2000

*
*
1985
*
2000

2002
1995

*
*
2000

2000

*

*

2000
*

1985
1985
*
*
*
*

37

Country name
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Samoa
San Marino
São Tomé and Principe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia and Montenegro
(former)
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines

1995 Income
Level (World
Bank)
Lower
Upper Middle
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
High
High
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
Lower
Lower Middle
High
Lower
Upper Middle
Lower
Lower Middle
Upper Middle
Lower
High
Lower Middle
Upper Middle
Lower Middle
Lower
Upper Middle
High
Lower
Upper Middle
Upper Middle
Lower Middle

Self-designation to
WTO
Developing

Developing
Developing
Developing
Developing
Developing
Developing
Developing
Least developed
Least developed
Least developed
Least developed

Least developed
Developing

Least developed
Least developed

Developing
Developing
Developing
Developing

Year of WTO
membership
1995

Year of TRIPS
compliance
2000

1997
1996
1995
1995
1995
1995
1995
1996
1995

1997
2000
2000
2000
2000
2000
1995
2000
2000

1996

2016

1995
1995
*

Observer
Member
Member

2005
1995

2005
2016

2000

*
*

Observer
Observer
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member

1995
1995
1995
1995
1996

2016
2000
1995
1995
2016

1995
1995

*
1990
1995

Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member

1995
1995
1995
1996
1995
1995

1995
1995
2000
2000
2000
2000

WTO status
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Observer
Member
Observer

Hamden Year
2005

2005
1995
1997
2000

1995

1997
2003
*
*

Ginarte-Park
Year
*
2000
*
2005
1995
2000
2000
*

*
1985
1995
*

38

Country name
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela, RB
Vietnam
Virgin Islands (U.S.)
Yemen, Rep.
Zambia
Zimbabwe

1995 Income
Level (World
Bank)
Lower
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
High
High
Lower Middle
Lower
Lower
Lower Middle
Lower
Lower Middle
Upper Middle
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
Lower
Lower Middle
High
High
High
Upper Middle
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
Lower Middle
Lower
High
Lower
Lower
Lower

Self-designation to
WTO
Least developed
Developing
Developing

Least developed
Developing
Least developed
Developing
Developing
Developing
Least developed
Developing

Developing
Least developed
Developing

Least developed
Least developed
Developing

WTO status
Observer
Member
Member
Member
Member
Observer
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Observer
Member
Member
Member
Member
Observer
Member
Member
Observer
Observer
Member
Member

Year of WTO
membership

Year of TRIPS
compliance

1995
1995
1995
1995

2000
2000
1995
1995

*
*

1995
1995
1995
2007
1995
1995
1995

2016
2000
2016
2007
2000
2000
2000

*
1999

1999

1995

1995

2016

*

*
1995

1996
1995
1995
1995

2000
1995
1995
2000

2007
1995

2016
2000
2008

1995
1995

2016
2000

Hamden Year

Ginarte-Park
Year
*

1985
1985
*
*
1995
*
2000

2001

1985
1985
2000

1995

1995
1995

*

*
*

39

