NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MICRO, MACRO, AND STRATEGIC FORCES IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE INVOICING
Linda S. Goldberg
Cédric Tille
Working Paper 15470
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15470

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2009

Cédric Tille gratefully acknowledges the support and hospitality of the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary
Research where parts of this paper were written. Linda Goldberg gratefully acknowledges the thoughtful
research support of William Ryan. We thank Clancy Barrett and Craig Kuntz of the Canadian customs
administration for making the detailed data available and answering our questions. We also thank Gita
Gopinath, Wilbert van der Klaaw, and seminar audiences at the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the International Monetary Fund, and the Stockholm School of
Economics for valuable feedback. The views presented are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Linda S. Goldberg and Cédric Tille. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Micro, Macro, and Strategic Forces in International Trade Invoicing
Linda S. Goldberg and Cédric Tille
NBER Working Paper No. 15470
November 2009
JEL No. F3,F4
ABSTRACT
The use of different currencies in the invoicing of international trade transactions plays a major role
in the international transmission of economic fluctuations. Existing studies argue that an exporter’s
invoicing choice reflects structural aspects of her industry, such as market share and the price-sensitivity
of demand, the hedging of marginal costs, due for instance to the use of imported inputs, and macroeconomic
volatility. We use a new highly disaggregated dataset to assess the roles of the various invoicing determinants.
We find support for the factors identified in the literature, and document a new feature, in the form
of a link between shipments size and invoicing. Specifically, larger transactions are more likely to
be invoiced in the importer’s currency. We offer a potential theoretical explanation for the empirical
link between transaction size and invoicing by allowing invoicing to be set through a bargaining between
exporters and importers, a feature that is absent from existing models despite its empirical relevance.

Linda S. Goldberg
Research Department, 3rd Floor
Federal Reserve Bank-New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org
Cédric Tille
Graduate Institute for International
and Development Studies
Department of Economics
Pavillon Rigot, Avenue de la Paix 11 A
1202 Geneve, Switzerland
cedric.tille@graduateinstitute.ch

1. Introduction

The currency in which exporters set the price of their goods – the so-called “invoicing”
currency – has long been recognized as a central aspect of international economics. Specifically,
it determines who among the exporter or the customer is exposed to exchange rate risk, and
whether exchange rate fluctuations lead to a switching of demand between goods produced in
different countries. An extensive theoretical and empirical literature has identified
complementary drivers of invoicing. A first category reflects structural features of the industry in
question, such as the price-sensitivity of demand and exporters’ market shares. A second
category of drivers reflects the need to hedge against unforeseen movements in marginal costs,
for instance due to exchange rate volatility or the presence of imported inputs priced in foreign
currencies.2 In addition to the currencies of the exporter or the importer, the literature has also
explored the use of “vehicle” currencies that are neither the exporter’s nor the customer’s.3
The existing literature suffers from two limitations, one empirical and one theoretical,
that we address in this paper. On the empirical front, the literature relies mainly on aggregate
data, potentially hiding contrasting patterns across exporters that might be apparent in more
disaggregated data.4 For instance, in a given country firms in an industry where demand is very
sensitive to prices have an incentive to choose an invoicing currency that is the same as their
competitors, where firms whose products are more differentiated are less subject to this
“coalescing” effect (Goldberg and Tille 2008). The existence of such heterogeneity in invoicing
data would improve our ability to test different theories relative to what is observable in the
aggregate data.
We address this limitation by using a new highly disaggregated dataset for Canadian
imports. Our data cover all Canadian import transactions between February 2002 and February
2009 (45 million observations), with information on the disaggregated industry, the invoicing
currency, and the country of origin for each transaction. We begin by documenting the patterns
of invoicing, both from the point of view of transactions count and the point of view of
2

A non-exhaustive list of recent contributions includes Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2005), Devereux, Engel, and
Storgaard (2004), Friberg (1998), Novy (2006), Goldberg and Tille (2008).
3
Goldberg and Tille (2008, 2009).
4
An exception is Gopinath, Itskhoki and Rigobon (forthcoming) who use BLS data to study the frequency of price
adjustment in U.S. imports and the relationship to currency of invoicing. Donnenfeld and Haug (2003) provide an
early look at a subsample of Canadian data for an earlier period. Goldberg and Tille (2008) survey other prior
research.
1

transaction value. The U.S. dollar is extensively used, accounting for nearly 85 percent of import
invoicing by count (75 percent by value). We distinguish between imports from the United
States, which account for a little more than half of total imports and are nearly exclusively
invoiced in U.S. dollar, and imports from other countries where the use of other currencies is
more substantial. We show that the Canadian dollar is used more extensively for large shipments
than smaller ones, accounting for a much larger share of imports by value than by count.
Invoicing patterns are also remarkably steady over time throughout our sample period.
The drivers of invoicing are then tested through a formal econometric exercise. We
consider variables that reflect industry-structure (i.e. whether demand is price-sensitive), the
market share of imports from that country in the specific industry, the size of shipments, the
reliance on commodity inputs in production, exchange rate volatility, dummy variables that
capture the ability of various currencies to hedge shocks to marginal costs, and the exchange rate
regime of the country of origin. Throughout our empirical analysis we distinguish between
imports from the United States and imports from other countries.
Our analysis leads to seven main results. First, exporters in industries where demand is
more price-sensitive tend to use the U.S. dollar (for U.S. exporters) or the Canadian dollar (for
non-U.S. exporters) relatively more than exporters in other industries. Second, exporters in a
country which has a dominant share of imports in a particular industry have a greater tendency to
use their own currency. Third, large shipments have a higher likelihood of being invoiced in
Canadian dollars than smaller ones, especially when the exporter has a high market share.
Fourth, exporters in industries with greater use commodity and energy as inputs are more likely
to invoice in U.S. dollars, reflecting the fact that dollars are the standard invoicing currency for
these inputs. Fifth, exporters from countries with a volatile exchange rate make little use of their
currency for invoicing trade. Sixth, we find some evidence of the invoicing use of currencies that
offer a hedge against movements in production cost. Finally, there is a strong tendency for
exporters in countries with a peg to the dollar to use the dollar more frequently, whereas
exporters in euro area countries or with currencies that track the euro closely have a stronger
tendency to use the euro.
From a theoretical perspective, the existing literature treats invoicing choice as decided
solely by the exporter. The only role of the customer is to provide the exporter with the
downward-sloping demand that the exporters take into account. This assumption of unilateral
2

invoicing is at odds with the evidence provided by Friberg and Wilander (2008). A survey of
Swedish exporters documents that the invoicing currency is predominantly set through a
negotiation between the exporter and the consumer. In addition to its lack of empirical realism,
the standard model is hard pressed to generate the type of link between transaction size and
invoicing selection that we observe in the data.
We address this limitation of the theory by developing a model where invoicing is set
through a bargaining game between the exporter and the customer. We do not claim that this is
the only setting that could lead to a role of transaction size. Instead we offer it as a way to
generate this feature through an extension of the standard model.5 Specifically, the invoicing
choice is determined as a split between the exporter and the customer of the surplus from the
transaction and reflects their relative negotiating power. Two main results emerge. First, a
bargaining allocation is likely to make more use of the destination currency than the unilateral
invoicing choice by the exporter. Intuitively, the exporter has an incentive to use her own
currency to limit the impact of exchange rate movements on her unit revenue, whereas the
customer gets a higher utility from having the price stabilized in her own currency. Second, the
model implies that the use of the customer’s currency is more pronounced for large sales. This
reflects the fact that the exporter’s default option is worse when negotiating with a large
customer, leading her to be more accommodating to the use of destination currency.
Interestingly, the impact of size on invoicing is more pronounced when the exporter has a large
bargaining power in splitting the surplus. Intuitively, size represents an alternative source of
bargaining strength for the customer, which she needs to rely on only if her direct bargaining
power is limited.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the new invoicing data,
as well as the measures used in the econometric analysis. The econometric results are analyzed in
Section 3. Section 4 reviews the invoicing drivers in the standard model, and points to its
inability of accounting for the observed link between transaction size and invoicing. Section 5
extends the model by introducing a bargaining dimension. Section 6 concludes.

5

Gopinath and Itskhoki (2009) provide an alternative approach to pricing, pass-through and by extension to invoice
currency choice by using a dynamic menu-cost model and a variable markup channel generate significant variation
in the frequency of price adjustment by exporters.
3

Section 2. The invoicing of Canadian imports
A novel database allows for a rich exploration of the various drivers of invoicing. The
database covers 45 million individual import transactions for Canada, covering all imports
during 2002 to 2009.
2.1 Sectoral and geographical breakdown
The Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) records every import transaction into
Canada. Each transaction is accompanied by a customs invoice with detailed information on the
contents’ exporting country of origin, currency of settlement, industry code (up to HS10),
quantity, and value of transaction.6

The original dataset, obtained from Statistics Canada

(StatsCan) in conjunction with CBSA, contained the full roster of 44.5 million import
transactions spanning the period from February 2002 through February 2009. After observing
some incomplete sampling in February and March 2002 we drop those months of data and then
apply other filters to the database: transactions are dropped if there is missing information for
invoicing currency, industry code, country of origin, or value. We drop Canadian imports that
record Canada as the country of origin, since these imports are most likely prior Canadian
exports being returned to producers, or are goods re-imported for the purpose of repairs. The
screened sample has 41.9 million observations. Additionally, in our econometric work (described
below) we introduce variables that are country and time-specific. For tractability, we limit
import observations so they are from the group of exporting countries (47) that account for a
combination of most import transactions by count (covering 95.9 percent) and by value (covering
97.1 percent).
Table 1 presents a decomposition of Canadian import transactions into sixteen broad
product categories, and six exporting regions. This decomposition is based on a count of import
transactions, without regard to the value of each transaction.

Table 2 provides a more

conventional decomposition of imports, weighting these by value of transactions. While
Canadian imports are widely dispersed across exporting countries, the United States is the largest
partner of Canada by a wide margin, accounting for 59 percent of imports by count and 57
percent by value. The next-largest import sources for Canada are the eurozone, with 12 percent
6

The Customs Coding form can be referenced at http://www.cbsa-asfc.gc.ca/publications/forms-formulaires/b33.pdf
4

by count and 9 percent by value, and Asia (both East and South East Asia and China), with 14
percent by count and 13 percent by value.
The rightmost column of each of these tables shows the industry composition of Canadian
imports. Clearly, industry concentration is lower than the concentration by country of origin of
these imports. The dominant import industries are machinery and equipment (23 percent of
imports by count and 26 percent by value), metal (13 percent by count, but only 7 percent by
value), and transportation (only 3 percent by count, but 21 percent by value reflecting the high
value added of this industry).
Tables 1 and 2 also show that the presence of particular countries or regions in Canadian
imports varies by industry. The United States share ranges from a low of 40 percent
(footwear/headgear by count; or 5 percent by value) to a high of 84 percent for mineral products,
by count (77 percent for plastics/rubber by value). Eurozone countries are most prevalent in
Canadian imports of chemicals, leather/furs/hides, and foodstuffs. While Asia accounts for only
14 percent of total imports (14 percent by count, 13 percent by value), its role is concentrated in
specific sectors such as textiles (24 percent by count and 45 percent by value),
footwear/headgear (23 percent by count and 77 percent by value) and leather/furs/hides (22
percent by count and 59 percent by value).
2.2 A broad assessment of invoicing
What are the broad patterns in the invoicing of Canadian imports? Figure 1 (upper and
lower panels) presents the evolution of the share of U.S. dollars (USD), Canadian dollars (CAD),
euros (EUR), and other currencies in invoicing Canadian imports. The upper panel presents
invoicing shares based on transaction count, with the lower panel showing the shares based on
transaction value. These figures yield some striking observations. Observe the dominant role of
the USD which is used on over 85 percent of Canadian import invoices over the period between
2002 and 2009. This role has also been quite stable over time. The CAD, EUR, and other
currencies each account for less than 5 percent of Canadian import invoices by count.
Interestingly, quite a different pattern of currency use emerges in terms of transaction values.
While the USD remains dominant, its share is lowered to 75 percent of imports. In import value
comparisons there is a larger role of the CAD, at between 20 and 25 percent of imports. The role
of the other currencies remains small overall. The larger role of the CAD in terms of value than
5

in terms of count indicates that CAD use is more concentrated among larger transactions, an
aspect that we explore further below.
A complementary way to look at the invoicing pattern is to take the point of view of the
exporter, and consider whether invoicing is done in the exporter’s currency – the so-called
“producer currency pricing” (PCP) option – in the destination currency – the “local currency
pricing” (LCP) option – or in a third “vehicle currency” (VCP). Figure 2 presents a window into
the geographical breakdown of exporter invoicing by showing the use of the PCP option for
imports from the United States, eurozone, United Kingdom, Japan, China, and all other
countries, both by count (left panel) and value (right panel). The United States is an outlier with
PCP being the dominant option. For the eurozone, UK and Japan, the degree of PCP is still
substantial, and more variable over time, but its use is concentrated in transaction of relatively
low value as shown by the lower shares in terms of value than in terms of count.
Figure 3 shows the shares of the three options (PCP, LCP, VCP), with the United States
exporters presented as distinct from exporters from all other regions. It is revealing that, in terms
of transaction counts, local currency pricing is the least prevalent pricing practice by count,
regardless of whether transactions are for exports from the United States or other regions. PCP is
the most prevalent form of pricing overall, reflecting both the U.S. exporter use of dollars, as
well as invoicing in euros by eurozone exporters, yen by Japanese exporters, and pound sterling
by United Kingdom exporters. For non-U.S. exporter transactions, VCP is the dominant option.
For all exporters, the USD is the dominant choice. However, the euro also is used on invoices for
countries in the geographic proximity of the euro area: the euro share in VCP is 23 percent for
Eastern Europe and the FSU, 19 percent for Switzerland, 14 percent for Scandinavia, and 9
percent for Britain. A somewhat different invoicing profile especially with respect to PCP and
LCP appears in terms of value, as the role of PCP shrinks to the benefit of LCP. This again
reflects a more prominent use of the CAD in large transactions than in small ones. PCP plays
only a minor role when we focus on non-U.S. exporters, whose exports mostly use a vehicle
currency for invoicing or the CAD.
The data show a novel pattern where invoicing outcomes differ with transaction size. To
illustrate the magnitude of this pattern, Table 3 provides the prevalence of LCP in the bottom
95th percentile and top 5th percentile of transactions (by size), by industry, and for U.S. and nonU.S. exporters to Canada. Each panel presents the median transaction size in the bottom 95th
6

percentile and top 5th percentile, as well as the shares of LCP. Import transactions in the top 5th
percentile are generally substantially larger, and thus unlikely to merely reflect just higher
quality goods. Larger transactions consistently display a substantially higher LCP share. This
pattern is robust across industries, and whether one considers all transactions, or the U.S.
exporters only, or focuses on exporters from the rest of the world. We have conducted formal
tests using imports disaggregated at the HS2 and HS4 levels, and found consistent patterns of
statistically higher use of LCP in higher value import transactions. The share of LCP rises as the
transaction size rises over the upper tail of the distribution of transaction sizes by industry.
3. Econometric analysis
We now turn to a formal assessment of the invoicing patterns in the data. Our
econometric tests are devised to explore the determinants of invoicing for the full (cleaned)
sample of Canadian imports described above, about 42 million observations. The dependent
variables are dummy variables indicating whether a given transaction is invoiced in the
producer’s currency (PCP=1, LCP=VCP=0), the destination currency CAD (LCP=1,
PCP=VCP=0), or a vehicle currency (VCP=1, PCP=LCP=0). The regression specifications are
multinomial logit, which impose the constraint that the three choice alternatives are mutually
exclusive and exhaustive (the three dummy variables add up to one). We estimate separate
regressions for Canadian imports from the United States (approximately 25 million observations)
and for Canadian imports from countries other than the United States (approximately 17 million
observations).
3.1. Explanatory variables
The range of regression variables introduced in our specifications is intended to span the
main motives emphasized in the theoretical literature (discussed in section 4). We group these
motives in six main categories. The first category reflects the tendency for invoicing to coalesce
in a common currency, a behavior which is likely to be more pronounced in industries with
homogeneous or highly substitutable goods as sales of these goods are more sensitive to price
differentials with comparable goods. The second category reflects the relative strength of
exporters and consumers, which could affect their weight when invoicing is set through
bargaining (section 5). The third category captures the use of commodity and energy inputs in
7

production. As these inputs tend to be invoiced in USD, we can expect industries with higher
intensity of use to make more use of the USD in invoicing as a means to hedge against
fluctuations in production costs. The last three categories of variables are linked to
macroeconomic volatility. Specifically, we introduce variables that measure exchange rate
volatility, whether a particular currency offers a hedge against movements in production costs,
and whether the exchange rate regime of the exporter’s country is a peg.
The specific variables constructed for these motives are as follows:


Refconi and Walrasconi are relevant for the coalescing motive in invoice currency choice.
They are constructed based on the Rauch Index, and following the discussion in Goldberg
and Tille (2008), these measures indicate which goods are likely to be characterized by high
elasticities of substitution. The Rauch index splits various industries (at the HS4 level) into
three categories: reference-priced or exchange traded, Walrasian, or differentiated goods. The
first two categories include goods that highly substitutable with each other, while
differentiated products, including the bulk of manufacturing, have more limited
substitutability. The dummy variables Refconi and Walrasconi take the respective values of 1
if goods are reference-priced or Walrasian (respectively) and zero otherwise, so that
differentiated goods are the reference category.7 Exporters of reference-priced and Walrasian
goods are expected to place a relatively high weight in limiting fluctuations of their price
relative to that of their competitors, leading invoicing to coalesce around a central currency.
The HS4 classifications are applied to each import at the level of HS4 industry i.



Importshareti,e and top5indi, reflecting the relative bargaining strength of exporters by
country e and importers in each industry i. Importshareti,e is the market share of the
exporter’s country in Canadian imports of the relevant industry (HS2 category). This variable
is used to assess whether exporters from countries with a large market share in a particular
industry are more inclined to invoice in their own currency. Top5indi is a dummy variable
equal to one if the value of the particular export transaction falls in the top 5th percentile for a
particular HS4 code, and is zero otherwise. The variables importshareti,e and top5indi are
used to proxy for the bargaining power of exporters and importers respectively. We
acknowledge that these proxies are imperfect. A preferable option would be to determine

7

While the index is originally constructed for SITC codes, we used an SITC-HS concordance to match the
variables. Rauch provided a “conservative” and a “liberal” classification, of which we use the conservative index.
8

whether a specific large transaction is associated with a large importer or a large exporter.
This type of distinction is infeasible in this data set, since we do not have identifiers for
individual importers or exporters that would enable a link to their specific characteristics that
could influence behavior.


Intensityi, capturing the role of commodity intensity of production. This variable, constructed
by HS2 code, represents industry share of commodities such as hydrocarbons and metals in
total costs, represented by the sum of producer value plus employee compensation. Given
that the USD is the dominant invoicing currency for these inputs, exporters in an industry
with higher commodity intensity may have an incentive to invoice in USD to hedge
movements in their input costs. The data used to construct this measure are assumed common
across countries and are constructed from the Standard Use Table of the United States 2002
Benchmark Input-Output tables.8 While ideally this measure would be constructed for
exporters in different countries using country-specific I-O tables, we opted to apply the U.S.
I-O table to all exporting countries because of limited data availability.



Coefvarte, reflecting exchange rate volatility between the exporter’s currency and the CAD.
As exchange rates are all defined against the CAD, a higher value of this measure indicates
more volatile macroeconomic fundamentals in the exporter’s country, which may make the
exporter less likely to invoice in her own currency. The measure is constructed as the
coefficient of variation (to filter out level effects) of the exporter’s exchange rate over a
rolling lagged five-year window. The exchange rate data are from the IMF’s International
Financial Statistics database (series rf, the period-average nominal exchange rate).



USDhedge, CADhedge, EURhedge, aimed at capturing the hedging benefits of different
currencies. As in Goldberg and Tille (2008), this hedging variable takes a value of one if the
USD, CAD or EUR are (respectively) significantly better currencies for hedging the
volatility of the exporter’s profits, and are zero otherwise. For instance, the EUR should
represent a good hedge for an exporter whose cost of production are high in states of the
world where the EUR appreciates. Constructing these variables entail substantial steps that
are described in the data appendix.

8

The detailed I-O codes are aggregates of NAICS codes, so we used a concordance between NAICS and HS2 to
determine commodity shares. Since each NAICS code can map to multiple HS2 codes, we weighted the
observations by the inverse of the number of codes to which it mapped, so that each NAICS code contributed equal
weight to the overall construction.
9



Dollarpeg and Euroarea, reflect exchange rate regimes, namely pegs and monetary union.
These dummy variables are country and time specific, and indicate whether the exporter’s
currency is maintaining a dollar peg or is part of the euro area or appears pegged to the euro.
As the exporter’s currency and the USD (or EUR) are similar options under a credible peg,
we expect the exporter to be more likely to invoice in USD (or EUR) as transacting in these
currencies involves smaller transaction costs. The peg classifications come from Ilzetski,
Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). Since these classifications extend only through the end of 2007,
we applied the end 2007 values to the 2008 and 2009 import transactions. The only country
outside of the formal euro area included as “euroarea” is Denmark, whose currency closely
tracked the euro during this sample period.

3.2. Econometric assessment of invoicing
The results of our econometric analysis are reported in Table 4 for imports from non-U.S.
countries and Table 5 for imports from the United States. The regressions are set up so that
invoicing options are taken relative to a benchmark, which we take to be the USD in all tables. In
the case of imports from non-U.S. countries, invoicing in the vehicle currency pricing (VCP)
option largely corresponds to use of USD, with some euro use by countries near to the euro area.
The pairs of columns in each numbered regression specification in Table 4 report the influences
on LCP (invoicing in CAD) or PCP of the variables indicated in the far left column of the table.
In the case of imports from the United States, invoicing in USD corresponds to the PCP option.
The results reported in Table 5 show the role of each regressor on the incidence of LCP or VCP
(invoicing in a currency that is neither the USD nor the CAD).
The tables report the maximum likelihood estimates of coefficients, with the standard
errors provided in brackets. For interpretations, it is important to recognize that the coefficient
estimates are not marginal effects of the variables, which are not constant and would need to be
constructed conditional on levels of each of the variables in the multinominal logit specification.
Each table presents regressions focusing on the role of the separate groups of variables
associated with the six main categories of invoicing motives described above. The final columns

10

of each table integrate the variables into single multinomial logit specifications.9 Overall, Table 4
provides results from 10 multinomial logit regression specifications, while Table 5 provides
results from only 9 specifications since the exchange rate peg variables are excluded. Coefficient
estimates that are statistically significant at the 1 and 5 percent level are indicated by * and **
respectively. The tables also report the number of observations used in the regressions and the
AIC statistic. All regressions include time fixed effects to capture common unobserved
variability by quarter, and have standard errors clustered by month.
3.2.1. Imports from non-U.S. countries
Table 4 presents the results for Canadian imports from countries other than the United
States, with VCP (invoicing in USD in practice) being the benchmark option. The regression
specifications show the direction of influence of regressions on the likelihood of choosing PCP
and LCP (versus VCP). Regression 2 reflects the coalescing motive. Imports from more
homogeneous sectors, as indicated by values of one for the dummy variables Refconi or
Walrasconi, have a higher probability of being invoiced in CAD and a lower probability of being
invoiced in producer’s currencies. This is consistent with a coalescing motive around the
destination currency, for instance reflecting competition from domestic Canadian firms, or
around the USD which is the standard invoicing currency in commodities.
Regression 3 captures the different aspects of the bargaining power of exporters and
importers. Exporters from a country with a high market share in Canadian imports in the relevant
industry are less likely to invoice in CAD, as they are in a stronger position vis-à-vis Canadian
customers. While regression 3 shows a smaller use of the PCP option for high market share
exporters, this is overturned once we control for other invoicing motives (regression 10). Large
orders (Top5indi=1) are associated with a larger use of the LCP option and a smaller use of PCP.
One interpretation of these results could be that larger imports are mapped to larger and more
powerful customers. These transactions are then more likely to be associated with LCP if the
importers prefer not to bear the exchange rate risk. The interacted terms in the regression show
the increased use of LCP for large shipments is most pronounced when exporters are from a
9

Differences across the coefficients on the regressors in the dedicated regressions versus the fully integrated
regressions could occur due to correlations among the regressors in the respective data samples. Appendix Tables 3
and 4 provide coefficients of variation to suggest where such issues of correlation may arise.

11

country with a large market share. This can be interpreted as showing that the benefits of a high
market share for an exporter are diminished when there are large customers on the other side of
the transaction. With the effect of Top5Ind interacted with the mean value of market share
according to the last regression column, we observe that the overall effect of being large is
negative whenever exporter market share in a country exceeds about 2 percent.
Regression 4 captures the effect on invoice currency choice of the commodity intensity of
production costs at the HS2 industry level. A higher intensity of commodity inputs, which tend
to be invoiced in USD, reinforces the use of USD in invoicing by reducing the prevalence of
both PCP and LCP. This variable sheds light on what might be the effects on invoicing of
imported input use, as countries which import a large share of commodity or other inputs would
likewise have an incentive to invoice their exports in the same currency as used for those
imports.
The role of exchange rate volatility is captured in regression 5. We observe that exporters
from countries with volatile currencies vis-à-vis the CAD are more likely to use the USD, with a
reduction in the use of both the LCP and PCP options. This feature is consistent with the
theoretical finding that invoicing takes place in currencies with more stable fundamentals.
The hedging motivation for invoicing is captured in regression 6. While the hedging
variables have some influence on invoicing, the role of these variables remains limited and not
fully consistent with theoretical priors. First, some of these terms are statistically insignificant
even in a sample of about 17 million observations. Second, the use of PCP is reduced for all
three hedge variables. While this is reasonable when the USD or CAD offer hedging benefits, it
is less clear that hedging benefits from the EUR should reduce PCP, given the large presence of
eurozone countries in the sample. Hedging benefits from the EUR, however, reduce the use of
LCP, which is to be expected. Yet, hedging benefits from the CAD do not lead to a larger use of
the LCP option. When the USD is a better hedging currency, invoicing is weakly tilted towards
it. Overall, this mixed evidence on the hedging motive can arise either because the theory is not
fully supported, or because of the challenges in building the hedging measures. It is possible that
this constructed indicator variable does not appropriately account for the profit correlations that
enter into producer decisions.
Regression 7 illustrates the impact of exchange rate regimes, with the findings being
consistent with theoretical priors. Exporters from countries with a peg to the USD make more
12

use of that currency at the expense of the LCP and VCP options. Exporters from the euro area
are likely to more frequently use the PCP option.
3.2.2. Imports from the United States
As previously noted, the vast majority of U.S. imports are invoiced in USD, which
represents the PCP option for this sample of nearly 25 million exports. Some interesting results
from Table 5 are that this pattern is reinforced when exported goods are highly homogeneous
(regression 2) and their production inputs are highly commodity intensive (regression 4).
Regression 3 shows that the PCP option gains prevalence when the United States
accounts for a large market share in Canadian imports for the industry in question. Yet, larger
transactions tend to be associated with more use of the LCP option, especially when the U.S.
exporter market share is high. These results are consistent with the evidence for non-U.S.
exporters. Periods of relatively high volatility in the USD-CAD exchange rate are associated
with larger use of third country currencies (regression 5). Regression 6 shows that our hedging
variables do not systematically influence invoicing choices by U.S. exporters.10
3.2.3. Which factors contribute most to invoicing?
While the multinomial logit expressions do not provide a direct variance decomposition
mapping, we examine the Akaike information criteria (AIC) values11 to compare explanatory
power of alternative combinations of regressors. The comparisons of AIC scores across the
specifications of Tables 4 and 5 are provided in Table 6. Recall that all specifications have the
USD as the dominant invoicing currency, so the fits of models are ones that best explain the
deviations of invoicing from this standard.
For invoicing of exports from non-US countries, the largest contributors by far are the
exchange rate regime choices of countries, whether pegging to the USD or if countries are part of
the euro area. The score comparisons show that the next largest contributors are the hedging
variables, although it is noteworthy that the role of these variables is likely arising because these
constructions have EURhedge being 0 for countries pegged to the euro, since the correlation is
10

As shown in Appendix Table 3, the Coefvar variable is highly collinear with the hedge variables, making
coefficient estimates of these variables unreliable.
11
This statistic equals -2ln (L)+2k where k is the number of parameters being estimated and L is the log likelihood.
Smaller values indicate that a model explains the data better (less information is lost in fitting the model to the data)
than larger values.
13

undefined; that is, if EURhedge is equal to 1, it must be something other than a euro zone
country. In other words, while the hedge variables alone appear to have explanatory power, this
is due to a correlation with the exchange rate regimes. Indeed, the magnitudes of the coefficients
from the hedge variables decline significantly in specifications that also introduce the exchange
rate regime dummy variables. The variables that capture strategic behavior by importers and
exporters are the next most important determinants of invoicing choices of exporters, with the
effects on explaining invoice currency selection dominating the effects of terms directly
associated with exchange rate variability of currencies and intensity of commodity input use.
Exports from the United States are heavily invoiced in USD. The strategic variables that
are the largest contributors to deviations from this structure are Importshareti,e and Top5indi,
followed distantly by the Refconi and Walrasconi variables. The identification is coming from the
fact that large invoices are more likely to be invoiced in CAD, and less likely to be invoiced in
any other currency. The commodity intensity of production, variability of bilateral exchange
rates, and hedging motives contribute very little to deviations from USD use in invoicing exports
to Canada.
4. The standard theoretical drivers of invoicing with multiple currencies
Our empirical results are consistent with standards theoretical models of the invoicing
choice of individual firms, as well as the aggregate invoicing shares. In this section, we briefly
review some of these insights in the simple model presented by Goldberg and Tille (2008). For
brevity we focus on the main elements, with more detailed exposition provided in the appendix.
The section concludes by showing the inability of this model to generate the observed link
between transaction size and invoicing.
4.1. A simple model
Consider an exporter, located in country e, which sells to customers in the destination
country d. The market is characterized by monopolistic competition, and the demand faced by
the exporter is inversely related to the price of her specific brand relative to the other brands sold
in the market, with a constant price elasticity of demand . Production relies on a technology
with decreasing returns to scale, implying a larger marginal cost for higher output.

14

The exporter sets a price before exchange rates are realized. The price is set in currency k,
which is a basket of the exporter’s currency e, the customer’s currency d, and a third vehicle
currency v. The exporter’s optimization proceeds in two steps, first choosing the composition of
the invoicing basket k, and then setting the price that is set in that basket.
As in Goldberg and Tille (2008), the solution of the model proceeds backwards. We first
solve for the optimal preset price taking the invoicing currency k as given. The exporter’s
expected profits at that price are then written as a quadratic log expansion around a steady state.
Intuitively, the invoicing choice determines the exporter’s exposure to exchange rate movements,
as well as the correlation of her her revenue and costs. For instance, the destination currency d
offers hedging benefits if it appreciates in the states of nature where the exporter faces high
wages. Setting the price in currency d then implies that the unit revenue, in the exporter’s
currency e, increases precisely when costs are high. The invoicing choice is then similar to a
portfolio choice, balancing exposures to risk and the hedging properties of various currencies.
These aspects are reflected in the variances and covariances between the various variables, and
capturing these requires a quadratic expansion of the exporter’s profits.
We denote the share of currency d in the invoicing basket of exporter e by  e,d d . Similarly,
the share of currency v in the basket is  e,v d . Each share is between zero and one, and the residual
is the share of currency e in the basket:  ee,d  1   ed,d   ev,d . For instance, the case of “producer
currency pricing” where the price is set in currency e and the customer bears all the exchange
rate risk corresponds to  e,e d = 1,  e,d d =  e,v d = 0. The case of “local currency pricing” where the
price is set in currency d and the exporter bears all the exchange rate risk corresponds to  e,e d =
0,  e,d d = 1,  e,v d = 0. We denote the shares of the various currencies in the price index over all
the brands sold in country d in a similar way. Specifically,  dd is the share of the index that is set
in currency d, and  dv is the share set in currency v.
In this setting, the optimal invoicing choice of the exporter in country e is given by:
(1)

 ed,d   dd  (1  )  (me ,d , s e ,d ) ;  ev,d   dv  (1  )  (me ,d , s e ,v )

where   [0,1] is a coefficient that is higher the more demand is price-sensitive and the more
the production function exhibits decreasing returns to scale. me ,d reflects the exogenous drivers
15

of production costs, namely wages as well as demand, as a higher demand is associated with a
higher marginal cost in the presence of decreasing returns to scale. s e ,d is the exchange rate
between currency e and currency d, with a higher value corresponding to a depreciation of
currency e. The  terms in (1) reflect the co-movements between costs and exchange rates.
Specifically, a positive value of  (me,d , s e,d ) indicates that marginal costs are high when
currency e is weak relative to currency d.12
The invoicing choice in (1) is driven by two factors. First, the exporter chooses an
invoicing basket that is close to the one chosen by her competitors, i.e. sets her shares  e,d d ,  e,v d
in line with the aggregate shares  dd ,  dv . Intuitively, the exporter wants to stabilize her output by
keeping her price (expressed in customer’s currency) close to that of her competitors. This
“coalescing” motive, captured by the first term on the right-hand side of (1), is more relevant
when demand is sensitive to movements in relative prices and when fluctuations in demand
affect marginal costs (i.e.  is large). Second, the exporter invoices in currencies that offer
hedging benefits, i.e. that appreciate when her marginal cost is high. This “hedging” motive is
captured by the second term on the right-hand side of (1).
The aggregate role of currencies in the market of country d, captured by the  terms,
reflects the invoicing shares of specific firms (1), as well as the market shares of firms from
different countries. These include local firms, which we assume invoice solely in currency d.
4.2. Empirical implications
The aggregate invoicing shares ’s consist of the exporter-specific invoicing shares ’s
and the market shares of producers from various countries in the destination market, including
local firms. The joint solution for the ’s and ’s combines (1) and the various market shares.
For brevity we focus on the intuition behind the impact of several prominent exogenous drivers.
The first driver is the market share of various countries. The lower the share of foreign
countries, the higher is the role of currency d in the invoicing. Intuitively, local firms invoice in
currency d. A higher share of local firm then directly reduces the role of currency d. This is
compounded by an indirect effect, as foreign firms increase their use of currency d to keep their
12

Specifically, the ’s are the coefficient of a regression of

me,d on the two exchange rates. This relationship was

the concept underlying construction of the hedge variables of section 3.
16

prices in line with that of local firms. That indirect effect is stronger when the coalescing motive
is more pronounced.
Conversely, a reduction of the share of local firms shifts invoicing away from currency d.
We can also show that the invoicing shifts mostly to the other currencies that account for a
relatively large share to start with. To sum up, we get the following implications:
Implication 1: A higher market share for an exporting country reduces the use of the
destination currency. This effect is larger in sectors with a strong coalescing motive and
a large share of imports.13
This implication is supported by the evidence provided in Section 3, that exporters’ from
countries with a large market share in the industry are more likely to use the PCP option at the
expense of the LCP option.
A second driver of invoicing is the use of imported inputs.14 If firms in country e import
inputs that are price in currency v, this tilts their invoicing towards currency v. Intuitively, this
tilt reflects the hedging motive in (1). An appreciation of currency v raises the cost of inputs, in
currency e, for these firms. Invoicing in currency v insures that their income in their own
currency also increases, and thus offers a hedge against fluctuations in marginal costs. In the
presence of a coalescing motive, this also shifts the invoicing of other firms even when their
costs are not directly exposed to the exchange rate, as they want to keep their own price in line
with that of firms from country e. In short, we get the following implications:
Implication 2: When costs in an exporting country 1 are more exposed to the exchange
rate with another country 2, the invoicing of all exporters shifts away from the currency
of country 1 towards the currency of country 2.
Our empirical results support this implication. All else equal, exporters in sectors with a
high use of commodity inputs, which are predominantly invoiced in USD, are more likely to
invoice their exports in USD than in their own currency or in the CAD.
The invoicing choice of exporters also reflects macroeconomic volatility. The currency of
a country characterized by large shocks, owing for instance to a weak monetary policy, is
associated with larger exchange rate movements than other currencies. This volatility reduces its
13
14

This aspect is discussed by Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2005).
See for instance Novy (2006).
17

attractiveness as an invoicing currency. Similarly, the currencies of countries with stable
fundamentals are more attractive, as stressed by Devereux, Engel and Storgaard (2004).
Implication 3: More volatile macroeconomic factors in a country shift the invoicing
away from its currency and towards the other currencies, especially towards the
currencies of countries with more stable fundamentals.
This is confirmed by our empirical evidence that countries with more volatile exchange
rates vis-à-vis the CAD, reflecting more volatile domestic macroeconomic conditions, are less
likely to use the PCP option for their exports.
Exchange rate regimes also affect the invoicing choice. If a country e stabilizes its
exchange rate vis-à-vis the destination currency, it reduces the attractiveness of that currency in
terms of hedging. As a result, invoicing shifts away from currency d towards currency e.
Implication 4: A reduction of exchange rate volatility by an exporting country vis-à-vis
the destination raises the share of its currency in invoicing at the expense of the
destination currency.
The evidence supports this implication, with exporters from countries with a peg to the
USD being more likely to use that currency than their own or the CAD.
4.3. The role of transaction size
The model described in the previous section does not consider different transaction sizes.
We can easily introduce that aspect in the model however. Consider that the exporter in country

e sells to different customers in country d, with different customers indexed by i  I , where I is
the set of all customers. The demand from customer i, C di (z ) , is written as:

(2)





-λ

C di ( z )  ( S e ,k ( i ) Pek,d( i ) ( z )) /( S e ,d Pd ) C di

where Pek,d( i ) ( z ) is the preset component of the price, S e,k (i ) is the exchange rate between currency
e and currency k(i), Pd is the price index of all brands in the destination market, in currency d,
and C di is the customer’s overall demand for all brands. We allow for the invoicing currency

k (i ) to differ across customers. Specifically, the invoicing shares in the destination currency d

18

and the vehicle currency v for customer i are denoted by  ed,d,i and  ev,,di . Similarly Pek,d( i ) ( z ) can
differ across customers.
Customers only differ through the size of their consumption in the steady state, denoted by
C di . They share the same price-elasticity of demand, and ex-post their overall demands fluctuate
by the same percentage amount: c di  c d , with lower case letters denoting logs.
We introduce a link between the various customers through the production technology.
Specifically, the exporter uses a technology with decreasing returns to scale in the total
production:
Ye ,d ( z )  ( ) 1 ( C di )1 H e,d ( z )



(3)

i

where 0    1 . The scaling of technology (3) by the steady state level of overall demand
simplifies the algebra. From this specification one may expect that the exporter treats different
customers differently. For instance, the exporter could choose to make more use of currency d
for large customers as fluctuations in their demands lead to large movements in the marginal cost
of production. However, we show that this is not the case, with a detailed description provided in
the appendix.
The maximization of expected profits (expressed as a quadratic log expansion around the
steady state) leads to the following first-order conditions with respect to  ed,d,i and  ev,,di :
0  E (me ,d s e ,d )  E ( s e ,d ) 2  ed,d,i  E ( s e ,d s e ,v )  ev,,di


(4)


λ1    

i
d ,i
d
i
v ,i
2
v
   d  e , d   d  E ( s e , d )    d  e , d   d  E ( s e , d s e , v ) 
  i

 i



0  E (me,d s e,v )  E ( s e,d s e,v )  ed,d,i  E ( s e,v ) 2  ev,,di


λ1    

2
i
d ,i
d
i
v ,i
v
   d  e , d   d  E ( s e , d s e ,v )    d  e , d   d  E ( s e , v ) 
  i
 i




where  di  C di /  C dj is the share of customer i in total steady state consumption. Taking
j

weighted averages of these conditions across customers, we show that the average invoicing
shares are identical to (1):


i

i
d

 ed,d,i   dd  (1  )  (me,d , s e,d ) ;



i
d

 ev,,di   dv  (1  )  (me,d , s e,v )

i

19

The first-order conditions (4) then imply that the invoicing shares are the same for all customers,
regardless of size. Allowing for different customer sizes and an interaction through the cost of
production therefore does not give rise to differential invoicing choice across customers in the
simple model.
5. A bargaining view of invoicing

The previous section shows that the standard model does not account for the link between
transaction size and invoicing that is found in the data. Generating this empirical pattern requires
extending the model. While one can think of many ways of extending the model, we focus on
relaxing the assumption of a unilateral invoicing decision by the exporter. In the simple model,
customers play no role in the invoicing decision, and simply provide exporters with a demand
schedule and let them choose the invoicing. Such an approach is not consistent with evidence
that invoicing is set through a bargaining between firms and customers, as shown by Friberg and
Wilander (2008). Allowing for exporters and customers to jointly determine invoicing is thus
more empirically realistic, and we show that it allows for a link between transaction size and
invoicing. This section develops a setting where invoicing is set through bargaining between
consumers and firms. While more empirically appealing, this alternative setup substantially
raises the degree of complexity of the analysis. We therefore focus on the problem of an
individual exporter, and abstract from the aggregate invoicing shares.
The essence of our results is as follows. We assume that invoicing is set through a
bargaining over the splitting of exporters’ and customers’ surpluses, with exogenous bargaining
weights. We consider that exporters’ are risk averse, which implies first that they have some
preference for invoicing in their own currency, but also – and more importantly – that failing to
sell to large customers raises their marginal utility of income. Exporters then have an incentive to
be more accommodative to the needs of larger customers, which entails more use of the
destination currency as this limits the customers’ exchange rate exposure. Our model generates a
larger use of the destination currency for sales to large customers.
Our model also implies that the impact of size on invoicing is most pronounced when the
exogenous bargaining share of the customer is small. Intuitively, a customer with substantial
bargaining power can directly tilt the invoicing towards her preference. By contrast, a customer
with limited power cannot directly push for her preferred invoicing, but can do so indirectly by
20

presenting the exporter with an unpalatable outside option should the bargaining fail. In other
words, the power of the customer takes the forms of the formal bargaining weight and of her
size, with the latter being most useful when the former is limited.
While our model generates the pattern observed in the data, it should be seen as one way to
do so among several potential modeling approaches. We view our contribution as a step towards
bringing bargaining into invoicing models, while recognizing that a range of alternatives can
likewise be explored.15 In designing our extension to the simple model, we aim to keep as close
as possible to that model, and have the simple model be a particular case of our more general
setting. We also deliberately choose not to allow for exogenous difference in the interaction
between exporters and customers depending on size. For instance, one may consider that large
customers have stronger direct bargaining weights, or that bargaining only takes place with such
customers but not with smaller ones. While such settings can be plausible, they appear to us as
being too close to “assuming our answers” and we opt not to allow for such features.
5.1. Consumer surplus

We consider sales towards several customers indexed by i, with the demand given by (2).
As in the previous sub-section, customers only differ through the size of their steady state
consumption, and ex-post overall demands fluctuate in step: c di  c d . Customer i gets concave
utility from her consumption of brand z, which generates a preference for an invoicing currency
that stabilizes consumption. The utility takes a standard CRRA form:
(5)

U di ( z )  (1   d ) 1 E[C di ( z ) / C di ]1 d

;

d  0

The inclusion of C di in (5) ensures that the size of the consumer does not affect its utility. Our
specification of a utility defined at the level of each brand, instead of over a complete basket of
brands, simplifies the analysis by shutting down spillovers across the demands for different
brands. In our analysis, we focus on the case of  d  1 which is empirically more relevant.
The utility (5) is obtained only if the exporter and the customer reach an agreement in their
bargaining over invoicing. Should they fail to do so, the alternative utility for the customer is

15

For instance, one could consider a setting with increasing returns to scale where large customers are valued as
they lower production costs for all sales.
21

equivalent to a consumption equal to a fraction  di  1 of C di . The surplus that the customer
gains from successful bargaining is then:
SC ek,(di )  (1   d ) 1 E[C di ( z ) / C di ]1 d  (1   d ) 1 ( di )1 d

(6)

5.2. Producer surplus

The exporter of brand z uses a technology with decreasing returns to scale:



C di ( z )  ( ) 1 (C di )1 H ei ,d ( z )

(7)





;

0  1

For simplicity, we assume that there are different production lines for different customers, so that
the demand by a customer does not affect the marginal costs of producing for other customers.
Our specification thus differs from (3). We opt for this specification for simplicity, as our earlier
analysis shows that linkages through cost do not give raise to differentiated invoicing. The
technology is also scaled by the level of steady state demand, which ensures that steady state
marginal costs and prices are equalized across customers. The profits that the exporter gets from
selling to customer j are denoted by  ek,(dj ) ( z ) . We assume that the exporter’s utility of her profits
takes a CRRA form:


Q ( z )  (1   e ) E   ek,(dj ) ( z )
 jJ


(8)

1 e

1

J
e

e  0

;

where J is the set of customers to whom the exporter can sell brand z. Our exposition will focus
on the case of  e  1 .
If the firm fails to reach an agreement with customer i she will only sell to the other
customers in the set I.16 The surplus of the exporter from successful bargaining with customer i is
then:
(9)

SE

k (i )
e,d



 (1   e ) E  ek,(dj ) ( z )    ek,(dj ) ( z )
j i


1

1 e



 (1   e ) E   ek,(dj ) ( z )
 j i


1 e

1

The impact of profits on the exporter’s marginal utility is an important difference from usual
models in which the discount factor is not influenced by the pricing and invoicing decisions. In

16

In equilibrium the firm sells to all customers. We can therefore evaluate the firm’s outside option in its bargaining
with a specific customer as the utility from sales to all other customers.
22

particular, it implies that the exporter’s marginal utility of income is higher when negotiating
with a larger customer, making her more willing to accommodate the customer’s preferences.
The exporter’s profits are affected by decisions on both pricing, Pek,d( i ) ( z ) , and invoicing,

 ed,d(i ) and  ev,(di ) . We consider that these are set in two stages. First, invoicing is set through a
bargaining between the exporter and the consumer. Second, the exporter sets the price taking the
invoicing and demand (2) as given. The first step is forward-looking and takes the conditional
pricing choice of the second step into account.
This assumption that invoicing is set through a bargaining process, but prices are not,
warrants further discussion. It differs from the standard approach in bargaining models where
agents first maximize the joint surplus and then split this surplus between them. While following
the latter approach has obvious appeal, it does not allow us (to our knowledge) to obtain the case
of unilateral invoicing and pricing as a particular case of the more general solution. By contrast,
limiting bargaining to the invoicing shares and letting exporters set the price unilaterally
encompasses the simpler model developed in section 4 as a particular case. We thus opted for
that limited inclusion of invoicing in order to remain as close as possible to the standard setting.
Our choice of a setting encompassing the standard one is done solely to keep the focus on
bargaining over invoicing, and should not be interpreting as a judgment against broader
bargaining models. Richer inclusions of bargaining in the context of invoice currency choice are
clearly desirable, but we leave them for future research.
5.3. Pricing

The exporter sets Pek,d( i ) ( z ) to maximize (8). This leads to a standard expression where the
expected discounted marginal revenue is a markup over the expected discounted marginal cost.
The price is then affected by the ex-post co-movements between the variables of the model, a
feature akin to a risk premium. An additional complication over our earlier model is that the
discount factor used in setting the price is itself a function of the profits. The preset price can be
written as a quadratic expansion around the steady state:
(10)

2
2
1
1
   (1   ) k (i )
p e ,d ( z )  E mcek,(di )   E mrek,d( i )   E disc ek,(di ) (mrek,d(i )  mcek,(di ) )

2
2

23

where mrek,d( i ) reflects the drivers of the marginal return, mcek,(di ) , reflects the drivers of marginal
costs, and disc ek,(di ) is the discount factor that is inversely relative to denoting the linear
component of profits,  e,d :
mrek,d(i )  (  1)[  ed,d(i ) s e ,d   ev,(di ) s e,v ]  z e ,d

 d (i )
[  e ,d s e ,d   ev,(di ) s e ,v ]




 (  1)
1
  e 
z e,d 
we    e e,d
   (1   ) 
   (1   )

mcek,(di )  we 
disc ek,(di )

1

z e,d 

where z e,d  [ s e,d  p d ]  c d . (10) shows that altering the invoicing shares impacts the exposure

of the exporter to fluctuations in exchange rates and marginal costs, and leads her to alter the
level at which she sets the prices. The utility of the exporter (8) can also be expressed as a
quadratic approximation around the steady state.
5.4. Invoicing

In the first step of the solution, the exporter and the customer set the invoicing shares to
maximize the following measure of joint surplus that combines (6) and (9):
(11)



SJ ek,(di )  SE ek,(di )

 SC 


k ( i ) 1
e,d

where   [0,1] reflects the relative bargaining power of the exporter. We do not allow for this
power to differ depending on the customer size, as this would be too immediate a way to
generate a link between size and invoicing. The surpluses (6) and (9) can be written as quadratic
approximations around the steady state, which shows that the gap between each surplus and its
steady-state value reflects expected cross products of the deviations of the exchange rates, wages
and consumption from steady state values. The joint surplus (11) can be written in a similar
form, giving a quadratic expression in the invoicing shares  ed,d(i ) and  ev,(di ) .
For brevity we focus on the optimization with respect to the invoicing share of the
destination currency,  ed,d( i ) , with the analysis for  ev,(di ) following similar steps. The derivative of
the joint surplus (11) with respect to the invoicing share takes the form (for brevity we abstract
from some coefficients that do not alter the message of the model):

24

SJ ek,(di )

(12)

 ed,d( i )



SE ek,(di )
 ed,d( i )

 D [ ,  ]
i
d

i
d

SC ek,(di )
 ed,d( i )

where Ddi [ di ,  ] is an increasing function of customer size measured by her steady-state share
of overall consumption,  di , and is a decreasing function of the exporter’s bargaining power, .
Both derivatives on the right-hand side of (12) are decreasing linear functions of the invoicing
share of the customer’s currency,  ed,d( i ) .
The optimal invoicing shares are obtained by setting (12) and the corresponding condition
with respect to the share of the vehicle currency to zero. The invoicing shares are then:
(13)

 ed,d(i )   s dd   w  ( we , s e,d )   c  (c d , s e,d )

(14)

 ev,(di )   s dd   w  ( we , se,v )   c  (c d , s e,v )

where the  terms are regressions coefficients defined in the same way as in (1), and the ’s are
coefficients.
The unilateral invoicing assumption of the standard model corresponds to the situation
where the exporter holds the entire bargaining power ( = 1). In that case Ddi  0 in (12) and the
invoicing shares (13)-(14) are identical to (1). Under this allocation, the marginal impact of the
customer’s currency invoicing share on the customer’s surplus (6) is:
SC ek,(di )

(15)



d (i )
e,d

 2

( d  1)  ( e  1) d
[ d E ( s e ,d ) 2   dv E ( s e ,d s e ,v )]
   (1   )



( d  1)  ( e  1)
(  1)(  1)  ( d  1)
Ec d s e ,d   e
Ewe s e ,d
   (1   )
   (1   )

unilat

The customer’s surplus is affected by the level of the preset price and the ex-post
volatility of consumption. Welfare is reduced when the exporter sets a higher price (10), an
aspect captured by the  e  1 terms in (15). Increasing the invoicing share of the destination
currency boosts the exporter’s exposure to exchange rate volatility, inducing her to charge a
higher price. In addition, lower demand ( c d  0 ) reduces the exporters’ profits and increases her
discount factor. If the exporter’s currency appreciates when demand is low ( Ec d s e,d  0 ), raising
the invoicing share of the destination currency adversely affects her as she faces a low revenue in
her currency at the same time that demand is low. This induces her to set a higher price. Finally,

25

high wages ( we  0 ) lower profits and increase the discount factor. If the exporter’s currency
depreciates when wages are high ( Ewe s e ,d  0 ), raising the invoicing share of the destination
currency generates a favorable hedge against these costs as the exporter receives more in terms
of her own currency when wages are high. This induces her to reduce her price.
The customer’s surplus is also lowered when demand is volatile, either because the
relative price of the brand is volatile or because aggregate demand fluctuates. This dimension is
captured by the  d  1 terms in (15). Increasing the invoicing share of the customer’s currency
above the unilateral allocation reduces the volatility of the exporter’s brand relative price, which
benefits the customer. In addition, the sensitivity of the customer’s surplus to the invoicing share
is lower when the customer’s currency is already used substantially in the unilateral invoicing.
This is the case if for instance this currency offers a good hedge against fluctuations in wages
( Ewe s e ,d  0 ). Increasing the use of the destination currency then yields only a moderate gain for
the customer. Finally, a higher use of the destination currency limits the impact of fluctuations in
demand, c d , on the customer’s surplus, if the exporter’s currency depreciates when demand is
high ( Ec d s e,d  0 ). Intuitively, invoicing in the exporter’s currency then lowers the relative price
of her good when demand is already high, thereby magnifying demand volatility.
The customer’s surplus then balances the impact on the preset price with that on demand
volatility. The second aspect dominates if the customer is sufficiently more risk averse than the
exporter, i.e. ( d  1)  ( e  1) . (15) also shows that a use of the customer’s currency in
invoicing above its share in the unilateral outcome is not necessarily in the customer’s interest, as
the burden this places on the exporter leads her to set prices at a higher level.
We focus on the case where (15) is positive, so that increasing the invoicing share of
currency d from its value under unilateral invoicing benefits the customer. The unilateral
allocation is thus characterized by SE ek,(di ) /  ed,d( i )  0 and SC ek,(di ) /  ed,d( i )  0 . We can show that
the second derivatives of the exporter’s and consumer’s surpluses (64) and (9) are negative. It
follows that the invoicing under a bilateral bargaining process ( < 1) entails a larger share of the
customer’s currency than the unilateral invoicing. The bilateral invoicing allocation is then
characterized by SE ek,(di ) /  ed,d(i )  0 and SC ek,(di ) /  ed,d( i )  0 . Our results can be summarized by
the following implication:
26

Implication 5: The optimal invoicing under bargaining is likely to call for a larger use
of the destination currency than under a unilateral choice by the exporter.
5.5. Invoicing and consumer size

The role of the consumer size is derived by setting (12) to zero, and differentiating the
resulting expression with respect to the invoicing share and the size of demand. Abstracting from
some scaling coefficients for brevity, this implies:
Ddi [ di ,  ]

(16)

SC ek,(di )


d (i )
e,d

d di  d ed,d( i )

As SC ek,(di ) /  ed,d( i )  0 at the bargained allocation, both sides of (16) are positive. The share of
the customer’s currency in the invoicing basket is then larger for bigger customers:
d ed,d( i ) / d di  0 .

Intuitively, the marginal value of exporter’s profits is higher when she fails to reach an
agreement with a large customer than when she fails to do so with a smaller one. When
bargaining with a large customer, the firm is more amenable to moving the use of the local
currency beyond the level that it would unilaterally choose.
The central element of our result is not just the fact that failing to reach an agreement with
a large customer entails substantial foregone profits, but that the marginal value of these profits
is larger. If the firm is risk-neutral (  e  0 ) then the function H in (16) is always equal to one
and its derivative is zero, implying that customer size has no impact on the outcome of the
bargaining process.
The impact of customer’s size on the invoicing decision depends on the value of the
derivative of the customer’s surplus with respect to the invoicing share. If the bargaining
allocation is substantially tilted towards the customer’s preferences, because of a limited
bargaining power of the exporter for instance (a small ), the derivative of the customer’s
surplus, SC ek,(di ) /  ed,d( i ) , is small as the bargaining process brings the customer close to her
preferred invoicing allocation. Going beyond the bargained allocation then entails only a limited
gain for the customer. The left hand side of (16) is then small and customer’s size has little
impact. Intuitively, being a large customer offers little additional benefit when the customer
already has a substantial role in the bargaining process. By contrast, only large customers can tilt
27

the invoicing allocation in their favor when their direct bargaining weight is limited. Our analysis
can be summarized in the following implication:
Implication 6: Under a bargaining determination of invoicing, the use of the destination
currency is more pronounced for larger customers. This is especially the case when the
bargaining allocation is close to the unilateral one.
This implication is in line with our empirical evidence that transaction in the top 5th
percentile of a specific industry are more likely to be invoiced in the destination currency. It is
also consistent with the finding that the impact of transaction size on invoicing is most
pronounced in industries where the exporter is from a country with a large market share, a proxy
for her bargaining power.
5.6. Discussion

Our model shows that moving the choice of invoicing from a unilateral decision by a firm
to a bargaining process substantially alters the results. First, it leads to a larger use of the
destination currency. Second, the use of destination currency is more pronounced for larger sales,
as the marginal value of profits is then high. Finally, the impact of customer’s size is larger when
customers otherwise have little direct influence on the bargaining process.
Our bargaining model also offers a channel through which firms in large countries are less
likely to invoice in the currency of their consumers. In the model, for brevity we considered that
the firm only sells to foreign consumers. The model could be extended to include domestic sales
by the firm in its own country. A firm with a large domestic market would have a lower marginal
utility of profits than a firm with a smaller home market, and thus be less amenable to shift its
invoicing towards the destination currency. In addition, the firm could to have a larger
bargaining power , which further reduces its willingness to accommodate the needs of foreign
consumers. While we have not assessed the impact of the various drivers considered in section 2
in our alternative model, the results are likely to be qualitatively similar.
As discussed at the beginning of section 5, we view our model as the first step towards
including bargaining in the invoicing process. We do not consider that this model represents the
final stage in such a research effort for two reasons. First, we limited the bargaining to invoicing,
and kept the pricing decision in the hands of the exporter. This choice is motivated by our desire
to have the extended model encompass the simple one of unilateral invoicing as a particular case.
28

Our setting however does not take the form of a maximization of the joint surplus, followed by a
splitting of this surplus, which is more standard in bargaining models.17 Developing broader
bargaining models is clearly a promising avenue for research. Second, our approach abstracts
from alternative channels through which invoicing could be different for large customers. One
would be a model with increasing returns to scale where firms are more willing to accommodate
the invoicing preferences of large customers as large sales drive production costs down.
6. Concluding Remarks

The extensive literature on international trade invoicing is affected by two limitations that
this paper addresses. On the empirical side, existing studies only consider aggregate data. We
instead test a range of possible determinants of invoicing by using a new highly disaggregated
dataset for 45 million Canadian import transactions. While the U.S. dollar is the dominant
currency for imports from the United States, other currencies play a substantial role in imports
from other countries, which account for nearly half of overall imports by count. We find strong
support for a direct role of exchange rate arrangements, coalescing in a common currency, use of
commodity inputs in production, and for the bargaining power of importers. The connection
between transaction size and invoicing is a new aspect in the invoicing literature. We find only
mixed support for invoicing decisions influenced by profit hedging considerations.
On the theory side, existing studies consider that invoicing is unilaterally set by
exporters, a feature that is not supported by survey evidence. We introduce interplay between
customers and exporters in the selection of invoicing currencies by considering bargaining
between the exporter and the customer. Two main results emerge. First, the bargaining solution
calls for a larger use of the destination currency than the unilateral invoicing. Second, the use of
the customer’s currency is more pronounced for large sales. This is especially the case when the
direct bargaining power of exporters is high.
Our conclusions provide a new perspective on the determinants of invoicing currency
use, and, through this, on international policy transmission through exchange rate movements.
For instance, a shift from a large number of relatively small imports to a handful of larger ones,
such as large retail chains, could boost the use of the importers’ currency and thus limit the passthrough of exchange rate movements to import prices. This link between industry concentration
17

See for instance Blanchard (2000) in the context of the labor market where firms and workers choose the
employment level to maximize that overall surplus, and bargain over the wage to split the surplus.
29

and pass-through has not been addressed to our knowledge, and offers an interesting
counterpoint to the standard view in the literature that large exporters always have an advantage
in determining pricing features. Another implication is that a shift by emerging markets away
from dollar pegs towards floating exchange rates could lower the use of the dollar as an
invoicing currency, as could declines in dollar use in sales of specific commodities in global
markets . Such a reduction in the global role of the dollar could have profound implications for
the international transmission of policy, as discussed by Goldberg and Tille (2009).

References:

Bacchetta, Philippe and van Wincoop, Eric. 2005. “A Theory of the Currency Denomination of
International Trade.” Journal of International Economics, (December) 67(2), pp. 295-319.
Blanchard, Olivier. 2000., “The Economics of Unemployment. Shocks, Institutions, and
Interactions.” mimeo, MIT .
Devereux, Michael, Engel, Charles, and Storgaard, Peter. 2004. “Endogenous Exchange Rate
Pass-Through when Nominal Prices are set in Advance.” Journal of International
Economics, 63(2), pp. 263-291.
Donnenfeld, Shabtai and Haug, Alfred. 2003. "Currency Invoicing in International Trade: An
Empirical Investigation." Review of International Economics, 11, pp. 332-345.
Friberg, Richard, and Wilander, Fredrik, 2008. “The currency denomination of exports -- A
questionnaire study.” Journal of International Economics, 75(1), pp. 54-69.
Friberg, Richard. 1998. "In which Currency Should Exporters Set their Prices?" Journal of
International Economics, 45(1), pp. 59-76.
Goldberg, Linda, and Cédric Tille. 2008. “Vehicle currency use in international trade.” Journal
of International Economics, 76, pp. 177-192.
Gopinath, Gita, Oleg Itskhoki and Roberto Rigobon, 2009. “Currency Choice and Exchange Rate
Pass-through", American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Ilzetski, Oleg, Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff, 2009. "Exchange Rate Arrangements
Entering the 21st Century: Which Anchor Will Hold?", mimeo.
Novy, Dennis, 2006. Hedge your Costs: Exchange Rate Risk and Endogenous Currency
Invoicing, mimeo, University of Cambridge.

30

Rauch, James. 1999. “Networks versus Markets in International Trade.” Journal of International
Economics, 48, pp. 7-35.

31

Table 1. Regional Exporter Presence in Canadian Imports by Broad Industry Group, by Count

Broad Industry
United States
Category
Animal Products
68.2
Vegetable Products
60.6
Foodstuffs
61.7
Mineral Products
84.0
Chemicals
70.3
Plastics/Rubbers
63.7
Leather/Furs/Hides
44.2
Wood Products
66.3
Textiles
42.8
Footwear/Headgear
39.7
Stone/Glass
52.9
Metals
61.7
Machinery/Electrical
56.3
Transportation
65.4
Miscellaneous
54.5
Service
67.2
Total
58.9

Percent Share in Import Transaction Counts
East and SE
Other
Eurozone
China
Asia
Americas
5.0
9.9
4.6
3.0
7.9
7.5
5.9
3.8
11.8
7.8
3.5
1.6
4.6
1.5
3.2
0.7
11.5
2.8
3.3
0.4
11.2
7.8
3.3
0.9
14.3
13.1
9.3
1.9
9.8
8.2
4.7
1.0
13.6
14.6
9.2
1.4
12.9
18.2
15.1
1.9
13.3
9.7
6.8
1.7
11.4
7.3
4.6
0.8
13.4
8.8
3.5
0.9
10.3
5.9
3.2
0.8
11.6
10.7
6.5
0.5
8.9
7.1
2.9
0.7
11.8
8.6
5.0
1.0

All Other
Countries
9.3
14.3
13.5
6.1
11.6
13.2
17.2
9.9
18.4
12.1
15.7
14.2
17.1
14.3
16.2
13.1
14.7

Percent of
Total
1.0
3.1
3.2
1.5
9.8
7.0
1.0
7.2
9.3
1.2
4.6
13.2
23.2
2.8
10.9
0.8

Table 2. Regional Exporter Presence in Canadian Imports by Broad Industry Group, by Value

Broad Industry
United States
Category
Animal Products
62.3
Vegetable Products
69.6
Foodstuffs
58.6
Mineral Products
26.9
Chemicals
59.0
Plastics/Rubbers
76.9
Leather/Furs/Hides
14.4
Wood Products
79.4
Textiles
32.2
Footwear/Headgear
4.9
Stone/Glass
55.5
Metals
64.5
Machinery/Electrical
54.5
Transportation
68.9
Miscellaneous
47.3
Service
59.6
Total
56.6

Percent Share in Import Transaction Value
East and SE
Other
Eurozone
China
Asia
Americas
5.5
8.3
7.9
4.2
5.5
3.7
2.8
6.2
17.7
4.0
1.9
4.9
4.6
0.3
0.4
1.3
19.3
1.3
2.0
1.2
5.1
5.4
6.0
0.4
15.9
5.3
53.2
3.0
7.2
2.3
6.0
1.6
6.7
11.4
33.2
0.9
11.0
11.9
64.8
3.9
8.7
2.7
8.0
11.3
7.6
4.9
9.4
3.7
7.9
9.0
11.1
0.3
9.1
4.2
0.8
0.9
9.7
4.6
22.2
0.2
24.0
0.7
0.9
0.1
9.2
5.0
7.5
1.5

All Other
Countries
11.8
12.2
12.8
66.5
17.2
6.1
8.2
3.5
15.6
3.6
13.8
9.8
17.2
16.0
15.9
14.7
20.2

Percent of
Total
0.8
1.9
3.0
10.9
7.8
4.7
0.4
3.4
2.7
0.5
2.2
6.8
25.7
21.0
6.2
2.0

32

Table 3. LCP Share and Import Transaction Size

Broad Industry
Category
Animal Products
Vegetable Products
Foodstuffs
Mineral Products
Chemicals
Plastics/Rubbers
Leather/Furs/Hides
Wood Products
Textiles
Footwear/Headgear
Stone/Glass
Metals
Machinery/Electrical
Transportation
Miscellaneous
Service

United States
Median Transaction Size, CAD
LCP Share by Count
Lower 95th
Upper 5th
Lower 95th
Upper 5th
Percentile
Percentile
Percentile
Percentile
9,422
321,806
2.1
4.2
4,718
381,710
2.3
3.5
12,046
328,670
3.3
17.2
4,882
694,664
2.5
6.9
2,641
257,238
3.5
11.7
5,781
358,761
2.7
7.5
507
44,148
3.3
7.2
2,573
230,359
2.7
12.9
802
120,959
3.4
5.5
246
25,006
4.3
8.7
2,024
191,971
3.1
5.9
2,577
258,173
2.9
5.4
5,070
472,596
2.7
6.6
20,279
2,726,504
2.3
9.2
2,291
259,831
3.1
7.9
2,897
554,463
4.8
13.2

Non‐U.S. Countries
Median Transaction Size, CAD
LCP Share by Count
Lower 95th
Upper 5th
Lower 95th
Upper 5th
Percentile
Percentile
Percentile
Percentile
3,861
457,343
5.7
16.2
2,335
221,396
5.7
9.3
2,733
326,451
6.0
24.5
764
27,059,727
5.2
7.0
1,462
262,860
6.6
19.3
1,289
187,073
3.3
13.9
1,309
284,232
3.4
10.3
539
150,689
4.1
13.5
1,030
180,142
4.0
10.7
1,014
375,026
4.7
7.7
1,307
183,740
4.0
8.7
925
211,080
3.7
13.2
2,861
560,843
3.3
10.9
6,071
1,921,510
2.7
13.4
1,937
277,942
3.8
13.2
1,929
545,826
6.4
20.6

33

Table 4. Determinants of Invoicing Currency Choice: Non‐US Exports to Canada
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
LCP
PCP
LCP
PCP
LCP
PCP
LCP
PCP
LCP
PCP
LCP
PCP
LCP
PCP
LCP
PCP
LCP
PCP
Intercept
‐2.77* ‐1.46* ‐2.85* ‐1.45* ‐2.70* ‐1.35* ‐2.76* ‐1.38* ‐2.73* ‐1.02* ‐2.66* ‐0.94* ‐2.83* ‐2.00* ‐2.77* ‐1.33* ‐2.57* ‐0.31**
[0.05] [0.10] [0.05] [0.10] [0.04] [0.09] [0.05] [0.10] [0.06] [0.16] [0.05] [0.08] [0.06] [0.10] [0.04] [0.09] [0.06] [0.15]
Refcon
0.52* ‐0.10*
0.47* ‐0.14*
[0.00] [0.00]
[0.01] [0.00]
Walrascon
0.25* ‐0.22*
0.18* ‐0.26*
[0.01] [0.01]
[0.01] [0.01]
Importshare
‐8.73* ‐3.19*
‐8.66* ‐3.22*
[0.14] [0.04]
[0.14] [0.05]
Top5ind
1.51* ‐0.03**
1.50* ‐0.03**
[0.01] [0.01]
[0.01] [0.01]
Top5ind*
3.61* ‐4.19*
3.76* ‐4.24*
importshare
[0.12] [0.13]
[0.12] [0.13]
Intensity
‐0.15* ‐0.80*
‐0.20* ‐0.97*
[0.03] [0.03]
[0.03] [0.04]
Coefvar
‐1.03 ‐10.11**
‐1.3 ‐11.27**
[0.89] [3.71]
[0.85] [3.55]
USDhedge
0.03 ‐0.37*
0.03
‐0.36*
[0.04] [0.09]
[0.04] [0.09]
EURhedge
‐0.28* ‐1.42*
‐0.28* ‐1.45*
[0.04] [0.09]
[0.04] [0.09]
CADhedge
‐0.1 ‐0.46*
‐0.11** ‐0.53*
[0.05] [0.09]
[0.05] [0.09]
Dollarpeg
‐0.43* ‐1.19*
[0.01] [0.02]
Europeg
0.43* 1.54*
[0.00] [0.01]
Time FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
16,905,286
16,905,286
16,905,286
16,905,286
16,905,286
16,905,286
16,905,286
16,905,286
16,905,286
AIC
21,406,515
21,375,939
21,055,445
21,399,071
21,337,453
20,945,316
19,529,769
21,026,254
20,856,969

10
LCP
PCP
‐2.78* ‐1.41*
[0.05] [0.13]
0.47* ‐0.17*
[0.00] [0.01]
0.24* ‐0.09*
[0.01] [0.01]
‐7.57* 0.55*
[0.15] [0.04]
1.55* 0.05*
[0.01] [0.01]
3.41* ‐3.15*
[0.12] [0.07]
‐1.00* ‐1.76*
[0.02] [0.03]
‐0.89** ‐7.48**
[0.41] [1.92]
0.01 ‐0.23*
[0.02] [0.04]
0.04 ‐0.14**
[0.02] [0.06]
0.05** 0.01
[0.02] [0.03]
‐0.22* ‐1.36*
[0.01] [0.04]
0.44* 1.46*
[0.01] [0.02]
Yes
16,905,286
19,223,300

34

Table 5. Determinants of Invoicing Currency Choice: US Exports to Canada

Intercept
Refcon
Walrascon
Importshare
Top5ind
Top5ind*
importshare
Intensity
Coefvar
EURhedge
CADhedge
Time FE
Observations
AIC

1
2
3
4
5
6
LCP
VCP
LCP
VCP
LCP
VCP
LCP
VCP
LCP
VCP
LCP
VCP
‐3.39* ‐5.32* ‐3.38* ‐5.14* ‐3.15* ‐4.75* ‐3.36* ‐5.31* ‐3.32* ‐6.09* ‐3.43 ‐5.32**
[0.02] [0.16] [0.02] [0.15] [0.03] [0.13] [0.02] [0.15] [0.03] [0.10] [0.52] [1.53]
‐0.01 ‐1.21*
[0.01] [0.03]
‐0.22* ‐2.24*
[0.01] [0.10]
‐0.61* ‐0.91*
[0.03] [0.02]
1.04* ‐1.15*
[0.02] [0.11]
0.34* ‐1.11*
[0.03] [0.19]
‐0.30* ‐0.13**
[0.03] [0.06]
‐1.62** 17.32*
[0.48] [1.88]
0.01
0.35
[1.62]
0.07
‐0.32
[1.59]
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
24,615,469
24,615,469
24,615,469
24,615,469
24,615,469
24,615,469
8,577,390
8,553,275
8,455,446
8,577,018
8,576,619
8,576,621

7
LCP
‐3.14*
[0.03]
0.05*
[0.00]
‐0.20*
[0.01]
‐0.63*
[0.03]
1.04*
[0.02]
0.33*
[0.03]

VCP
‐4.77*
[0.14]
‐1.15*
[0.04]
‐2.23*
[0.10]
‐0.57*
[0.03]
‐1.12*
[0.11]
‐1.18*
[0.20]

Yes
24,615,469
8,434,003

8
9
LCP
VCP
LCP
VCP
‐6.54 ‐6.28** ‐6.29*
‐6.57
[5.80] [1.72] [0.37] [198.90]
0.05*
‐1.16*
[0.00]
[0.04]
‐0.19*
‐2.28*
[0.01]
[0.10]
‐0.62*
‐0.59*
[0.03]
[0.03]
1.05*
‐1.13*
[0.02]
[0.11]
0.32*
‐1.13*
[0.03]
[0.11]
‐0.30* ‐0.13** ‐0.18*
0.79*
[0.03] [0.06] [0.02]
[0.07]
61.76 ‐43.25 61.28*
‐48.6
[33.83] [7.32] [3912.90]
‐0.84 4.12* ‐0.85*
5.17
[0.43] [0.10]
[53.66]
1.59 1.79** 1.60*
2.72
[0.84] [0.18]
[96.59]
Yes
Yes
24,615,469
24,615,469
8,576,249
8,432,849

35

Table 6. Comparison of AIC Scores
Non‐US
Model

AIC
All variables
19,223,300
Pegs
19,529,769
Hedges
20,945,316
Industry + Bargaining
21,026,254
Bargaining (Importshare/Top5ind) 21,055,445
Coefvar
21,337,453
Industry (Ref/Walras)
21,375,939
Intensity
21,399,071
Time FE only
21,406,515
Intercept only
21,432,400

US
Model

AIC
All variables
8,432,849
Industry + Bargaining
8,434,003
Bargaining (Importshare/Top5ind) 8,455,446
Industry (Ref/Walras)
8,553,275
Coefvar
8,576,619
Hedges
8,576,621
Intensity
8,577,018
Time FE only
8,577,390
Intercept only
8,586,852

Note: the AIC score is equal to 2k – ln(L) where k is the number of parameters and L is the maximized value
of the likelihood function.

36

Figure 1. Currency Use in Invoicing
Canadian Imports

Figure 2. Prevalence of Producer Currency
Pricing by Specific Exporters

37

Figure 3. Producer, Local and Vehicle Currency Pricing in Canadian Import Transactions

38

Appendix: Constructing the hedging variable

As exposited in Goldberg and Tille (2008), the hedging motive for invoice currency selection
reflects

the

covariances

between

exchange

rates

and

producer

marginal

costs

  med , sed  and   med , sev  . The idea is that the producer should choose an invoicing
currency so that revenues are highest when costs are highest, with this positive correlation
helping to hedge producer profitability. Producer marginal costs are modeled as

med  we  1    /   cd where we is the wage or producer price index representing the unit
marginal cost of the exporter and cd is the sensitivity of marginal costs to changes in demand,
representing the shape of the production frontier.18 We proxy for exporter marginal costs in
each country by constructing quarterly values for med , where the cost of inputs we are the
logs nominal producer price indices in exporter’s currency, is set at 0.65, and c d is the log
of real consumption in Canada as the export destination market “d”. The PPI values are more
desirable than pure wages since they internalize the cost of imported inputs that can influence
hedging decisions. (Even more desirable would be industry-specific production costs). sev is
in units of currency e per unit of currency v so an increase is a depreciation of currency e.
Ideally, surprises in consumption strength and PPI would be correlated with surprise
depreciations of the exporter currency to extract a preferred hedge. We do not have data
coverage to run this type of experiment. Instead, we compute each med and run a rolling
correlation with three bilateral exchange rates, which are vis-à-vis dollars, euros, and CAD,
over 8 prior quarters of data. A desirable hedging currency has a positive correlation and a
higher correlation than the two alternative currencies. If no currencies have recent positive
correlations with the med , then all hedge dummies are given a zero value at a particular date.
Constructing each of these variables relied on careful empirical work. However,
despite this care, the weakest construction is likely to be for the hedging variables USDhedge,
CADhedge and EURhedge. Intuitively, the hedging motive argues that the currency used for
18

For the approximately 50 countries covered as exporters to Canada we have wage data and producer price
index data. For the 26 countries across which both wage and PPI data are available, these series tend to be
highly correlated in most cases except for France and Japan, and positively but less strongly correlated for parts
of Asia. Wage data were nominal and in the home currency from the ILO : http://laborsta.ilo.org/ . PPI data are
from the IMF’s IFS database.

invoicing should be the currency which generates unexpected fluctuations in revenue that
offset unexpected shocks to marginal costs, stemming from either wages or the strength of
demand. If, for instance, an unexpected high growth in Canadian demand raises the marginal
cost, the exporter has an incentive to invoice in a currency that tends to appreciate against his
own in such states, thereby boosting his unit revenue. The challenge is to implement such a
construct for our sample of 47 exporters and over the full sample period. In practice, if there is
a period of above trend growth in an export destination market, an exporter might value for
invoicing, via the hedging motive, a currency that has tended to appreciate over similar
periods of economic growth. We construct rolling correlations of exporter bilateral exchange
rates against the proxy for exporter costs over the prior 8 quarters and use the pattern of
observed correlations in an exporter’s recent past to determine his hedging preference in
period t. A hedging currency should appreciate (on average) when the export destination
market has abnormally high growth, and should have a stronger positive correlation that
would be the case if alternative currencies were used for hedging. In our data, the general
trend is that the CAD is a good hedge early on in the period and late in the period. USD and
EUR get some action in the middle. Across all countries and over the whole estimation
period, the three currencies are about equally balanced: USD 22 percent, EUR 21 percent,
CAD 26 percent and none 31 percent.

40

Appendix Table 1

Country
Algeria
Angola
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Chile
China
Czech Republic
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Hong Kong
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Malaysia
Mexico
Netherlands
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
South Africa
South Korea
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States
Venezuela
Vietnam
Total

Frequency
2,804
638
189,876
264,842
283,294
293,295
70,499
2,086,341
166,495
248,269
161,066
848,044
1,366,460
379,889
121,353
638,209
305,158
239
137,397
211,370
1,039,771
1,119,697
290,031
804,077
361,875
5,889
90,394
133,013
63,036
229,161
155,627
133,610
59,141
10,028
159,667
110,256
593,440
336,599
366,043
458,790
970,169
467,332
226,562
1,027,244
24,654,574
14,926
193,860
41,850,350

Percent of Observations
By Count
By Value
0.01
1.10
0.00
0.97
0.44
0.43
0.61
0.32
0.65
0.43
0.67
0.74
0.16
0.35
4.78
7.29
0.38
0.07
0.57
0.35
0.37
0.26
1.94
2.44
3.13
2.69
0.87
0.16
0.28
0.06
1.46
0.44
0.70
0.24
0.00
0.45
0.31
0.53
0.48
0.22
2.38
1.31
2.57
3.66
0.66
0.64
1.84
3.67
0.83
0.51
0.01
0.65
0.21
1.36
0.30
0.07
0.14
0.33
0.53
0.23
0.36
0.16
0.31
0.10
0.14
0.44
0.02
0.38
0.37
0.32
0.25
0.18
1.36
1.65
0.77
0.36
0.84
0.54
1.05
0.55
2.22
0.96
1.07
0.52
0.52
0.18
2.35
3.34
56.49
54.96
0.03
0.38
0.44
0.15
95.89
97.12

41

Appendix Table 2. Coefficients of Correlation: Non-U.S. Exports to Canada
Dollarpeg
Europeg Walrascon Refcon Top5ind LCP
PCP
Dollarpeg
1.00
Europeg
‐0.30
1.00
Walrascon
0.00
‐0.01
1.00
Refcon
‐0.02
0.02
‐0.05
1.00
Top5ind
0.14
‐0.05
0.01
‐0.01
1.00
LCP
‐0.03
0.01
0.01
0.04
0.10
1.00
PCP
‐0.16
0.33
‐0.01
‐0.02
‐0.04
‐0.10
1.00
VCP
0.16
‐0.31
0.01
‐0.01
‐0.01
‐0.41
‐0.87
USDhedge
‐0.27
0.11
0.00
0.01
‐0.03
0.01
0.03
EURhedge
0.18
‐0.40
0.00
‐0.02
0.01
‐0.01
‐0.14
CADhedge
0.06
0.06
‐0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.03
Intensity
‐0.07
0.04
0.08
0.04
0.00
0.00
‐0.02
Coefvar
‐0.11
‐0.13
0.01
0.00
‐0.01
0.00
‐0.05
Importshare
0.47
‐0.14
‐0.02
‐0.06
0.20
‐0.04
‐0.07
Appendix Table 3. Coefficients of Correlation: U.S. Exports to Canada
Walrascon Refcon
Top5ind
LCP
PCP
Walrascon
1.00
Refcon
‐0.09
1.00
Top5ind
0.00
0.01
1.00
LCP
‐0.01
0.00
0.08
1.00
PCP
0.01
0.01
‐0.07
‐0.92
1.00
VCP
‐0.01
‐0.02
‐0.01
‐0.01
‐0.37
EURhedge
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
CADhedge
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
Intensity
0.14
0.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
Coefvar
0.00
0.00
‐0.01
0.00
0.00
Importshare
0.01
0.21
0.04
‐0.01
0.02

VCP

1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
‐0.02

VCP

1.00
‐0.03
0.13
‐0.03
0.02
0.05
0.08

USDhedge EURhedge CADhedge Intensity Coefvar Importshare

1.00
‐0.36
‐0.41
0.01
0.07
‐0.12

1.00
‐0.43
‐0.02
0.05
0.07

EURhedge CADhedge Intensity

1.00
‐0.59
0.00
0.51
‐0.02

1.00
0.00
‐0.73
0.02

1.00
0.00
0.03

1.00
0.00
‐0.16
0.04

1.00
‐0.01
‐0.13

1.00
‐0.06

1.00

Coefvar Importshare

1.00
‐0.06

1.00

42

