NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THIRTY YEARS OF CURRENCY CRISES IN ARGENTINA:
EXTERNAL SHOCKS OR DOMESTIC FRAGILITY?
Graciela Kaminsky
Amine Mati
Nada Choueiri
Working Paper 15478
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15478

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2009

This paper was written for the Economía 18th Panel Meeting- LACEA, IMPA - Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
November 21, 2008. We thank Gastón Gelos, Roberto Rigobon, Federico Sturzenegger, Carlos Winograd,
and participants at the Economia Meeting for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and should not be attributed to the IMF, its Executive Board, its management, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Graciela Kaminsky, Amine Mati, and Nada Choueiri. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Thirty Years of Currency Crises in Argentina: External Shocks or Domestic Fragility?
Graciela Kaminsky, Amine Mati, and Nada Choueiri
NBER Working Paper No. 15478
November 2009
JEL No. F3,F30,F32,F34
ABSTRACT
This paper examines Argentina’s currency crises from 1970 to 2001, with particular attention to the
role of domestic and external factors. Using VAR estimations, we find that deteriorating domestic
fundamentals matter. For example, at the core of the late 1980s crises was excessively loose monetary
policy while a sharp output contration triggered the collapse of the currency board in January 2002.
In contrast, adverse external shocks were at the heart of the 1995 crisis, with spillovers from the Mexican
crisis and high world interest rates being key sources of financial distress.

Graciela Kaminsky
Department of Economics
George Washington University
Washington, DC 20052
and NBER
graciela@gwu.edu
Nada Choueiri
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20431
nchoueiri@imf.org

Amine Mati
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20431
amati@imf.org

I. Introduction
Argentina has had an active presence in international capital markets since its
independence in the early 19th century. Participation has been quite volatile though. In the early
1800s, in the midst of the lending boom fueled by the end of the Napoleonic wars, Argentina as
well as many countries in Latin America were able to issue bonds in London to finance their
wars of independence and the civil wars that followed. This lending boom ended in the summer
of 1825 when the Bank of England raised the discount rate to stop the drain in reserves.

The

tightening of liquidity was followed by stock market crashes, banking problems, and recessions
in England and Continental Europe. Within months, the crisis also spread to Latin America.
Argentina defaulted in 1827 in the midst of what is known as the first Latin American Debt
Crisis, only resuming payments in 1857.
Similar international capital flow booms to emerging markets occurred in 1867-1872,
1880-1890, 1893-1913, and 1920-1929 fueled by an easing monetary stance in the financial
centers of those times and by the financial needs of railway expansion, urbanization, and
development of the banking sector of countries in the periphery. While Argentina participated
heavily in all these capital flow bonanzas, its participation was quite volatile with financial crises
often following booms.1
In the aftermath of the crisis of the 1930s, international capital markets all but
disappeared and Argentina was unable to borrow again until the 1970s. The period from the
mid-1970s to 2002 was as tumultuous as that of the earlier era and characterized by booms and
busts in international capital flows, crises, and failed stabilization programs. During this period,
Argentina had eight currency crises, four banking crises, and two sovereign defaults.
argued that domestic fragilities were at the heart of these crises.2

Many

Others blamed erratic

international capital markets by pointing out the lending boom of the late 1970s that ended with
defaults across all Latin American countries or the lending cycle of the 1990s that triggered
banking and currency crises in the most active participants in international capital markets, such

1

For example, the boom of the 1880s ended with banking and currency crises as well as a sovereign default, while
the end of the capital inflow episode of the 1920s led to Argentina’s abandonment of the gold standard. See,
Kaminsky (2009) for an analysis of Latin America’s participation in international capital markets from
independence to the Great Depression.
2

See, for example, Mussa (2002) and Perry and Serven (2002)

1

as Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, and Venezuela.3 This important debate is still
unsettled. Now, in the midst of the worst international financial crisis since the great depression,
untangling the roots of financial distress becomes crucial. This is the question we plan to
examine in this paper.
We focus on Argentina’s currency crises of the last thirty years. We cast our net wide
and examine the role of three external shocks and four sources of domestic vulnerability on
currency turmoil. Our selection of external shocks centers on the role of the easing/tightening of
monetary policy in the world financial centers, financial contagion and overall “international
investors’ sentiment” about emerging markets, and real exchange rate misalignments caused by
currency depreciations in Argentina's major trading partners.

With respect to domestic

vulnerabilities, we focus on the boom-bust cycle of domestic credit and monetary policy, fiscal
problems, shocks to economic activity, and increases in households’ risk aversion triggered by
spells of hyperinflation, controls on foreign exchange transactions, cycles of controls on prices
and wages, and bank deposit confiscations that have plagued Argentina’s recent history. To
capture the onset of the crises and track the buildup of fragility during fixed exchange rate
regimes, we look at the evolution of foreign exchange reserves of the central bank as a
proportion of domestic credit. For short periods of time in the early 1970s and late 1980s,
Argentina adopted a dual exchange rate regime, with a fixed exchange rate for commercial
transactions and a freely floating exchange rate for capital account transactions. For these
episodes, the onset of a crisis is captured by an index of exchange market pressure, which is
constructed as a composite index of losses of reserves of the central bank and the dual exchange
market premium. Structural VAR techniques are used to identify the effects of domestic and
external shocks on the onset of the crises.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents a chronology of
Argentina’s currency crises since 1970. Section III presents a basic model to underpin the VAR
specification. Section IV discusses the estimation, presents the data, and examines key empirical
results. Section V concludes.

3

For example, Calvo, Leiderman, and Reinhart (1992, 1996).

2

II. Chronology of the Currency Crises4
During most of the post WWII period, Argentina experienced chronic inflation. Many
stabilization programs with the exchange rate as an anchor were launched in the belief that with
fixed exchange rates, domestic inflation would converge quickly to world levels. These programs
also included plans of fiscal and monetary austerity (although, in most cases, they were later
abandoned). All the programs ended up with currency crises. In addition to failed stabilization
attempts, global external factors also contributed to the general instability of the domestic
currency. Declining interest rates in the industrialized world fueled capital flows to developing
countries in the late 1970s and in the 1990s and while these capital flow bonanzas are generally
considered beneficial to emerging markets, they also trigger real exchange rate appreciations and
current account deficits, which often lead to currency crises. Besides, these flows are prone to
quick reversals whenever monetary policy in the center economies switches to a contractionary
stance. Also, fragilities in the domestic financial system as well as forced conversions of deposits
were another potential cause of runs against the Argentine peso. Thus, our chronology of crises
will highlight the evolution of the different stabilization programs implemented in this period as
well as the role of world shocks and financial vulnerabilities.
To help in our crisis chronology, Figure 1 shows the evolution of the central bank’s
foreign exchange reserves and the dual market premium from January 1970 to January 2002, the
month of the onset of the last crisis. The dates of the currency crises are indicated by the vertical
lines. It is clear from Figure 1 that almost all crises were preceded by losses of reserves or by
sharp increases in the dual market premium when foreign exchange controls were introduced.
Table 1 reports crisis dates and the names of the stabilization programs preceding them as
well as the time in which these programs were implemented. To gauge the severity of each
crisis, Table 1 shows the loss of foreign exchange reserves of the central bank in the months
leading into the crisis, the dual exchange market premium at the onset of the crisis, and the
devaluations following the crisis. All speculative attacks, with the exception of the one in 1995,

4

This chronology is partly based on Blejer and Liviatan (1987), Cumby and van Wijnbergen (1989), D’Amato,
Grubisic, and Powell (1997), De la Torre, Levy-Yeyati, and Schmukler (2002), Di Tella and Dornbusch (1989),
Dornbusch and de Pablo (1989), Edwards (2002a and 2002b), Giorgio and Sagari (1996), Hausman and Velasco
(2002), IMF (2004a and 2004b), Kiguel (1989), Montanaro (1990), and Rodriguez (1994).

3

ended with a sharp devaluation. The central bank managed to avoid a devaluation during the
speculative attack of 1995, despite a 41-percent loss in foreign exchange reserves.
The first crisis and the collapse of the stabilization plan implemented by the then minister
of finance José Gelbard occurred in March 1975 after various speculative attacks that resulted in
a 56 percent loss of foreign exchange reserves even in the presence of many restrictions to free
convertibility.5 At that time, the domestic currency in the commercial and the financial markets
were devalued by 100 and 50 percent, respectively. More than a dozen additional devaluations
followed over the course of the year.6
The second crisis occurred in February 1981 when a 10 percent devaluation was
announced. Two other devaluations followed: 34 percent in April and 38 percent in June. This
was also the collapse of the second stabilization program, the Tablita Plan, which was launched
in December 1978 and characterized by a slowly declining preannounced rate of exchange rate
depreciation (the “tablita”). The program also included fiscal and monetary reforms as well as a
sweeping financial liberalization plan that led to the complete deregulation of domestic banking
activities and a removal of capital account restrictions. This episode coincided with the capital
flow bonanza fueled by the savings of OPEC economies following the 1973 oil shock and
channeled to emerging markets through the eurodollar market.

By 1980, the boom in capital

inflows to Argentina had triggered an explosive growth in domestic credit and overall banking
fragilities, which ended with the failure of two of the largest private banks as well as the
liquidation of almost 100 financial institutions.7 The crisis in 1981 also coincided with the
reversal in international capital flows triggered by a shift towards anti-inflationary monetary
policy in the United States.
The third crisis took place in July 1982. Following the February 1981 crisis, a variety of
refinancing programs to banks and insurance programs to holders of foreign currency
denominated debt were implemented, maximum interest rates were reimposed and then

5

Part of the exchange rate pressures led to a sharp increase in the financial market premium, which peaked at 369
percent right before the abandonment of the program.
6

While during 1975 there were several devaluations, such as the devaluation experienced in June 1975 when
Celestino Rodrigo was the Finance Minister, these devaluations are not examined separately. Consecutive
devaluations less than six months apart from the first devaluation are considered part of the same crisis.
7

See Baliño (1987) for a detailed analysis of the banking crisis in 1980-1981.

4

abandoned,8 and dual rates were reintroduced from March to December 1981. Naturally, the
continuous regulatory changes regarding interest rates and foreign exchange markets contributed
to reducing investors’ jittery confidence in the domestic currency and the banking sector. During
this period, inflation continued to accelerate in part fueled by the bailout of the banking sector.
Despite the announcement of a new stabilization plan in December 1981, the so-called Alemann
Plan, inflation continued to surge fueled this time by central-bank financing of massive military
spending during the Malvinas war. The economy was also hard hit by many adverse external
shocks: the decrease in international commodity prices, the increase in foreign interest rates, a
world-wide recession, and the beginning of the world debt crisis. After a 17-percent loss in
foreign exchange reserves, the crisis culminated in July 1982 with a 148 percent devaluation, the
introduction of dual exchange rates with controls on domestic interest rates and the capital
account, and an exchange rate floating for the following three years.
During the floating regime, inflation continued to increase, reaching 300 percent during
the first half of 1985. In June 1985, a new stabilization plan, the Austral Plan, was launched. A
new currency, the Austral,9 was introduced, the dual exchange rate regime was abandoned, the
domestic currency was fixed again to the dollar, and interest rate controls were eliminated.
Importantly, the introduction of the Austral was accompanied by a forced renegotiation and mark
down of debt contracts and banking deposits. However, while inflation was contained, the
annual rate of inflation was still at about 100 percent by mid-1986, forcing the government to
abandon the peg. The government tried to save the program with repeated rounds of enforcement
and then relaxation of price controls and other restrictions with no success. In the first nine
months of 1987, reserves of the central bank declined by 1.5 billion dollars (60 percent), leading
to a collapse of the Austral Plan in 1987, with the domestic currency being devalued by 16
percent in September and by 33 percent in October.
The next two currency crises occurred in the midst of a hyperinflation period.10 The first
crisis occurred in April 1989, with a 387 percent devaluation. The second crisis erupted within
eight months, with a 175 percent devaluation in December 1989 and a 220 percent devaluation in
8

See Baliño (1987) and Machinea and Fanelli (1987) for a detailed analysis of the measures adopted during this
period.
9

One Austral was equivalent to 1,000 pesos.

10

From the collapse of the Austral Plan in September 1987 to the implementation of the Convertibilty Plan in 1991,
prices in Argentina increased 4,500 times.

5

February 1990. Again during this period, there were two stabilization attempts: The Primavera
Plan in August 1988 and the BB Plan in December 1989. Both plans included price controls,
dual exchange rates, and fiscal and monetary contraction. In both plans, monetary and fiscal
restraints were rapidly abandoned and investors’ confidence immediately deteriorated.

In

December 1989, the government froze most domestic austral-denominated time deposits and
converted them to 10-year dollar denominated bonds, the Bonex. The value of these bonds
immediately dropped to less that 30 percent of face value, weakening investors’ faith in the
domestic currency.
The last two currency crises were in early 1995 and in January 2002. In April 1991, the
Convertibility Plan was launched. Its main feature was the creation of a currency board to
enforce the 1-to-1 peg of the peso to the dollar.11 The plan also included a series of privatization
and deregulation measures as well as fiscal reforms. Also in the early 1990s, Argentina, along
with other emerging markets, witnessed another round of capital inflows triggered by declining
interest rates in the United States together with the 1989-1990 Brady Plan agreement for Mexico
and other Latin American countries.

As in the late 1970s, capital inflows led to a domestic

credit explosion and to consumption, real estate, and stock market booms. The real exchange rate
appreciated and the current account deteriorated. In 1994, the shift back to a tight monetary
policy in the United States12 led to worldwide interest rate increases, contributing to banking
fragilities and a credit crunch amid a severe recession in Argentina. Following the Mexican
crisis in December 1994, Argentina's banking system suffered from large deposit withdrawals.
As investors converted pesos into dollars, the central bank's reserves decreased sharply (41
percent in the first quarter of the year), marking the first currency crisis of the Convertibility
Plan. At that time, however, the convertibility program did not end up with a devaluation of the
domestic currency and the reversal of capital flows to Argentina was only transitory.
By the end of 1995, capital flows not only had resumed but even surpassed the levels
reached before the Mexican crisis. Capital flows to Argentina and Latin America continued to
grow even in the midst of the 1997-1998 Asian crisis. Eventually, these flows started to
diminish as the behavior of international capital markets changed drastically during the Russian
crisis and the collapse of Long Term Capital Management in the Fall of 1998. This time around,
11

The monetary reform in January 1992 replaced the austral with the peso at a rate of 10,000 australs for 1 peso.

12

The Federal Funds interest rate was raised by 250 basis points in 1994 alone.

6

as in the mid 1980s, the collapse in capital flows was of a more permanent nature. Argentina
still fared comparably better than other countries in the region, with capital flows to Argentina
still relatively high in the last half of 1999. The relief was however only temporary as capital
flows to Argentina completely dried out in the last half of 2000 and especially in 2001. By this
time, political uncertainty (President Menem’s desire to remain in power for a third term) as well
as financial turmoil following Brazil’s crisis in January 1999 had severely affected private
investment and consumption in Argentina, with economic activity plummeting through 2001. As
the situation continued to deteriorate, the government sought more financing.

When the

government found it difficult to reschedule its debt, it resorted to compulsory placing of
government bonds at banks, with banks becoming increasingly more exposed to government
default. By June 2001, a massive bank run had started, sealing the fate of the currency board. In
December, the government announced a deposit freeze, foreign exchange controls, and a debt
moratorium. The currency board was formally abandoned in January 2002 with a 40 percent
devaluation of the peso. The convertibility regime was replaced with a dual exchange rate system
based on an official exchange rate of 1.4 pesos per dollar for the public sector and most traderelated transactions while all other transactions were conducted at market rates. On February 11,
the dual exchange rate was abolished and the peso depreciated to 1.8 pesos per dollar. By June
2002, the exchange rate had reached 4 pesos per dollar.
III. A Basic Model
The numerous crises in Argentina in the last quarter of a century have stirred a heated
debate about the causes behind the periodic collapses of the peg. Throughout the years, several
explanations have been offered. Many argue, as it is also evident in our chronology, that at the
heart of the crises are large fiscal deficits, leading to rapid growth in money creation and
eventually to a depletion of reserves that make the peg unsustainable. Another view stresses that
crises erupt because of real exchange rate misalignments brought about by exchange-rate based
stabilization plans13 or by devaluations in neighboring countries. According to this view, the
exchange rate misalignment eventually leads to unsustainable current account deficits and to
speculative attacks against the domestic currency. Another version of the “real appreciation”
theory of currency crises links the real appreciation with protracted recessions and with
13

See, for example, Reinhart and Végh (2002).

7

governments’ inability to defend the peg in bad times. For example, Drazen and Masson (1994)
conclude that in the presence of persistent unemployment, a tough policy (such as one required
by the commitment to the currency board in Argentina in the late 1990s) may lower rather than
raise the credibility of a no-devaluation pledge and thus trigger a currency attack.
The crises of the 1990s brought to the spotlight the fact that crises may be of a contagious
nature. While crises could be synchronous across countries because of a common adverse shock
(i.e. a rise in world interest rates), crises may spillover when the infected country is linked to
others via trade or finance. For example, Kaminsky, Lyons, and Schmukler (2004) argue that the
1994 Mexican crisis spread to Argentina and Brazil via mutual fund withdrawals as mutual fund
managers scrambled for liquidity following investors’ major redemptions from mutual funds
specializing in Latin America. Similarly, Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000) conclude that the
Mexican default in 1982 propagated to all Latin American countries when U.S. banks, badly
damaged by the Mexican default, tried to rebalance the overall risk of their portfolios by calling
loans and drying up credit lines not only in Mexico but also in all the Latin American countries
where they had exposure. Calvo (1999) provides a different interpretation of the collapse of the
peg, which he labels “the sudden stop” syndrome. While this view shares with previous views
the acknowledgment of fiscal unsustainability and real exchange rate misalignment problems, it
places strong emphasis on international financial shocks. At the core of Calvo's explanation lies
an unexpected and persistent stop in international capital flows, such as the one observed
following the Russian crisis in August 1998. As explained in Calvo, Izquierdo, and Talvi
(2002), the unexpected slowdown in capital flows forces emerging economies, such as
Argentina, to drastic adjustments of their current account deficits to accommodate the shortage
of external credit. Naturally, a real exchange rate adjustment becomes the essential ingredient
for this adjustment to take place. With sticky prices, this adjustment can only be accomplished
with a devaluation.
Finally, Kiguel and Neumeyer (1995) and Ericsson and Kamin (1993) among others,
have emphasized investors’ jittery confidence in Argentina’s domestic currency and the banking
sector due to the continuous changes in regulations on interest rates and foreign exchange
markets as well as the forced conversions of bank deposits in 1985, 1989, and 2001 as triggers of
runs against the peso. This section will incorporate these features into a small open economy
model, which will be estimated afterwards.
8

As examined above, the monetary authority in Argentina alternated between the adoption
of fixed and dual exchange rate systems. For example, a fixed exchange rate and full
convertibility for both current and capital account transactions were at the core of the Tablita
Plan and the Convertibility Plan while a dual exchange rate system was introduced during the
Gelbard Plan (1973-1975). In most cases, when the peg collapsed, the central bank allowed the
exchange rate to float for some time. Our model should reflect these changing exchange rate
regimes. This section discusses two versions of the model that respectively capture the stylized
features of each system.
The Fixed Exchange Rate Regime
The model is a discrete-time model of an open economy with a fixed and unique
exchange rate. The government has a predefined goal for domestic credit, not necessarily
consistent with the goal of a fixed exchange rate. Fixing the exchange rate is a secondary goal
that can be abandoned if it hinders discretionary monetary policy. This assumption seems to
capture quite well monetary and exchange rate policies in Argentina in the post WWII period.
Investors realize that these two goals might conflict and expect the central bank to abandon the
peg when it runs out of reserves as in Krugman (1979). We follow Blanco and Garber (1986) to
model the onset of the crisis with a twist. In that paper, the authors only focus on the effect of
money supply shocks. Here, we extend their model to account for foreign shocks as well as
other domestic shocks, such as fiscal policy.
The money market is the central component of our model. Equilibrium in that market is
given by the following equation,
mt − p t = −α it + β ct + γ y t + μ td ,

(1)

where m and p are respectively the logarithms of the money stock and the price level, i is the
domestic interest rate, y is the aggregate output level, and μ d represents money demand shocks.
A negative money demand shock can capture investors’ shift out of pesos into dollars in the
midst of the financial instability of the 1980s or the run against deposits due to confiscation risk
in 2001. A new feature of the money demand is the component c. As we will examine in more
detail below, this component will try to capture shifts in international investors’ perception about
emerging markets. For example, an increase in c could capture international investors' renewed
interest in emerging markets following the resolution of the debt crisis, with a decline in c
9

typifying the sudden stop syndrome such as the one triggered by the Russian crisis of August
1998 or a contagion effect, such as the reversal in capital flows following the 1994 Mexican
crisis.
In the open economy, interest rates and prices are determined by
it

= it∗ + E t et +1 − et + ρ t

(2)

pt

= et − q t ,

(3)

where i* is the world interest rate, e is the logarithm of the nominal exchange rate, ρ is the risk
premium, q is the log of the real exchange rate, and E is an expectations operator. Equation (2)
allows for deviations from interest parity. Equation (3) allows for deviations from purchasing
parity. In equation (3), the log of the foreign price level is normalized to zero. Money supply in
the fixed exchange rate system can be written as follows:
mt = d t + rt ,

(4)

where r is the ratio of foreign exchange reserves of the central bank to domestic credit in foreign
currency and d is the logarithm of the domestic credit component of the money base. In this
simple model, changes in domestic monetary policy or changes in bank credit to the private
sector, changes in the world interest rate, shocks to money demand and sudden stop or contagion
effects will determine the evolution of reserves of the central bank. When reserves are depleted,
the central bank will not be able to intervene in the foreign exchange market any longer and will
have to let the exchange rate float. Using the money-market clearing conditions, we can
determine the equilibrium flexible exchange rate ~
e . 14
t

d t + α (it∗ + ρ t ) − β ct − γ y t + q t = (1 + α ) ~
et − α E t ~
et +1 .

(5)

To obtain the time path of the permanently floating exchange rate e~, we need to specify
the stochastic processes that govern domestic credit, risk premium, foreign interest rates, the real
exchange rate, output, and the “sentiment” of international investors towards emerging markets.

14

dt

= φ g t + d t −1 + μ ts

ρt

=

it∗

= it∗−1 + μ t∗

ρ + μ tg

(6)
(7)
(8)

In a pure flexible exchange rate regime, by assumption, the stock of reserves of the central bank drops to zero.

10

ct

= ct −1 − ω it∗ + μ tc

gt

=

qt

= δ q t −1 − χμ ts + μ tq

(11)

yt

=

y + λq t + μ ty

(12)

g t −1 + u tg

(9)
(10)

where g is the fiscal deficit, y is the full employment level of output, and μ s , μ g , μ ∗ , μ c ,

μ y are shocks to money supply, to fiscal policy, to world interest rates, foreign investors’
sentiment towards emerging market assets (either exuberance or sudden stop/contagion
syndrome), and the shock to aggregate demand. Finally, μ q captures exogenous shocks to the
real exchange rate.

For example, it may reflect nominal devaluations in trading-partner

countries, such as the Brazilian depreciation in January 1999. The shocks μ j are normallydistributed white noise shocks with zero mean and standard deviation

σ j , for

j ∈ {d , y , s, g ,∗, c, q} .

Equation (6) represents the domestic credit process. In (6), we allow fiscal imbalances to
be (partly or totally) financed by money creation. Equation (7) captures a time-varying risk
premium, with fiscal deficits triggering higher premium.15 Equation (8) reflects the process
followed by the world interest rate.

Equation (9) captures investors’ interest in emerging

markets. Naturally, this interest cannot just be explained by shocks to risk aversion triggered by
say, the resolution of the debt crisis in 1989. Fluctuations in interest rates in financial centers
can also affect the reallocation of portfolios towards emerging economies. This is why increases
in i* in equation (9) affect adversely the reallocation of portfolios towards emerging economies.
In equation (10), we model fiscal policy as an exogenous process. Equation (11) models the real
exchange rate as a mean reverting process. We allow the real exchange rate to be affected by
monetary shocks since expansionary monetary policy in fixed exchange rate regimes will lead to
higher inflation and a transitory real appreciation as examined in Reinhart and Végh (2002). We
also allow for other exogenous shocks to the real exchange rate. With these shocks, we would
15

In models with sovereign debt, risk premium is always associated with the possibility of default. It is argued that
as debt increases, it may become unsustainable or the country may become unwilling to pay back. These models
suggest including foreign debt as an explanatory variable for risk. Unfortunately, for empirical purposes, we cannot
relate the risk premium to foreign debt because debt statistics are at best only available at annual frequencies and our
estimations use monthly data. Since in Argentina, governments deficits have been associated with foreign
borrowing, we include the fiscal indicator, for which we have monthly data, as the determinant of the premium.

11

like to capture the effects of a depreciation in a trading-partner country, such as the effect of the
devaluation of the Brazilian real in January 1999. Finally, output deviates temporarily from the
full employment level with fluctuations of the real exchange rate or in response to other
aggregate demand shocks.

The relationship between the real exchange rate and economic

activity in equation (12) is ambiguous since a real depreciation can increase competitiveness and
fuel demand for domestic goods, but also lead to contractionary effect because of liability
dollarization (Céspedes, Chang, and Velasco (2004)).
Using equations (5)-(12), we obtain the equilibrium flexible exchange rate:

e~t = dt + α (1+ β ω) it∗ + αρ − β ct − γ y + [

1 − γλ
1
] qt + αφ gt −
(μtd + γμty − αμtg )
(1+ α ) − αδ
1+ α

(13)

The exchange rate depreciates in response to expansionary monetary shocks, fiscal
deficits, and positive shocks to world interest rates; it appreciates in response to positive output
shocks, increases in investors’ interest in emerging markets, and positive money demand
disturbances.

Finally, a real exchange rate depreciation has an ambiguous effect on the

equilibrium flexible nominal exchange rate. The decline in domestic prices triggering the real
depreciation leads to higher real money balances and lower domestic interest rates, which fuel a
depreciation of the nominal exchange rate. But the real depreciation may stimulate economic
activity and demand for money, which results into an appreciation of the equilibrium exchange
rate.
The peg will collapse at time t + 1 if e~t +1 > e . Thus, the time t probability of a currency
collapse in the next period can be written as follows:
1 − F (kt ) = Pr[υt +1 > kt ],

(14)

where

υt +1 = θ1μtg+1 + θ 2 μt∗+1 + (1 − θ 3 ) μts+1 + θ 3 μtq+1 − βμ tc+1 − θ 4 (γμty+1 + μtd+1 )
kt

= e − d t − φ (1 + α ) g t − θ 2it∗ − θ 3 qt − αρ + βct + γy

and F'( kt ) > 0 , θ1 = φ (1 + α ) + α/(1 + α );θ 2 = α (1 + βω ) + βω , θ 3 =

1 − γλ
1
.
, θ4 =
1 + α (1 − δ )
(1 + α )

Knowing the distribution function of the shocks F (k t ) , agents can form expectations of
the future exchange rate based on the average of the current fixed exchange rate and the rate

12

expected to materialize conditional on a devaluation, both weighed by the respective
probabilities of occurrence:
Et et +1 = F (k t )e + [1 − F (k t )]Et (~
et +1 | υ t +1 > k t )

(15)

After linearizing equation (15), we can solve the model in equations (1)-(4) and obtain
the path of reserves in the fixed exchange-rate system when there is a chance that there will be an
abandonment of the peg:
rt = η 0 − η1 ( d t − e) − η 2 it∗ + η 3 ct + η 4 y t − η 5 g t + η 6 q t + μ td .

(16)

The coefficients ηi are function of the parameters of the distribution of the shocks and of
the structural parameters of the model. Reserves will fall with expansionary monetary and fiscal
policies, and with hikes to world interest rates. In contrast, a positive shock to money demand or
demand for domestic goods as well as investors’ shift towards emerging markets lead to an
increase in foreign exchange reserves. Shocks to the real exchange rate have an ambiguous
effect on reserves. The VAR to be estimated is based on equations (6)-(12) and (16).
The Dual Exchange Rate Regime
To relieve balance-of-payment pressures on foreign exchange reserves, albeit
temporarily, Argentina implemented dual rates in the early 1970s and in the 1980s, with a fixed
exchange rate for trade account transactions and a flexible exchange rate for all other
transactions. We now proceed to develop a simple model of the economy under a dual-rate
regime to examine the behavior of the central bank's foreign exchange reserves and the dual
market premium.
The core of our model is still the money market equilibrium condition given by equation
(1).

Prices continue to be determined by equation (3). The interest parity condition is now

written as follows:
it = it∗ + E t f t +1 − f t + ρ t

(2')

where f t is the log of the exchange rate for non-trade account transactions. Note that in equation
(2') it is assumed that the purchase and sale of assets as well as the interest rate proceeds are
channeled through the non-trade account exchange rate market. Using (1), (2'), and (3), we can
write the equilibrium condition in the money market as
d t + rt − e + α (it∗ + ρ t ) − β ct − γ y t + q t − μ td = αf t − αE t f t +1

13

(17)

where e is the fixed exchange rate for trade account transactions. Note that reserves at the
central bank can still change in response to trade account imbalances because the central bank
intervenes to keep the commercial rate fixed. A persistent deficit in the trade account may
deplete reserves holdings. When reserves are depleted, the central bank will not be able to
intervene again in the foreign exchange market and will have to allow the commercial rate to
depreciate. We assume that the foreign exchange rate market is unified after the abandonment of
the peg.
Naturally, investors will try to forecast as best as they can the time and the size of the
devaluation. To examine the likelihood of a devaluation, we need to describe the behavior of the
trade account. We assume that the trade account depends on the real exchange rate:
Rt − Rt −1 = κ qt ,

(18)

The probability of a unique floating exchange rate can be written as:
Pr ( Rt +1 ≤ 0) = Pr[κ ( μ tq+1 − χμ ts+1 ) ≤ − Rt − κ δ q t ].

(19)

Equation (19) indicates that a devaluation in a trading partner (a negative μ q ) will deteriorate
the trade account and increase the probability of a currency crisis. Similarly, expansionary
domestic monetary policy will trigger higher prices and a real appreciation of the domestic
currency and a deteriorating trade balance. In the event of a currency crisis, the exchange rate
market will be unified with the exchange rate equal to ~e . Note that the expected future value of
the financial exchange rate can be written as
E f = Pr ( R ≤ 0)e~ + [1 − Pr ( R
t

t +1

t +1

t +1

t +1

≤ 0)]Et ( f t +1 | Rt +1 > 0)

(20)

The expected financial exchange rate is a non-linear function of monetary and fiscal
shocks, investors’ preference for emerging markets, world interest rates, output, and real
exchange rate shocks. To aid in the solution, we linearize equation (20). Instead of evaluating
separately the path of the financial rate and foreign exchange reserves, we follow the crisis
literature and estimate an index of severity of the speculative attack by using a composite
indicator tracking foreign exchange reserve losses and the dual market premium.16

( f t − e) − ΔRt = τ 0 + τ 1 (d t − e) + τ 2 it∗ − τ 3 ct − τ 4 yt + τ 5 g t − τ 6 qt − μ td
16

(21)

In the crisis literature, the index of exchange market pressure is a composite index that incorporates reserve losses
of the central bank, the rate of exchange rate depreciation, and hikes in interest rates. See, for example,
Eichengreen, Rose, and Wyplosz (1994) and Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999). Here, we adapt the index to account
for the buildup of pressure in the dual exchange rate market.

14

where ΔR is the percent change in foreign exchange reserves of the central bank. In (21), the
index of exchange-market pressure increases with expansionary monetary and fiscal policy, and
positive hikes in world interest rates; it decreases with positive shocks to economic activity and
money demand as well as with higher investors’ interest in emerging markets. In Section IV, the
VAR specification that corresponds to the dual markets system is based on equations (6)-(12)
and (21).
IV. Explaning the Nature of Currency Crises
This section applies the models described in Section III to identify the nature of the
shocks triggering a speculative attack. First, we describe the estimation methodology. Second,
we discuss the data, and finally we elaborate on the results.
The VAR
Our theoretical model implies estimating the following system:
AX t = A( L) X t −1 + Cμ t ,

(22)

V ( μ t ) = Σ.

where X is the vector of variables [i ∗ , c, g , y, (d − e), q, rˆ] , r̂ is the level of foreign exchange
reserves as a proportion of domestic credit during the episodes of fixed exchange rates and is a
composite index of reserve losses and the dual market premium in episodes with capital account
inconvertibility, and μ is the vector of the structural shocks, [ μ ∗ , μ c , μ g , μ y , μ s , μ q , μ d ] . The
theoretical framework of Section III provides guidelines for imposing zero restrictions on the
elements of A , A(L ) and C .
A( L) is a matrix polynomial of order n , where n is the number of lags, and C is a full

rank matrix. The covariance matrix of the structural innovations is denoted by Σ . Under the
assumption of zero correlation across innovations, Σ is diagonal. The matrices A and C capture
the contemporaneous interactions between all the variables in the system.
We can now obtain the reduced-form VAR representation by multiplying both sides of
(22) by A−1 :
X t = B ( L) X t −1 + ε t .

(23)

ε is the vector of reduced-form innovations, [ε ∗ , ε c , ε g , ε y , ε s , ε q , ε d ] . The structural and
reduced-form innovations are related by the following equation:
15

ε t = A−1Cμt .

(24)

The identification restrictions for both the unified and the dual exchange-rate models, as
implied by the analysis of the previous section, can be summarized as follows:

ε∗

= μ∗

εc

= γ 21 μ ∗ + μ c

ε tg

= μ tg

εy

= γ 46 μ q + μ y

εs

= γ 53 μ g + μ s

εq

= γ 65 μ s + μ q

ε rˆ

= γ 71 μ ∗ + γ 72 μ c + γ 73 μ tg + γ 74 μ y + γ 75 μ s + γ 76 μ q + μ d

Note that the parameters γ are functions of the structural parameters in the system, such
as the degree of monetization of the fiscal deficit, and these may be changing over time. For
example, with fixed exchange rates and capital mobility, central banks lose their ability to
conduct an independent monetary policy. This is not the case with a dual exchange rate regime,
making it necessary to estimate the systems for each exchange rate regime separately. Even
within a particular exchange rate regime, parameters may vary. For example, the hard peg of
1991, approved by law, certainly introduced more barriers to the conduct of monetary policy
than the fixed exchange rate regime implemented in the late 1970s. Again, we need to test
parameter stability within a given exchange rate system.
The Data

Figure 2 shows the evolution of domestic and external indicators from January 1970 to
December 2001, the month preceding the last crisis.17 All the indicators are at a monthly
frequency so we can track closely the onset of domestic and external vulnerabilities. The dates of
the currency crises are indicated by the vertical lines. The top two panels show the evolution of
monetary and fiscal factors. Domestic credit in dollars (including both credit to the public and
private sector), shown in the left panel, provides a measure of possible inconsistency between the
fixed exchange rate and monetary shocks. The central government deficit (annualized as a
proportion of GDP), shown in the right panel, provides a measure of government debt
sustainability. While a broader measure of the public sector would have been more appropriate to
17

See the Data Appendix for data sources and definitions.

16

measure the fiscal stance, long high frequency time series on local governments and public
enterprises are not available.18
The middle panels show the effective real exchange rate (a depreciation is shown as an
increase in the real exchange rate index) and the index of manufacturing production.

The

bottom left panel shows the behavior of the world real interest rate, captured by the U.S. real
interest rate. Finally, the bottom right panel shows the first principal component of foreign
exchange reserves19 of the five largest Latin American countries (with the exception of
Argentina), Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Venezuela. With this index, we try to provide
a measure of investors’ sentiments towards Latin America. Investors’ overall enthusiasm about
Latin American markets translates into increases in the first principal component of foreign
exchange reserves held by central banks, while worries about Latin America lead to losses of
foreign exchange reserves across Latin American countries, again as captured by the first
principal component of reserves. Since increases in foreign exchange reserves of central banks
can also be affected by changes in interest rates in financial centers, we will separately identify
in our estimations the effect of shocks to investors’ preferences (possibly capturing contagion
effects) and world interest rate shocks on the fluctuations of the first principal component (as
shown in equation 9).
The Results

As discussed in the chronology, we divided our sample into fixed and dual exchange rate
regimes.

The fixed exchange rate regimes include the Tablita, Alemann, Austral, and

Convertibility Plans20 while the dual exchange rate regimes include the Gelbard, Primavera, and
BB Plans.

Macropolicies and credibility may vary across and within stabilization plans, affecting
the transmission of shocks and making it necessary to test for parameter stability. Since periods
with dual exchange rate regimes are very short, we cannot test this hypothesis. Thus, we
18

Information on public sector debt is available, although not at a monthly frequency.

19

It would have been preferable to use international capital flows data to emerging markets to proxy “investors’
interest in emerging markets.” However, capital flow data is at best only available at quarterly or even annual
frequencies.
20
While during the Tablita and Convertibility Plans there were never controls on foreign exchange transactions, at
times during the Alemann and Austral Plans, the government allowed different rates for financial and commercial
exchange rate transactions. Still, we include these last two episodes in our estimations of the fixed exchange rate
episodes because when these plans were launched, a unique exchange rate regime was implemented.

17

estimate a unique VAR for the Gelbard, Primavera, and BB Plans and the currency crises that
followed the implementation of those plans. Since the fixed exchange rate regimes episodes are
longer-lasting, we test for parameter stability during these episodes.21 We test for three structural
breaks. We examine whether the transmission mechanism during the Tablita-Alemann-Austral
periods is different from that of the Convertibility Plan. We also test for two structural breaks
during the Convertibility Plan: the crisis in April 1995 (following the Mexican crisis) and the
Brazilian crisis in January 1999. We find that the transmission mechanism during the TablitaAlemann-Austral is different from that of the Convertibility Plan. We also find a structural break

in the aftermath of the Brazilian crisis. Thus, our results for the fixed exchange rate episodes
will include three VAR systems: The first includes the Tablita, Alemann and Austral Programs;
the second one refers to the Convertibility program from its implementation in April 1991 to
December 1998; while the third episode starts in January 1999 with the Brazilian devaluation
and ends with the collapse of the currency board in January 2002.
As examined above, our VARs include seven variables: the world real interest rate, the
first principal component of foreign exchange reserves of Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and
Venezuela, government deficit (as a proportion of GDP), industrial production, domestic credit
in dollars, the real exchange rate, and foreign reserves ( or the index of exchange market pressure
for the dual periods).

However, in light of the unavailability of data series on industrial

production during the Gelbard Plan (1973-1975), the VAR for the dual exchange rate regimes
only includes six variables. Although some of our variables turned out to be I(1),22 we estimate
an unrestricted VAR in levels in order to allow the data to pick up the underlying long-run
cointegrating relationship. We allow for 2 lags in all three systems23, which was sufficient to
produce serially uncorrelated residuals.24
21

To test whether VARs were different, we introduced slope dummies representing various periods into the reserves
equation, with a significant slope dummy implying that transmission mechanisms were different across different
periods.
22
Dickey-Fuller tests failed to reject the unit root hypothesis for the first principal component of foreign exchange
reserves of the five largest Latin American economies, foreign exchange reserves of the central bank of Argentina,
the industrial output and money variables at the 5 percent significance level (although we got mixed results on
money variables, depending on number of lags ultimately chosen). The hypothesis was rejected for the world real
interest rate, the exchange market pressure index and the deficit.
23

The estimation was done with only one lag for the dual system, due to the limited number of observations for the
hyperinflation episode. We also estimated the system with one lag for the 1999-2001 unified exchange rate system.

24

Slope dummies were introduced for hyperinflation periods and for periods in which no stabilization plan was
being implemented. Based on the model's assumptions and significance levels of variables, we formulate the world

18

We present our results in three complementary ways. First, we examine the impulse
responses to assess whether we have identified correctly the various shocks, that is, whether, for
example, our “money supply” shock leads to a decline in foreign exchange reserves of the central
bank as the first generation model of currency crises described in Section III predicts. Second,
we report the variance-decomposition of reserves during the fixed exchange rate regimes and of
the index of exchange market pressure during dual exchange rate regimes to assess the
importance of domestic and foreign shocks. The variance decompositions provide us with a
yardstick of the average role of each shock over the whole estimation period, that is, during both
tranquil and crisis times. In some cases, such as during dual exchange rate periods, the variance
decompositions show the importance of each shock over various stabilization plans and crisis
episodes. To untangle the role of domestic and world shocks for each stabilization program and
on the unfolding of the currency turbulences for each crisis examined, we then present the
historical decompositions of foreign exchange reserves and the index of market pressure for the
various stabilization plans and then estimate the role of each shock from the onset of the
fragilities until the crisis month.
Figure 3 shows the impulse responses of the ratio of foreign exchange reserves to
domestic credit (shown in percent) to domestic and external shocks during episodes of unified
exchange markets. The left panels show the impulse responses during the Tablita, Alemann and
Austral Plans, the middle panels show the impulse responses for the first part of the
Convertibility Plan from the implementation of the currency board until the Brazilian Crisis, and

the right panels show the impulse responses for the second part of the Convertibility Period from
the Brazilian Crisis to the Argentine Crisis in January 2002. The top four panels show the
responses to domestic shocks. The effects of shocks to money supply, government deficit, and
money demand are all statistically significant and of the expected signs, with positive shocks to
money supply and government deficit and negative shocks to money demand triggering losses of
reserves, with somewhat more persistent effects during the Tablita-Alemann-Austral Plans. In
contrast, the effects of shocks to output only show a strong and positive effect on reserves

real interest rate equation as a univariate AR(1). The equation for the first principal component of reserves of the
five largest Latin American countries only includes lags of the world real interest rate in addition to lags of the
principal component variable itself. Ultimately, we end up estimating a near VAR using SUR estimation while
allowing for a Sims-Bernanke decomposition of the structural innovations.

19

during the second part of the Convertibility Plan. The effect of this shock on reserves is
negligible during the other two episodes as shown in Table 2.
The bottom three panels show the responses to world shocks. Shocks to the world real
interest rate are only statistically significant during the Tablita-Alemann-Austral Plans and the
first part of the Convertibility Plan (until the Brazilian Crisis), with hikes in world interest rates
triggering losses in reserves. Since the 1990s, a continuously increasing research in international
finance has emphasized the role of international investors’ sentiments (or “risk appetite”) in
creating capital flow bonanzas to particular regions, such as Latin America in the late 1970s,
Europe in the early 1990s, or East Asia in the mid 1990s. This same literature has also singled
out the role of international investors’ sentiments in capital flow reversals. As the impulse
responses in Figure 3 show, those effects, captured by shocks to the first principal component of
foreign exchange reserves, are only important during the early 1990s up to the Brazilian crisis in
January 1999. Finally, shocks to the real exchange rate (attempting to capture exogenous
shocks, such as trade partners fluctuations in their real exchange rates due to crises or the
adoption of a stabilization plan) are never statistically significant.
Figure 4 shows the dynamic responses during Dual Exchange Rate Regimes. Domestic
shocks are also important during these episodes, with positive shocks to money supply and fiscal
deficits and negative shocks to money demand leading to currency turbulences as captured by
reserve losses or increases in the dual market premium.

While the dual market system

implemented in Argentina implied the use of controls on capital flows to insulate the domestic
economy from world shocks, our results indicate that fluctuations in world real interest rates and
shocks to “investors’ interest in emerging markets” have statistically significant effects on the
index of exchange market pressure, with hikes in world interest rates and negative shocks to
investors’ sentiment leading to currency turmoil in Argentina. As with fixed exchange rate
regimes, real exchange rate shocks are never statistically significant.
Tables 2 and 3 report the variance decompositions for the fixed exchange rate and the
dual exchange rate episodes, respectively. As Table 2 shows, the shocks that move the currency
market vary across all these episodes, only money demand shocks are important across the whole
sample (explaining between 18 and 80 percent of the conditional variance of foreign exchange
reserves at all horizons), suggesting that changes in rules as well as improvement or
abandonment of property rights affect dramatically households’ behavior and are at the core of
20

all bonanzas and crises in Argentina. Interestingly, the period starting in April 1991 with the
adoption of the currency board until the Brazilian crisis in January 1999 looks different from
other episodes. During the earlier part of the currency board episode, world shocks –as captured
by shocks to world real interest rates and “investors’ interest in emerging markets” – account for
about 20 to 70 percent of the conditional variance of foreign exchange reserves (as a proportion
of domestic credit in dollars). In contrast, vulnerabilities in domestic indicators –fiscal deficits
and shocks to economic activity– are the main drivers of reserve fluctuations during the last
part of the Convertibility Plan, accounting for about 60 percent of the variance in foreign
exchange reserve forecasting errors. Finally, currency booms and busts during the Tablita,
Alemann, and Austral Plans are mostly explained by world real interest rate shocks and money

supply and demand shocks (in line with the crisis chronology).
Table 3 reports the variance decomposition for the dual exchange rate episodes. Again,
as during the fixed exchange rate episodes, money demand shocks explain a substantial part of
currency market ups and downs (between 20 and 50 percent of the forecasting variance of the
index of exchange market pressure for all horizons). The dual exchange rate episodes look very
similar to the Tablita-Alemann-Austral plans, with money supply shocks and world interest rates
explaining about 50 percent of the forecasting variance of the index of market pressure.
To track the effects of the identified domestic and world shocks in real-time on currency
bonanzas and crises, we now present the historical decompositions of the foreign exchange
reserves and the index of exchange market pressure. Figures 5 and 6 present, respectively, the
decomposition for the fixed exchange rate and the dual exchange rate episodes from the
implementation of each stabilization plan until the crisis. In these figures, the solid line shows
the difference between the actual value of reserves or index of market pressure and the
forecasted value with information at the start of the stabilization plan while the dotted lines show
the part explained by either domestic or international shocks. Since the Alemann Stabilization
Plan only lasted a few months and this plan also helped maintain the fixed exchange rate regime

launched with the Tablita Plan, we report the historical decomposition jointly for both plans.
The results in Figure 5 indicate that the capital flow bonanza, as captured by the increases
in reserves, in the year following the implementation of the stabilization plans was mostly fueled
by better domestic fundamentals across all episodes. This finding agrees with the conventional
wisdom in both academic and policy circles that the launching of the stabilization plans
21

coincided, at least transitorily, with fiscal and monetary reforms as well as deregulation of the
financial sector.25 Our results for the Tablita Plan and first part of the Convertibility Plan also
show that the capital flow bonanzas in the year following the implementation of the plans were
triggered by favorable external conditions. We feel confident about our identification since the
implementation of the Tablita in the late 1970s and Convertibility Plans in the beginning of the
1990s coincided with episodes of low world real interest rates and with a surge in investors’
interest in emerging markets following the Brady debt relief program of 1989-90.

The

historical decompositions in Figure 5 indicate that capital flow reversals and the onset of the
crises in 1981-82 and 2001 were caused in part (totally for the crisis in 1987) by deteriorating
domestic fundamentals. In contrast, the reversal in the path of reserves starting in 1994 was
mostly due to unfavorable world conditions. Only during the four months preceeding the 1995
crisis were fragilities observed on the home front, mostly driven by bank deposit runs.
Figure 6 shows the historical decompositions for the stabilization plans during the dual
exchange rate regimes. In this figure, we jointly examine the two stabilization plans during the
hyperinflation episode. In contrast with the stabilization plans during the fixed exchange rate
regimes, the implementation of the Gelbard, Primavera, and BB Plans do not fuel (even
transitorily) a reduction in exchange market pressures. In the Gelbard Plan, a large part of the
initial vulnerabilities are triggered by adverse external conditions, driven by hikes in world
interest rates in 1974. In the stabilization plans in the late 1980s, the exchange market pressure
is mostly explained by rapidly deteriorating monetary conditions. Remember that these plans
take place at the height of the hyperinflation period, which only ends with the implementation of
the Convertibility Plan.
Figures 5 and 6 only assess the combined effect of all domestic shocks or that of external
shocks. Also, the historical decompositions in these figures cover times of both bonanza and
crisis. Table 4 provides a higher resolution picture of crisis times. First, it untangles the various
sources of domestic fragility into money supply, government deficit, output, and money demand
shocks. Second, it sorts out the origins of external vulnerability into world real interest,
investors’ interest in emerging markets (or contagion), and real exchange rate shocks. Third, it
concentrates on the onset of the currency turmoil until the crisis, that is, it shows the historical
25

See, for example, IMF (2004a, 2004b), Blejer and Liviatan (1987), Kiguel (1989), and Machinea and Fanelli
(1987).

22

decompositions from the times reserves start to fall or the index of market pressure starts to
increase. Each cell in this table shows the share of the fluctuations in foreign exchange reserves
(or the index of exchange market pressure) explained by each single shock. As shown in Table
4, all currency crises are preceded by domestic vulnerabilities with the exception of the 1995
crisis. Monetary shocks are at the core of the domestic fragilities for all crises with the exception
of the 2002 crisis, when dramatic adverse shocks to economic activity seal the fate of the
currency board. Importantly, monetary shocks do not just reflect money supply shocks. In
particular, money demand shocks are very important during the Tablita, Alemann, and Austral
crises. As described in our chronology, these are episodes plagued by numerous regulatory
changes on interest rates and foreign exchange markets –as during the period from February
1981 to June 1982– or by the stop and go cycles of controls on prices, wages and public utilities
during the Austral Plan.26 Naturally, these continuous changes in rules on financial and price
contracts fuel uncertainty and reduce households’ faith in the financial system and overall ability
of the authorities to maintain the peg. Finally, our results do not uncover an important fiscal
effect at the onset of the crises. These results may be due to our “fiscal deficit” indicator that
includes the central government but not the local governments and public enterprises, which ran
particularly large deficits during the Tablita Plan and the latter part of the Convertibility Plan.
Since our fiscal indicator captures only partially the fiscal deficit of the consolidated public
sector, fiscal shocks may in fact be captured by the shocks to money supply in equation (6).27
External shocks are also important in explaining currency turbulences. For example,
hikes in world interest rates have a major impact on currency vulnerabilities during the Tablita
and Alemann Plans, when world real interest rates increased from -1 percent in July 1980 to
26

The management of prices was a central part of the Austral Plan. Prices and wage controls were introduced at the
start of the program, but the first adjustment in prices was implemented in April 1986. In July 1986, the government
introduced ceilings for monthly increases in prices as well as limits on wage increases. By the last months of 1986,
prices were again fluctuating freely. In February 1987, a price freeze was again announced only to be relaxed in
May 1987.
27

Since the results in Table 2 show that even our partial measure of fiscal shocks can explain 20 percent of the
variance decomposition for foreign exchange reserves during the last part of the Convertibility Plan (January 1999December 2001), we examine the possibility of a time-varying effect of the fiscal shock.
We decompose the
historical decomposition in Table 4 into two episodes. The first episode starts in January 2001 from the onset of
currency turmoil and lasts until July 2001. The second episode starts in August 2001 and ends in December 2001,
with the collapse of the Convertibility Plan. During the first episode, increases in government deficit explain 18
percent of the losses of reserves. But on July 29, 2001, the Argentine Congress passes the “Zero Deficit Law,”
requiring a balanced budget by the fourth quarter of 2001. In August 2001, the deficit starts to decline while
reserves losses continue to increase, explaining the almost zero cumulative net effect of fiscal shocks on reserves
from January to December 2001 shown in Table 4.

23

about 10 percent on average in 1981-1982, and during the Convertibility Plan in 1994, when the
Federal Reserve increased its policy rate by 250 basis points. Indeed, our results indicate that 53
percent of the total decline in the historical forecast error of Argentina's reserves between
October 1979 and June 1982 is explained by world interest rate shocks, with the world interest
rate effect increasing to 69 percent in the 1995 crisis.
In the 1990s, external shocks are not limited to those fueled by changes in monetary
conditions in industrialized countries. Spillover effects from other Latin American countries (as
captured by a shock to investors’ interest in emerging markets) magnify reserve losses triggered
by monetary tightening in financial centers. Our empirical estimations suggest that about onefourth of the fall in reserves from December 1993 to February 1995 can be explained by
contagion factors. However, contrary to theories advocating sudden stops as an explanation of
the 2002 Argentine crisis (Calvo, Izquierdo, and Talvi, 2002), we find that adverse shocks to
investors’ interest in emerging markets played no role in explaining the collapse of the currency
board as capital inflows had already dried up following the Russian crisis in late 1998. By 2001,
investors had already started observing Argentina as a country with problems of its own.
We also examined the costs of crises fueled by domestic fragilities and those triggered by
adverse external shocks even in the presence of immaculate domestic fundamentals. Table 5
shows various costs for these two types of crises. First, we looked at the severity of the crises as
captured by reserve losses in the six months prior to the crises and the real exchange rate
depreciation in the six months following the crises. On average, losses of reserves for crises
fueled by domestic vulnerabilities reach 33 percent but only reach 16 percent for crises triggered
by external shocks. Similarly, real depreciations are far larger (73 percent) for crises triggered
by fragile domestic fundamentals than for crises with only adverse external shocks (5 percent).
Second, we examined the crisis impact on the economy. Output losses in the year of the crisis
and the following year average 5 percent for crises with domestic fragilities while the economy
grows 3 percent during the crisis triggered by adverse external shocks. Finally, we examined the
external adjustment following the crises. Access to international capital markets can be severely
impaired in the aftermath of crises, with countries having to run sizable current account surpluses
to repay their debt. We examined the size and type of the adjustment across these two types of
crises. In the case of crises with domestic vulnerabilities, most of the adjustment occurs on the
import side, with imports falling approximately 23 percent in the year following the crisis and
24

exports only growing 21 percent despite large depreciations during this type of crisis. This
evidence suggests that Argentina might have been unable to attract trade credits to finance
exports when its economy was quite fragile. In contrast, in the aftermath of the 1995 crisis,
booming exports were at the heart of the recovery of the current account (35 percent increase)
and even imports continued to increase (10 percent).
V. Conclusions

Economists have puzzled at length over the causes and severity of currency crises. As a
result, research in this area has surged, especially since the ERM crises in 1992-1993. Most of
the empirical research has focused on predicting crises using reduced-form estimations and failed
to uncover the effect of policy and structural shocks on the changing severity of currency
turmoil. This paper uses an old methodology to study this new problem, implementing VAR
techniques to quantify the role of different shocks in the severity of currency crises. Our case
study is Argentina, a country that not only has been at the center stage in every single episode of
international financial turmoil (such as the 1982 debt crisis, the 1994 Tequila crisis, and the 1999
Brazilian crisis), but also has had many currency collapses of its own. Thus, while our analysis
is confined to one country, it does provide a glimpse of the nature of worldwide currency
turbulences. Our results confirm previous findings in the literature but also suggest new results.
The major conclusions that emerge from our analysis are as follows. First, our
estimations confirm the results obtained by Calvo, Leiderman, and Reinhart (1992) regarding the
role of monetary tightening in industrial countries during the episodes of capital flows reversals
of the early 1980s and mid 1990s. Both the collapse of the Tablita-Alemann Plans and the
speculative attack against the peso in 1994-95 in the midst of the Convertibility Plan were in
large part precipitated by the shift to a contractionary monetary stance in the United States.
Second, as expected, inconsistent monetary and exchange rate policies did trigger many
of the main speculative attacks against the peso. But, as our event chronology and historical
decompositions suggest, loose monetary policy was not the only culprit. The erratic nature of
capital account restrictions and interest rate and credit controls as well as the stop and go cycles
on price and wage controls in the mid 1980s also played a key role— with the uncertainty
triggered by forced conversion of contracts leading to capital flight and downward pressure on
money demand.

25

Third, the mid-1990s look somewhat different. Spillovers from Mexico and other Latin
American countries seem to have been a source of financial distress for Argentina, explaining
about 25 percent of the severity of the speculative attack in 1995. This is not surprising as in the
1990s the extent of integration of Latin America to international capital markets sharply
increases. It is also in the 1990s when mutual funds become important players in Latin America.
Naturally, this provides a new channel for spillovers, as was the case when mutual funds
retreated from several countries in Latin America after the losses they suffered from the Mexican
devaluation.
Fourth, the origin of the 2002 crisis lies in the sharp depression that started in the last half
of 1998 and continued and deepened throughout the pre-crisis period. As the economy slided
into recession, the currency board became a liability as the government was constrained to carry
out a contractionnary monetary policy in the midst of a a profound recession.

Financial

contagion from Brazil or other Latin American countries was found to play no role in explaining
the collapse of the currency board in 2001.
Finally, our results show that the participation in international capital markets can be
risky and that crises may occur even in the presence of immaculate domestic fundamentals. Still,
the costs of crises triggered by just adverse external shocks are far smaller than those of crises
fueled by fragile domestic fundamentals.

26

Appendix

The data used in the VAR estimation is at monthly frequencies and covers the periods 1970:12001:12.
Data Sources:

All data is from International Financial Statistics, IMF unless explained below.
Fundación de Investigaciones Económicas Latinoamericanas, FIEL
Definitions and Units of the Variables in Figures 1 and 2:
r: Ratio of Argentina’s Foreign Exchange Reserves to Domestic Credit in dollars, in percent.
(f-e): Percentage difference between the black/dual exchange market exchange rate and the
commercial exchange rate.
d-e: Total domestic credit of the banking sector, measured in billion dollars at the commercial
exchange rate.
q: Real effective exchange rate with respect to Argentina’s main trading partners.
i*: U.S. Real Interest Rate: Nominal interest rate on one-year U.S. Treasury Bills adjusted for
CPI inflation (in percent).
c: First principal component of foreign exchange reserves of the following countries: Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela. The principal component is constructed as a linear
combination of the five series, where the weights correspond to the eigenvector associated with
the largest eigenvalue of the covariance matrix of the individual series (See Drhymes (1974) for
an explanation of principal components analysis).
g: Annualized central goverment deficit measured as a proportion of GDP, in percent. Obtained
from Ministry of Finance, the IMF Government Finance Statistics and IMF Staff reports.
y: Monthly index of industrial production. FIEL database.

27

References

Baliño, Tomás, (1987), “The Argentine Banking Crisis of 1980,” International Monetary Fund
Working Paper WP/87/77.
Blanco, H. and P.M. Garber, (1986), “Recurrent Devaluations and Speculative Attacks on the
Mexican Peso,” Journal of Political Economy, v.94. pp. 148-166.
Blejer, M. and N. Liviatan, (1987), “Hyperinflation: Stabilization Strategies in Argentina and
Israel, 1985-1986,” International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, Vol. 34, No.3, September,
409-438.
Calvo, G., (1999), “The Russian Virus,” University of Maryland, mimeo.
Calvo, G., A. Izquierdo, and E. Talvi, (2002), “Sudden Stops, the Real Exchange Rate, and
Fiscal Sustainability: Argentina's Lessons,” Inter-American Development Bank, mimeo.
Calvo, G., L. Leiderman, and C. Reinhart, (1992), “Capital Inflows to Latin America: The 1980s
and the 1990s.” IMF Working Paper, No. 85.
Calvo, G., L. Leiderman, and C. Reinhart, (1996), “Inflows of Capital to Developing Countries
in the 1990s,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 10, No. 2, Spring.
Céspedes, L., R. Chang, and A. Velasco, (2004), “Balance Sheets and Exchange Rate Policy”
American Economic Review, September.
Cumby, R.E. and S. van Wijnbergen, (1989), “Financial Policy and Speculative Runs with a
Crawling Peg: Argentina 1979-1981,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 27.
pp.111-127.
D'Amato, L., E. Grubisic, and A. Powell (1997), “Contagion, Bank Fundamentals or
Macroeconomic Shocks? An Empirical Analysis of the Argentine 1995 Banking
Problems,” paper presented at the 1997 LACEA meetings (Bogota: Colombia).
Di Tella, G., and R. Dornbusch, eds., (1989), The Political Economy of Argentina, 1946-1983,
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
De la Torre, A., E. Levy Yeyati, and S. L. Schmukler, (2002). “Argentina’s Financial Crisis:
Floating Money, Sinking Banking,” Washington DC. World Bank.
Dornbusch, R. and J.C. de Pablo, (1989), “Debt and Macroeconomic Instability in Argentina,”
in J. Sachs, ed. Developing Country Debt and the World Economy.
Drazen, A. and P. Mason, (1994), “Credibility of Policies versus Credibility of Policymakers,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 109 No. 3, August, 735-754.
28

Edwards, S., (2002a), “The Argentine Debt crisis of 2001-2002: A Chronology and Some Key
Policy Issues.” Mimeo. UCLA.
Edwards, S., (2002b), “The Great Exchange Rate Debate After Argentina,” NBER Working
Paper No 9257. Cambridge, Massachussets.
Drhymes, P., (1974), Econometrics: Statistical Foundations and Applications. New York:
Springer-Verlag.
Eichengreen B., A. Rose and C. Wyplosz, (1994), "Speculative Attacks on Pegged Exchange
Rates: An Empirical Exploration with Special Reference to the European Monetary
System," in The New Transatlantic Economy. ed. by M. Canzoneri, P. Masson, and V.
Grilli. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press for CEPR.
Ericsson, N. and S. Kamin, (1993), "Dollarization in Argentina," International Finance
Discussion Paper No. 460. Washington D.C.: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve.
Giorgio, L. and S. Sagari, (1996), “Argentina's Financial Crises and Restructuring in the 1980s,”
Bank Restructuring: Lessons from the 1980s, A. Sherg (ed), Washington D.C.: World
Bank Publications.
International Monetary Fund (2004a), “The IMF and Argentina, 1991-2001”. Independent
Evaluation Office. 2004. Washington DC.
International Monetary Fund (2004b), “ Lessons from the Crisis in Argentina” Occasional Paper
236. Washington DC.
Hausman, R. and A. Velasco, (2002) “The Argentine Collapse: Hard Money's Soft Underbelly,”
April, Harvard University mimeo.
Kaminsky, Graciela, (2009), “Two Hundred Years of Financial Integration: Latin America since
Independence,” in http://home.gwu.edu/~graciela.
Kaminsky, G. and C. Reinhart, (2000), “On Crises, Contagion, and Confusion,” Journal of
International Economics.
Kaminsky, G., R. Lyons, and S. Schmukler, (2004), “Managers, Investors, and Crises:
Investment Strategies of Mutual Funds,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 64,
Issue 1, October 2004, 113-134.
Kiguel, M., (1989), “Inflation in Argentina: Stop and Go Since the Austral Plan,” Policy,
Planning, and Research Working Paper No. 162, The World Bank, March.
Kiguel, M. and P. Neumeyer, (1995), “Seigniorage and Inflation: The Case of Argentina,”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol. 27, No. 3, August, 672-682.
29

Krugman, P, (1979), “A Model of Balance of Payments Crises,” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, v. 11. pp. 311-325.
Machinea, J. and J. Fanelli, (1988), “Stopping Hyperinflation: The Case of the Austral Plan in
Argentina, 1985-87,” in Inflation Stabilization: The Experience of Israel, Argentina,
Brazil, Bolivia, and Mexico, M. Bruno, G. Di Tella, R. Dornbusch, and S. Fischer (eds),
MIT Press, 111-152.
Montanaro, E, (1990), “The Banking and Financial System in Argentina: The History of a
Crisis,” The Future of Financial Systems and Services, E. Gardener, ed. New York: St.
Martin's Press.
Mussa, M., (2002) Argentina and the Fund: From Triumph to Tragedy, Institute for International
Economics, March.
Perry, G. and L. Servén, (2002), “The Anatomy of a Multiple Crisis: Why Was Argentina
Special and What Can We Learn From It?” The World Bank, May, mimeo.
Reinhart, C. and C. Végh, (2002), “Do Exchange Rate-Based Stabilizations Carry the Seeds of
Their Own Destruction?” mimeo, University of Maryland.
Rodriguez, C. (1994). “Argentina: Fiscal Disequilibria Leading to Hyperinflation,” in Easterly,
Rodriguez and Schmidt-Hebel, eds. Public Sector Deficits and Macroeconomic
Performance, New York: Oxford University Press

30

Table 1
Stabilization Plans and Crises

Stabilization Plans
Crisis Date

Reserve Losses
(in percent)*

Cumulative
Dual Market
Devaluation
Devaluation on the
Premium on the
in the First Six
Month of the Crisis
Month of the Crisis
Months Following
(in percent)
(in percent)
the Crisis
(in Percent)

Name

Implemented on:

Gelbard

May 1973

March, 1975

56

369

100

628

Tablita

December 1978

February 1981

45

n.a

10

136

Alemann

December 1981

July 1982

17

n.a

148

244

Austral

June 1985

September 1987

75

n.a.

16

133

Primavera

August 1988

April 1989

62

206

387

4025

BB

July 1989

February 1990

58

105

220

232

Convertibility

April 1991

March 1995

41

n.a

0

0

Convertibility

April 1991

January 2002

50

n.a

40

265

Note: * For each episode, reserve losses are computed from the month the stock of reserves held by the central bank peaks until the crisis date.

Table 2
Variance Decomposition for Foreign Exchange Reserves During Fixed Exchange Rate Regimes
Fraction of Variance Due to Shocks to:
Tablita, Alemann, and Austral Plans
Horizon
(months)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

Convertibility Plan: April 1991-December 1998

Money Supply

Government
Deficit

Output

Money
Demand

World Real
Interest Rate

Investors'
Interest in
Emerging
Markets

19
17
16
16
17
17
17
18
18
18
19
19
20
20
21
21
21
22
22
23
23
24
24
24

1
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

0
0
2
5
7
9
10
10
11
11
11
11
10
10
10
10
9
9
9
9
9
8
8
8

80
80
76
70
65
59
55
50
46
43
40
38
36
34
32
31
30
29
28
27
27
26
26
26

0
1
2
5
8
11
15
18
21
24
27
29
31
33
34
35
36
37
38
38
38
39
39
39

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1

Real
Exchange
Rate *

Money Supply

Government
Deficit

Output

Money
Demand

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

6
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

8
7
6
5
5
4
4
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

81
77
69
61
55
50
46
43
40
38
36
34
33
31
30
29
28
27
27
26
25
25
24
24

Convertibility Plan: January 1999-January 2002

World Real
Interest Rate

Investors'
Interest in
Emerging
Markets

Real
Exchange
Rate *

Money Supply

Government
Deficit

Output

Money
Demand

World Real
Interest Rate

Investors'
Interest in
Emerging
Markets

Real
Exchange
Rate *

0
3
7
11
14
17
19
21
23
24
25
25
26
26
27
27
27
27
28
28
28
28
28
28

4
9
13
17
20
22
25
26
28
29
31
32
33
34
35
36
36
37
38
39
39
40
40
41

0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

0
2
3
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

10
17
19
20
20
20
21
21
21
21
21
21
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
19
19
19

15
33
40
43
45
45
46
46
46
46
46
45
45
45
45
45
44
44
44
44
43
43
43
42

71
44
33
28
25
23
22
21
21
20
20
20
20
19
19
19
19
19
19
19
18
18
18
18

3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
6
6
7
7
8
9

0
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4

0
1
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

Table 3
Variance decomposition for the Index of Exchange Market Pressure
During Dual Market Regimes

Horizon
(months)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

Money
Supply

51
48
44
40
37
35
33
32
31
30
29
29
28
28
27
27
26
26
25
25
25
24
24
24

Fraction of Variance Due to Shocks to:
Investors'
Interest in
Government
Money
World Real
Deficit
Demand
Interest Rate Emerging
Markets
0
3
7
10
12
13
13
13
12
12
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
12
12
12

47
47
45
42
40
37
35
34
32
31
30
29
29
28
27
27
26
26
25
25
25
24
24
24

1
1
2
4
7
9
11
14
16
18
19
21
22
24
25
26
27
27
28
29
29
30
30
31

0
1
2
2
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
6
6
6
6

Real
Exchange
Rate *
0
0
1
2
3
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
4
4
4
4
4

Note: * It captures responses to exogenous shocks to the real exchange rate, such as nominal devaluations
in trading-partner countries.

Table 4
The Role of Domestic and External Shocks on the Onset of Crises
Losses of Reserves or Increases in the Dual Market Premium: Percentage Share Explained by:
External Shocks

Total

World Real
Interest Rate

Investors'
Interest in
Emerging
Markets

41
42
0
41
93
11

34
53
-14
17
69
22

-3
-9
6
12
24
-20

Crisis

March 1975
February 1981 and July 1982
September 1987
August 1988 and July 1989
March 1995
January 2002

Domestic Shocks
Real
Exchange
Rate

Total

Money
Supply

Government
Deficit

Output

Money
Demand

9
-2
8
12
-1
8

59
58
100
59
7
91

36
18
23
72
-1
13

7
2
-14
2
-3
-7

…
-3
14
…
-4
63

16
40
77
-16
15
22

Note: This table focuses on explaining the onset of crises. The historical decomposition starts from the month when foreign exchange reserves are at their peak or when the
dual market premium is at its through and ends on the month of the crisis. Numbers in bold signify that impulse responses for these shocks are significant for most horizons.

Table 5
Costs of Crises
(in percent)

Crisis

Real Exchange
Output
Exports
Import
Rate
Changes in
Reserve losses
Changes in
Changes in
Depreciation
the Year of
in the Six
the Year
the Year
in the Six
the Crisis and
Months Prior
Following the Following the
Months
the Following
to the Crisis
Crisis
Crisis
Following the
Year
Crisis

March 1975
February 1981
July 1982
September 1987
August 1988
July 1989
March 1995
January 2002

40
56
10
36
47
20
16
25

181
53
30
27
66
-20
5
174

-5
-5
-8
1
-8
9
3
-15

20
30
19
34
35
6
35
4

-46
-50
-6
-4
-39
4
10
-16

Crises with Domestic Vulnerabilities
Crises with External Adverse Shocks

33
16

73
5

-5
3

21
35

-23
10

Notes: Reserves, exports, and imports are in U.S. dollars. Output is measured as real GDP. The last two rows of the Table
show the average costs of currency crises mainly triggered by domestic vulnerabilities and currency crises mainly fueled by
adverse external shocks. As discussed in the paper, the only crisis triggered by external adverse shocks is the March 1995
crisis.

Figure 1
Indicators of the Fragility Buildup
Foreign Exchange Reserves
(in Billion Dollars)

24

16

8

Jan-00

Jan-97

Jan-94

Jan-91

Jan-88

Jan-85

Jan-82

Jan-79

Jan-76

Jan-73

Jan-70

0

Dual Exchange Market Premium
(in Percent)
400

300
200
100

Note: The vertical lines indicate the month of the crises.

Jan-00

Jan-97

Jan-94

Jan-91

Jan-88

Jan-85

Jan-82

Jan-79

Jan-76

Jan-73

Jan-70

0

Note: The vertical lines indicate the month of the crises.
-5
-3

Jan-00

-1

Jan-97

0

Jan-94

1

Jan-91

5

Jan-88

3

300
100

150

60

Jan-94

Jan-91

Jan-88

Jan-85

Jan-82

Jan-79

Jan-76

Jan-00

140

Jan-00
00

450
Jan-97

Industrial Production
Index Number

Jan-97
97

Jan-94
94

Jan-91
91

Jan-88
88

Jan-85
85

Jan-82
82

Jan-79
79

Jan-76
76

Real Exchange Rate
Index Number

Jan-85

10
Jan-73

Jan-70

Domestic Credit
(in Billion Dollars)

Jan-82

5

Jan-79

15

Jan-76

World Real Interest Rate
(Percent per Annum)
Jan-73
73

0
Jan-70
70

Jan-00

Jan-97

Jan-94

Jan-91

Jan-88

Jan-85

Jan-82

Jan-79

Jan-76

Jan-73

Jan-70

0

Jan-73

Jan-000

Jan-977

Jan-944

Jan-911

Jan-888

Jan-855

Jan-822

Jan-799

Jan-766

Jan-733

Jan-700

80

Jan-70

Jan-00

Jan-97

Jan-94

Jan-91

Jan-88

Jan-85

Jan-82

Jan-79

Jan-76

Jan-73

Jan-70

Figure 2
Domestic and External Indicators
Government Deficit
(Percent of GDP)

30

60

40
15

20
0

-15

Latin American Foreign Exchange Reserves: First Principal Component
Index Number

Figure 3
Impulse Responses of Foreign Exchange Reserves to Various Shocks during Fixed Exchange Rate Regimes

Tablita, Alemann, and Austral Plans

Convertibility Plan: April 1991-December 1998

Money Supply

Money Supply
1

1

Money Supply
1

0.5

0

Convertibility Plan: January1999-January 2002

0

0
-1

-1

-0.5

-2

-1

-2
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

1

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

1

0.5

0.5

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Government Deficit

0
-1
-2
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Output

1

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Output
0.5

2

3

1

-1
1

2

Government Deficit

Government Deficit
1

-1

1

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Output
3
2

1
0

0

1
0

-1
-0.5

-2
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

-1
1

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Money Demand

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Money Demand

2

2

1

1

0

0

-1

-1

Money Demand
3
2
1

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

0
-1

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

World Real Interest Rate

0

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

World Real Interest Rate

World Real Interest Rate
0.5

1

1

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

1
0.5

0

-1

0
-0.5
-0.5

-2
-1

-3
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

-1
1

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

2

3

4

Investors' Interest in Emerging Markets
2

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Investors' Interest in Emerging Markets

Investors' Interest in Emerging Markets
1

1

0.5
1

0
0.5

-0.5

0

-1

-1

-1.5

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

1

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Real Exchange Rate

Real Exchange Rate

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Real Exchange Rate

0.5

1

1

0.5

0.5
0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5
-0.5

-1
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

-1
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Figure 4
Impulse Response of the Index of Market Pressure to Various Shocks during Dual
Exchange Regimes

Money Supply

32
12
-8
-28
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Government Deficit
20
10
0
-10
-20
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Money Demand
10
-10
-30
-50
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

World Real Interest Rate
25
15
5
-5
-15
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Investors' Interest in Emerging Markets
12
6
0
-6
-12
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Real Exchange Rate
15
5
-5
-15
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Figure 5
Sources of the Fluctuations in Foreign Exchange Reserves
During Fixed Exchange Rate Regimes
Tablita and Alemann Plans
External

Domestic
20

20

10

10

0

0

-10

-10

-20
Dec-78

Jul-79

Feb-80

Sep-80

Apr-81

Nov-81

Jun-82

-20
Dec-78

Jul-79

Feb-80

Sep-80

Apr-81

Nov-81

Jun-82

Austral Plan
External

Domestic

20

20

10

10

0

0

-10

-10

-20
Jun-85

Dec-85

Jun-86

Dec-86

Jun-87

-20
Jun-85

Dec-85

Jun-86

Dec-86

Jun-87

Convertibility Plan: April 1991-December 1998
Domestic

20

External
20

10

10

0

0

-10

-10

-20
Apr-91

Jan-92

Oct-92

Jul-93

Apr-94

Jan-95

-20
Apr-91

Jan-92

Oct-92

Jul-93

Apr-94

Jan-95

Convertibility Plan: January 1999-January 2002
External

Domestic

20

20

10

10

0

0

-10

-10

-20
Jan-99

-20
Jul-99

Jan-00

Jul-00

Jan-01

Jul-01

Jan-99

Jul-99

Jan-00

Jul-00

Jan-01

Jul-01

Note: In each panel, the solid line shows the difference between the level of reserves (as a share of domestic credit in dollars--in percent) and the level that
would have been forecasted based upon the history of the system up through the implementation of the stabilization plan. Thus, it reflects the cumulative
impact of both domestic and foreign shocks. The dotted line shows the actual path of reserves that would have prevailed if either domestic or foreign
shocks had hit the system.

Figure 6
Sources of Fluctuations in the Index of Market Pressure During Dual Exchange Rate Regimes
Gelbard Plan
External

Domestic
300

300

200

200

100

100

0

0
-100

-100
Feb-74

May-74

Aug-74

Nov-74

Feb-74

Feb-75

May-74

Aug-74

Nov-74

Feb-75

Primavera and BB Plans
Domestic

External

300

300

150

150

0

0

-150

-150
Aug-88

Dec-88

Apr-89

Aug-89

Dec-89

Aug-88

Dec-88

Apr-89

Aug-89

Dec-89

Note: In each panel, the solid line shows the difference between the level of the index of exchange market pressure (in percent) and the level that would have been forecasted based
upon the history of the system up through the implementation of the stabilization plan. Thus, it reflects the cumulative impact of both domestic and foreign shocks. The dotted line
shows the actual path of the index of exchange market pressure that would have prevailed if either domestic or foreign shocks had hit the system.

