                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE GLOBAL 1970S AND THE ECHO OF THE GREAT DEPRESSION

                                           Alan M. Taylor

                                        Working Paper 15475
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15475


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2009




This paper is forthcoming as a chapter in the volume The Shock of the Global to be published by Harvard
University Press. Financial support from the Center for the Evolution of the Global Economy at UC
Davis is gratefully acknowledged. I would like to thank conference participants for useful feedback,
and I am particular indebted to Niall Ferguson and Lawrence Summers for their detailed comments
and suggestions. All errors are mine. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Global 1970s and the Echo of the Great Depression
Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 15475
November 2009
JEL No. N10,N40,N70

                                              ABSTRACT

The Great Depression ushered in a long era of deglobalization that lasted for many decades. An old
conventional wisdom (e.g. Polanyi) argues that the common aspect of this shock across all countries,
a deep depression, can explain the large and persistent global shift away from orthodox liberal economic
policies—including, for example, the collapse of free trade. Yet there is substantial unexplored variation,
since not all countries experienced the same depth of shock in the 1930s. Hence, if the “policy path
dependence” argument is correct, we should be able to detect it using this variation. Those countries
with deeper slumps ought to have seen policy shifts that were larger and more persistent. A fuller economic
history of the reglobalization of the postwar period should confront this question, and we present some
preliminary evidence for the path dependence hypothesis.


Alan M. Taylor
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
amtaylor@ucdavis.edu
The decade of the 1970s sits on a delicate cusp: receding from conversations on the

contemporary world, detaching from pressing policy debates, and sliding imperceptibly

into the arena of historical scholarship. A tumultuous time in many respects, the era that

began circa 1970 appears to offer the richest seams for students of social history,

geopolitics, and culture; but in this paper I argue that in the sphere of economic history

the 1970s may yet emerge as one of the most important turning points of the modern era.

           Twenty years ago, when some of the contributors to this volume were beginning

graduate school, new research on the economic history of the Great Depression, which is

now indisputably a part of the standard syllabus, was at the cutting edge. The view that

World War I demarcated the endpoint of history had been left behind. The new interwar

scholarship has been a vital area of research ever since, and has helped us understand the

first great economic turning point of the world economy in the twentieth century: the

great deglobalization of the interwar period.

           Time has now rolled on, and from where we stand that Great Reversal is surely

long over, and it is the postwar process of reglobalization that now looms in the economic

historian’s rearview mirror. Understanding, documenting, and explaining that process is

only just beginning—but as with the scholarship of the Great Depression a generation

ago, the postwar period will form the new frontier for researchers. Where that exploration

will take us remains to be seen, but I think we can already start to discern some important

terrain.

           In this paper I sketch how enduring questions about globalization, of both markets

and society, can be seen to link the 1970s back in time to the Great Depression.

Moreover, these very same concerns still resonate today in what many are starting to


                                                1
perceive as a moment when globalization, and the consensus behind it, is at risk of

reversal yet again.

       Economic historians discussing these topics are naturally drawn to an enduring

account of the last Great Reversal, and still one of the most controversial and influential

theses in the social sciences, Karl Polanyi’s study The Great Transformation.1 I do not

discuss, much less endorse, many of the claims of that wide-ranging book—its much-

disputed characterization of the premodern natural state of markets embedded in society,

and its plainly incorrect expectation that developed economies operating as social

democracies would henceforth be inimical to trade and financial openness. But as a

description of the Great Reversal as it happened, the book has much to commend it.

       After World War I, policymakers understood that the global economy had been

damaged by the suspension of the gold standard, restrictions on trade, and exchange

controls. Adverse policies were coincident with, and amplified by, the spillovers from the

elevated levels of distrust and belligerence between nations. But everyone fully expected

the situation to normalize, albeit after some effort, with a return to something like the

largely laissez-faire pre-1914 global economy.

       Following the Great Depression (and another war), the political-economy

equilibrium shifted dramatically against this vision. Polanyi, if not the first to note this

shock to economic structures and their supporting ideology, grasped its ramifications and

deeper meaning. A global economy built along anything resembling the lines of the pre-

1914 model was unlikely to return anytime soon (or ever, in Polanyi’s view). The puzzle,

then, is to understand what happened next, and how globalization was in many ways

rebuilt after that time of massive retrenchment—what might be called a Polanyi Moment.


                                               2
       My first task is to present a set of facts: what actually happened in terms of

globalization from the 1940s through the 1970s and up to today. As we shall see, the

1970s were notable for the persistence of controls on international capital flows, but at

the same time saw a loosening of exchange rates, and growing world trade supported by

major—but very uneven—steps toward trade liberalization.

       This focuses my question. Why was reglobalization so slow and so uneven? We

can discuss various forces that may have coalesced fortuitously in the 1970s to spark the

engines of globalization into life, despite some other pressures that worked in the

opposite direction. But to move from a descriptive narrative to an analytic one, we need

some theory and a testable hypothesis.

       As we now know, most countries, once stuck in the Great Reversal, eventually

shifted policy gears and liberalized. Some trade-oriented countries liberalized very

quickly in the 1970s or before; others oriented inward and clung to protectionist barriers

up to the 1990s and beyond. But why were some so quick to liberalize and others much

slower? That is the question.

       Empirical variation naturally invites closer quantitative scrutiny. On the basis of

preliminary evidence—and there is much more work to be done—I will argue that it was

here that the Great Depression had its lasting effect, not (pace Polanyi) by preventing

countries ever globalizing again, but by conditioning the speed at which they ultimately

re-embraced globalization in the postwar period. The destination was the same, but the

many routes taken diverged remarkably—and in some respects predictably. Especially

among the developing countries—economies outside the advanced core, with a limited

role in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), and no role in the European


                                             3
Union (EU) project—those that suffered more of a downturn in the 1930s were more

“reactive” in policymaking afterwards, to use Carlos Díaz Alejandro’s term, and they

were more inclined to resist globalization the second time around.

       If this argument withstands scrutiny it becomes an important link in our historical

and institutional narrative, a bridge from the interwar calamity to more recent events, part

of the making of the modern world economy. We could then argue that the global

capitalist economy was not subject to a “hard reset” in 1946, starting from scratch under

the new Bretton Woods order. Rather, there was a legacy from the 1930s, an institutional

memory. Path dependence meant that the experience of the 1930s hung like a shadow

over each country—its policymaking institutions, its interest groups, its politics and

ideology. And it was a long shadow: policy persistence was shaped by this history for

decades, carrying some countries forward into the vanguard of reglobalization, while

holding others back.

       Against this backdrop the lessons for the present are drawn into sharp focus in the

conclusion to this paper. Policymakers have cautioned that the world stands on the brink

of its worst financial crisis since the 1930s. For example, just before this conference,

most of the policymaking elite attending the August 2008 Jackson Hole Symposium

revealed that they had no clear idea how bad conditions were or might yet become. But

history suggests that an exclusive focus on resolving the immediate credit crunch risks

confusing the trees and the forest.

       If a policymaker took a short-run view, one that could take globalization for

granted, the response to the crisis might focus on how to contain periods of financial

panic, fear, and distrust, which destabilize and disrupt financial markets in the manner


                                              4
explained by Hyman Minsky.2 Such a Minsky Moment was certainly witnessed in the

1930s, and fear of a replay has haunted, and motivated, policymakers as a similar

collapse in asset prices, credit, and liquidity erupted in 2008–09. But if we pause to take

the longer view, then the example of the 1930s also shows that there can be more serious

and longer-lasting downsides to any major crisis of capitalism. The worse the downturn,

the greater the surge in anti-globalization and anti-market sentiments, reactions that can

endure for decades once embedded in policy. On past form, a Minsky Moment may pass

relatively quickly, but a Polanyi Moment will not.


Facts: What Do the Data Show?

Today “globalization” is everywhere; in the 1970s, it was mostly latent. As of August

2008 the word appeared in 3,840 book titles in the Library of Congress catalog; of those,

3,839 were published after 1987, the other one in 1983. Narrowing the focus simply to

the scholarly literature in economics would also expose a profession forced to grapple

more and more with problems in international economics from the 1980s onwards: trade

and wages, currency crises, global imbalances, and so on, shifts that have mirrored the

reality of rapidly changing economic environment.

       Prior to the 1970s, with the exception of occasional cracks in the Bretton Woods

fixed exchange rate regime, international economic relations were conducted under

conditions of limited freedom for trade, and almost total prohibition for finance.

       The evolution of trade policy from 1945 until the 1970s was constrained in terms

of speed and scope. Unilateral liberalizations were few (but not unimportant for the

countries in question), and with one notable exception (the European Economic

Community) preferential free trade areas did not amount to much. That left GATT as the
                                             5
main locus for progress on trade liberalization. Yet the number of goods whose tariffs

were cut was always very limited in this era, and the list of countries meaningfully

participating in this bargaining process was very small—essentially just the developed

countries. Until the GATT Tokyo Round (1973–79), developing countries played little

effective role; they would not have a major say until the Uruguay Round (1986–93).

       Trade liberalization may have been slow prior to 1970, but financial liberalization

was virtually nonexistent. This was by design, of course, the goal of the Bretton Woods

architecture being to make a world safe for international trade, not for international

finance. After the 1930s, the latter was seen as destabilizing, and was clearly inimical to

the new desire for macroeconomic policy autonomy in a world still wedded to fixed

exchange rates. Thus by the 1960s only current account transactions were liberalized

(though not rapidly) even as capital account transactions were still outlawed. But it did

not take long for investors to find ways round these restrictions, and the porous controls

led to larger financial drains, reserve leakage, and currency crises with increasing

frequency as the system lurched, with all its contradictions, toward collapse.

       After 1970 the reglobalization trend intensified, but this tendency was at first

much stronger in the sphere of trade transactions than financial transactions.

       Figure 1 shows the evolution of trade policy since 1970, using the longest-span

dataset we have based on a trade-tax proxy for protectionism. (Note: it is only a proxy,

and excludes many other important distortions such as quotas and exchange rate premia

which might have been at least as large in their own right; but it is the only measure with

adequate temporal and spatial coverage for our purpose.)




                                             6
       The decline in trade taxes was dramatic, but occurred more rapidly in the

developed countries. The developing countries, on average, liberalized trade later, with

major moves occurring at the time of the Uruguay Round in the late 1980s and early

1990s. Nonetheless, some developing countries did liberalize much sooner: well-known

examples include the more export-oriented economies of East Asia. Meanwhile, other

countries maintained a more protectionist stance. It is this variety of trade liberalization

experiences in the 1970s that deserves a closer look.

       Why focus on trade policies in this discussion? Simply because financial

liberalization in the 1970s was almost nonexistent. Most developed countries—even fast

movers such as Britain in 1979 and Germany in 1981—delayed their financial

liberalization until long after they had started to liberalize trade. They even waited until

many years after the end of the Bretton Woods system had obviated the need for capital

controls to protect fixed exchange rates in a world of nascent monetary activism. In the

EU as a whole, financial liberalization was a slow process in the 1980s, with even some

setbacks (as in France under Mitterand); and it would not be until the end of that decade,

with the Maastricht Treaty looming, that capital market integration would be consolidated

as part of the single market goal. Outside the advanced economies, progress was slower

still. In the emerging markets and developing countries, financial liberalization was a rare

event before the 1990s. 3

       Since the focus of this study is the 1970s as a turning point, and since the wave of

financial liberalization came so much later, I turn my attention now exclusively to

questions surrounding the advance of free trade policies. Why did it take so long for free

trade policies to be reestablished? Why did some countries liberalize much more rapidly


                                              7
than others? How did this matter for economic outcomes in the longer run? And what

lessons does this episode carry for today? These are large enough questions to more than

occupy the remainder of this paper.


Puzzles: Why Was Reglobalization So Slow?

This paper treats the 1970s as a key turning point, when the first major postwar moves

toward globalization emerged in the sphere of trade policy.

       Why the 1970s? Despite the attempts after 1945 to forge a new international

economic order around a consensus for prosperity through trade, the greater part of the

trade liberalization that we now take for granted occurred was delayed at least twenty-

five years. The period 1945–70 saw only modest progress, but the period 1970–95

witnessed much more rapid opening, albeit only in selected countries. Why did this

rebuilding process take so long?

Certainly the structures of GATT did not prevent a slow pace, and may even have

encouraged it. Admittedly GATT was off to a flying start when the first agreement in the

Geneva Round of 1947 achieved big results, slashing 45,000 tariffs on $10 billion of

trade among the 23 founding members. But subsequent rounds expanded the membership

only slowly and achieved fewer cuts on ever-smaller tranches of an ever-expanding

volume of world trade. The 2nd Round (Annecy, 1949) covered only 5,000 tariffs and

admitted 10 more countries. The 3rd Round (Torquay, 1950–51) cut 8,700 tariffs and

admitted 4 new countries. The 4th Round (Geneva II, 1956) covered just $2.5 billion of

trade—one quarter the level of the first round a decade before. The Dillon Round (1960–

61) achieved more (4,400 cuts on $5 billion of trade). Little in this record would have led



                                             8
one to predict an imminent acceleration in openness in the developed countries, or any

expansion of these trends to the developing countries.4

        The 1970s were also an inauspicious moment for globalization in other respects.

An oil shock and global stagflation led many countries into recessions that were deeper

than anything seen since the 1930s. Downturns have generally encouraged protectionist

sentiments, and not just since the 1930s: Polanyi saw similar mechanisms at work, albeit

with less destructive results, in the protectionist backlash during and after the recession of

the 1870s, when the free trade treaties worked out in the 1860s by Cobden and others

gave way to rising tariffs, especially in Continental Europe.

        All that said, some opposing forces were present in the 1970s that could

encourage, or at least sustain trade opening. Most notable of these was the absence of the

“golden fetters”—fixed exchange rates such as the gold standard system that had

amplified previous slumps. But the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system released

monetary policy and exchange rates, giving countries other levers to control aggregate

demand: as a tool to stimulate expenditure switching towards home goods, a devaluation

could be as effective as a tariff, at least in the short run. And indeed, the larger trade

flows are, the more powerful that tool becomes.

        In addition, in the 1970s the success, actual or potential, of some pro–free trade

projects was starting to become apparent. The EEC was attracting new applicants, and the

growth accelerations of the East Asian newly industrializing countries (NICs) were just

starting to register qualitative significance, if not yet statistical significance—although

the latter would build over time. Meanwhile, the limitations of import-substituting

industrialization in the more inward-looking countries were becoming clearer.


                                               9
        There had also been signs within trade negotiations of an increased desire for

openness. Many more developing countries had joined GATT in the 1960s. The Kennedy

Round (1964–67) was the biggest advance in 20 years, with 50 countries using across-

the-board negotiations to achieve concessions on $40 billion of world trade. Even so

these agreements still covered mostly manufacturing trade and the developed countries.

But by the early seventies, 99 countries were present for GATT’s Tokyo Round, and

some success was achieved in reducing tariffs for tropical goods as well as manufactured

goods, with agreements covering $300 billion in world trade. (These figures are not

adjusted for inflation.)

        Still at some level, these explanations lack a deeper explanatory power, and in

some cases they suffer from a serious simultaneity problem. Macroeconomic policies

may have been reconfigured after the 1970s, and GATT may have been reinvigorated—

all encouraging events for trade liberalization—but are these events causes or symptoms?

And why did steps toward liberalization occur at different times in different countries?

        We need to look back and explore the causal connections that bridge the gap from

the historical crisis of globalization circa 1930 and the reconstruction that began in

earnest circa 1970.


Hypotheses: A Legacy of the Great Depression?

A familiar yet unquantified narrative bridge is often used to link the policy shocks of the

1930s, the reaction against laissez-faire orthodoxy, with the endurance of these policies

into the postwar era. It is central to Polanyi’s thesis, although he saw the shock as more

permanent. It is present in the narratives of economic history and the history of economic

thought. For example: Carlos Díaz Alejandro explaining the “reactive” trade isolationism
                                             10
of South America; Deepak Lal exploring the rise of “dirigiste” economic thinking more

broadly; or Peter Temin describing the legacy of the Great Depression as “socialism in

many countries.” In these and other accounts the crisis of the 1930s demanded a

response; but it was not to be temporary, and after wartime autarky there were strong

political economy constraints that ensured the long-run persistence of the new policies, as

political inertia and the rise of new interests set policy on a path-dependent course.5

While this narrative is true at a general level, it was obviously by no means a uniform

trend in all countries. Thus we can potentially learn much more by looking closely at the

variation among them. Some countries experienced deep economic pain in the Great

Depression; and by the same logic, if this deep pain were translated into policy responses,

we ought to have seen more “reactive” policies imprinted in countries that had the

deepest slumps. Conversely, in countries where the slump was mild, or almost

nonexistent, the political dynamic ought to have been very different, with less of a

reaction against economic orthodoxy.

       To sum up, where the standard narrative focuses on a representative experience

common to many countries—Great Depression then policy reaction—I think we can

make further progress by thinking about the extent to which there was a heterogeneous

shock in the 1930s. We can then use that variation in the data and subsequent policy

responses, to understand why the Great Depression echoed so loudly in some countries

that were clinging to inward-looking policies in the 1970s, and reglobalizing slowly,

while in other cases reactive policies were more temporary and policy reform pushed

ahead more rapidly.




                                             11
       The key problem is to explain policy persistence. If this idea has empirical

content, then we can make advances on other fronts. We can cease thinking of the policy

choices of the postwar period as purely exogenous random variations, or as simply

problematic endogenous responses to economic growth. Instead we can confront and put

to further analytical use their origins as historically contingent, or as path-dependent

outcomes possessing some regularity.6


Empirics: Evidence of the Echo?

Given the space available, I will show some preliminary evidence that the depth of the

Great Depression did carry over, through the subsequent decades, into policymaking

responses in the latter part of the twentieth century. I will also show that this path

dependence was more strongly evident in direct measures of policy reform than in

measures of participation in the liberalization process under GATT.

       More than any other institution GATT was supposed to be the venue for countries

to work together and repair the damage to international trade wrought by the interwar

crisis. Thus, one might think, one useful measure of policy persistence, of attitudes

towards a return to free trade, might be gleaned from the point in time when countries

actually signed up to GATT. For example, as I noted earlier, few developing countries

were involved in the early GATT rounds, but by the time of the Tokyo and, especially,

Uruguay rounds, dozens had signed up.

       Can we detect any impact of Great Depression experiences in this process? Did

the countries that were hurt most by the Great Depression spend a longer period of time

on the sidelines outside of GATT, thus manifesting their greater reaction against



                                              12
orthodoxy and resistance to open trade? The answer is no, but this is by no means

damaging to my hypothesis.

        As Table 1, column 1, shows there is absolutely no correlation between the date

of entry into GATT and the depth of the Great Depression, where the latter is measured

by the standardized cumulative GDP losses in the years 1930 to 1934 relative to the 1929

level in each country. In fact the correlation is slightly negative but not statistically

significant. (Data for Former Soviet Union and Eastern bloc countries are excluded.)7

        But this is not damning evidence for the policy persistence hypothesis. After all,

being a member of GATT has never been the same thing as being an active and effective

participant in GATT. Many developing countries joined GATT and yet participated little

at first, and offered few tariff concession until the later rounds. Therefore, GATT

membership date tells us nothing about the point at which they seriously moved to lower

trade barriers and promote trade.

        This finding is therefore consistent with recent influential research by Andrew

Rose which shows that there is no correlation between joining GATT (or the World

Trade Organization) and an increase in trade. Actions speak louder than words: GATT

membership is neither necessary nor sufficient to ensure liberalization at any given

moment.

        Thus we should look more carefully to find more accurate measures of changes in

trade policy. But this task is not so simple, given the broad span of time I wish to

investigate. Hence the next natural candidate I examine is the widely used index of

openness created by Jeffrey D. Sachs and Andrew Warner, updated by Romain Wacziarg

and Karen Horn Welch.8 This is a binary (0–1) indicator, where 1 is openness as judged


                                              13
by multiple criteria, including tariff levels, quotas, exchange rate distortions, and market

structures (socialist planning and export monopolies). In contrast to the GATT entry date,

the Sachs-Warner openness variable, as a policy proxy, is a measure better suited to

gauging when liberalization actually happened.

       As column 2 of the table shows, using this indicator, we find that there is a

positive correlation of dates of opening with the intensity of the Great Depression.

Economies damaged more by the Great Depression waited longer to liberalize in the

postwar period, as my working hypothesis would suggest. Nevertheless, the statistical

significance of this relationship is weak (though it is higher if the sample restricted to

developing countries).

       Can we do better? And to address the question posed earlier, can we focus

specifically on that critical period of the 1970s, when some countries took the lead in

opening their economies for the first time since the 1930s, whilst others lagged behind?

In search of a more precise measure of trade policy alone I finally turn to direct estimates

of trade taxes as a fraction of total trade (exports plus imports), based on the Economic

Freedom in the World database.9 These narrowly defined and continuous data might be

preferred by some to the Sachs-Warner dummy indicator as a measure of trade reform,

since the latter includes some components that are not connected to trade policy per se

(such as exchange rate distortions and export marketing boards). I consider the

percentage change in the level of the trade tax ratio in the 1970s. Note that this variable is

used only as a proxy for trade barriers; many other policies (such as quotas) are not

captured by this measure.




                                              14
       As column 3 demonstrates, in the 1970s there appears to have been a very clear

echo of the Great Depression. The near-zero intercept shows that there was barely any

trend toward policy liberalization on average in these data, which is not that surprising in

the context of a decade of global slowdown and the first deep recessions in many

countries since the 1930s. Still, heterogeneous outcomes stand out when we look across

countries. The countries that suffered relatively mild downturns in the 1930s were still

more likely to lower trade barriers in the 1970s. Countries that suffered the worst of

slumps in the 1930s were much more standoffish when the prospect of reglobalization

appeared on the horizon, and their trade taxes tended to stay high or even rise. A country

with a 1 standard deviation lower level of output loss in the early 1930s was likely to cut

trade taxes by an additional factor of 17% in the 1970s. Moreover, these results are

statistically significant, despite the small sample.

       In column 4 I consider the problem that some early liberalizers (most EEC and

OECD countries and some open developing countries such as South Korea) had already

lowered their trade barriers before 1970. These countries might bias the results toward a

null finding or a low correlation, since they would have little to gain from further trade

liberalization and would have completed their own reversal.

       I therefore exclude from the sample the countries that already had below median

trade taxes in 1970. I find that in the sample that is left, the “more protected” group

(mostly developing countries, as one might guess), the echo of the Great Depression is

even more pronounced, as might also be expected. Here, a country with a 1 standard

deviation (s.d.) lower level of output loss in the early 1930s was likely to cut trade taxes

by an additional factor of 26% in the 1970s.


                                              15
       To put it another way, if we take the seriously argument of an “echo effect” from

the Great Depression, these results say that during the 1970s, an initially unliberalized

Country A carrying the institutional memory of a relatively painful Great Depression

output loss of 1 s.d. more than average would have retreated into proetctionism, raising

trade barriers by about 25%. But an initially unliberalized Country B carrying the

institutional memory of a relatively mild Great Depression output loss of 1 s.d. less than

average would have been more inclined to continue liberalization, lowering trade barriers

by about 25%.

       The net result would be a significant divergence in policy stances by the end of

the decade for initially identical countries: Country A would end up with trade barriers

nearly twice as large as Country B’s, owing to the more severe policy persistence. If

these mechanisms can be further substantiated, they will attest to a very heavy hand of

history weighing on the postwar reconstruction of the global economy in the 1970s.

       Previously all of this might have been intuited from the broad patterns: for

example, we knew that East Asia, somewhat decoupled from the financial and output

collapses in Europe and North America, suffered only a mild recession in the 1930s and

liberalized more rapidly; in contrast, Latin American commodity exporters were badly hit

by the West’s 1930s economic disaster, and subsequently kept their trade barriers up

longer.10 To give some specific country examples from the data, there is a marked

regional contrast in the measure of output loss in the Great Depression as we compare,

say, the large losses of Mexico (loss of +0.43 standard deviations above the mean),

Uruguay (+0.43 s.d.), Argentina (+0.50 s.d) or Chile (+1.52 s.d.) with the milder

downturns in Japan (–0.60 s.d.), Taiwan (–0.83 s.d.), the Philippines (–0.99 s.d.), or


                                             16
Korea (–1.37 s.d.), where the deviations are cumulative lost output from a large sample of

N = 51 countries. In the former group of countries, the adverse shocks were closely

identified with the global economy, as in the writing of Raúl Prebisch and others, and a

new reactive economic ideology replaced the old orthodoxy in the early postwar period.

In the latter countries, the shocks were mild to nonexistent, and comparatively little

change in economic thinking ensued. The economic future envisaged by Polanyi came to

pass, but it emerged in some places more strongly than in others.

       It is desirable, and I argue feasible, to move beyond those broad brushstrokes and

examine the links between these key transitions in economic history more closely.

Clearly more analysis remains to be done to expand the sample, examine other indicators

and mechanisms, and ascertain the robustness of the correlations. Nonetheless, there is

suggestive evidence here that the institutional memory of the 1930s crisis was a factor

that influenced policy for a long time to come, including the speed at which countries

embraced the opportunities of reglobalization in the 1970s.


Lessons for Today

The Great Transformation was not an “end of history” moment, and the subsequent fifty

years witnessed something of a reglobalization along classical liberal lines that Polanyi

could not envisage. The new globalization differed from its laissez-faire predecessor, and

its foundations were built on international and domestic institutions that supported an

“embedded liberalism” with more social protection. Nonetheless, by the 1990s it could be

argued that the acceleration of globalization had eroded or disembedded much of that

protection.11



                                             17
       As a generality, the idea that the Great Depression was a watershed moment that

echoed throughout the rest of the twentieth century is an ingrained element of

conventional wisdom. It is most often viewed in this light as a story of what happened

within countries, to explain the timing of reactions against laissez faire and in favor of

more state intervention. In many scholarly as well as popular accounts, these great long

swings in economic ideology and policy outcomes and their similarities around the globe

tend to take center stage.

       These grand narratives implicitly emphasize the “common shock” of the Great

Depression and the policy response worldwide. In this paper I have sought to argue that

this view is incomplete, and that we can better understand the legacy of this defining

moment by using the approaches of new comparative economic history to see how the

differences in experiences across countries led to a variety of path-dependent outcomes

evolving over time. Certainly, using the depth of the slump in the 1930s is a crude

indicator, and one-dimensional at that. It is a first step only, and further, deeper research

will be needed to validate the argument and flesh out the linkages; but the payoffs to this

scholarship could deliver important lessons for research and policymaking.

       Both research and teaching in international economic history tend to treat the

history of the modern world in separate phases. Major breaking points are rarely bridged

by narrative, and have received much less quantitative analysis. The Great Depression is

a case in point. When we discuss the origins of the postwar economic order, we tend to

view Bretton Woods as a clean slate. But around the globe, countries emerged from

World War II with very different experiences, ideologies, interest groups, and agendas.

Outside the Communist bloc they may have signed up in some general way to a new


                                              18
economic order including the goal of freer trade under GATT. But how policies and

economic development played out in each case over subsequent decades would reflect the

countries’ very different initial conditions, including the impact of the crisis of the 1930s

on domestic policymaking. A more complete global economic history of the 20th century

is needed to bridge that transition with more than narrative so that we can better

understand how those heterogeneous developments came about.

       Research in economic growth will also benefit. Despite some skeptical resistance,

one of the most widely held views in the research on postwar economic growth is that

open economies have grown faster than closed economies. The divergence of economic

fortunes became most apparent after 1970, when countries like the Asian NICs began

their export-oriented growth, while at the other end of the spectrum, more autarkic

regimes such as the import-substituters of Latin America, waited much longer to

liberalize. That correlation is robust, but is it causal? One way to think about the legacy

of the Great Depression is that it generates some plausible exogenous variation in

subsequent trade policy, and in that respect (as an instrumental variable, in econometric

language) it may help us better estimate the impact of differential speeds of policy reform

on growth acceleration. In a recent paper Antoni Estevadeordal and I put this idea to

work, showing that even as late as the 1990s, trade reforms still carried an echo of the

Great Depression, and the faster reformers saw more rapid growth acceleration than the

slow reformers.12 There is some irony here: the countries that were worst hit by the Great

Depression adopted reactive policies that may have helped somewhat in the 1930s, but

they fell behind economically in the long run. If that logic holds up, then one question




                                             19
worth investigating is whether the Great Depression was a major contributing factor to

the Great Divergence, thanks to the wide range of policy responses it unleashed.

        At a broader level, understanding the very-long-run persistence of policy shocks

emanating from the 1930s carries lessons for policymaking. Policies are never

irreversible, but they can take on a life of their own and endure for decades. Theorists

have shown in various ways how policy persistence mechanisms can make this happen.

Evidence isn’t plentiful, but if any past episode can prove this hypothesis, it would be

policy responses to the greatest slump in history, the 1930s crisis. Should the thesis be

more strongly confirmed, the lesson for current times of economic turmoil would be very

clear. Avoid a Great Depression, or else face a risk that policymaking could veer into a

radically autarkic stance for a many decades. From a historical standpoint, there is good

reason to put extra weight on safeguarding the world economy against a deep slump, if

such a meltdown would shift the political economy equilibrium past some threshold, and

unleash even stronger isolationist pressures than already exist.

        To sum up, in terms of global economic history, the 1970s can be seen as a

bookend decade matched with the decade of the 1930s. The 1930s marked an end of

globalization, which, although some expected it to be a permanent shift, kept trade flows

in abeyance for only a few decades. The 1970s saw a widening embrace of trade

liberalization that set the world on course for reglobalization. It is a process that still

continues for now, but if we want to understand better the possible risks of another

reversal, we might profitably invest more attention in the historical dynamics of the last

one.




                                               20
Figure 1
Trade Liberalization 1970–2000

To present a proxy for trade liberalization across many countries and years, this figure shows
average levels of trade taxes as a percentage of exports plus imports for the full sample of
countries in the Economic Freedom in the World 2005 dataset. Also shown are average levels for
advanced and developing countries.




                                              21
Table 1
Postwar Liberalization and the Great Depression

The table shows cross-country OLS regressions of various measures of postwar trade openness on
the depth of the Great Depression, measured by cumulative real GDP loss in Maddison’s data in
the years 1930–1934 relative to the 1929 level (standardized to a mean of 0 and an s.d. of 1).
Angus Maddison, The World Economy: Historical Statistics (Paris, 2001). Column 1 uses as a
dependent variable the year when a country joined GATT according to Andrew K. Rose, “Do We
Really Know That the WTO Increases Trade?” American Economic Review 94, no. 1 (March
2004): 98–114. Column 2 uses as a dependent variable the year when a country became open
using the Sachs-Warner criteria according to Romain Wacziarg and Karen Horn Welch, “Trade
Liberalization and Growth: New Evidence,” World Bank Economic Review 22, no. 2 (June 2008):
187–231. Column 3 uses the proportional change in the 1970s in the ratio of trade taxes to total
trade, taken from the Economic Freedom in the World 2005 dataset. Column 4 is the same as (3)
but restricted to countries that initially had high (above-median) trade taxes in 1970, mostly the
developing countries. The Great Depression output loss measure is statistically significant in
columns (3) and (4) at the 5 percent and 1 percent levels respectively. Standard errors are shown
in parentheses. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 5 percent (*) and 1 percent (**)
levels.

                                        (1)            (2)         (3)              (4)
Dependent variable                      Year           Year        Average          Average
                                        country        country     change in        change in
                                        joined         went        trade taxes in   trade taxes in
                                        GATT           open        the 1970s        the 1970s
Sample                                  All            All         All              Above
                                                                                    median trade
                                                                                    taxes in 1970

1930–34 output loss (standardized)      –3.843         1.334       0.171*           0.264**
                                        (2.89)         (2.86)      (0.084)          (0.090)

Constant                                1961**         1974**      –0.0362          0.0661
                                        (2.60)         (2.49)      (0.075)          (0.080)

Observations                            41             35          41               21
R-squared                               0.04           0.01        0.10             0.31




                                                  22
NOTES



1
    Karl Polanyi, The Great Transformation (New York: Farrar and Rinehart, 1944).
2
  Hyman P. Minsky, “The Financial Instability Hypothesis,” The Jerome Levy
Economics Institute Working Paper No. 74, May 1992.
3
 On trends in financial globalization, see Maurice Obstfeld and Alan M. Taylor, Global
Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and Growth (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2004). On the evolution of international financial policies see Rawi Abdelal,
Capital Rules: The Construction of Global Finance (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 2007).
4
  On various interpretations of the limited role of developing countries in GATT prior to
the Uruguay Round, see Rorden Wilkinson and James Scott, “Developing Country
Participation in the GATT: A Reassessment,” World Trade Review 7(3), 473–510 (June
2008).
5
 Carlos Diaz Alejandro, “Latin America in the 1930s,” in Rosemary Thorp, ed., Latin
America in the 1930s: The Role of the Periphery in World Crisis (London: Macmillan
1984). Deepak Lal, The Poverty of 'Development Economics (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1986). Peter Temin, Lessons from the Great Depression (Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, 1989).
6
  Theoretical treatments of policy persistence include, inter alia, Gordon Tullock, “The
Transitional Gains Trap,” Bell Journal of Economics, vol. 6(2), 671-678 (Autumn 1975).
Raquel Fernandez and Dani Rodrik, “Resistance to Reform: Status Quo Bias in the
Presence of Individual-Specific Uncertainty,” American Economic Review 81(5), 1146-
55 (December 1991); Alberto Alesina and Allan Drazen, “Why Are Stabilizations
Delayed?” American Economic Review 81(5), 1170-88 (December 1991); and Stephen
Coate and Stephen Morris, “Policy Persistence,” American Economic Review 89(5),
1327–36 (December 1999). A recent empirical work which uses this idea to explain
growth outcomes is Antoni Estevadeordal and Alan M. Taylor, “Is the Washington
Consensus Dead? Growth, Openness, and the Great Liberalization, 1970s–2000s,” NBER
Working Papers 14264 (August 2008). A recent theoretical paper argues that openness
spread slowly after 1950 because policymakers were subject to learning and policy
frictions; see Francisco J. Buera, Alexander Monge-Naranjo, and Giorgio E. Primiceri,
“Learning the Wealth of Nations” (unpublished paper, UCLA, May 2008).
7
 Computations of GDP loss are based on data from Angus Maddison, The World
Economy: Historical Statistics (Paris: OECD, 2001).



                                            23
8
 Jeffrey D. Sachs and Andrew Warner, “Economic Reform and the Process of Global
Integration,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 26(1), 1–118 (1995); Romain
Wacziarg and Karen Horn Welch,” Trade Liberalization and Growth: New Evidence,”
World Bank Economic Review 22(2), 187–231 (June 2008).
9
  Data from the Economic Freedom in the World Annual Report, 2005 and previous
issues. http://www.freetheworld.com/ .
10
  Angus Maddison, Two Crises: Latin America and Asia 1920–1938 and 1973–1983
(Paris: OECD, 1985).
11
  John Gerard Ruggie “International Regimes, Transactions, and Change: Embedded
Liberalism in the Postwar Economic Order,” International Organization 36(2): 379–415
(Spring 1982); Dani Rodrik, “How Far Will International Economic Integration Go?”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 14(1), 177–186 (Winter 2000).
12
     See note 6.




                                         24
