NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIRE SALES IN A MODEL OF COMPLEXITY
Ricardo J. Caballero
Alp Simsek
Working Paper 15479
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15479

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2009

We thank David Laibson, Frederic Malherbe, Juan Ocampo, and seminar participants at Harvard and
MIT for their comments, and the NSF for financial support. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Ricardo J. Caballero and Alp Simsek. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Fire Sales in a Model of Complexity
Ricardo J. Caballero and Alp Simsek
NBER Working Paper No. 15479
November 2009
JEL No. D8,E0,E5,G1
ABSTRACT
Financial assets provide return and liquidity services to their holders. However, during severe financial
crises many asset prices plummet, destroying their liquidity provision function at the worst possible
time. In this paper we present a model of fire sales and market breakdowns, and of the financial amplification
mechanism that follows from them. The distinctive feature of our model is the central role played
by endogenous complexity: As asset prices implode, more “banks” within the financial network become
distressed, which increases each (non-distressed) bank’s likelihood of being hit by an indirect shock.
As this happens, banks face an increasingly complex environment since they need to understand more
and more interlinkages in making their financial decisions. This complexity brings about confusion
and uncertainty, which makes relatively healthy banks, and hence potential asset buyers, reluctant
to buy since they now fear becoming embroiled in a cascade they do not control or understand. The
liquidity of the market quickly vanishes and a financial crisis ensues. The model exhibits a powerful
“complexity-externality.” As a potential asset buyer chooses to pull back, the size of the cascade grows,
which increases the degree of complexity of the environment. This rise in perceived complexity induces
other healthy banks to pull back, which exacerbates the fire sale and the cascade.

Ricardo J. Caballero
MIT
Department of Economics
Room E52-373a
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
caball@mit.edu
Alp Simsek
MIT
alpstein@MIT.EDU

1

Introduction

Financial assets provide return and liquidity services to their holders. However, during
severe …nancial crises many asset prices plummet, destroying their liquidity provision
function at the worst possible time. These …re sales are at the core of the ampli…cation
mechanism observed in severe …nancial crises: Large amounts of distressed asset sales
depress asset prices, which exacerbates …nancial distress, leading to further asset sales,
and the downward spiral goes on.
There are many instances of these dramatic …re sales and the chaos they trigger in
recent …nancial history. As explained by Treasury Secretary Paulson and Fed Chairman
Bernanke to Congress in an emergency meeting soon after Lehman’s collapse, the main
goal of the TARP during the subprime crisis as initially proposed was, precisely, to put a
‡oor on the price of the assets held by …nancial …rms in order to contain the sharp contractionary feedback loop triggered by the confusion and panic caused by Lehman’s demise.
And a few years back, after the LTCM intervention, then Fed Chairman Greenspan wrote
in his congressional testimony of October 1, 1998:
“Quickly unwinding a complicated portfolio that contains exposure to all
manner of risks, such as that of LTCM, in such market conditions amounts
to conducting a …re sale. The prices received in a time of stress do not re‡ect longer-run potential, adding to the losses incurred... ...a …re sale may
be su¢ ciently intense and widespread that it seriously distorts markets and
elevates uncertainty enough to impair the overall functioning of the economy.
Sophisticated economic systems cannot thrive in such an atmosphere.”

In this paper we propose a model of …re sales that builds on the idea that complexity,
a feature strongly disliked by investors during downturns for the uncertainty it generates,
rises endogenously during crises: As asset prices implode, more …nancial institutions
(banks, for short) within the …nancial network may go under, which increases each bank’s
likelihood of being hit by an indirect shock from counterparty risk. This means that
banks face an increasingly complex environment since they need to understand more and
more interlinkages in making their …nancial decisions. Thus, perceived uncertainty rises
with complexity and makes relatively healthy banks reluctant to buy since they now fear
becoming embroiled in the cascade themselves, and no reasonable amount of research can
rule out this option in the time available. The liquidity of the market quickly vanishes
and a …nancial crisis ensues.
1

In Caballero and Simsek (2009) we show the basic interaction between the size of the
equilibrium cascade in a …nancial network and the degree of complexity of the portfolio
problem facing banks. In that model banks have bilateral linkages in order to insure each
other against local liquidity shocks. The whole …nancial system is a complex network
of linkages which functions smoothly in the environments for which it is designed, even
though no bank knows with certainty all the many possible connections within the network
(that is, each bank knows the identities of the other banks but not their exposures).
However, these linkages may also be the source of contagion when an unexpected event of
…nancial distress arises somewhere in the network. During normal times, banks only need
to understand the …nancial health of their neighbors, which they can learn at low cost. In
contrast, when a signi…cant problem arises in parts of the network and the possibility of
cascades arises, the number of nodes to be audited by each bank rises since it is possible
that the shock may spread to the bank’s counterparties. Eventually, the problem becomes
too complex for them to fully …gure out, which means that banks now face signi…cant
uncertainty and they react to it by retrenching into a liquidity-conservation mode.
This structure is the starting point of this paper. Our focus here is on secondary
markets and on the feedback between that environment and the …re sales that arise in
these markets. In particular, this paper introduces a secondary market in which banks
in distress can sell their legacy assets to meet the surprise liquidity shock. The natural
buyers of the legacy assets are other banks in the …nancial network, which may also
receive an indirect hit. When the surprise shock is small, cascades are short and buyers
can inspect their neighbors to rule out an indirect hit. In this case, buyers purchase
the distressed banks’ legacy assets at their “fair" prices (which re‡ect the fundamental
value of the assets). In contrast, when the surprise shock is large, longer cascades become
possible which increases the complexity of the environment, and buyers cannot rule out
an indirect hit. As a precautionary measure, they hoard liquidity and disengage from
trades in (now illiquid) legacy assets and may even turn into sellers. The price of legacy
assets plummets to “…re-sale" levels.
A central aspect of our model is the dependence of the cascade size on the price
of legacy assets, which leads to multiple equilibria for intermediate levels of the surprise
shock. When legacy assets fetch a fair price in the secondary market, the banks in distress
have access to more liquidity and thus the surprise shock is contained after fewer banks are
bankrupt, leading to a relatively simple environment. When the environment is simple,
the natural buyers rule out an indirect hit and demand legacy assets, which ensures that
these assets trade at their fair prices. Set against this benign scenario is the possibility of
a …re-sale equilibrium where the price of legacy assets collapses to …re-sale levels, which
2

leads to a longer cascade and a greater level of complexity. As the level of complexity
increases, natural buyers become worried about an indirect hit and they hoard liquidity
and/or sell their own legacy assets, which reinforces the collapse of asset prices.
This ampli…cation mechanism is exacerbated by a complexity-externality. As a potential asset buyer chooses to pull back, the size of the potential cascade grows and with it
the degree of complexity of the environment (each bank needs to explore larger segments
of the network to understand the risk it is exposed to). This rise in complexity induces
other healthy banks to pull back as a precautionary measure, which further exacerbates
the …re sale and cascade.1
Our framework has two additional (and more standard) externalities: A networkliquidity externality that stems from the interlinkages of the …nancial system; when a
bank chooses to raise external liquidity rather than to generate it from its own resources,
it spreads the distress to other banks. And a …re-sale externality that arises from the
negative e¤ects that a bank’s distressed asset sales have on other banks’balance sheets.
These two externalities are present in many network and liquidity models. They interact
but are distinct from the complexity externality that we highlight, which stems from the
feature that any decision that lengthens the potential cascade, increases the complexity
of the environments that other banks need to consider.
This paper is related to several strands of literature. In the canonical model of …re
sales, these happen because during …nancial crises the natural buyers of the assets (other
banks) also experience …nancial distress (cf. Shleifer and Vishny (1992,1997)). More
recently, Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2008) show that even if some potential buyers are
not distressed or constrained, these may choose not to arbitrage the …re sale in the short
run because they anticipate a better deal in the future. Our model lies somewhere in
between these two views: Most potential buyers are unconstrained, as in Brunnermeier
and Pedersen (2008), but they are confused and hence fearful of going about their normal
arbitrage role (and in this sense they are distressed as in Shleifer and Vishny (1992)). It
is the complexity of the environment that sidelines potential buyers.
There is an extensive literature that highlights the possibility of network failures and
contagion in …nancial markets. An incomplete list includes Allen and Gale (2000), Laguno¤ and Schreft (2000), Rochet and Tirole (1996), Freixas, Parigi and Rochet (2000),
Leitner (2005), Eisenberg and Noe (2001), and Cifuentes, Ferucci and Shin (2005) (see
1

Although we do not pursue this avenue in the paper, complexity probably plays a role in creating
the incompleteness needed for a pecuniary externality to arise. If agents could sign contracts contingent
on the events that follow a cascade, then the externality would be greatly reduced. However, as potential
cascades lengthen, the number of contingencies that need to be written into contracts grow exponentially.

3

Allen and Babus (2008) for a recent survey). These papers focus mainly on the mechanisms by which solvency and liquidity shocks may cascade through the …nancial network.
In contrast, we take these phenomena as the reason for the rise in the complexity of the
environment in which banks make their decisions, and focus on the e¤ect of this complexity on banks’ prudential actions. It is also worth pointing out that the complexity
mechanism we emphasize in this paper is operational even for relatively small amounts
of contagion. The contagion literature is sometimes criticized because it is hard to believe that many …nancial institutions would be caught up in a cascade of bankruptcies.2
That is, even if there is a cascade, it is reasonable to expect that it would eventually be
contained (especially since banks take precautionary actions to …ght the cascade). But
as this paper illustrates, even partial cascades can have large aggregate e¤ects, since they
greatly increase the complexity of the environment.3
Our paper is also related to the literature on ‡ight-to-quality and Knightian uncertainty in …nancial markets, as in Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2008), Routledge and
Zin (2004), and Easley and O’Hara (2005); and to the related literature that investigates
the e¤ect of new events and innovations in …nancial markets, e.g. Liu, Pan, and Wang
(2005), Brock and Manski (2008), and Simsek (2009). Our contribution relative to these
literatures is in endogenizing the rise in uncertainty from the behavior of the …nancial
network itself. More broadly, this paper belongs to an extensive literature on ‡ight-toquality and …nancial crises that highlights the connection between panics and a decline in
the …nancial system’s ability to channel resources to the real economy (see, e.g., Caballero
and Kurlat (2008), for a survey).
The organization of this paper is as follows. In Section 2 we describe the …nancial
network and the secondary market for assets, and we introduce a surprise shock (a rare
event) in the network. We also discuss a benchmark case without complexity e¤ects
(because banks can understand the network at no cost). Section 3 contains our main
results. There, banks have only local knowledge about the …nancial network, and a
su¢ ciently large surprise shock increases the complexity of the environment and leads to
2

See, e.g.,Brunnermeier, Crockett, Goodhart, Persaud, an Shin (2009) which argue that the domino
model of …nancial contagion is not useful for understanding …nancial contagion in a modern …nancial
system since “.... It is only with implausibly large shocks that the simulations (of their model) generate
any meaningful contagion. The reason is that the domino model paints a picture of passive …nancial
institutions who stand by and do nothing as the sequence of defaults unfolds. In practice, however, they
will take actions in reaction to unfolding events, and in anticipation of impending defaults...”
3

The role of cascades in elevating complexity was also highlighted in Haldane’s (2009) speech, who
nicely captures the mechanism when he wrote that at times of stress "knowing your ultimate counterparty’s risk becomes like solving a high-dimension Sudoku puzzle."

4

a breakdown in secondary markets. This section also highlights the dependence of the
level of complexity on asset prices and demonstrates the possibility of multiple equilibria.
In Section 4 we describe the three externalities in our setup and analyze their role in our
main results. The paper concludes with a …nal remarks section and several appendices.

2

Equilibrium without Complexity

In this section, we describe the basic environment and characterize the equilibrium for
a benchmark case in which …nancial institutions (banks, for short) have full knowledge
of the interlinkages between all the banks in the …nancial network. In this benchmark
we show that if the network is deep (i.e., there is a large number of banks) secondary
markets do not break down and the …nancial network is resilient to a perturbation. That
is, the size of …nancial cascades is contained and aggregate loan contraction is limited.
These relatively benign results contrast with those we obtain in the next section once we
introduce complexity.

2.1

The Environment

We consider an economy with three dates f0; 1; 2g in which a single good (one dollar)
can be kept in liquid reserves or it can be loaned to production …rms. If kept in liquid
reserves, a unit of the good yields one unit in the next date. Instead, if a unit is loaned
to …rms, it then yields R > 1 units at date 2. These new loans are completely illiquid.
n
The economy has n continuums of banks denoted by fbj gj=1 . Each of these continuums
is composed of identical banks and, for simplicity, we refer to each continuum bj as bank
bj , which is our unit of analysis.4 Each bank has initial assets which consist of 1 y
units of legacy loans, z units of demand deposits in one other bank, and y units of ‡exible
reserves set aside for making new loans at date 0. The bank’s liabilities consist of a unit
measure of demand deposits held by retail depositors and z units of demand deposits held
by one other bank. The demand deposit contracts in this economy pay 1 unit at date 1
(resp. R units at date 2) if the depositor arrives early (resp. late). There are no liquidity
driven depositors. I.e. as long as the bank is solvent, all retail depositors would rather
arrive at date 2. Note that a bank that loans all of its ‡exible reserves has just enough
assets to pay its depositors at date 2. At date 0 (only) there is a secondary market for
legacy loans and the (equilibrium) price for these loans is r < 1 (see below). The central
trade-o¤ in this economy will be whether the bank uses its ‡exible reserves to make new
4

The only reason for the continuum is for banks to take other banks’decisions as given.

5

loans and to purchase legacy loans in the secondary market, or whether it hoards some
of this liquidity in response to a rare event (that we describe below).
The banks’cross demand deposit holdings form a …nancial network denoted by:
b( ) = b

(1)

!b

(2)

!b

(3)

! :::: ! b

(n)

!b

(1)

(1)

where : f1; ::; ng ! f1; ::; ng is a permutation that assigns bank b (i) to slot i in the
…nancial network. The arc ! denotes that the bank in slot i (i.e., bank b (i) ) has z units
of demand deposits in the bank in the subsequent slot i + 1, and slot n has slot 1 as a
forward neighbor.5 A central feature of the model is the banks’ uncertainty about the
…nancial network in (1), but we will shut down this ingredient until the next section. For
now, all banks know all the …nancial linkages (cross-deposits) in the network.
At date 0, the banks learn that a rare event has happened and one bank, bj , will
become distressed. Similar to Allen and Gale (2000), in order to remain solvent this bank
needs to make dollars of payment (to an outsider) at date 1.
These losses might spill over to other banks via the …nancial network and may bring
them into …nancial distress at date 1. To prepare for date 1, at date 0 the banks take one
of the following actions Aj0 = fHS; H; Bg, which are restricted to a discrete choice set for
simplicity (see Caballero and Simsek (2009) for a related model with unrestricted action
space). As the most extreme precautionary measure, the bank may choose Aj0 = HS, to
hoard all of its ‡exible reserves y as liquidity and sell all of its legacy loans 1 y in the
secondary market, keeping a completely liquid balance sheet. As a less extreme measure,
the bank may choose Aj0 = H, to hoard its ‡exible reserves as liquidity and to keep its
legacy loans on its balance sheet. Alternatively, the bank may choose Aj0 = B; to keep
its own legacy loans on its balance sheet and to be a potential buyer of loans. That is,
this bank uses its ‡exible reserves either to make new loans or to buy legacy loans in the
secondary market (whichever is more pro…table). At date 1, the bank chooses whether to
keep or withdraw its deposits on the forward neighbor bank, Aj1 2 fK; W g.
Given the rare event, a bank may not be able to pay its depositors the contracted
amount (1; R) (despite the precautionary measures it takes), but instead it ends up paying
some q1j ; q2j to all depositors. Banks know that there are no liquidity driven retail
depositors, thus a bank which is able to pay its depositors at least q1j at date 2 can refuse
to pay the retail depositors if they arrive early. With this assumption, the continuation
equilibrium for bank bj at date 1 takes one of two forms. Either the bank is solvent, pays
5

In Caballero and Simsek (2009), we motivate the formation of the …nancial network for its role in
facilitating bilateral liquidity insurance, as in Allen and Gale (2000).

6

q1j = 1; q2j 1, and the retail depositors withdraw at date 2; or the bank is insolvent, pays
q1j < 1; q2j = 0, and all depositors draw their deposits at date 1.
The bank chooses actions Aj0 ; Aj1 to maximize q1j until it can meet its liquidity obligations to depositors, that is, until q1j = 1. Increasing q1j beyond 1 has no bene…t for the
bank, thus once it satis…es its liquidity obligations, it then tries to maximize the return
to late depositors q2j . Note that the banks make their decisions while facing uncertainty
about the network structure. For expositional simplicity we assume that banks are in…nitely risk averse (rather than just risk averse) with respect to the …nancial network, i.e.
they evaluate their decisions according to the worst possible network realization which
they …nd plausible.
Secondary Market for Legacy Loans
Legacy loans are traded in a centralized exchange that opens at date 0. Given the loan
price r, the banks that choose Aj = HS sell all of their legacy loans (1 y units for each
bank) while the banks that choose Aj = B are potential buyers of legacy loans and may
spend up to y (their ‡exible reserves). There is no demand or supply for legacy loans
outside of the network.
A legacy loan traded in the secondary market is held by a bank di¤erent than its
originator, and it yields returns R
< R at date 2. We assume > 0 which simpli…es
the subsequent analysis, but the economic results generalize also to the case = 0.6 Note
that there is an upper bound on endogenous loan prices. In particular, potential buyers
of legacy loans give up ‡exible reserves which they could also use to make new loans, thus
each loan has an opportunity cost of R units at date 2. Since secondary loans return R
units at date 2, no potential buyer would demand legacy loans at a price greater than
rf air

(R

) =R:

Legacy and new loans can be freely disposed of at the scrap value rf ire 2 (0; rf air ), so
rf ire is a lower bound on prices.
If r < rf air , potential buyers spend all of their ‡exible reserves y on legacy loans,
while if r = rf air , they are indi¤erent between buying legacy loans and making new loans.
6

In other words, even though banks get returns slightly lower than R from legacy loans purchased
in the secondary market, they are the natural buyers of these loans in the sense of Shleifer and Vishny
(1992).

7

Figure 1: Timeline of events.

Thus, the market clearing condition for legacy loans can be written as

(1

y)

X
j

j

1 A = HS

yX
1 Aj = B
r j

8
>
<

0 if r = rf ire
= 0 if r 2 (rf ire ; rf air ) .
>
:
0 if r = rf air

(2)

The …rst term on the left hand side denotes the total supply of loans while the second
term denotes the maximum potential demand. If the left hand side of Eq. (2) is negative
for each r 2 [rf ire ; rf air ], then legacy loans trade at their fair value rf air , potential buyers
are indi¤erent between buying legacy loans and selling new loans, and they buy just
enough legacy loans to clear the market. If the left hand side of Eq. (2) is 0 for some
r 2 [rf ire ; rf air ], then r is the equilibrium price. If the left hand side is positive for each
r 2 [rf ire ; rf air ], then there is excess supply of loans and the price is given by the scrap
value rf ire (note that this happens only if there are no potential buyers). We refer to this
situation as a breakdown in the legacy loan market.
Equilibrium
Figure 1 recaps the timeline of events in this economy. We can now de…ne equilibrium:
De…nition
1. An equilibrium iis a collection of bank actions and payments
h
j
j
A0 ( ) ; A1 ( ) j ; q1j ( ) ; q2j ( ) j
and a price level r 2 [rf ire ; rf air ] for legacy loans
b( )

8

such that, given the realization of the …nancial network b ( ) and the rare event, each bank
bj chooses its actions according to the worst case …nancial network that it …nds plausible,
the legacy loan market clears (cf. Eq. (2)), and the retail depositors withdraw deposits
early if and only if q2j ( ) < 1.
We next turn to the characterization of this equilibrium. Let { 2 f1; ::; ng denote the
slot of the distressed bank bj= ({) . Note that, for each …nancial network b ( ) and for each
bank bj , there exists a unique k 2 f0; ::; n 1g such that
j = ({

k) ,

which we de…ne as the distance of bank bj from the distressed bank.7 The distance k is
the payo¤ relevant information for a bank bj and will play a key role in the analysis.8

2.2

The Benchmark without Complexity

We characterize the equilibrium in two steps: We start by describing the banks’actions
and payo¤s for a given price level of legacy loans, r; and then solve for the equilibrium
price using the legacy loan market clearing condition (2).
Suppose the loan prices are …xed at some r 2 [rf ire ; rf air ] and consider the banks’
optimal actions and payments in this setting. Consider a distressed bank that needs to
obtain liquidity at date 1 (e.g. the original distressed bank b ({) ). This bank could try to
obtain the required liquidity either by withdrawing its cross deposits at date 1 (i.e. by
choosing Aj1 = W ) and/or by taking a precautionary action at date 0 (i.e. by choosing
Aj0 2 fH; HSg). It can be checked that the bank always weakly prefers ex-post liquidity
withdrawal to the ex-ante precautionary actions, thus we …x banks’liquidity pecking order
as follows:
Assumption (LPO). The liquidity pecking order is such that a bank that will need
at least z units of liquidity at date 1 …rst chooses Aj1 = W , and then (if there is need)
resorts to ex-ante precautionary measures.
Under assumption (LPO) and the parametric condition
z, the original distressed
({)
bank b , which has to make a liquidity payment of at date 1, withdraws its deposits
from the forward neighbor bank b ({+1) . This puts bank b ({+1) also in need of z units of
liquidity, which also withdraws its deposits on the forward neighbor bank. As in Allen
7

We use modulo n arithmetic for the slot index i, e.g. { k = 1 represents the slot n 1.
Note that the de…nition of equilibrium has built in a conservative feature which characterizes …nancial
markets in distress: Banks make their precautionary decisions based on the worst outcome they …nd
plausible. This feature plays no role in the benchmark since banks know the actual …nancial network.
8

9

and Gale (2000), this triggers further withdrawals until, in equilibrium, all cross deposits
are withdrawn, i.e. Aj1 = W for all j. In particular, a bank in need of liquidity (including
the original distressed bank b ( ) ) tries, but cannot, obtain any net liquidity through cross
withdrawals. Anticipating that it will not be able to obtain additional liquidity at date 1,
the distressed banks try to obtain some liquidity by taking precautionary actions at date
0.
To simplify the characterization of the banks’date 0 actions, we assume
y + (1

y) rf air < 1 < (1

y) R.

(3)

The left hand side of this condition is not new, as it follows from > 0. It ensures that a
bank that sells its legacy loans (i.e. that chooses the most precautionary action Aj0 = HS)
does not have enough resources to promise at least 1 unit to its depositors at date 2, and
thus it will be insolvent at date 1. The right hand side of this condition ensures that a
bank that keeps its legacy loans on its book (i.e. that chooses Aj0 2 fH; Bg) can always
promise its depositors at least 1 unit at date 2. Under condition (3), a bank that expects
to make a net liquidity payment at date 1 …rst considers hoarding liquidity, i.e. the action
Aj0 = H. If the bank’s expected loss at date 1 is less than its ‡exible reserves y, then
it chooses Aj0 = H and averts insolvency. If the bank’s expected loss is greater than y,
then the bank expects to be insolvent at date 1 even if it chooses Aj0 = H. Hence, this
bank believes that it cannot avoid insolvency and thus it chooses Aj = HS to improve its
liquidation outcome. We refer to y as the bank’s bu¤er, since this is the maximum level
of losses the bank can sustain while remaining solvent.
We next conjecture that, under appropriate parametric conditions (including condition
(3)), there exists a threshold K (r) 2 f1; ::; n 2g, which depends on loan prices, such
that all banks with distance k
K (r) 1 are insolvent (there are K (r) such banks)
while the banks with distance k K (r) remain solvent. That is, the crisis will partially
cascade through the network but will be contained after K (r) n 2 banks have failed.
We refer to K (r) as the cascade size.
The original distressed bank, b ({) , is insolvent as long as its required payment is greater
than its bu¤er y (and greater than z so that assumption (LPO) applies), i.e. if and only
if
> max (y; z) .
(4)
Suppose this is the case so bank b

()

is insolvent. Anticipating insolvency, this bank

10

chooses A0

({)

= HS, all retail depositors will arrive early at date 1, and the bank will pay
q1

()

=

y + r (1

y)
1+z

+z

<1

to each depositor (where the inequality holds in view of condition (3)). Note that the
bank will have y + r (1 y) units of liquidity at date 1, it will make a payment of , and
it will receive z units in cross-deposits from its forward neighbor bank b ({+1) (which is
solvent in our conjectured equilibrium and thus will pay 1 unit for each unit of deposit).
Consider next the bank b ( 1) with distance 1 from the distressed bank. To remain
()
solvent, this bank needs to pay 1 on its deposits to bank b ( 2) but it receives only q1 < 1
()
on its deposits from the distressed bank b ( ) , so it loses z 1 q1
in cross-deposits.
Hence, bank b ( 1) will also become insolvent if (and only if) its losses from cross-deposits
()
> y, which can be rewritten as
are greater than its bu¤er, z 1 q1
q1

()

<1

y
.
z

If this condition fails, the only insolvent bank is the original distressed bank and the
cascade size is K (r) = 1. If this condition holds, then bank b ( 1) anticipates insolvency
({ 1)
and chooses A0
= HS, and it will pay its depositors
q1

(

1)

= f q1

()

y + r (1

y) + zq
1+z

()

.

(5)

From this point onwards, a pattern emerges. The payment by an insolvent bank b
(with k 1) is given by
({ k)
( (k 1))
q1
= f q1

({ k)

({ k)

and this bank’s backward neighbor b ({ (k+1)) is also insolvent if and only if q1
< 1 yz .
Hence, the payments by insolvent banks converge to the …xed point of the function f (:),
and if
y
y + r (1 y) > 1
,
(6)
z
then there exists a unique K (r) 2 such that
k)

<1

(K(r) 1))

1

q1
and q1
If n

(

(

y
for each k 2 f0; ::; K (r)
z
y
.
z

2 is greater than the solution, K (r), to this equation, i.e. if
11

2g

(7)

n

(8)

K (r) + 2;

then, Eq. (7) shows that (in addition to the trigger-distressed bank b ({) ) all banks b ( k)
with distance k 2 f1; ::; K (r) 1g are insolvent since their losses from cross deposits are
greater than their corresponding bu¤ers. These banks choose Aj0 = HS to improve their
liquidation outcome. In contrast, bank b ({ K(r)) is solvent, since it can meet its losses by
({ K(r))
hoarding liquidity, i.e. this bank chooses A0
= H. Since bank b ({ K(r)) is solvent,
all banks b ( k) with distance k 2 fK (r) + 1; ::; n 1g are also solvent since they do not
incur losses in cross-deposits. These banks are potential buyers of legacy loans, i.e. they
choose Aj0 = B. This veri…es our conjecture for a partial cascade of size K (r) under
conditions (3), (4), (6) ; and (8).
Note also that Eqs. (5) and (7) imply that K (r) is decreasing in r: with a higher
loan price, the liquidation value of each bank is greater, thus the crisis is contained after
a smaller number of insolvencies. For future reference, we strengthen condition (6) to
y + rf ire (1

y) > 1

y
,
z

(9)

so that there exists a partial cascade for any r 2 [rf ire ; rf air ]. The next lemma summarizes
the above discussion.
Lemma 1. Suppose information is free so that banks know the …nancial network b ( ),
that the loan prices are exogenously …xed at r 2 [rf ire ; rf air ], that assumption (LPO) holds,
and that conditions (3), (4), (8) ; and (9) are satis…ed. Then, there exists a partial cascade
of size K (r), where K (r) is de…ned by Eq. (7). Banks with distance from the distressed
bank k
K (r) 1 are insolvent and they choose Aj0 = HS. The transition bank with
distance K (r) averts insolvency by choosing Aj0 = H. The remaining banks with distance
k K (r) + 1 are solvent and they choose Aj0 = B.
Figure 2 displays the equilibrium cascade size K (r) when the loan prices are exogenously …xed at some r 2 [rf ire ; rf air ] for a particular parameterization of the model,
illustrating that K (r) is decreasing in r. The negative dependence of the cascade size on
the price of loans will play an important role in the next section in which we consider the
equilibrium with endogenous complexity
We next consider the legacy loan market clearing condition and solve for the equilibrium level of prices in the free-information benchmark. We claim that if n is su¢ ciently
large, the endogenous loan price in the free-information benchmark is given by r = rf air .
To see this, note that the insolvent banks (there are K (r) of them) choose Aj0 = HS
12

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

Figure 2: Cascade size in the free-information benchmark. The plot displays the
cascade size K (r) when the loan prices are exogenously …xed at r 2 [0; rf air ] (for a given
level of ).

and sell all of their existing loans, hence the aggregate supply of loans is given by
K (r) (1 y). The transition bank b ({ K(r)) chooses to hoard liquidity, while the remainn 1
ing solvent banks b ({ k) k=K(r)+1 (there are n K (r) 1 of them) choose Aj0 = B, i.e.
they are potential buyers of loans. Suppose n is su¢ ciently large so that
(n

K (r)

1) y > r (1

y) K (r) for all r 2 [rf ire ; rf air ] .

(10)

Under this condition, the demand from the potential buyers exceed the supply of loans
for any price level r < rf air , thus the loan market clearing condition (2) implies that
r = rf air .
Intuitively, if the cascade is only partial and banks know the …nancial network, then
there exist banks which will remain solvent and know that much. These banks do not
hoard liquidity and are ready to use their ‡exible reserves to purchase loans from distressed
banks. When there are su¢ ciently many banks, the demand from these solvent banks is
enough to absorb the supply from the distressed banks, ensuring that the secondary loans
are traded at their fair price rf air . We refer to condition (10) as the deep secondary market
assumption. The next proposition summarizes the above discussion and characterizes the
symmetric equilibrium for the free-information benchmark.
Proposition 1. Suppose information is free so that banks know the …nancial network
b ( ). Suppose assumption (LPO) holds, conditions (3), (4), (8) ; and (9) are satis…ed,
and the deep secondary market assumption (10) holds. Then:
13

1

0.5

0

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

6
4
2
0

11
10.5
10

Figure 3: Equilibrium in the free-information benchmark. The top, the middle,
and the bottom panels respectively plot the loan prices, the cascade size, and the aggregate
level of new loans as a function of the losses in the originating bank.

(i) The unique equilibrium price is given by r = rf air .
(ii) For the continuation equilibrium (at date 1): All banks choose Aj1 = W . Banks
with distance k K (rf air ) 1 are insolvent while the banks with distance k K (rf air )
are solvent.
(iii) For the ex-ante equilibrium (at date 0): The insolvent banks choose Aj0 = HS,
the transition bank with distance K (rf air ) chooses Aj0 = H, and all other solvent banks
(i.e. banks with distance k K (rf air ) + 1) choose Aj0 = B.
(iv) For the loan market: The insolvent banks sell all of their loans in the secondary
market, while the solvent banks with distance k
K (rf air ) + 1 are indi¤erent between
buying legacy loans and making new loans. These banks spend a portion of their ‡exible
reserves to buy the legacy loans sold by the insolvent banks and they make new loans with
the rest of their reserves. The aggregate level of new loans made in this economy is given
by:
Y = (n K (rf air ) 1) y K (rf air ) (1 y) rf air .
(11)
Discussion. Figure 3 displays the equilibrium in the benchmark economy for particular
parameterization of the model. The …gure demonstrates that the loan prices are …xed at
rf air , the cascade size is increasing in , and the aggregate level of new loans is decreasing

14

in . Intuitively, as increases, there are more losses to be contained, which increases
the spread of the insolvency. As the insolvency spreads, more banks hoard their ‡exible
reserves as liquidity instead of making new loans, which lowers Y. Note, however, that Y
decreases “smoothly”with . These results o¤er a benchmark for the next section. There
we show that once auditing becomes costly, both K and Y may experience large changes
with small increases in .

3

Endogenous Complexity and Fire Sales

Let us repeat the steps of the previous section but now with our key assumption: Banks
only have local knowledge about the …nancial network b ( ).
Each bank observes its two forward neighbors but is otherwise uncertain about how the
remaining banks are allocated to the remaining …nancial slots (cf. Eq. (1)). In particular,
we assume this uncertainty takes a simple form: Banks with distance k
2 know their
distances from the distressed bank, and banks with distance k
3 are uncertain about
their distances and assign a positive probability to all distances k~ 2 f3; 4; ::; n 1g.
In this context, when the shock is small, the system behaves exactly as in the benchmark. But when the shock is large, banks need to understand distant (complex) linkages
in order to assess the amount of counterparty risk they are facing. Their inability to
…gure out these complex linkages triggers a set of precautionary actions which overturns
the relatively benign implications of the benchmark environment.
As in the benchmark, the original distressed bank b ({) withdraws its deposits from
the forward neighbor bank, which triggers further withdrawals until, in equilibrium, all
cross deposits are withdrawn, i.e. Aj1 = W for all j. Since the distressed bank knows that
it cannot obtain any net liquidity at date 1, it tries to obtain liquidity at date 0. Under
({)
condition (4), it also knows that it cannot avoid insolvency, thus it chooses A0 = HS.
Next consider a bank bj with distance k > 0, and note that a su¢ cient statistic for this
bank to choose action Aj0 2 fHS; H; Bg is the amount it expects to receive in equilibrium
from its forward neighbor. In other words, to decide on the level of its precautionary
measure, this bank only needs to know whether (and how much) it will lose in crossdeposits. Formally, if the bank chooses Aj0 at date 0 and its forward neighbor pays x
at date 1, then this bank’s payment can be written as a function q1 Aj0 ; x ; q2 Aj0 ; x .
However, the bank chooses Aj0 while facing uncertainty about the …nancial network, and
consequently about x. Note also that q1 Aj0 ; x and q2 Aj0 ; x are increasing in x for any
choice of action. That is, the bank’s payment is increasing in the amount it receives from

15

its forward neighbor regardless of the ex-ante precautionary measure it takes. Thus, since
the bank is in…nitely risk averse, it will choose its precautionary action as if it will receive
from its forward neighbor the lowest possible payment x.
To characterize the bank’s optimal action further, we de…ne a useful notion of equilibrium. We say that the equilibrium allocation is distance based and monotonic if the
banks’ equilibrium payments can be written as an increasing function of their distance
from the distressed bank. That is, there exists weakly increasing payment functions
Q1 ; Q2 : f0; ::; n 1g ! R such that
q1

(i k)

( ) ; q2

(i k)

( ) = (Q1 [k] ; Q2 [k])

for all b ( ) and k. We conjecture (and verify in Appendix A.1) that the equilibrium is
distance based and monotonic.
Under this conjecture, consider again a bank bj with distance k > 0, and note that
the payment of the bank’s forward neighbor can be written as x = Q1 [k 1]. Then,
the bank’s uncertainty about the forward neighbor’s payment x = Q1 [k 1] reduces to
its uncertainty about the forward neighbor’s distance k 1, which is equal to one less
than its own distance k. If the bank knows its distance to the distressed bank, i.e. if
k 2 f1; 2g, then it chooses its optimal action Aj0 2 fHS; H; Bg knowing that it will
receive x = Q1 [k 1] from its forward neighbor. On the other hand, if the bank is
uncertain about its distance, i.e. if k
3, then it assigns a positive probability to all
~
distances
ik 2 f3; :::; n 1g. Moreover, since Q1 [:] is an increasing function, the payment
h
3
Q1 k~ 1 is minimal for the distance k~ = 3. Hence a bank bj with distance k

chooses Aj0 2 fHS; H; Bg as if it will receive x = Q1 [2] from its forward neighbor. In
words, the banks that are uncertain about their distances to the distressed bank choose
their precautionary action as if they are closer to the distressed bank than they actually
are.
Formally, our next lemma establishes that all banks with distance k
3 choose the
action that the bank with distance k~ = 3 would choose if the information was freely
available (characterized in Lemma 1). If the free-information cascade size is given by
K (r) = 3; so that the bank with distance k~ = 3 would take the precautionary action
A30 = H to avert insolvency, then all banks with k 3 also take the precautionary action
Aj0 = H even though ex-post they end up not needing liquidity. If the free-information
cascade size is even greater (i.e. if K (r) 4) so that the bank with distance k~ = 3 would
be insolvent and choose the most precautionary action A30 = HS, then all banks with
k 3 fold by taking the most precautionary action Aj0 = HS, which ensures that their
16

insolvency (even though some of these banks would be solvent in the free-information
economy). The proof of the following lemma is relegated to Appendix A.1 since most of
the intuition is provided by the above discussion.
Lemma 2. Consider the setup of Lemma 1, but now information is costly rather than
free, so that banks know only their two forward neighbors and they are otherwise uncertain
about the …nancial network b ( ). Let K (r) denote the cascade size that would obtain if
information was freely available (characterized in Lemma 1).
Then the equilibrium is distance based and monotonic. Each bank bj with distance
k 2 f0; 1; 2g chooses the same action that it would choose in the free-information economy
(characterized in Lemma 1). Each bank bj with distance k 2 f3; ::; n 1g chooses the same
action that the bank with distance 3 would choose in the free-information economy. In
particular, there are three cases to consider, depending on the cascade size:
If K (r)
2, then the crisis in the free-information economy would not cascade to
bank with distance 3, which would choose Aj0 = B. Thus, each bank bj with distance
k 2 f3; ::; n 1g chooses Aj0 = B, and the equilibrium actions and payments are identical
to the free-information economy described in Lemma 1. In particular, the cascade size is
^ (r) = K (r).
given by K
If K (r) = 3, then the crisis in the free-information economy would cascade to and
stop at bank with distance 3, which would choose Aj0 = H to avert insolvency. Thus each
bank bj with distance k 2 f3; ::; n 1g chooses Aj0 = H. The equilibrium cascade size is
^ (r) = K (r), but the banks’actions
still the same as the free-information economy, i.e. K
and payments are di¤erent.
If K (r)
4, then bank with distance 3 would be insolvent in the free-information
economy and would choose Aj0 = HS. Thus, all banks choose Aj0 = HS and they are all
^ (r) = n.
insolvent, i.e. the cascade size is given by K
Note that the loan trade decisions of the banks with distance k
3 depend on the
free-information cascade size K (r). In particular, if K (r) 2, these banks are potential
buyers in the loan market, while if K (r) 3, they are either neutral in the loan market
(if K (r) = 3) or they are potential sellers (if K (r) 4). This dependence of the banks’
loan trades on the free-information cascade size K (r) (which itself depends on the loan
price) plays a key role in subsequent analysis, where we endogenize the loan prices and
complete the characterization of the equilibrium.
We next solve the equilibrium level of loan prices in the costly information setting and
present our main results. There are three cases to consider depending on the cascade size
K (r) over the price range r 2 [rf ire ; rf air ].
17

Case (i). If K (rf ire ) 2, then we conjecture that there is a unique symmetric equilibrium, that we refer to as the fair-price equilibrium, in which loan markets endogenously
clear and loans trade at their fair price r = rf air . To verify this conjecture, recall that
K (r) is a decreasing function so that K (r) K (rf ire ) 2 for all r 2 [rf ire ; rf air ]. Hence,
regardless of the endogenous price r, Lemma 2 implies that all banks with k 3 choose
Aj0 = B; and as such, these banks are potential buyers of loans. Thus, under the deep secondary market assumption (10), the unique equilibrium price is given by r = rf air . Once
the equilibrium price is determined, the remaining equilibrium allocations are uniquely
determined as described in Lemma 2, proving our conjecture for this case.
Case (ii). If K (rf air ) 3, we conjecture that there is a unique symmetric equilibrium,
which we refer to as the …re-sale equilibrium, in which there is a breakdown in the loan
market and r = rf ire . To see this, note that 3 K (rf air ) K (r) for all r 2 [rf ire ; rf air ],
thus Lemma 2 implies that all banks with k 3 choose either Aj0 = H (if K (r) = 3), or
Aj0 = HS (if K (r) 4). In words, these banks are either neutral in the legacy loan market
or they are sellers, in particular, they are not potential buyers. Using Lemma 2 once more,
note that the banks with distance k 2 are necessarily insolvent, so they choose Aj0 = HS
and become sellers in the legacy loan market. Thus, the legacy loan market features at
least 3 sellers but no buyers. The market clearing condition (2) implies that r = rf ire , i.e.
there is a breakdown in the secondary loan market.
Case (iii). If K (rf air )
2 < 3
K (rf ire ), we conjecture that there are two stable
equilibria: one fair-price equilibrium and one …re-sale equilibrium. To see this, …rst suppose that the price of loans is given by r = rf air so that the cascade size satis…es K (r) 2.
Then, the analysis for case (i) applies unchanged, in particular, all banks with distance
k 3 are potential buyers and the price rf air clears the market, verifying that there is a
fair-price equilibrium. Next suppose that the price of loans is given by r = rf ire so that
the cascade size satis…es K (rf ire ) 3. Then, the analysis for case (ii) applies unchanged,
in particular, all banks with distance k 3 are either neutral in the loan market or they
sell their loans, and loan prices collapse to r = rf ire , verifying that there is a …re-sale
equilibrium.
We summarize these results in the following, and main, proposition.
Proposition 2. Consider the setup of Proposition 1 with the di¤erence here being that
banks only have local understanding of the network, so that banks know only their two
forward neighbors and they are otherwise uncertain about the …nancial network b ( ).

18

Let K (r) denote the cascade size in the free-information economy with price level r 2
[rf ire ; rf air ] (characterized in Lemma 1).
(i) Fair-price equilibrium: If K (rf ire ) 2, there is a unique equilibrium in which the
loan market clearing condition (2) is satis…ed with equality and loans trade at their fair
price r = rf air .
^ = K (rf air )
The cascade size is the same as the free-information benchmark, i.e. K
^ 1) choose Aj0 = HS and sell their loans,
2. The insolvent banks (with distance k K
^ +1 choose Aj0 = B and are indi¤erent between
while the solvent banks with distance k K
using their reserves to make new loans or to buy legacy loans in the secondary market.
The aggregate level of new loans is equal to the benchmark Eq. (11).
(ii) Fire sale equilibrium: If K (rf air ) 3, then there is a unique equilibrium in which
there is a breakdown in the secondary loan market, i.e. there is an excess supply of loans
and r = rf ire .
(ii.1) If K (rf ire ) = 3, all banks with distance k 3 choose Aj0 = H. These banks
^ = K (rf ire ).
remain solvent and the cascade size is K
(ii.2) If K (rf ire )
4, all banks with distance k
3 choose Aj0 = HS. These
^ = n.
banks go under and the cascade size in this case is K
In either sub-case, all ‡exible reserves are hoarded as liquidity and there are no new
loans, Y = 0.
(iii) Multiple equilibria: If K (rf air ) 2 < 3 K (rf ire ), there are two stable equilibria.
In the fair-price equilibrium, loans trade at their fair price r = rf air , the cascade
^
size is K = K (rf air ) 2, the solvent banks are indi¤erent between making new loans or
purchasing loans in the secondary market, and the aggregate level of new loans Y is given
by the benchmark Eq. (11).
^ = 3 (if
In the …re sale equilibrium, r = rf ire , the cascade size is given by either K
^ = n (if K (rf ire ) 4), all banks hoard liquidity and (if K (rf ire ) 4)
K (rf ire ) = 3) or K
dump their loans in the secondary market, and there are no new loans, Y =0.
Discussion. Figure 4 displays the equilibria with network uncertainty for a particular
parameterization of the model. The top panel reproduces the cascade size K (r) in the
free-information benchmark as a function of the losses in the originating bank , when
loan prices are …xed at r = rf ire and r = rf air . The remaining three panels display
the equilibria with network uncertainty, illustrating the characterization in Proposition 2.
Note that there is a unique equilibrium for small and large levels of , however, there are
multiple equilibria for intermediate levels of .
19

5

0

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

1
0.5
0
40
20
0
15
10
5
0

Figure 4: Equilibria with network uncertainty. The top panel plots the cascade size
K (r) in the free-information benchmark as a function of the losses in the originating bank
, when loan prices are …xed at r 2 f0; rf air g. The remaining three panels display the
equilibria with network uncertainty: They respectively plot the loan prices, the cascade
size and the aggregate level of new loans as a function of , for both the fair-price and
the …re-sale equilibria.

20

When is su¢ ciently small so that K (rf ire )
2, i.e. when the free-information
benchmark features a short cascade even for the price level r = rf ire , there is a unique
fair price equilibrium. This equilibrium features a low level of complexity thus the banks
that are uncertain about their distance to the distressed bank can rule out an indirect hit.
Consequently, these banks use their reserves to make new loans and to demand assets.
The aggregate level of new loans is the same as in the free-information benchmark, and
assets trade at their fair prices.
In contrast, when is su¢ ciently large so that K (rf air )
3, i.e. when the cascade
size in the free-information benchmark is su¢ ciently large, there is a unique …re-sale
equilibrium. In this equilibrium, the aggregate level of new loans makes a very large
and discontinuous drop to zero. That is, when the losses (measuring the severity of the
initial shock) are beyond a threshold, the cascade size becomes so large that banks are
unable to tell whether they are connected to the distressed bank or not. All uncertain
banks act as if they are closer to the distressed bank than they actually are, hoarding
much more liquidity than in the free-information benchmark and leading to a severe
credit crunch episode. Moreover, these banks, some of which would be potential buyers
in the free-information benchmark, become sellers and this leads to a collapse in asset
prices. This result provides a rationale for the collapse of asset prices in an environment
in which complexity suddenly (and endogenously) rises. Furthermore, it is possible (if
K (rf ire )
4) that the uncertain banks panic so much that they take an extremely
precautionary action to increase their liquidation outcome. However, ex-post, this action
ensures that the uncertain banks become insolvent.
When is in an intermediate range, the cascade size is manageable if price of loans
is high (i.e. K (rf air ) 2), however it becomes unmanageable if loans trade at the …resale price (i.e. K (rf ire ) 3). In this case, the interaction between asset prices and the
endogenous level of complexity generates multiple equilibria.
In the fair-price equilibrium, loans trade at a higher price and the cascade size is
relatively small, which reduces the level of complexity. With the lower level of complexity,
the banks that are uncertain about their distance to the distressed bank become potential
buyers of loans, which ensures that loans trade at the higher price and that the cascade
is shorter.
Set against this benign scenario is the possibility of a …re-sale equilibrium, in which
the price of loans collapses and there is a longer cascade, which increases the level of
complexity. As the level of complexity increases, banks that are uncertain about their
distances panic and sell their loans, which reinforces the collapse of loan prices.
Note also that, whenever there are multiple equilibria, the fair-price equilibrium Pareto
21

dominates the …re-sale equilibrium for all banks and their depositors. Intuitively, the …resale equilibrium entails two distinct social costs: fewer new loans and more banks become
insolvent. In the next section, we identify the negative externalities in our setup that
account for these social costs.

4

Three Externalities

In this section, we discuss the various externalities present in our setup and we highlight
the role they play in our main results. Our model features three distinct externalities,
which we call the network-liquidity externality, the …re-sale externality and the complexity externality. The …rst of these emerges directly from the interlinkages between banks.
The second externality stems from the interaction of loan prices and the endogenous
determination of bank runs. These two externalities are relatively standard. Models of
interconnected banks typically feature externalities akin to our network-liquidity externality (see, for example, Rotemberg (2009)), while models based on the Diamond and Dybvig
(1983) setup typically lead to …re-sale externalities whenever prices a¤ect the likelihood of
bank runs (see, for example, Allen and Gale (2005)). The complexity externality is novel
to our analysis, and it emerges from the interaction of loan prices and the complexity of
the …nancial network.

4.1

Network-liquidity Externality

In our setup, a distressed bank can obtain liquidity through two distinct sources: It can
either withdraw its deposits on the forward neighbor bank, or it can hoard its liquid reserves (or it can sell its legacy loans, as a last measure). Since aggregate liquidity is scarce,
a bank that chooses the former option puts its forward neighbor bank also in distress,
imposing a liquidity externality on it. In particular, if the bank decides to withdraw its
cross deposits, the forward neighbor bank scrambles for liquidity and faces insolvency if it
is unable to meet this liquidity demand. A distressed bank in our setup always (weakly)
prefers to withdraw deposits (cf. assumption (LBO)).9 In Appendix A.2, we study the
polar opposite case, enforced by the government, in which a bank that needs liquidity …rst
hoards its own liquid reserves, and thus avoids in‡icting a liquidity externality whenever
it can. Our analysis shows that internalizing the liquidity externalities in this fashion
The bank’s preference for liquidity withdrawal is strict if the forward neighbor pays q2j < R. In
the more general model analyzed in Caballero and Simsek (2009), the bank always strictly prefers to
withdraw deposits and thus always in‡icts a liquidity externality.
9

22

leads to shorter cascades in aggregate (see Proposition 3 in the appendix).
Intuitively, the scramble for liquidity is like a hot potato which the banks can either
pass straight to their neighbors, or which they can cool down a bit using their resources
before passing it on. When all banks pass it without cooling it, the hot potato eventually
reaches a vulnerable bank, i.e. a bank which is su¢ ciently close to the original distressed
bank. This bank cannot pass the potato to its neighbor, which is already bankrupt.
Moreover, the resources of this bank alone are not su¢ cient to cool down the potato
hence the bank burns (i.e. it cannot meet the liquidity demand and becomes insolvent),
which lengthens the cascade. In contrast, when each bank cools down the potato before
passing it on, then the potato is cold before it reaches the vulnerable bank, leading to a
much shorter cascade.

4.2

Fire Sale Externality

Consider a bank that decides to sell some loans, leading to a small decline in loan prices.
This action has a small positive e¤ect on the net budgets of the banks that buy legacy
loans, while it has a small negative e¤ect on the net budgets of the banks that sell legacy
loans. Absent further e¤ects, the welfare impacts of these budget changes would typically
“net out,”which is the content of the …rst welfare theorem. However, a small decline also
increases the likelihood of a bank run in our setup, leading to a further decline in the
welfare of these banks and their depositors. Consequently, the e¤ects of price changes do
not necessarily “net out,”and loan prices feature a negative pecuniary externality.
To formalize this point, let us consider the benchmark economy analyzed in Section 2.2.
This setting shuts down the complexity externality (since the banks know the …nancial
network) which we will analyze in the next subsection.
Recall that the cascade size K (r) is decreasing in r: with a lower loan price, the
liquidation payment of each bank is greater (cf. Eq. (5)), thus the crisis is contained
after a smaller number of insolvencies (cf. Eq. (7)). In particular, there exists some
r 2 [rf ire ; rf air ] such that, for any " > 0 we have
K (r

"=2) = K (r + "=2) + 1:

That is, the cascade size increases by one in response to an arbitrarily small decrease
in loan prices. The small price drop from r + "=2 to r "=2 leads to the insolvency of
one more bank, in‡icting a discrete negative e¤ect on the welfare of this bank and its
backward neighbor, while it has a continuous e¤ect on the welfare of other banks. Hence,

23

for su¢ ciently small ", the net welfare e¤ect of the price change from r + "=2 to r "=2
is negative, demonstrating the …re sale externality.10
The general intuition behind this externality is that a drop in asset prices lowers the
liquidation value of an insolvent bank, which increases the probability of a bank run in
the counterparties of this bank.

4.3

Complexity Externality

Consider next the model analyzed in Section 3 in which banks only have local information
about the …nancial network. Similar to the above analysis for the …re sale externality, a
bank that sells a loan has a small negative impact on loan prices, which in turn increases
the length of the cascade. However, in this case, longer cascades also increase the complexity of the …nancial network. Since banks are averse to complexity (which we model
as in…nite risk aversion with respect to the …nancial network), an increase in complexity
leads to a welfare reduction for banks that are uncertain about the …nancial network.
To formalize this point, consider the set of parameters that lead to multiple equilibria
in Proposition 2, K (rf air ) 2 < 3 K (rf ire ). Then, there exists r 2 [rf ire ; rf air ] such
that, for any " > 0 we have
K (r

"=2) = 3 > K (r + "=2) = 2.

That is, small decline in loan prices makes the cascade size in the free-information
benchmark exceed the critical threshold of 2. Recall that the banks with distance
k 2 f3; ::; n 1g mimic the bank with distance 3 in the free-information benchmark.
Then, when the loans trade at price r + "=2, these banks know that they will not lose
anything in cross deposits, thus they do not take any precaution and they pay out at least
q1j = 1; q2j = R to their depositors (and perhaps more, if they can acquire legacy loans
at a discount).
In contrast, when the loans trade at price r "=2, the banks with distance k 2
f3; ::; n 1g are worried that they might su¤er an indirect hit from the cascade. Since
these banks are in…nitely risk averse, their welfare is greatly reduced. Moreover, these
banks hoard liquidity to precaution against the worst case scenario, and they end up
paying q1j = 1; q2j < R to their depositors. Hence, a small drop in prices in‡icts a discrete
10
The discrete nature of the …re sale externality is due to our modeling assumptions, in particular, our
assumption that the good equilibrium is selected whenever there are multiple equilibria for bank runs.
However, the externality would also be present in other variants of the model, as long as the probability
of a bank run is increasing in the date 1 losses (i.e. the severity of the liquidity shock) of the bank.

24

negative e¤ect on all of the banks with distance k 2 f3; ::; n 1g and their depositors,
demonstrating the complexity externality.
The complexity externality may also lead to multiple Pareto-ranked equilibria in our
setup, as we have already seen in Proposition 2. In particular, an increase in the level of
complexity due to a reduction in the price of assets not only lowers the welfare of many
banks and their depositors, but also induces these banks to take extreme precautionary
measures, which, in some instances, includes further asset sales. The sale of assets by
banks in panic mode reduces asset prices further, which leads to a vicious cycle culminating
in the …re-sale equilibrium. In contrast, an increase in asset prices reduces the complexity
externality, which may mitigate the precautionary measures and turn more sellers into
buyers, leading to a virtuous spiral towards the fair price equilibrium.
Finally, note that the complexity externality is potentially much more potent than
the …re sale externality analyzed in the previous subsection and highlighted in the literature. The reason is that the …re-sale externality a¤ects banks that are on the verge
of insolvency. In contrast, the complexity externality a¤ects all banks that are uncertain
about the …nancial network, which, in practice, includes virtually all …nancial institutions.
The greater scope of the complexity externality also leads to widespread (precautionary)
actions, which has the potential to create aggregate e¤ects, price changes, and multiple
equilibria.

5

Conclusion

In this paper we provide a model that illustrates how …re sales and complexity can trigger a very powerful negative feedback loop within a …nancial network. More severe …re
sales lengthen the potential cascades, and raise the complexity of the environment exponentially. This triggers confusion among potential asset buyers, which pull back and
exacerbate the …re sale. In extreme scenarios these potential buyers can turn into sellers,
leading to a complete collapse in secondary markets.
In our model, the distressed institutions’ motive for …re sales is to improve their
outcome in the worst case scenario of insolvency. This is an extreme assumption made
only to simplify the exposition. In reality, the distressed institutions may sell assets for a
multitude of reasons that do not imply anticipating insolvency. E.g. they may be forced
to do so by regulatory requirements, or they may hope to avoid a run by obtaining more
liquidity. These reasons can be incorporated into our framework while preserving our
main conclusions.

25

Having said this, the particular insolvency motive we consider also raises the question
of what would happen if the distressed institutions chose to gamble for resurrection by
not selling their assets, which would improve their outcome in good states at the cost of
a greater bankruptcy risk. Our model suggests that gambling for resurrection may be a
mixed blessing for the aggregate. Gambling by potential buyers, that is, institutions that
are far from the cascade but that do not know this, would limit the …re sales and the
downward spiral of prices. On the other hand, gambling by institutions near the cascade
would increase the cascade size and trigger the complexity mechanism.
We did not explore policy questions, but it is apparent that our environment creates many policy opportunities during crises. Supporting secondary markets, insulating
…nancial institutions from counterparty risk, and stress testing (increasing transparency
and supporting if needed) systemically important …nancial institutions, are all policies
practiced during the current …nancial crisis and supported by our framework.
.

A
A.1

Appendix
Proofs Omitted in the Main Text

Proof of Lemma 2
Case (i): K (r)
2. To prove that the conjectured actions and payments constitute
({)
an equilibrium, …rst note that the original distressed bank optimally chooses A0 = HS
and pays out the same level Q1 [0] that it would pay in the free-information economy
(since it receives the full amount z from its forward neighbor, b ({+1) , which is solvent
in the conjectured equilibrium). Next consider a bank with distance k 2 f1; 2g. Under
the conjectured equilibrium, this bank knows that it will receive x = Q1 [k 1] from its
forward neighbor, which is equal to what it would receive in the free-information economy.
Hence, it optimally chooses the same action it would choose when information is free.
Consider next a bank with distance k 3. This bank is uncertain about its distance,
thus it chooses its date 0 action as if it will receive x = Q1 [2] from its forward neighbor.
Under the conjectured equilibrium, the cascade size is K (r) 2, thus we have Q1 [2] = 1.
Since the bank makes no losses in cross deposits (even in the worst case scenario of k~ = 3),
it optimally chooses Aj0 = B, verifying the optimality of the conjectured action.
Since the banks’actions are the same as the free-information economy, their payments
are also identical to that case, which veri…es (by Lemma 1) that the equilibrium is distance
26

based and monotonic.
Case (ii): K (r) = 3. Similar to the previous case, the original distressed bank and
the banks with distance k 2 f1; 2g optimally choose the same action and make the same
payments as in the free-information economy.
Consider next a bank with distance k 3. This bank is uncertain about its distance,
thus it chooses its date 0 action as if it will receive x = Q1 [2] from its forward neighbor.
Since K (r) = 3, under the conjectured equilibrium, we have Q1 [2] (which is equal to its
level in the free-information benchmark) lies in the interval (1 y=z; 1). Hence, the bank
with distance k 3 expects (with some probability) to make losses less than its bu¤er,
thus it chooses Aj0 = H to counter these losses, verifying the optimality of its conjectured
action.
These banks with distance k
3 are solvent, but they pay potentially less than the
free-information economy. In particular, the bank with distance k = 3 pays the same
amount (Q1 [3] ; Q2 [3]) that it would pay in the free-information case, while the banks
with distance k 4 end up paying
Q1 [k] = 1 and Q2 [k] = y + (1

y) R 2 (1; R) ,

where Q2 [k]
1 follows from Eq. (3). It follows also that the equilibrium is distance
based and monotonic.
Case (iii): K (r) 4. In this case, note that the banks’payments, given the conjectured
actions, are the solutions to the following system of equations:
Q1 [0] =
Q1 [k] =

y + (1
y + (1

y) r

+ zQ1 [n 1]
1+z
y) r + zQ1 [k 1]
, for k 2 f1; ::; n
1+z

(12)
1g .

Note that, by condition (3), the solution to this system satis…es Q1 [k] < 1 for all k,
verifying that the banks are indeed insolvent given their actions. The system in Eq. (12)
also veri…es that the equilibrium allocation is distance based and monotonic.
To verify the optimality of banks’actions, …rst note that Eq. (12) implies the payments
K(r) 1
fQ1 [k]gk=0 are lower than what they would be in the free-information economy, because
the forward neighbor of the original distressed bank pays Q1 [n 1] < 1 in this case (while
it would be solvent and would pay 1 unit per deposit in the free-information economy).
Consider a bank with distance k 2 f1; 2g, and recall that this bank chooses its date 0
27

action knowing that it will receive Q1 [k 1] from its forward neighbor. Since K (r)
4, this bank would be insolvent in the free-information economy. In the present case,
Q1 [k 1] is even lower than what it would be in the free-information economy. Thus the
bank with distance k 2 f1; 2g is necessarily insolvent, and it optimally chooses Aj0 = HS.
Consider next a bank with distance k 3. This bank is uncertain about its distance
and thus it chooses its date 0 action as if it will receive x = Q1 [2] from its forward
K(r) 1
neighbor. Since K (r)
4, and since the payments fQ1 [k]gk=0
are even lower than
the free-information economy, we necessarily have Q1 [2] < 1 y=z. In other words, the
bank with distance k
3 believes that it might experience losses beyond its bu¤er and
go bankrupt. Consequently, it chooses the most extreme precautionary action Aj0 = HS
to improve their liquidation outcome, verifying the optimality of the conjectured action.

A.2

Equilibrium without Liquidity Externalities

In the main text, the bank always considers deposit withdrawal as the …rst source of
liquidity (cf. assumption (LBO)), thus imposing a liquidity externality on its forward
neighbor bank. To clarify the role of liquidity externalities, in this appendix we analyze
the equilibrium under a government policy that prevents banks from withdrawing cross
deposits unless they have used all of their liquid reserves.
To facilitate the analysis, it helps to consider a slightly greater action space for banks:
Aj0 ; Aj1 2 fH (~
y ) ; HS; Bg

fW (~
z ) ; Kg ,

(13)

where Aj0 = H (~
y ) denotes that the bank hoards y~ 2 (0; y] units of its ‡exible reserves,
j
and A1 = W (~
z ) denotes that the bank withdraws z~ 2 (0; z] units of its deposits on
the forward neighbor bank. In other words, we allow the banks to partially hoard their
‡exible reserves and to partially withdraw their cross deposits. Next, we introduce the
main assumption of this appendix: the government enforces the reverse of the liquidity
pecking order in assumption (LPO) so that banks do not impose a liquidity externality
on their forward neighbors, whenever they can avoid doing so.
Assumption (LPO-R). Consider a bank that needs liquidity at date 1 and whose
forward neighbor bank is solvent. The government imposed liquidity pecking order for this
bank is such that the bank …rst considers hoarding its ‡exible reserves, i.e. it considers the
action Aj0 = H (~
y ). The bank withdraws some of its cross deposits (chooses Aj1 = W (~
z ))
j
only if A0 = H (y) is not su¢ cient to meet its liquidity demand.

28

Finally, we strengthen the right hand side of condition (3) to
1 + z < (1

y) R,

(14)

so that a bank’s own legacy loans are enough to promise all depositors (including the
backward neighbor bank) at least 1 unit at date 2.
Under these assumptions and when n is su¢ ciently large, we conjecture that there is
an equilibrium in which all banks with distance k 1 (i.e. all banks except potentially
the original distressed bank) are solvent. In other words, the cascade size is at most 1, in
stark contrast with the equilibria characterized in Propositions 1 and 2.
In the conjectured equilibrium, the original bank b ({) hoards all of its liquid reserves
({)
({)
and also withdraws its deposits on bank b ({+1) , i.e. it chooses A0 = HS and A1 =
W (z), which puts bank b ({+1) in need of z units of liquidity. Under the new assumption
for the liquidity pecking order, bank b ({+1) (with distance n 1) …rst resorts to hoarding
({+1)
({+1)
its ‡exible reserves. If z
y, then this bank chooses A0
= H (z) ; A1
=K ,
that is, the bank meets its liquidity payments purely by hoarding its ‡exible reserves,
and it does not withdraw any cross deposits. Otherwise z > y and this bank chooses
({+1)
({+1)
A0
= H (z) ; A1
= W (z y) . In this case, consider bank b ({+2) with distance
n 2, which needs to …nd z y units of liquidity. This bank’s response is similar to bank
b ({) : if z y y, then the bank meets its liquidity payment purely by hoarding its ‡exible
reserves, and otherwise it withdraws an even smaller amount from its forward neighbor.
It follows that a pattern emerges for the banks’cross withdrawal decisions. In particular, let n 1 denote the unique integer such that
yn

z > y (n

1)

and suppose n > n. Then, for each j 2 f1; ::; n 1g, the bank b ({+j) with distance n j
({+j)
({+j)
chooses A0
= H (y) ; A1
= W (z jy) , while the bank b ({+n) with distance n n
({+n)

({+n)

chooses A0
= H (z (n 1) y) ; A1
= K . Since the bank with distance n n
keeps its cross deposits, the remaining banks with distance k 2 f1; :::; n n 1g do not
need any liquidity, and these banks withdraw their deposits if and only if their forward
neighbors are insolvent.
Going back to the original distressed bank b ({) , note that, unlike in the previous
sections, this bank obtains a total of y + z units of liquidity: y units from its bu¤er and z
units from cross deposits (if it remains solvent). Hence, this bank is insolvent if and only

29

if
(15)

> y + z,

which is a stronger condition than (4). Suppose this condition is satis…ed so that bank
b ({) is insolvent and consider the backward neighbor bank b ({ 1) . This bank chooses
({ 1)
({)
A1
= W (z) and receives some q1 z < z from the original distressed bank. Despite
incurring some losses, in view of condition (14), bank b ({ 1) is solvent and it can promise
its late depositors (including the backward neighbor bank) at least 1 unit at date 2, i.e.
({ 1)
({ 1)
it pays q1
= 1; q2
> 1 . Since the backward neighbor bank b ({ 2) does not need
liquidity, it chooses to keep its deposits in bank b ({ 1) . Repeating this reasoning, all banks
with distances k 2 f1; ::; n n 2g are solvent, and thus all banks with distances k 2
({ k)
({ k)
f2; ::; n n 1g choose A0
= B; A1
= K , in particular, keeping their deposits
in their forward neighbor banks.
Note also that there is at most one seller in the conjectured equilibrium (the original
distressed bank b ({) ) while the banks with distance k 2 f2; ::; n n 1g are potential
buyers of loans. Hence, under the deep secondary market assumption (i.e. the analogue
of condition (10) for this setup),
(n

n

2) y > 1

y,

(16)

the unique equilibrium price is given by r = rf air . Note also that this analysis applies
regardless of whether the banks know the …nancial network b ( ) or whether they only
have local knowledge (i.e. they know only their two forward neighbors). We summarize
this result in the following proposition.
Proposition 3. Suppose the banks’ action space is extended to (13), assumption (LPO)
for the liquidity pecking order is replaced by assumption (LPO-R) (which is imposed by
the government), conditions (15) and (16) hold. Then, regardless of whether the banks
know the …nancial network b ( ) or just their two forward neighbors, there is a symmetric
equilibrium in which loan prices are given by r = rf air and the cascade size is equal to 1.
In particular, the original distressed bank is insolvent while all other banks are solvent.
At date 1, the banks with distance k 2 f1; 0; n 1; ::; n n 1g withdraw all or some of
their cross deposits, while the banks with distance k 2 f2; 3; ::; n ng keep their deposits
in the forward neighbor bank.
Proposition 3 establishes our main result in this appendix: If the banks avoid in‡icting
a liquidity externality, then the cascade size is much shorter relative to the cases analyzed
in Propositions 1 and 2. To see the intuition, consider the equilibrium in Proposition 3
30

and consider what the banks would do if we removed the government imposed liquidity
pecking order in assumption (LPO-R). Consider bank b ({+n) , which meets its liquidity
demand from its backward neighbor purely by hoarding its ‡exible reserves. For this
bank, hoarding reserves delivers 1 unit of liquidity at an opportunity cost of R (in period
2), while withdrawing cross deposits would deliver 1 unit of liquidity at an opportunity
({+n+1)
({+n+1)
cost of q2
. Given the characterization in 3, it can be checked that q2
<R
({+n+1)
(as some of the losses in the original bank will spillover to bank b
). Hence, if
not restricted by government policy, bank b ({+n) would strictly prefer to withdraw its
cross deposits to hoarding liquidity, which would put bank b ({+n+1) in distress. Similarly,
absent government policy, bank b ({+n+1) would prefer to withdraw its cross deposits and
the scramble for liquidity would continue to cascade in similar fashion. Eventually, a
vulnerable bank, b ({ 1) , which is su¢ ciently close to the original distressed bank (and
thus has incurred some losses) would become distressed. This bank might be unable to
…nd the required liquidity and might become insolvent. Hence, the liquidity externalities
have the potential to make vulnerable banks go insolvent. The government imposed
liquidity order in assumption (LPO-R) internalizes these liquidity externalities, which in
turn ensures that the cascade size is shorter.

31

References
[1] Allen, F. and A. Babus (2008). “Networks in Finance,” working paper, Wharton
Financial Institutions Center, University of Pennsylvania.
[2] Allen, F. and D. Gale (2000). “Financial Contagion,”Journal of Political Economy,
108, p.1-33.
[3] Allen, F. and D. Gale (2005). “Financial Fragility, Liquidity, and Asset Prices,”
Journal of the European Economic Association, 2(6), p.1015-1048.
[4] Brock, W. A. and C. F. Manski.(2008). “Competitive Lending with Partial Knowledge of Loan Repayment,”working paper, University of Wisconsin.
[5] Brunnermeier, M., A. Crockett, C. Goodhart, A. Persaud and H. Shin (2009). “The
Fundamental Principles of Financial Regulation,” ICMB-CEPR Geneva Report on
the World Economy 11.
[6] Brunnermeier, M. and L. H. Pedersen (2005). “Predatory Trading,” Journal of Finance, 60(4), p.1825-1863.
[7] Caballero, R. J. and A. Krishnamurthy (2008). “Collective Risk Management in a
Flight to Quality Episode,”Journal of Finance, 63(5) p.2195-2230.
[8] Caballero, R. J. and P. Kurlat (2008). “Flight to Quality and Bailouts: Policy Remarks and a Literature Review,” <http://econ-www.mit.edu/…les/3390>, October
2008.
[9] Caballero, R. J. and A. Simsek (2009). “Complexity and Financial Panics,”
<http://econ-www.mit.edu/…les/4268>, June 2009.
[10] Cifuentes, R., G. Ferrucci, and H.S. Shin (2005). “Liquidity Risk and Contagion,”Journal of European Economic Association,”3, p. 556-566.
[11] Diamond D., and P. Dybvig (1983). “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance and Liquidity,”
Journal of Political Economy, 91, p.401-419.
[12] Easley, D., and M. O’Hara (2005). “Regulation and Return: The Role of Ambiguity,”
working paper, Cornell University.
[13] Eisenberg L. and T. Noe (2001). “Systemic Risk in Financial Systems,”Management
Science, 47, p.236-249.
32

[14] Freixas, X., B. Parigi, and J. C. Rochet (2000). “Systemic Risk, Interbank Relations and Liquidity Provision by the Central Bank,” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, 32, p.611-638.
[15] Haldane, A. (2009). “Rethinking the Financial Network,”mimeo, Bank of England.
[16] Laguno¤, R., and S. L. Schreft (2001). “A Model of Financial Fragility,” Journal of
Economic Theory, 99, p.220-264.
[17] Leitner, Y. (2005): “Financial Networks: Contagion, Commitment, and Private Sector Bailouts,”Journal of Finance, 60(6), p.2925-2953.
[18] Liu J., J. Pan and T. Wang (2005) “An Equilibrium Model of Rare-Event Premia and
Its Implication for Option Smirks,”Review of Financial Studies, 18(1), p.131-164.
[19] Rochet, J. C. and J. Tirole (1996). “Interbank Lending and Systemic Risk,”Journal
of Money, Credit, and Banking, 28, p.733-762.
[20] Rotemberg, J. “Liquidity Needs in Economies with Interconnected Financial Obligations,”NBER working paper, No. W14222.
[21] Routledge, B. and S. Zin (2004). “Model Uncertainty and Liquidity,”working paper,
Carnegie Mellon University.
[22] Shleifer, A. and R. W. Vishny (1992). “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A
Market Equilibrium Approach,”Journal of Finance, 47(4), p.1343-66.
[23] Shleifer, A. and R. W. Vishny (1997).“The Limits of Arbitrage,”Journal of Finance,
52(1), p.35-55.
[24] Simsek, A. (2009). “Speculation and Risk Sharing with New Financial Assets,”working paper, MIT.

33

