NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FAMILIES AS ROOMMATES:
CHANGES IN U.S. HOUSEHOLD SIZE FROM 1850 TO 2000
Alejandrina Salcedo
Todd Schoellman
Michèle Tertilt
Working Paper 15477
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15477

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2009

We owe a large debt of gratitude to Luigi Pistaferri, who participated in the early stages of this project
and contributed greatly to our understanding of the data. We would also like to thank Stefania Albanesi,
Ran Abramitzky, Alessandra Fogli, Jeremy Greenwood, Bob Hall, Larry E. Jones, Narayana Kocherlakota,
Pete Klenow and seminar participants at the Minneapolis Fed, SED 2005, the Macro SITE 2005, the
2008 Midwest Macro Conference, Brown University, Columbia University, and the Hoover Lunch
for helpful comments. We are particularly grateful to Tom Mroz for sharing his computational resources
at Clemson University. Funds from NSF grant No. 0519324 and the Stanford Institute for Economic
Policy Research (SIEPR) are gratefully acknowledged. Comments are welcome: asalcedo@banxico.org.mx,
tschoel@clemson.edu, tertilt@stanford.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Alejandrina Salcedo, Todd Schoellman, and Michèle Tertilt. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Families as Roommates: Changes in U.S. Household Size from 1850 to 2000
Alejandrina Salcedo, Todd Schoellman, and Michèle Tertilt
NBER Working Paper No. 15477
November 2009
JEL No. D1,E1,J11,N30,O1
ABSTRACT
Living arrangements have changed enormously over the last two centuries. While the average American
today lives in a household of only three people, in 1850 household size was twice that figure. Further,
both the number of children and the number of adults in a household have fallen dramatically. We
develop a simple theory of household size where living with others is beneficial solely because the
costs of household public goods can be shared. In other words, we abstract from intra-family relations
and focus on households as collections of roommates. The model's mechanism is that rising income
leads to a falling expenditure share on household public goods, which endogenously makes household
formation less beneficial and privacy more attractive. To assess the magnitude of this mechanism,
we first calibrate the model to match the relationship between household size, consumption patterns,
and income in the cross-section at the end of the 20th century. We then project the model back to
1850 by changing income. We find that our proposed mechanism can account for 37 percent of the
decline in the number of adults in a household between 1850 and 2000, and for 16 percent of the decline
in the number of children.

Alejandrina Salcedo
Mexican Central Bank
Research Department
Mexico City
alejandrina.salcedo@gmail.com
Todd Schoellman
Clemson University
Department of Economics
Clemson, SC
tschoel@CLEMSON.EDU

Michèle Tertilt
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
tertilt@stanford.edu

1

Introduction

Over the last century and a half, family structure and living arrangements in the United States
have undergone significant changes. Today’s average household is half as large as in 1850. The
decline in fertility explains part of this change, as the average household today contains two fewer
children of the head. However, other forms of cohabitation also have become less common. While
in 1850 almost every household included a married couple, today less than half of households
do. The number of extended family members living in the household, and even the number of nonrelatives, has also declined. One view is that these figures are symptoms of a severe social problem.
If so, then there may be a role for the government to intervene and subsidize larger families.1 In
this paper, we explore an alternative view. We propose a model where falling household sizes
are an optimal response to growing incomes. When we calibrate the model, we find that about a
third of the decline in household size since 1850 can be attributed to rising incomes alone. Thus,
our analysis suggests that a substantial part of the decline in living together may be an efficient
response to changing economic conditions, rather than evidence of frictions that would point to a
role for government intervention.
In this paper, we think of households as collections of roommates living together to share
the costs of household public goods. The larger a household, the less each roommate pays for
public goods such as housing. The mechanism we propose is based on the idea that private goods
have a higher income elasticity than public goods. Therefore, as people get richer, the household
public goods become relatively less important. This changing consumption pattern reduces the
economies of scale of living with other people, and endogenously decreases the optimal household
size. Hence, optimally changing consumption bundles provide the link from income to household
size. In other words, the optimal number of roommates is decided through a simple cost-benefit
analysis, with costs and benefits changing endogenously as income changes.
While literal roommates constitute only a small fraction of all households, we believe that decisions to form, alter, or dissolve families are also influenced by the same cost and benefit analysis.
For example, adult children have the choice of whether or not to leave their parents’ home; a driving consideration for those who stay is cost. Elderly parents often move in with their adult children
to save money. Similarly, when couples contemplate a divorce, they consider whether establishing
two separate households is affordable.2 On the other hand, there are also happily married couples
who choose to live apart because they can afford to do so. Sociological and demographic research
1 For example, the Policy Review published by the Hoover Institution published a special feature in 1996 titled
“Can Government Save the Family?”. Similarly, in 2008, the Family Research Council published a document titled
“25 Pro-Family Policy Goals for the Nation.”
2 On July 13, 2009, the front page of the Wall Street Journal featured a story of couples who delayed the decision
to dissolve their marriages due to the current recession.

1

has studied the rise of Living Apart Together (LAT) Relationships – couples who identify their
relationships as stable but choose not to live together (Sasha Roseneil 2006, Charles Q. Strohm,
Judith A. Seltzer, Susan D. Cochran & Vickie M. Mays 2009). Further, we document that all forms
of cohabitation have become less common over time. Hence we diverge from the existing literature
by emphasizing the cost-benefit analysis common to all forms of living together, rather than the
incentives specific to a particular living arrangement.
Our story implies that richer households are smaller and spend a lower fraction of their budget
on public goods relative to private goods. We provide evidence that these two implications are
indeed observed in the data. Using U.S. Census Data, we show a strong negative relationship between income and household size. We then document that there is a negative relationship between
income and the ratio of households’ public to private consumption expenditures. To do so, we classify expenditures from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) and from the National Income
and Product Accounts (NIPA) as household public goods or private goods. In the cross-section
from the CEX, the highest income quintile has a ratio of public to private consumption expenditures that is 20 percent lower than that of the poorest quintile. In the time series from the NIPA,
we note that over the last 50 years the aggregate ratio of household public to private consumption
has fallen by 40 percent.
An overlapping generations model formalizes our story. Adults have preferences over a private
good, a household public good, and the number of their own children in the household. They can
choose to live with roommates, who help bear the cost of the household public goods, but finding
roommates and maintaining good relationships takes time. The optimal number of roommates and
the consumption of household public goods are linked: households with more roommates find
it optimal to consume more household public goods due to the low price, and adults who want
more household public goods find it optimal to have more roommates to share the costs. If the
utility function displays more curvature in public than in private goods, then higher incomes lead
to a higher expenditure share on private goods in our model. Relatively lower public consumption
decreases the benefit of living with adults, so household sizes fall. A similar channel applies
to children: over time, parents devote a higher share of their expenditures to private goods for
their children, effectively making children more expensive and leading to a decline in the number
of children per household. Thus, the model features a quality-quantity tradeoff with respect to
children that is directly tied to the (changing) composition of the consumption basket.
We calibrate the model using the cross sectional data on the relationships among income,
household size, and the relative consumption of public to private goods. We then change incomes
exogenously over time (e.g., due to technological progress) and ask to what extent rising incomes
alone could have caused the fall in household size. In the data, the number of adults per household
fell by 1.2 between 1850 and 2000, while the number of children per household fell by 1.9. The
2

model predicts a decline of about half an adult and a third of a child over the same time horizon. We computed these results assuming a constant age composition of the population over time.
When adjusting for the changing age composition of the population, the model predicts a decline
of 0.64 adults and of 0.55 children. Thus, the model can account for up to one half of the observed
change in the number of adults and up to one third in the number of children in the household.
These findings suggest that rising demand for private goods may have contributed significantly to
the changes in the living arrangements of Americans over the last century and a half.
Our quantitative model also has implications for the resources saved given the changes in living
arrangements. We find that the time spent meeting roommates and maintaining relationships in
2000 corresponds to 7 percent of GDP. Given today’s smaller households, this figure is about
25 percent lower than in 1850. We also find that the total cost of a child (time plus goods) has
increased by about 20 percent over the same time span. The reason is that richer parents choose to
tilt their consumption bundles towards more private consumption, for themselves and also for their
children.
Most of the theoretical literature on household formation focuses on a particular margin of family formation such as marriage, divorce, fertility, or the importance of the extended family. A rare
exception is Thomas K. Burch & Beverly J. Matthews (1987) who point to a general trend towards
“simpler” households and argue in favor of a general theory of household formation. Another notable exception is John F. Ermisch (1981) who builds and estimates a static model of household
formation. However, no attempt is made to assess how well the model can account for changes
in living arrangements over time. Raquel Fernandez, Nezih Guner & John Knowles (2005) and
Jeremy Greenwood, Nezih Guner & John Knowles (2003) also study several margins of living
together in models that emphasize the importance of income and search frictions. These papers do
not seek to explain the long-term patterns documented here. John C. Beresford & Alice M. Rivlin
(1966) are probably the first to emphasize a rising “demand for privacy” as a factor in changing
living arrangements, but have no formal model. Michael Byalsky, Michael Keren & David Levhari (1999) argue that a shift from public to private services may have caused a decline in optimal
kibbutz-size in Israel during the 20th century.
In contrast, analyses that focus on a particular change in family arrangements (and thus household size) abound. Quantitatively, the most significant change has been the fertility decline. A
strong (negative) relationship between fertility and income exists, both over time and in the cross
section (Larry E. Jones & Michèle Tertilt 2008). A large literature investigates changes in fertility
patterns over the last two centuries, some focusing on the overall decline, and some on the baby
boom.3 It is often argued that the negative income-fertility relationship is due to parents trading
3 See

for example Oded Galor & David N. Weil (1996) on women’s wages, Matthias Doepke (2004) on human
capital and child labor laws, Jeremy Greenwood & Ananth Seshadri (2002) on the role of new household technolo-

3

off quantity of children for quality of children, which typically means more human capital or time
investment per child (Gary S. Becker & H. Gregg Lewis 1973). Our model introduces an interesting variant to the quantity-quality theory by suggesting that parents are choosing endogenously to
allocate more private goods to their children while having fewer children.
Smaller bodies of work exist for other margins of family formation. Several authors focus on
the age at which young people leave their parents’ homes, and point to earnings of young adults and
house prices as the main factors (Donald R. Haurin, Patric H. Hendershott & Dongwook Kim 1994,
John Ermisch & Pamela Di Salvo 1997, Alessandra Fogli 2000). Income (particularly old-age
pensions) also seems to play a role in the increased tendency for the elderly to live alone (Dora L.
Costa 1997, Dora L. Costa 1999, Kathleen McGarry & Robert F. Shoeni 2000, Carlos Bethencourt
& Jose-Victor Rios-Rull 2009). Other authors analyze the decline in marriage and increase in
divorce. For example, Jeremy Greenwood & Nezih Guner (2009) offer a model to explain the
decline in marriage and the increase in divorce, arguing that technological progress in the home
production sector made people increasingly more able to live in smaller households. Michael J.
Brien, Lee A. Lillard & Steven N. Stern (2006) study the determinants of cohabitation, marriage
and divorce in a model with frictions and heterogeneous match quality. Ferdinando Regalia &
Jose-Victor Rios-Rull (2001) explore the rise of single female and single mother households in the
United States based on the increase in relative wages of women. Some of these studies on specific
margins of household formation emphasize that government policy (such as social security) affects
living arrangements. Then the government already implicitly affects household sizes, and there
may be a role for policy. On the other hand, a common factor in almost all of these studies is
that growing incomes (or technological progress more generally) enable people to live in smaller
households. It is this overall point that we explore in our paper.
The next section documents changes in household size in the U.S. In Section 3 we present
evidence for the channel proposed in this paper. Section 4 sets up the model and derives some
basic theoretical results. The calibration is described in Section 5, while Section 6 presents our
results. Section 7 concludes. Additional details on the data are provided in the Appendix.

2

Changes in Household Size and Composition

Over the course of development, there has been a strong trend towards smaller households. Frances E.
Kobrin (1976) documents that household sizes in the United States have been falling since 1790.
gies, and Larry E. Jones & Alice Schoonbroodt (forthcoming) on changes in mortality. Papers on the baby boom
include Stefania Albanesi & Claudia Olivetti (2009), Jeremy Greenwood, Ananth Seshadri & Guillaume Vandenbroucke (2005) and Matthias Doepke, Moshe Hazan Hazan & Yishay Maoz (2007). This literature has grown greatly
in recent years; see Larry E. Jones, Alice Schoonbroodt & Michèle Tertilt (forthcoming) for a survey.

4

Peter Laslett (1969) documents a similar phenomenon in England – although arguing that the decline did not start until the early 20th century. Simon Kuznets (1978) uses cross-country data to
show that more developed countries tend to have smaller households.
In this section we use Census data to shed more light on changes in household size and composition in the United States over the last century and a half.4 Using micro data allows us to
distinguish between family and household size, to analyze household size over the life cycle, and
to document changes in household composition. Micro data also enable us to analyze the relationship between household size and income in the cross section. We use adults (18 years of age or
older) as the unit of observation. Focusing on the average adult, instead of on the average household, helps us avoid any under-representation of people living in large households. Even more
importantly, it allows us to perform analyses by age without looking only at households heads.5
Figure 1 shows the dramatic decline in household size from 1850 to 2000. The total number
of household members for the average adult fell by about 50 percent, from 6.2 in 1850 to 3.1 in
2000. But this drop is not just another illustration of the fertility decline of the 19th century. To see
this, we decompose average household size into adults (18 years of age and above) and children
(under 18 years of age). The number of adults declined by more than one person, from 3.5 to
2.3, while the number of children decreased by almost two children, from 2.7 to 0.8. One might
think that the decline in adult household members was driven mostly by changes in the family
structure.6 While changing family structure played an important role, it should be noted that nonfamily living arrangements declined as well. The number of non-family members is simply the
gap between household and family members in Figure 1. While in 1850 the average person lived
with one non-family member (i.e. a person not related by blood, marriage, or adoption), such
arrangements had become almost nonexistent by 2000. In other words, sharing households with
unrelated individuals, a common practice in the 19th century, essentially had disappeared by the
middle of the 20th century.
To confirm further that the trend is not only a decline in marriage and fertility, we also decompose household size into different member categories, classifying each person according to
his or her relationship to the household head. Figure 2 shows this decomposition for the years
1850 and 2000. The Figure shows a decline in household members in almost every category: in
4 We use the publicly available data from IPUMS (Steven Ruggles, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A.
Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia Kelly Hall, Miriam King & Chad Ronnander 2009). See Steven Ruggles & Susan
Brower (2003) for a description. A more detailed description of the data analysis is presented in Appendix A1.1.
5 This distinction is important because most people are not household heads most of the time, and heads of households have different household sizes from that of the average American. For example, in 2000, only 39% of 25 year
old persons were household heads. While the average 25 year old person lived in a household of size 3.3, the average
household size for heads of households aged 25 is only 2.5. The difference is larger the older the Census is. Furthermore, the fraction of individuals heading their own household at a given age has exhibited significant changes over
time.
6 Families in the U.S. Census are subsets of households that are related by blood, marriage, or adoption.

5

2000 there were fewer spouses, fewer children (both minors and adult children), fewer parents,
siblings, grand-children, other relatives, and non-relatives in the household, compared to 1850.
The only exception is the category “partners, friends, and visitors”, which reflects the recent rise
in nonmarried partners. This increase, however, is more than offset by the decline in spouses.
Figure 1: Household Size: Number of Members
7

Household

Number in Household of Average Adult

6

Family
Adults

5

Children

4

3

2

1

0
1850 1860 1870 1880 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Census Year

Source: U.S. Census. Excludes group quarters. The unit of observation is an adult, so
that each point represents the average household size across adults.

Figure 2: Household Members, 1850 and 2000

Number in Househ
hold of Average Adult

3.0
2.5

1850
2.0

2000
1.5
1.0
0.5

Other Nonreel.

Other Reel.

Partner/Frien
nd

Relationship to Head

Grandchild

Siblin
ng

Paren
nt

Child 18
8+

Child <1
18

Spousse

Heaad

0.0

Source: U.S. Census. The unit of observation is an adult. Each bar represents the mean number of
household members in each category.

The reduction in household size has occurred at all stages of the life cycle. In Figure 3 we
plot the number of household members by age group for each census year. Age groups span five
years and are labeled by the middle year. The main point here is that the entire profile has shifted
6

down almost uniformly. Young adults (18 to 22) live in larger households than 23-27 year old
adults. Persons in their mid-40s have the largest households, and the elderly the smallest. We have
also constructed a life cycle profile following cohorts across different censuses (not reported here),
which confirms the downward shift in the household size age profile.
Figure 3: Average Household Size by Age
Various Censuses
Num. of Persons in Household of Average Adult

8
7

Census
6

1850
1870

5

1900
1920

4

1950
1970

3

2000

2
1
20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

70

75+

Age Group

Source: U.S. Census. The unit of observation is an adult, so that each point represents the average
household size across adults. Age groups are composed of five years and are labeled by the middle
year.

In sum, the number of household members for the average adult has decreased by half over the
last 150 years. The average adult lives in a household with fewer members of every type: fewer
spouses, young children, adult children, siblings, and especially fewer non-family members. The
decline has occurred at all ages. Given the universality of the decline, we believe it is worthwhile to
pursue an analysis of household size that abstracts from specific events such as marriage, divorce
and children moving out of the household and focuses instead on the common elements of all these
decisions.

3

Increasing Demand for Private Consumption

The idea we pursue in this paper is that household public goods are a key reason for living together, the benefit of a larger household being a lower cost (per capita) of the public goods. If the
income elasticity of public goods is lower than that of private goods, then public goods become
relatively less important as incomes increase which would cause a decline in optimal household
size. We use cross-sectional data to investigate the presence of this mechanism. First, if income
7

is an important determinant of household size, then one would also expect richer people to live
in smaller households at any point in time. Second, if the mechanism works through differential
demand for household public goods, then one would expect the ratio of public to private goods to
vary systematically across people with different income levels.
We start by analyzing the relationship between income and household size. We find a strong
negative relationship between per capita income and size. In fact, poorer adults live with more
adults and more children. Specifically, we use 2000 U.S. Census data to compute the household
size by age group and income quintile.7 For almost all age groups, we find that adults in the
highest income quintile live with fewer adults and fewer children than do adults at the bottom of
the income distribution.8 Table 1 presents household sizes for two age groups, 23-27 and 28-32.
We find that average household size differs by more than one adult between the top and bottom
quintile. The relationship is monotone across all quintiles. Further, the negative relationship is
present for various measures of household size: adults only, children only, family members only,
as well as non-family members. The negative relationship holds for almost all age groups. The
average income elasticity for the number of adults in the household is -0.10, while for children
it is -0.05. The only exceptions are young adults (18-22 years) where we find a (small) positive
relationship between income and adult household size, and older adults (38-47, and 73+) where we
find a (small) positive relationship between income and number of children in the household. This
exception might be due to the differential timing of child-bearing for women of different education
levels (and hence income). More educated women typically have children later in life, which might
explain why the number of children in the household for older Americans is positively correlated
with income. Details are reported in Table A3.
Above we documented that the decline in household size over time has been visible across all
categories of household members (see Figure 2). One might wonder to what extent the same holds
true in the cross section. In fact, as in the time series, richer individuals in the cross section share a
household with fewer adult children, fewer parents, siblings, grand-children, other relatives, partners and friends, as well as with fewer non-relatives (see Figure 4). The two exceptions are the
categories spouses and children under age 18, which are both higher numbers for richer households. The reason is that we are not controlling for age in this figure and that both children in the
household and income are hump-shaped over the life-cycle. Once controlling for age, the relationship between income and children in the household is negative, as shown in Table 1. In sum, while
7 Income

for each adult is measured as household income divided by the number of adults in the household.
negative relationship between income and household size has been noted previously in the literature. Early
work by Dorothy S. Brady (1958) and Beresford & Rivlin (1966) uses data tabulations to support such a relationship.
More detailed work is provided by Robert T. Michael, Victor R. Fuchs & Sharon R. Scott (1980) and Fred C. Pampel
(1983), who use cross-state variation and individual microdata to study the relationship between income and household
size. Ermisch (1981) provides evidence of the same relationship in the 1973 and 1976 General Household Surveys of
Britain, where he estimates an income elasticity of household size of -0.20.
8A

8

the time series and cross section do not line up perfectly, they do display a lot of similarities.
Figure 4: Household Members by Income Quintile, 2000

Quintile 1

0.8

Quintile 5
0.6

0.4

0.2

Other Nonrel.

Partner/Friend

Other Rel.

Grandchild

Sibling

Parent

Child 18+

Child <18

Spouse

0.0
Head

Numb
ber in Household of A
Average Adult

1.0

Relationship to Head

Note: Authors’ calculations based on U.S. Census data. The unit of observation is an adult. Each
bar represents the mean number of household members in each category.

Table 1: Average Household Size by Income Quintiles, 2000
23-27 year old persons

28-32 year old persons

Quintile

Total

Family

Adults

Children

Total

Family

Adults

Children

1

3.95

3.26

2.72

1.23

4.12

3.58

2.49

1.62

2

3.94

3.27

2.80

1.14

4.13

3.59

2.57

1.56

3

3.56

3.02

2.60

0.96

3.80

3.40

2.38

1.42

4

3.09

2.65

2.40

0.69

3.33

3.03

2.15

1.18

5

2.75

2.38

2.31

0.44

2.81

2.58

1.99

0.82

Note: Authors’ calculations based on U.S. Census data. The unit of observation is an adult. Income for each adult is
computed as income per capita for adults within the household.

Moving to the second part of the hypothesis, we show some direct evidence on the increasing
demand for private goods. To do so, we compute measures of public and private goods in the data
and analyze how much they vary with income – both over time and in the cross section. To do this,
we classify consumption goods as public or private. We perform this classification on aggregate
data from the National Economic Accounts (NIPA) for which we have a time series starting in
1929. We also use the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) for which we have more detailed
information on consumption items, but only for a short period of time. We also use the numbers
found in the CEX data throughout the rest of the paper.
Classifying goods into private and public is not trivial; many goods have some private and some
public characteristics. However, to map the data into our conceptual framework we need to cate9

gorize goods into these two extremes, and doing so requires strong assumptions. The overarching
principle we use is to classify goods based on “technology of usage,” essentially asking the question: can a good be used by several individuals at the same time? For some goods, such as movie
or bus tickets, the answer is clearly no, and they are classified as private. For more complicated
situations, we assume that any good that could be shared is public unless typically it is not shared
for one of the following five reasons: timing, depreciation, hygiene, taste, or fit.9 The method is
described in more detail in Appendix A1.2. Using these principles, we classify the following as
private goods: school tuition, health expenditures, personal care, clothing, public transportation,
and food away from home. Public goods include housing, utilities, most durables, cars and related
expenditures, and household appliances. We also classify food consumed at home as a public good.
We do so because Angus Deaton & Christina Paxson (1998) and several subsequent papers find
that food consumed at home has public good characteristics (Li Gan & Victoria Vernon 2003, Angus Deaton & Christina Paxson 2003). This finding seems to apply to historical and recent data
on expenditure patterns (Trevon D. Logan 2007). In particular, larger households spend less per
capita on food when total expenditures are kept constant. One potential explanation is that there are
unmodeled economies of scale in food production. Finally, note that we do not consider whether
(or not) a given household actually shares the goods classified as public.10 If richer people use
public goods in a more private fashion, then our estimate of the income elasticity of the ratio of
public to private consumption would be a lower bound on the actual elasticity, implying that the
channel could be more important than indicated by our analysis.
We start by using NIPA data published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis to analyze the long
term trend in the ratio of public to private expenditures. Unfortunately, these data are available only
after 1929. Figure 5 presents the behavior of the ratio, which has declined from 2.0 in 1929 to 1.34
in 2006. This is a drop of about one third.11 The main item driving the increase in private goods
over the entire period is medical care, which has increased from 3% of total expenditures to 17%.
Expenditure shares of other private goods including education, recreation, and personal care also
have increased. In contrast, the clothing expenditure share has fallen over time. As for public
goods, the main item is food (purchased for off-premise consumption) which has decreased from
19% of total expenditures in 1929 to 8% today.
The decrease in the ratio of public to private goods shown by the historical aggregate series
9 For example, while tooth brushes could in principle be shared, most people do not share them for hygienic
reasons; a bed could in principle be shared, however, most people do not take turns using a bed since they would need
it at the same time; clothing could in principle be shared, however, this is unlikely to be practical because of fit. All of
these goods are thus classified as private.
10 For example, we are not considering whether some years ago household members shared a TV while today each
member may have his own television.
11 The dip during the Second World War years is due to an increase in consumption of clothing (classified as private
goods) together with a decline in housing, furniture, and cars (classified as public goods).

10

Figure 5: Personal Consumption Expenditures:
Ratio of Public to Private Goods




















































































Note: Author’s calculations based on National Economic Accounts.

provides suggestive evidence in favor of our mechanism. However, this phenomenon could also
be explained by changing relative prices. To circumvent this problem, we compare expenditure
patterns along the income distribution in a cross-section, where relative prices are fixed. We use
data from the Consumption Expenditure Survey (CEX), which contains detailed information on
household expenditure. We pool data from 1995 to 2000 and treat it as a single cross section.
Given the finer classification of goods in the CEX compared to the National Accounts data, we
can break down goods more carefully into public and private categories. As before we use adults
as the unit of observation. For each adult we construct the ratio of expenditures on public goods
to expenditures on private goods for the household. Our measure of income is household income
per adult. Figure 6 presents the ratio of public to private goods expenditures by income quintile,
averaged across ages. The ratio is lower for higher quintiles, supporting our hypothesis. For the
poorest quintile it is 3.6 compared to 2.9 for the richest quintile, a 24% difference. As in the
Census data, we find a strong negative relationship between income and household size in the
CEX. Overall then, people in the lower quintiles have larger households and spend relatively more
on public goods, while people in higher quintiles have smaller households and spend relatively
more on private goods. We perform the same exercise classifying adults into different age groups
(of five years each) and find that in all cases the income elasticity of the ratio of expenditures in
public to private goods is negative. The average elasticity across all 12 age groups is -0.091. See
Appendix A1.2 for more details.
Some of the choices we made to classify goods might be arguable. We address the most
obvious criticisms in a series of robustness checks reported in the Appendix. We exclude some
of the most controversial goods from our analysis entirely and find similar patterns. We classify
care services (such as babysitting and adult care) as private and obtain slightly lower elasticity
11

estimates. Interpreting public goods generously by including all goods that have the potential to be
shared reduces the elasticity estimate by roughly a quarter. Finally, reclassifying car products and
car services as private lowers the elasticity estimate by most. However, we find negative elasticities
for each of the robustness checks. While the exact magnitudes differ across the different robustness
exercises, the fact that the ratio of public to private goods decreases systematically with income is
extremely robust.
Figure 6: Ratio of Expenditures on Public to Private Goods
by Income Quintile, 1995-2000
3.8
3.6
3.4
32
3.2
3.0
2.8
1

2

3
Income Quintiles

4

5

Source: Authors’ calculations based on CEX data, 1995-2000. Income quintiles, aggregate H, and
aggregate V are calculated separately for each age; the quintile results in the Figure are the average
across ages.

4

The Model

We use an infinite horizon overlapping generations model. There are children and adults in the
model, but only adults make choices. Adults decide each period whom to live with and what
quantities of private and household public goods to consume.

4.1 Households
Households are collections of roommates (adults and children) who live together for the purpose
of sharing the costs of household public goods. The tradeoff is that living with others takes time
that could otherwise be spent in the labor market. In each period, each adult imposes a cost of B
units of time on each other adult in the household. This cost represents the time it takes to find
roommates and to maintain the necessary relationships. In each period, each child imposes a cost
12

of Bk units of time on his parent.12 In this case, these costs capture the time it takes to care for a
child. We also allow the costs of living with other people to vary by (own) age: Ba and Bka , where a
is the age of the adult. The differing costs by age capture life cycle effects. For example, Ba might
be low for young people as everyone else is single too, and finding a partner or roommate is easy.
Older people will spend a lot more time searching for roommates. We can also capture the fact
that fecundity declines with age by letting Bka increase in age.
Households, then, are clubs comprised of adults and children sharing household public goods.
Generally, this approach introduces two problems. Modeling the optimal sorting of people with
different tastes into local clubs is difficult.13 Similarly, with heterogeneous household members,
specifying how members bargain over spending on public vs. private goods would be quite difficult. We get around these issues by assuming that only identical types, i.e. adults of the same
age and productivity (and their children), can live together. This is a strong assumption and prevents the analysis of some dimensions of household heterogeneity (such as the rise in two earner
couples). However, for analyzing aggregate trends in household size, it is a useful simplifying assumption because it allows us to abstract from club formation and household bargaining. We also
abstract from issues of enforceability or possible free riding. Further, we assume that households
can be formed and dissolved each period at no cost. That is, there is no fixed cost of setting up a
household and no household capital stock that links household size over a person’s life. Again, we
make this assumption mostly for simplicity. Age variation in the costs of living together can be
thought of as one way to capture this capital stock.
Since we make a distinction between consumers and households, we use upper case letters to
denote quantities per household, and lower case letters to denote per capita quantities.

4.2 Consumers
Adults derive utility from consumption of two types of goods and from the presence of their children in the household. The first consumption good is consumed privately by a particular adult
and denoted by v. The second consumption good is a local public good shared in the household,
denoted by H. Public and private consumption are distinct goods and enter the utility function
separately. Public goods are shared among all household members non-rivalrously. Private goods
cannot be shared. Note that we call a public good that is being consumed in a one person household
still a public good. Adults derive utility also from the number and well-being of their own children.
The number of children of a given adult is denoted by k (for kids). Children, like all other people
12 For simplicity, and as is standard in the fertility literature, we assume there is only one parent per child. Essentially a household in our model is formed by adults who live together as roommates, each bringing along their own
children.
13 See David Lam ((1983), (1984), (1988)) for an analysis of households as clubs.

13

in the household, derive utility from consuming the household public good, H, but also from their
allocation of private goods, vk . People care about other adults in the household only indirectly:
they help finance the cost of the public good. There is no reason for living together other than that
it is cheaper. Let S be the number of adults in a household, then the total number of children in a
household is K = Sk.
Let U(v, H, k, vk ) denote the period utility function of an adult. Throughout the paper we will
assume the following functional form:
v1−φ
H 1−σ
+ω
+ δ kα
U(v, H, k, v ) =
1−σ
1−φ
k

½

H 1−σ
(vk )1−φ
+ω
1−σ
1−φ

¾

Note that adults care about their own and their children’s consumption bundles in the household
in the same way. The relative weight that adults put on children’s utility is denoted by δ > 0. We
allow for decreasing marginal utility from additional children through the exponent α ∈ (0, 1).14
The non-homothetic formulation (when σ 6= φ ) allows for non-linear Engel curves, which are
important for capturing expenditure patterns seen in the data. Finally, ω ≥ 0 is a parameter that
determines the relative importance of public vs. private consumption goods.
In the previous section we documented strong patterns in household size by age and income, so
we allow for two corresponding dimensions of heterogeneity. First, we assume a finite number of
productivity types, denoted by i. Labor productivity is a function of the type (capturing differences
in ability across people) and year (capturing general technological progress as well as capital accumulation). We denote productivity of a consumer of type i in year t by z(t, i).15 Second, people
differ in their age. Each consumer is indexed by his or her birth year τ . Consumers live for a finite
number of ages, indexed by a ∈ {0, . . . , A}. Thus, a consumer who is born in year τ is a = t − τ
years old in year t.16
An adult in this economy maximizes life-time utility by choosing a basket of consumption
goods (v, H, vk ) and a household size and composition (S, k) for each point in her life-cycle, subject
to a life-time budget constraint. We denote consumption of the private good of a person of type
i, born in year τ , at age a by v(τ , a, i). The same notation is used for all other goods as well as
for the household sizes. We also assume fully functioning asset markets, and denote the price of

14 α

= 1 would mean that adults care about the sum of utilities across all children.
simplicity, we abstract from human capital accumulation over the life cycle. The implied life-cycle earnings
profiles are increasing, but only in line with increases in GDP per capita.
16 Note that we do not model the transition from childhood to adulthood explicitly here. Our model is simply a
model of adults who choose also how many children to have in the household, but there is no fertility choice that
determines the number of adults in the next generation.
15 For

14

consumption in period t by p(t). We can then write the consumer problem as:
A
¡
¢
max ∑ β τ +aU v(τ , a, i), H(τ , a, i), k(τ , a, i), vk (τ , a, i)
a=0
A

(1)

·

¸
H(τ , a, i)
k
+ v(τ , a, i) + v (τ , a, i)k(τ , a, i)
s.t. ∑ p(τ + a)
S(τ , a, i)
a=0
A

≤

∑ p(τ + a)z(τ + a, i)[1 − Ba(S(τ , a, i) − 1) − Bkak(τ , a, i)]

a=0

k(τ , a, i) ≥ 0 ∀a and S(τ , a, i) ≥ 1 ∀a
v(τ , a, i), h(τ , a, i), vk (τ , a, i) ≥ 0
The constraint S(τ , a, i) ≥ 1 indicates that all adults have to live at least with themselves, and
further that there is no cost of living alone.
Note that the budget set for this problem is non-convex. Define h = HS as per adult expenditures
on the public good and V k = kvk as total child expenditures. With this change of variables, the
budget constraint is linear, while the redefined utility function is
(Sh)1−σ
v1−φ
U(v, h, S, k,V k ) =
+ω
+ δ kα
1−σ
1−φ

(

k

( Vk )1−φ
(Sh)1−σ
+ω
1−σ
1−φ

)

The parameters of this utility function are restricted in several ways in our calibration. First,
we focus our attention on the standard Barro-Becker case, 0 < α < 1 and σ , φ < 1.17 Second,
we need further conditions to ensure that the utility function is concave. σ > 0.5 is necessary for
concavity in h and S. Further, 0 < φ < 1 and 1 < α + φ < 2 is sufficient (although not necessary)
for concavity in k; our calibration satisfies these parameter restrictions. Finally, for our story to
hold it is necessary that σ > φ . We provide intuition to this effect below, and use the data to inform
us about the relative values of these two parameters.

4.3 Equilibrium
We assume a small open economy, so that the interest rate rt is given exogenously. An equilibrium
is then simply defined as follows:
Definition 1 An equilibrium is an allocation {v(τ , a, i), H(τ , a, i), vk (τ , a, i)}τ ,i,a , a household com17 An

alternative well-defined parameter specification could start with α < 0 and σ , φ > 1 (Jones & Schoonbroodt
forthcoming).

15

position {S(τ , a, i), k(τ , a, i)}τ ,i,a and prices {p(t)}t such that:
1. Each agent (τ , i) maximizes problem (1).
2.

pt
pt+1

= 1 + rt+1 for all t.

4.4 Model Properties
Letting λ be the Lagrange multiplier on the budget constraint and, for ease of exposition, omitting
the type, cohort, and age indicators, the first order conditions are
S:
v:

H
= S 2 Ba
z
β τ +a ω v−φ = λ p

vk :

β τ +a δ kα −1 ω (vk )−φ = λ p

H:

β τ +a (1 + δ kα )SH −σ = λ p
½ 1−σ
¾
(vk )1−φ
τ +a
α −1 H
β δ αk
+ω
= λ p[vk + zBka ]
1−σ
1−φ

k:

The first equation shows that the marginal benefit of an additional adult in the household is
higher, the higher the consumption of the public good H is. The second equation gives the costs
and benefits of private good consumption, v. When income is higher (a lower multiplier on the
budget constraint), households consume more private goods, v. The next two first order conditions
display similar effects for the other two consumption goods, vk and H. However, things are a
little more complicated here, as the number of children, k, and adults, S, also enter. The marginal
benefit of additional vk consumption declines in the number of children, as children and per-child
consumption are substitutes in the utility function.18 In contrast, the marginal utility of public
consumption increases both in the number of adults and children in the household, since more
people benefit from the public consumption good. The last equation shows that an increase in the
marginal cost of children (pvk + pzBka ) reduces the optimal number of children. Finally, in this
set-up the marginal cost of an additional child increases in desired private child consumption, vk .
Combining the first order conditions with respect to H and S, we can derive an equation that

18 Note,

however, that in this formulation, children and total child consumption, kvk , are complements. See Jones
& Schoonbroodt (forthcoming).

16

relates optimal number of adults at two different ages, denoted by a and a0 here.
µ
S(a) =

p(τ + a) a0 −a
β
p(τ + a0 )

¶

1
1−2σ

µ

Ba z(τ + a)
Ba0 z(τ + a0 )

¶

σ
1−2σ

µ

1 + δ k(a0 )α
1 + δ k(a)α

¶

1
1−2σ

S(a0 )

(2)

This expression shows how the optimal number of adults is related to its cost. Assuming the
optimal number of children does not vary much with Ba , we can see that adult household size is
higher precisely during those ages when the cost is lower (recall that σ > 0.5).
To gain some additional intuition on the workings of the model, consider a simplified version
of the model with δ = 0 (i.e. without children) and assume people live for one period only. The last
assumption makes the budget constraint and feasibility coincide and hence it is easy to solve the
model explicitly. In particular, using the first order conditions and the one-period budget constraint,
one can collapse the problem into one equation and one unknown:
z

σ −φ
φ

1

(Bσ ω ) φ S(z)

2σ −1
φ

+ 2BS(z) = 1 + B

Using the implicit function theorem, we can derive conditions under which an increase in income
leads to a decrease in household size.
1

ds
=
dz

φ
σ 2σ −1 zσ −2φ ) φ
−σ−
φ (ω B s
1

2σ −1
σ σ −φ s2σ −1−φ ) φ
φ (ω B z

+ 2B

We have already assumed σ > 0.5, so σ > φ guarantees that this expression is negative. When
σ > φ , Engel curves are nonlinear and private goods are a relative luxury good. Higher income
households devote a higher fraction of income to private goods, so the incentives to form households decline.
In equilibrium, the ratio of total private vs. public consumption can be expressed as
´1
V
Sv ³
σ −φ 2σ −φ −1 φ
=
= ω (Ba z)
S
H
H

(3)

We have already shown that S falls in income when σ > φ . If in addition φ > 2σ − 1, then the right
hand side increases directly through the increase in z and indirectly through the decrease in S, so
that households with higher incomes are guaranteed to have higher private to public consumption
Sv
H
ratios. It is easy to show that the same result applies for expenditure shares, Sv+H
and Sv+H
.
While the formal results are derived only for the special case without children, numerical exploration of the model shows that the same logic applies more broadly. Generally, under the parameter
17

restrictions derived above, higher income leads to a higher expenditure share on private goods and
accordingly smaller (adult) household sizes. This finding holds for different types within a cohort,
across cohorts, and over the life cycle. We also confirm numerically that as long as σ > φ , Engel
curves are such that vk increases faster than H, which makes children endogenously more costly.
This leads to a fall in the number of children. Thus, our model features a quality-quantity trade-off
that works through the endogenous choice of private goods for children.

5

Calibration

In this section, we calibrate the model to measure the quantitative importance of our channel over
the last 150 years. We calibrate the parameters to match a rich set of moments based on Census
and CEX data from 2000 and 1995-2000. In particular, the calibration uses the variation in income
and household size in the cross section to pin down parameter values. We use the calibrated model
to simulate changes in income and then evaluate the effects on household size and the associated
change in expenditures on public and private goods. In other words, we project the model back to
1850, when income was lower, and assess what fraction of the overall decline in living together
can be accounted for by the model.
A model period is five years. We set A = 12, corresponding to age bins 18-22, 23-27, ..., 68-72,
73+ in the data. We use an annual discount factor of 0.97, which, given our model period of 5
years, implies β = 0.975 . We set the exogenous interest rate equal to 4.89% annually. This is the
interest rate that would arise endogenously in a model with logarithmic utility, a discount factor
of 0.97 and the average annual growth rate of 1.74% that we use, as we explain below. It is also
within the range of interest rates reported in the data.19
We use income per capita as our measure of labor productivity, z. Since we are interested in
long-term trends, we feed in the average growth rate, rather than annual variations. On average,
GDP per capita has been growing at 1.74% annually over the last century and a half.20 We assume
there are five types of agents, i, each corresponding to an income quintile. We assume workers
stay in the same quintiles over their lifetime. Further, we assume that the relative positions of
these five quintiles are constant over time. We construct the relative income of the five quintiles
based on per capita household income across quintiles in the CEX data (as described in Appendix
19 Good interest rate data is notoriously difficult to obtain and estimates vary widely depending on which measure
of interest rates is used. For example, short-term returns on U.S. government securities yield an average interest rate
around 1-1.5% (John H. Cochrane 2001). Peter Rupert & Paul Gomme (2007) argue that the return to capital is a more
appropriate measure of interest rates for calibration purposes. Long-term returns on equity average around 8.1-9%
(Robert J. Barro 2005) while Edward C. Prescott (1986) argues that standard calibrations of RBC models imply a real
interest rate of 4%. The number we use is close to the midpoint of the range of reported numbers.
20 This number is based on Louis D. Johnston & Samuel H. Williamson (2006).

18

A1.2 and reported in Table A2). This method gives the following multiples of average income
for the five quintiles: (z1 , z2 , z3 , z4 , z5 ) = (0.20, 0.55, 0.83, 1.20, 2.23). Then z(τ , a, i) is set equal to
z(τ , a, i) = ziYτ +a , where Yτ +a is GDP per capita in year τ + a.
Finally, we calibrate five parameters of the utility function (α , δ , ω , σ , φ ), and 24 cost parame©
ª12
ters ( Ba , Bka a=1 ) using a rich set of moments from the 2000 U.S. Census and from the Consumer
Expenditure Survey (1995-2000). One set of moments consists of the cross-sectional values for
the number of adults (S) and children (K) in the household for each age group, which are obtained
from Census data. We also include income elasticities for the number of adults and children by
age group, which we constructed using CEX information. The next set of moments consists of the
income elasticities of the ratio of public to private expenditures, as described in Section 3. Since
we estimated the elasticity separately for each age group, this gives an additional 12 moments.
Lastly, we use that the average child requires about 4% of an adult’s time budget.21 A complete
list of the moments, together with the model analogues, is presented in Table A3.
In total, we have 61 moments: S, K, and the income elasticities of S, K, and H/(V + V k ),
for each of the twelve age groups; plus average time spent on children. Given that we have 29
parameters, this results in an overidentified system where we cannot match each moment exactly.
Instead, we minimize a weighted least-squares loss function. The exact loss function is described in
Appendix A2. Intuitively, the average levels of S and K by age group pin down the cost parameters
(B and Bk ). The elasticities of S, K, and H/(V +V k ) help identify the elasticity parameters in the
utility function α , σ , and φ . Finally, the average child care time helps pin down δ separately from
the level of time costs Bka .
Table 2: Calibrated Parameters
Parameter

α

δ

ω

σ

φ

Value

0.334

0.123

4.082

0.735

0.690

Table 2 gives the calibrated parameters (α , δ , ω , σ , φ ).22 The procedure yields σ > φ , which
is consistent with the hypothesized non-homotheticity in preferences for private and public goods,
21 The

Bureau of Labor Statistics (2004) provides data on time spent with children drawn from the 2004 American
Time Use Survey (ATUS). Based on their estimates, we calculate two notions of the time cost of children. Direct time
is only the time spent caring for and helping children, as denoted by the respondents. Indirect time is the difference
between time spent on all household tasks for households with and without children. ATUS separates households into
those with and without children under 6; we use the 2000 Census to weight these two observations together, and to
transform total time into average time per child. We then divide by 16 working hours per day to find an estimate of the
fraction of the time budget. For direct time, the resulting estimate is 3.84%; for indirect time, it is 4.73%. We use 4%
in our calibration.
22 Our calibration shows that the objective function is fairly flat: a number of different parameterizations fit nearly
as well. However, they also yield similar results.

19

0

.05

Cost
.1

.15

.2

Figure 7: Costs of Household Formation over Life Cycle
Time cost of adults (B) and children (Bk )

20

25

30

35

40

45 50 55
Age group
B

60

65

70

75

Bk

although the difference between the two parameters is relatively small. Figure 7 shows the time
costs of having adults and children in the household. The cost of an additional adult increases
almost linearly with age. The cost of children is tied closely to (lagged) biological constraints
faced by parents, particularly mothers.

5.1 Fit
The calibrated model generally fits the data well. Figure 8 compares the model-predicted profiles
of S and K by age with the data. The data and model series agree closely. The shape by age group
is determined by the full set of B and Bk parameters.
The critical element of our calibration is the relationship between income and the choice variables, which led us to target the cross-sectional elasticities as our main moments. The model
should fit the cross-sectional relationship between income and S, K, and the H/(V + V k ) reasonably well before it is used to assess the mechanism in the time series. Figure 9a shows the log of
the H/(V + V k ) ratio by income quintile, averaged across all ages for each income quintile. The
model fits the data elasticities quite closely. The values for the model and the data are shown on
different scales, indicating that the levels of the two are quite different. Given that the level was
not included in our calibration targets, the poor fit here is not surprising. We do not see this as a

20

0

1

2

3

Figure 8: Cross-Section Profiles of Household Size
Number of Adults and Children by Age Group
Actual and Predicted

20

30

40

50
Age group

60

Adults Model
Children Model

70

Adults Actual
Children Actual

Figure 9: Actual and Predicted Relationships with Income
(a) H/(V +V k ) by Income Quintile

1

2

3
quintile

ln ( H/Vtot Model )

4

2
1.5
1
.5

1.05

−2.25

1.1

ln ( H/Vtot Model )
−2.2
−2.15
−2.1

1.15
1.2
1.25
ln ( H/Vtot Actual )

2.5

1.3

−2.05

(b) Number of Adults and Children by Income Quintile

5

1

ln ( H/Vtot Actual )

2

3
quintile

Adults Model
Children Model

4

5

Adults Actual
Children Actual

major weakness as what matters for our mechanism is the elasticity rather than the level.23
23 In

experiments not reported here, we have tried to include the level as a calibration target. The resulting better
match comes at the cost of fitting the elastiticies more poorly. This tradeoff is not surprising in an over-identified

21

Figure 9b shows adult and child household sizes by income quintile, averaged across all ages. It
demonstrates that the model matches the negative relationship between income and size quite well
on average, indicating a good fit of the elasticity. The model and data values for each individual
moment are presented in Table A3.

6

Results

We project the model back to 1850, assuming income has grown at an annual rate of 1.74 percent
between 1850 and 2000. Figure 10a presents the results for the number of adults in the household,
S. We include both the time series for the actual data and the results from the model. In the data,
the number of adults decreased from 3.5 in 1850 to 2.3 in 2000. The model predicts a decrease of
about half an adult, which is 37 percent of the actual fall.
Figure 10b shows the results for the number of children in the household, K. The data indicate
that in 1850 there were 2.7 children per household, while in 2000 there were 0.8. The model
generates a change of 0.31 children, i.e., it captures 16 percent of the total difference between
2000 and 1850.
Figure 10: Actual and Predicted Household Size
(a) Number of Adults in Household

(b) Number of Children in Household
3.0

3.5

Number of children (K)

Number of adults (S)

2.5
3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

2.0

0.5
1850

1870

Adults Actual

1890

1910

1930

Adults Model

1950

1970

1990

1850

Adults Model-Weighted

1870

1890

Children Actual

1910

1930

Children Model

1950

1970

1990

Children Model-Weighted

An additional factor that has been left out of the analysis so far is the changing age structure of
the population. Falling mortality has led to population aging, which is relevant because the elderly
generally live with fewer adults and fewer children. To account for this effect, we obtain the actual
model.

22

age composition of the population for each reported year. We use it to construct weighted results
that take into consideration changes in the demographic composition. These results are shown
in Figures 10a and 10b under the label Model-Weighted. Allowing for changes in mortality, the
model accounts for 53 percent of the change in the number of adults between 1850 and 2000, and
29 percent of the change in the number of children in the same period. Hence we conclude that
one-third to one-half of the observed change in the number of adults, and one-sixth to one-third of
the observed change in the number of children, can be attributed to our mechanism where increases
in income endogenously decrease economies of scale within the household.
Figure 11 compares the actual and predicted ratios of expenditures on public goods to those on
private goods (H/(V +V k )). The actual ratio is taken from Figure 5, i.e. based on U.S. NIPA data.
Both series are normalized to take a value of one in 1930. In the data, the H/(V +V k ) ratio in 2000
is 70% that of 1930, while in the model it is 90%. In sum, the drop in the ratio of public to private
consumption is about three times larger in the data compared to what the model would imply. This
is perhaps not surprising, given that other channels probably contributed to the decline in public
consumption. For example, falling prices for household public goods seem a likely candidate.24
Figure 11: Ratio of Expenditures on Public to Private Goods
Actual and Predicted
1.2
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
Model

Actual (NIPA)

0.6
1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

6.1 Understanding the Mechanism
In our model, agents make decisions about the number of adults they want to live with, their number
of children, and a consumption basket composed of private and public goods. We are interested
in understanding how these components interact. To disentangle the different effects, we conduct
24 The

importance of falling prices of household durable goods for changes in marriage and divorce is emphasized
in Greenwood & Guner (2009).

23

Table 3: Predicted Change in S and K (1850-2000)
Adults ∆1850−2000

Children ∆1850−2000

Actual

Model

Model
Actual

Actual

Model

Model
Actual

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Baseline

1.20

0.45

0.37

1.89

0.31

0.16

Weighted

1.20

0.64

0.53

1.89

0.55

0.29

Homothetic (σ = φ )

1.20

0.00

0.00

1.89

0.00

0.00

No Children (δ = 0)

1.20

0.43

0.36

1.89

0.00

0.00

One Adult (large B)

1.20

0.00

0.00

1.89

0.04

0.02

three experiments. In the first, we set σ = φ , which implies homothetic preferences and therefore,
shuts down our proposed channel. In experiment two, we set δ = 0, which means that there is no
utility value in having children. In experiment three, we set B = 0.25, which is a large enough cost
to make all adults want to live alone.
Table 3 presents the results of the three different experiments. For comparison, the first row
presents the baseline results and the second one the weighted benchmark numbers. The experiments each give unweighted results, so they should be compared to the first row. Column 1 reports
the actual change in the number of adults between 1850 and 2000. Column 2 gives the implied
change in the number of adults that results from the calibrated model. Column 3 reports the proportion of the actual change that can be explained by the model. Columns 4 to 6 present the analogous
results for children. In the first experiment, we set σ = 0.69 so that it is equal to the calibrated φ .
When preferences are homothetic, the ratio of public to private goods consumed (H/(V +V k )) is
unresponsive to changes in income. This implies that economies of scale within the household will
not be affected, which yields a constant optimal household size. There is no change in the number
of adults (Column 2) or in the number of children (Column 4).
The fourth row of Table 3 gives the results for the experiment with δ = 0. There is obviously
no change in number of children (Column 5). Eliminating children implies that adults have some
free resources that they allocate optimally between private and public goods. Because adults are
richer in this sense, they choose to live with fewer adults. This effect is larger in 1850 (where
there are more children in the baseline case) than in 2000. Therefore, the fall in adult household
size in this experiment is smaller compared to the baseline decline. However, quantitatively the
difference is very modest. The model generates a decline of 0.43 adults in this experiment relative
to 0.45 in the baseline. In other words, while there is some interaction in the model between the
optimal child and adult household sizes, we find that this interaction explains little about the U.S.

24

experience. One reason for the lack of interaction is that children are modeled as belonging to a
particular adult, not to the entire household. Thus, each adult has to pay for the consumption of
private goods for his or her children and therefore, living with other adults does not make children
cheaper.
Finally, we explore the case where adults are forced to live alone. We set a high enough cost
of living with other adults so that adults of all ages choose to live alone. Then, by construction,
the number of adults never changes (Columns 2 and 3 in Table 3). We find that the fall in the
number of children in this experiment is very small; it explains only two percent of the change in
the number of children between 1850 and 2000 (Column 6). This shows that there is little direct
effect of growing incomes on the number of children. The decline in children per household works
primarily through a decline in adults per household, not a decline in children per adult.
These experiments teach several lessons about the mechanism of the model. First, non-homothetic
preferences are crucial for our story. Second, the mechanism is most useful for explaining adult
living arrangements. The number of children also declines, but due mostly to an indirect effect
that works through the number of adults. Finally, the reverse effect from children to adults is very
small.

6.2 Falling Cost of Roommates and Rising Child Expenditures
We now discuss some ancillary implications of the model. Our model emphasizes the cost of living
with other people, which is time spent forming and maintaining relationships with roommates and
children. Given that household sizes have fallen over time, we can use the model to back out the
resources saved due to changes in living arrangements. In particular, we construct the value of time
spent on household formation and maintenance costs relative to GDP. Figure 12 plots the average
household cost taken across all age groups and quintiles. We find that the cost of living with other
people is substantial; on average, the time spent dealing with roommates is valued at 7 percent of
GDP. Further, resources devoted to living arrangements have decreased by around 25 percent over
the last 150 years. In other words, the model suggests that the decline in household size has been
accompanied by substantial resource saving, about 2.5 percent of GDP.
While the pure time cost of children has decreased (due to fewer children), people choose to
devote more resources to children, which leads to an increase in the total cost of children. This
distinction is shown in Figure 13, where we report three different measures of the costs of children.
The Figure shows the results for the age group 28 to 32 in the third income quintile. The lowest
line is simply the pure time cost of one child, Bk , which is constant by assumption. We then add
the child’s private consumption to construct a measure of the total cost of a child, which is plotted
as the middle line. This total cost displays a substantial increase, from 7.6 percent of a parent’s
25

.07

.08

.09

Figure 12: Implicit Household Formation/Maintenance Costs Relative to GDP

1840

1860

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Note: Mean z[B(S − 1) + Bk k], across all age groups and quintiles divided by the mean
output, z[1 − B(S − 1) − Bk k], also across all age groups and quintiles.

time to 9 percent. In other words, total child costs per child have increased by about 20 percent,
which might be what people have in mind when they complain about the rising costs of raising
children.25 Rather than children becoming literally more expensive (which seems unlikely), our
model suggests that parents voluntarily choose to spend more resources on children, making each
child endogenously more expensive. Essentially there is a quantity-quality trade-off at work in this
model, although the mechanism is different from the usual one. The typical story is that higher
income parents invest more in their children, or substitute consumption per child for number of
children (Becker & Lewis 1973). In our formulation, the quantity-quality tradeoff arises naturally
from the composition of household consumption. While both public and private goods are normal
goods, private goods are assumed to expand more quickly with income, raising the de facto cost of
each child.
Finally, the total cost of all children in the household declines over time, as the top line in
Figure 13 shows. This is not surprising since the total number of children in the household falls
substantially over this period, and more than compensates for the increased cost per child.

7

Conclusion

Over the course of 150 years, the household of the average American has shrunk by half. The decline was broad-based, affecting all forms of cohabitation for Americans of all ages. The negative
25 The U.S. Department of Agriculture produces an annual report measuring expenditures on children;

in real terms,
expenditures increased about 20% between 1950 and 2008 (Mark Lino & Andrea Carlson 2009). This rise is often
reported as rising costs of children. See for example the November 12, 2007 Business Week special report, ”Is Raising
Kids a Fool’s Game?”

26

0

.05

.1

.15

Figure 13: Cost of Children
Fraction of time an adult would have to work to pay for the cost

1840

1860

1880

1900

1920

Time cost of one child (Bk)
Cost of one child

1940

1960

1980

2000

Cost of all children in the household

Note: For age group 28 to 32 in the third income quintile. Cost of one child is equal to
(vk + Bk z)/z. Cost of all children in the household is equal to (vk + Bk z)K/z.

cross-sectional correlation between income and household sizes suggests that rising income might
have been a key force. The evidence we present on consumption patterns indicates that higher
incomes are accompanied by a greater relative preference for private over household public goods.
Since the primary purpose of roommates is to share the costs of local public goods, the declining
budget share of local public goods leads people to form smaller households endogenously. Hence,
optimally changing consumption bundles provide the link from income to household size. This
story is general to all living arrangements. Our approach abstracts from the specifics of relationships (other than the distinction between adults and children) in order to capture those elements
that are common to all “roommate choices”: living with parents, spouses, grandparents, uncles,
adult children, servants, and so on.
The calibration exercise implies that changing demographics and consumption patterns account
for one-half of the drop in the number of adults per household, and one-third of the drop in the
number of children per household. Thus, some of the changing structure of families, changing
attitudes towards fertility, and changing consumption habits can be viewed as efficient responses
to changing incomes. While there is some popular concern about the social costs of smaller households, we quantify the benefits: the value of time freed up from finding roommates and maintaining
good relationships is equivalent to 2.5 percent of GDP. In our model these changes are efficient,
and there is no need for governments to subsidize larger families.
At the same time, our mechanism explains only part of the observed change, which leaves room
for other channels. Changes in institutions and social norms were probably significant factors.
For example, relaxed divorce laws may have facilitated the decline in the number of spouses per
household. Likewise, the introduction of social security may have affected the living arrangements
27

of the elderly, particularly elderly widows. For these other reasons, policy interventions may be
desirable. In this case, our findings show that the efficient household size has changed in response
to rising GDP. Hence, past household sizes are not the right benchmark for efficient household
sizes today, and the role for government intervention should reflect this fact.
This paper also opens up several questions. For one, our model suggests that equivalence
scales are endogenous, and hence are different across different household types, but also might
be changing over time. Given this, what is an appropriate measure of equivalence scales, say, for
constructing poverty scales? We leave this inquiry for future research.

Appendix
A1 Data
The main sources of data for our analysis are the U.S. Census and the Consumer Expenditure
Survey.

A1.1 Census
First, we need to define a household. The Census definition of a household has always been related
to a group of persons who share a dwelling and share some resources. The measure of resources
used has changed somewhat over time: early Censuses emphasized shared income, but later ones
used shared kitchens, shared dining tables, shared cooking equipment, or meals taken together to
define a household. Although we suspect that the changes in the definition have little impact on
our measures, there is no way to evaluate that assertion formally.
The U.S. Census classifies all housing units as households, group quarters, or vacant units.
According to the Census documentation “Group quarters are largely institutions and other group
living arrangements, such as rooming houses and military barracks.” We are interested in households, and not group quarters like college dorms, jails, hospitals, or mental institutions, where
living arrangements are largely involuntary. Unfortunately, the exact definition of group quarter
has varied also across Censuses. In the 1940 to 1970 Censuses, households with five or more persons unrelated to the head are classified as a group quarters. For the 1850 to 1930 and 1980 to
1990 the condition is ten or more persons unrelated to the head.26 See Ruggles & Brower (2003)
26 In

later years this constraint is not binding. For example in 2000 no households are classified as group quarters
based on the number of unrelated members.

28

for more details.27 The only way to construct a consistent measure of household is to consider as
group quarters all housing units with five or more unrelated members. In other words, households
can have at most four persons unrelated to the head. We call this the consistent definition of household. The main concern with this definition is that it may improperly classify large households as
group quarters. To mitigate this problem we have the “mixed” definition, where for censuses 18501930 and 1980-2000 the only households that are classified as group quarters are those with ten or
more unrelated persons, and for 1940-1970 those with five or more unrelated persons. Figure A1
shows that the consistent and the mixed measures differ very little. The consistent definition gives
slightly lower numbers, which is not surprising since it classifies some large households as group
quarters. All numbers used in the paper are based on the mixed definition.
Two other potential problems are as follows. First, some individuals that were sampled but
could not be associated to a group quarter or household are classified as fragments. We exclude
these. Second, not all members from large households were interviewed in the early Censuses.
Before 1930, information on at most 30 members of the household was collected. This is not a
concern given that less than 0.1 percent of the households have more than 30 members.
Figure A1: Household Size by Household Definition
Num. of Persons in Household of
Average Adult

6.5
Definition: Consistent

6.0

Definition: Mixed

5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
1850

1870

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Census Year
Note: Computed using U.S. Census data. “Mixed” indicates that for the 1850-1930 and 1980-1990
households with more than ten members unrelated to the head are classified as group quarters, as
well as those with more than five unrelated members for 1940-1970. “Consistent” indicates that
all households with more than five unrelated members are classified as group quarters (excluded
from the household count).

Table A1 gives the exact figures used in the paper.

27 These

authors also describe some problems with the classification of household members according to their
relationship to the head.

29

Table A1: Different Measures of Household Size
Census
Year
1850
1860
1870
1880
1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000

Household
Members
6.16
5.84
5.66
5.54
5.23
5.06
4.79
4.56
4.18
3.77
3.66
3.50
3.18
3.09
3.07

Family
Size
5.18
4.95
4.79
4.67
4.51
4.34
4.27
4.11
3.91
3.58
3.57
3.42
3.06
2.90
2.83

Adults

Children

Obs

3.47
3.37
3.30
3.34
3.34
3.33
3.17
3.09
2.98
2.65
2.37
2.30
2.30
2.31
2.28

2.68
2.47
2.36
2.21
1.90
1.73
1.62
1.47
1.20
1.12
1.30
1.19
0.88
0.78
0.79

99,016
142,715
201,914
273,521
436,140
548,914
634,416
761,371
886,961
1,141,994
1,106,337
2,548,180
1,569,017
1,796,436
2,011,639

Note: Computed using U.S. Census data. The unit of observation is an adult. Household members
refers to all persons in the household. Family size includes only those related by blood, marriage
or adoption. Adults are individuals 18 years of age or older.

A1.2 CEX
Our measures of consumption on private goods and household public goods are based on data
from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) from 1995 to 2000. The CEX collects detailed
data on the expenditure of American households as well as information on income and household
characteristics. The data is collected by the U.S. Census Bureau for the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The CEX consists of two surveys, the Diary and the Interview. The Diary is designed to
obtain expenditure data on small and frequently purchased items. The Interview is a rotating panel
that follows households for 5 quarters. It records information on about 95% of all expenditures
(excluding expenditures for housekeeping supplies, personal care products, and non-prescription
drugs). In this paper we use the Interview survey, which also gathers information on income and
socio-demographic variables such as number of household members. The first interview is considered a baseline and its main purpose is to obtain an inventory of household appliances. Data on
consumption is collected on the second to fifth interviews and refer to expenditures made in the
previous three months. Figures on income are collected only on the second and fifth interviews.
The main information that we obtain from CEX is the consumption of public and private goods
in the household. The survey identifies each consumption item by a Universal Classification Code
(UCC), and there are around 550 UCCs. We classify all consumption items into public and private
at the UCC level.
30

The main characteristic of the goods that we take into account when classifying them is their
intrinsic technology: whether a good can be used by several individuals at the same time. With
this in mind, we construct some rules to give discipline to the classification of goods. The first rule
is that if the good cannot be shared under any circumstances, then we classify it as private. This
is the case with meals and beverages consumed in restaurants, public transportation (e.g. plane or
bus tickets), health plans and medical expenditures, some recreational expenses (like club fees or
tickets for events), and education. Secondly, we classify all goods that can be shared by taking turns
as public unless they typically are not shared for one of the following five reasons: coincidence
of usage, depreciation, hygiene, taste, or fit. Using these rules leads us to classify the following
as private goods: linens (coincidence of usage), towels (coincidence of usage), jewelry (taste),
personal care appliances (hygiene), magazines (taste), and school supplies (fit), and clothing (fit)
as private.
On the other hand, we classify the following as public goods. First, all housing and housing
related expenditures including utilities are classified as public goods. A home typically is shared
by all household members, and there is no particular feature of a house that typically is not shared
for any of our five reasons. In other words, all household members benefit from a home. As part
of household expenditures we include rent for households that rent and an imputed rent for home
owners. The annual imputed rent was estimated as 1/16 of the reported market value of the home,
within the range of rental-price ratios reported in Morris A. Davis, Andreas Lehnert & Robert F.
Martin (2008).
Using the same logic, we classify most durable goods also as public. The non-rivalry characteristic is not as evident as in the housing case given that, for example, only one person can sit in
a chair at a time. However, we consider that all household members can benefit from durables at
home given that they suffer a very small depreciation when one person uses it. In this category we
include most furniture, dishwashers, dinnerware, appliances, TVs and the like, computers, pets,
and recreational equipment. We use the same logic for cars and related expenditures. Another
category we classify as public is food prepared at home. This classification is based on Deaton &
Paxson (1998) who argue that there are economies of scale in the preparation of food consumed at
home.
Summing up, goods that are identified as public are: food at home, home related expenditures,
utilities, laundry, kitchen utensils, most furniture, cars, car related expenditures, TV, DVD, other
household appliances, newspapers and books, and contributions. Private goods include food away
from home, linens, bedroom furniture, travel items, clothing, transport (bus or plane), school tuition, health expenses, club or recreational lessons, and personal care. We excluded categories
that are investment rather than consumption goods (such as home repairs). Other excluded items
are finance charges and care for household members (babysitting and adult care centers). The
31

classification at the UCC level is available from the authors upon request.
For all calculations, the sample is restricted to households that responded about their expenditures in the four interviews, so that there is information on their annual consumption. This
restriction reduces our sample size to 40% of the households. Additionally, we retain only those
households where there were no changes in the number of household members. This is the case
for 85% of the households. Finally, given that we interpret income as a measure of productivity,
we also drop households for which there is a missing or negative value for income. Because we are
interested in the behavior of the variables for the average adult, the unit of observation is an adult
(18 years of age or older). The final number of observations is 29,277 adults in 15,942 households.
All dollar quantities are converted to real terms using CPI.
We construct a measure of annual consumption (public and private) by adding information
from the four interviews. Income is reported on an annual basis and we use the figure reported
in the fifth interview. The income variable that we assign to each adult is total household income
divided by the number of adults in the household.
For the calibration of the model (and other statistics presented in Section 3), we construct
the ratio of public to private consumption expenditures. To do so we obtain the mean value of
expenditures in public and private goods for adults of a particular age group. We take the ratio of
these aggregates as our moment in the model and the data. Additionally, we compute the income
elasticities of this ratio for our age groups. For each age group we calculate the income elasticity
of the public-private consumption ratio based on the five quintile observations. Table A2 shows
these measures for two of the age groups. It shows clearly how across quintiles the ratio of public
to private goods falls and how, at the same time, both measures of household size (adults and
children) decrease. Note that the household size numbers differ slightly from Table 1 since these
numbers are based on the CEX rather than the Census.
We have four robustness checks on the classification of goods into public and private. Figure
A2 presents the mean ratio H/V by income quintile, averaged across age groups for the baseline and
each of the additional exercises. First, we exclude from the analysis expenditures on goods that are
likely to have a controversial classification as either public or private goods. These items include
cars, babysitting and adult care, videos, some games and toys, CDs, fishing and photo equipment,
magazines, newspapers, and books. All were classified as public except photo equipment which
was private. Excluding controversial items decreases H/V for all quintiles, and does not alter the
main conclusion that richer people consume a smaller proportion of public goods. The income
elasticity of H/V at the baseline for this age group is -0.12, and excluding controversial items
does not change it. In a second robustness check we classify babysitting and adult care as private
instead of excluding them (“Care as Private”). The difference from the baseline is very small
(the elasticity is -0.13). The third exercise consists of classifying all goods that can be shared in
32

Table A2: Average Household Size by Income Quintiles, 1995-2000
Quintile
(relative
income)

23-27 year old persons
Public
Private

HH
members

28-32 year old persons

Adults

Children

Public
Private

HH
members

Adults

Children

1 (0.20)

3.60

3.60

2.65

0.95

4.21

3.79

2.40

1.40

2 (0.55)

3.80

3.43

2.56

0.87

3.65

3.61

2.17

1.44

3 (0.83)

3.49

3.23

2.33

0.91

3.57

3.16

2.07

1.10

4 (1.20)

3.21

2.90

2.30

0.60

3.45

2.91

1.97

0.94

5 (2.23)

2.99

2.66

2.19

0.47

2.92

2.75

1.88

0.88

Note: Authors’ calculations based on CEX data (1995-2000). The unit of observation is an adult. Income is computed as total
income in the household divided by the total number of adults. We report relative incomes as a multiple of average income.
Public/Private refers to expenditures on public goods as a proportion of expenditures on private goods. HH members stands for
the total number members of the household.

some way, like taking turns, as public (“Max Public”). The main items that change classification
are some furniture and clothing. In this case, as is shown in Figure A2, H/V increases, but the
elasticity only changes to -0.09. Finally, the largest drop in the ratio results from reclassifying cars
as private instead of as public. This reduces the income elasticity to -0.05.

A2 Computational Methods and Calibration Details
D (a) is the income elasticity of adult household size S for
Let ε denote elasticity. For example, εS,z
M (a) is the same elasticity in the model. Using this notation,
people of age a in the data, while εS,z
we minimize the following loss function

Ã

12

L=

∑

a=1
12

+∑

a=1

Ã

D (a) − ε M (a)
εS,z
S,z

!2

1 12
D
12 ∑a=1 εS,z (a)

SaD (a) − SaM (a)
1 12
D
12 ∑a=1 Sa (a)

!2

12

Ã

+∑

a=1

12

+∑

a=1

Ã

D (a) − ε M (a)
εK,z
K,z

!2

1 12
D
12 ∑a=1 εK,z (a)

KaD (a) − KaM (a)
1 12
D
12 ∑a=1 Ka (a)

!2

Ã

12

+∑


D
M
εH/(V
(a) − εH/(V
(a)
+V k ),z
+V k ),z

a=1

1 12
D
12 ∑a=1 εH/(V +V k ),z (a)
2

k
∑12
a=1 Ba Ka
12
 0.04−∑a=1 Ka

+

(0.04)


 .

Note that the empirical average of 4% of time spent with children has been substituted in already.

33

!2
+

1

2

H/V
3

4

5

Figure A2: Ratio of Public to Private Goods by Income Quintile

1

2

3
Income Quintile

Benchmark
Cars as Private
Max Public

4

5

Exclude Controversial
Care as Private

Note: Computed using data from CEX, 1995-2000. Results shown are average results for a quintile, across ages. The
case “Exclude controversial” does not consider all goods whose classification into public or private was controversial.
“Cars as Private” reclassifies cars from public into private goods. “Care as Private” considers items like babysitting
or adult care in the private category instead of excluding them. “Max Public” classifies as public all goods that can
be shared in some way.

34

Table A3: Moments in Model and Data
Moment
Average S, 18-22
Average S, 23-27
Average S, 28-32
Average S, 33-37
Average S, 38-42
Average S, 43-47
Average S, 48-52
Average S, 53-57
Average S, 58-62
Average S, 63-67
Average S, 68-72
Average S, 73+
S-Elasticity, 18-22
S-Elasticity, 23-27
S-Elasticity, 28-32
S-Elasticity, 33-37
S-Elasticity, 38-42
S-Elasticity, 43-47
S-Elasticity, 48-52
S-Elasticity, 53-57
S-Elasticity, 58-62
S-Elasticity, 63-67
S-Elasticity, 68-72
S-Elasticity, 73+
H/V-Elasticity, 18-22
H/V-Elasticity, 23-27
H/V-Elasticity, 28-32
H/V-Elasticity, 33-37
H/V-Elasticity, 38-42
H/V-Elasticity, 43-47
H/V-Elasticity, 48-52
H/V-Elasticity, 53-57
H/V-Elasticity, 58-62
H/V-Elasticity, 63-67
H/V-Elasticity, 68-72
H/V-Elasticity, 73+

Data Value
3.051
2.519
2.209
2.137
2.192
2.300
2.328
2.255
2.183
2.101
2.021
1.858
0.009
-0.096
-0.116
-0.084
-0.118
-0.125
-0.110
-0.074
-0.063
-0.026
-0.035
-0.036
-0.143
-0.095
-0.155
-0.093
-0.072
-0.121
-0.076
-0.112
-0.096
-0.069
-0.044
-0.016

Model Value
3.041
2.508
2.215
2.145
2.193
2.292
2.304
2.243
2.150
2.059
2.039
1.906
-0.073
-0.073
-0.074
-0.074
-0.074
-0.073
-0.072
-0.071
-0.070
-0.070
-0.069
-0.070
-0.091
-0.091
-0.092
-0.093
-0.092
-0.092
-0.090
-0.090
-0.089
-0.088
-0.088
-0.089

Moment
Average K, 18-22
Average K, 23-27
Average K, 28-32
Average K, 33-37
Average K, 38-42
Average K, 43-47
Average K, 48-52
Average K, 53-57
Average K, 58-62
Average K, 63-67
Average K, 68-72
Average K, 73+
K-Elasticity, 18-22
K-Elasticity, 23-27
K-Elasticity, 28-32
K-Elasticity, 33-37
K-Elasticity, 38-42
K-Elasticity, 43-47
K-Elasticity, 48-52
K-Elasticity, 53-57
K-Elasticity, 58-62
K-Elasticity, 63-67
K-Elasticity, 68-72
K-Elasticity, 73+
Time Spent with Kids

Data Value
0.857
0.839
1.180
1.518
1.420
1.010
0.554
0.290
0.197
0.162
0.125
0.084
-0.106
-0.334
-0.247
-0.097
0.021
0.083
-0.063
-0.255
-0.299
-0.319
-0.141
0.056
0.040

Model Value
0.856
0.836
1.186
1.515
1.419
1.011
0.546
0.299
0.200
0.165
0.126
0.083
-0.145
-0.145
-0.148
-0.150
-0.149
-0.145
-0.138
-0.131
-0.126
-0.123
-0.119
-0.117
0.039

Note: Average S and K by age group are computed using the 2000 U.S. Census. Details are presented in Appendix A1.1. Income
elasticities for S, K, and H/(V +V k ) by age group, were computed using 1995-2000 CEX data, as described in Appendix A1.2. Time
spent with kids is estimated based on BLS information.

35

References
Albanesi, Stefania, and Claudia Olivetti. 2009. “Maternal Health and the Baby Boom.”
Columbia University, mimeo.
Barro, Robert J. 2005. “Rare Events and the Equity Premium.” NBER Working Papers 11310.
Becker, Gary S., and H. Gregg Lewis. 1973. “On the Interaction between the Quantity and Quality of Children.” Journal of Political Economy, 81(2, Part 2): S279–S288.
Beresford, John C., and Alice M. Rivlin. 1966. “Privacy, Poverty, and Old Age.” Demography,
3(1): 247–258.
Bethencourt, Carlos, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull. 2009. “On the Living Arrangements of Elderly
Widows.” International Economic Review, 50(3): 773–801.
Brady, Dorothy S. 1958. “Individual Incomes and the Structure of Consumer Units.” The American Economic Review, 48(2): 269–278.
Brien, Michael J., Lee A. Lillard, and Steven N. Stern. 2006. “Cohabitation, Marriage, and
Divorce in a Model of Match Quality.” International Economic Review, 47(2): 451–494.
Burch, Thomas K., and Beverly J. Matthews. 1987. “Household Formation in Developed Societies.” Population and Development Review, 13(3): 495–511.
Bureau
of
Labor
Statistics.
2004.
“American
Time
Use
Survey
2004
Results
Announced
by
BLS.”
Available
online
at
http://www.bls.gov/news.release/History/atus_09202005.txt.
Byalsky, Michael, Michael Keren, and David Levhari. 1999. “The Kibbutz as a Labor-Managed
Club: Public and Private Goods, Incentives and Social Control.” In Trade, Growth and Development – Essays in Honor of Professor T.N. Srinivasan. , ed. Gustav Ranis and Lakshmi K.
Raut. North-Holland.
Cochrane, John H. 2001. Asset Pricing. Princeton University Press.
Costa, Dora L. 1997. “Displacing the Family: Union Army Pensions and Elderly Living Arrangements.” Journal of Political Economy, 6: 1269–1292.
Costa, Dora L. 1999. “A House of Her Own: Old Age Assistance and the Living Arrangements
of Older Nonmarried Women.” Journal of Public Economics, 72: 39–59.

36

Davis, Morris A., Andreas Lehnert, and Robert F. Martin. 2008. “The Rent-Price Ratio for the
Aggregate Stock of Owner-Occupied Housing.” Review of Income and Wealth, 54(2): 279–
284.
Deaton, Angus, and Christina Paxson. 1998. “Economies of Scale, Household Size, and the
Demand for Food.” Journal of Political Economy, 106(5): 897–930.
Deaton, Angus, and Christina Paxson. 2003. “Engel’s What? A Response to Gan and Vernon.”
Journal of Political Economy, 111(6): 1378–1381.
Doepke, Matthias. 2004. “Accounting for Fertility Decline During the Transition to Growth.”
Journal of Economic Growth, 9(3): 347–383.
Doepke, Matthias, Moshe Hazan Hazan, and Yishay Maoz. 2007. “The Baby Boom and World
War II: A Macroeconomic Analysis.” NBER Working Paper 13707.
Ermisch, John, and Pamela Di Salvo. 1997. “The Economic Determinants of Young People’s
Household Formation.” Economica, 64: 627–644.
Ermisch, John F. 1981. “An Economic Theory of Household Formation.” Scottish Journal of
Political Economy, 28(1): 1–19.
Fernandez, Raquel, Nezih Guner, and John Knowles. 2005. “Love and Money: A Theoretical
and Empirical Analysis of Household Sorting and Inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 273–344.
Fogli, Alessandra. 2000. “Endogenous Labor Market Rigidities and Family Ties.” New York University, mimeo.
Galor, Oded, and David N. Weil. 1996. “The Gender Gap, Fertility and Growth.” The American
Economic Review, 86(3): 374–387.
Gan, Li, and Victoria Vernon. 2003. “Testing the Barten Model of Economies of Scale in Household Consumption: Toward Resolving a Paradox of Deaton and Paxson.” Journal of Political
Economy, 111(6): 1361–1377.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri, and Guillaume Vandenbroucke. 2005. “The Baby
Boom and Baby Bust.” American Economic Review, 95(1): 183–207.
Greenwood, Jeremy, and Ananth Seshadri. 2002. “The U.S. Demographic Transition.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 92(2): 153–159.

37

Greenwood, Jeremy, and Nezih Guner. 2009. “Marriage and Divorce since World War II: Analyzing the Role of Technological Progress on the Formation of Households.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Nezih Guner, and John Knowles. 2003. “More on Marriage, Fertility and
the Distribution of Income.” International Economic Review, 44(3).
Haurin, Donald R., Patric H. Hendershott, and Dongwook Kim. 1994. “Housing Decisions of
American Youth.” Journal of Urban Economics, 35: 28–45.
Johnston, Louis D., and Samuel H. Williamson. 2006. “The Annual Real and Nominal GDP for
the United States, 1790 - Present.” Economic History Services, http://eh.net/hmit/gdp/.
Jones, Larry E., Alice Schoonbroodt, and Michèle Tertilt. forthcoming. “Fertility Theories: Can
they explain the Negative Fertility-Income Relationship?” Demography and the Economy.
ed. John Shoven, University of Chicago Press.
Jones, Larry E., and Alice Schoonbroodt. forthcoming. “Complements versus Substitutes and
Trends in Fertility Choice in Dynastic Models.” International Economic Review.
Jones, Larry E., and Michèle Tertilt. 2008. “An Economic History of the Relationship Between
Occupation and Fertility - U.S. 1826-1960.” Frontiers of Family Economics Vol. 1. ed. Peter
Rupert, Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Kobrin, Frances E. 1976. “The Fall in Household Size and the Rise of the Primary Individual in
the United States.” Demography, 13(1): 127–138.
Kuznets, Simon. 1978. “Size and Age Structure of Family Households: Exploratory Comparisons.” Population and Development Review, 4(2): 187–223.
Lam, David. 1983. “The Economics of Household Composition in Developing Countries.” PhD
diss. University of California, Berkeley.
Lam, David. 1984. “Household Public Goods and the Shadow Price of Privacy: A Framework
for Modeling the Interaction of Household Composition and Economic Behavior.” Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Population Association of America, Minneapolis.
Lam, David. 1988. “Marriage Markets and Assortative Mating with Household Public Goods:
Theoretical Results and Empirical Implications.” The Journal of Human Resources,
23(4): 462–487.

38

Laslett, Peter. 1969. “Size and Structure of the Household in England Over Three Centuries.”
Population Studies, 23(2): 199–223.
Lino, Mark, and Andrea Carlson. 2009. “Expenditures on Children by Families, 2008.” U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion. Miscellaneous Publication No. 1528-2008.
Logan, Trevon D. 2007. “Economies of Scale in the Household: Puzzles and Patterns from the
American Past.” Economic Inquiry, forthcoming.
McGarry, Kathleen, and Robert F. Shoeni. 2000. “Social Security, Economic Growth, and the
Rise in Independence of Elderly Widows in the 20th Century.” Demography, 37: 221–236.
Michael, Robert T., Victor R. Fuchs, and Sharon R. Scott. 1980. “Changes in the Propensity to
Live Alone: 1950-1976.” Demography, 17(1): 39–56.
Pampel, Fred C. 1983. “Changes in the Propensity to Live Alone: Evidence from Consecutive
Cross-Sectional Surveys, 1960-1976.” Demography, 20(4): 433–447.
Prescott, Edward C. 1986. “Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement.” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 25(1): 11–44.
Regalia, Ferdinando, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull. 2001. “What Accounts for the Increase in the
Number of Single Households?” University of Pennsylvania, mimeo.
Roseneil, Sasha. 2006. “On Not Living With a Partner: Unpicking Coupledom and Cohabitation.”
Sociological Research Online, 11(3).
Ruggles, Steven, and Susan Brower. 2003. “Measurement of Household and Family Composition
in the United States, 1850-2000.” Population and Development Review, 29(1): 73–101.
Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken,
Patricia Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. 2009. “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 4.0 [Machine-readable database].” Minneapolis,
MN: Minnesota Population Center [producer and distributor], Available online at
http://usa.ipums.org/usa/.
Rupert, Peter, and Paul Gomme. 2007. “Theory, Measurement and Calibration of Macroeconomic Models.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(2): 460–497.
Strohm, Charles Q., Judith A. Seltzer, Susan D. Cochran, and Vickie M. Mays. 2009. “‘Living
Apart Together’ Relationships in the United States.” Demographic Research, 21(7): 177–214.
39

