NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ROLE OF SEARCH IN UNIVERSITY PRODUCTIVITY:
INSIDE, OUTSIDE, AND INTERDISCIPLINARY DIMENSIONS
James D. Adams
J. Roger Clemmons
Working Paper 15489
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15489

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2009

The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation generously supported this research. We thank Nancy Bayers
and Henry Small of Thomson-Reuters Scientific for advice on the data, the editors for their patience,
W. Edward Steinmueller for helpful remarks on interdisciplinary research, and Paula E. Stephan and
two referees for comments. Any remaining errors are our responsibility. This paper was presented
at a conference on “The Economics and Policy of Academic Research,” held at the Collegio Carlo
Alberto, Torino, Italy, on July 14-15, 2008; and at the Communia 2009 Conference, also held in Torino
on June 28-30, 2009. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by James D. Adams and J. Roger Clemmons. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Role of Search in University Productivity: Inside, Outside, and Interdisciplinary Dimensions
James D. Adams and J. Roger Clemmons
NBER Working Paper No. 15489
November 2009
JEL No. D24,D80,L31,O32,O33,O38
ABSTRACT
Due to improving information technology, the growing complexity of research problems, and policies
designed to foster interdisciplinary research, the practice of science in the United States has undergone
significant structural change. Using a sample of 110 top U.S. universities observed during the late
20th century we find that knowledge flows, both in total and in their major components, are a significant
and positive determinant of research output. Outside knowledge-flows from other universities have
increased at a faster rate than inside flows from the same university. Over time, the importance of
outside flows for research output has risen, and it has done so at a faster rate than the importance of
inside flows has decreased. Thus the overall contribution of knowledge-flows has increased and has
shifted towards outside flows.
Turning to knowledge-flows by field, we find that interdisciplinary knowledge-flows have increased
only slightly relative to same field flows, despite policy initiatives that favor interdisciplinary research.
Moreover, the importance of interdisciplinary flows for research output, while positive and statistically
highly significant, has stayed about the same, even as same field flows have become more important,
probably because of growth in cyber infrastructure. Although a final verdict is yet to be reached, one
interpretation is that interdisciplinary research is still in its early stages. While interdisciplinary flows
have begun to increase, the resulting discoveries, and their influence on subsequent research, may
still lie in the future.

James D. Adams
Department of Economics
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
3406 Russell Sage Laboratory
Troy, NY 12180-3590
and NBER
adamsj@rpi.edu
J. Roger Clemmons
Institute for Child Health Policy
College of Medicine
The University of Florida
PO Box 100147
Gainesville, FL 32610-0147
jrc@ichp.ufl.edu

I.

Introduction

What role does information technology play in the choice between local research, distant
research, and research within a field versus between fields? Can science policy bring scientists
together from different fields to produce significant hybrid research? And do these synthetic
discoveries exert a rising influence on subsequent research? In this paper we explore these
questions using a panel of 110 top U.S. universities.
Any such study must come to grips, either informally or formally, with the self-interests of
researchers. Scientists search for knowledge that is useful for their own work. That in turn
contributes to the pleasure of discovery, to promotion and wage growth, and to the chance of
prestigious awards. Taking these goals as given, search is conditioned by characteristics of
knowledge that affect its costs and returns. These characteristics include distinctions between
the same and other universities and fields. Put differently, search is shaped by inside, outside,
and interdisciplinary dimensions of knowledge. The resulting knowledge-flows depend on the
costs and returns from search. For example, interdisciplinary flows will be meager if it is more
costly to acquire knowledge from other fields. Conversely, the flows will increase if policy
creates research centers which encourage joint research by scientists from different fields.
To explore these questions we use a panel of fields, universities, and years, observed during
1981-1999. The data account for most academic research in the U.S., and in combination with a
similar panel for firms, they account for most scientific research in the U.S. Using a definition of
knowledge-flows equal to citation-weighted Research and Development (R&D) stocks, we
obtain the following findings. First, the share in all knowledge-flows of outside knowledge from
other universities increases by 30%. Hence outside flows rise relative to inside flows from the
same university. The share of interdisciplinary flows also increases, but the increase is slight,

about 10% across fields. The interdisciplinary share rises faster, by 70%, in engineering and
mathematics. But the share declines or remains flat in astronomy, computer science, economics
and business, medicine, and physics.
Given the rising use of interdisciplinary research in engineering, we undertake a detailed
study of citation flows for engineering subfields. We observe a drop in the citation share from
the same subfield, a flat share for other engineering, and a rising share for science outside
engineering. We undertake a similar study for mathematics and statistics. Pure and applied
mathematics increasingly cites physics, while statistics increasingly cites biology and medicine.
Since engineering and mathematics are the focal point of U.S. policies favoring interdisciplinary
research, it appears that the policies may have had some effect on these disciplines.
Much of the paper explores the role of knowledge-flows on research “output” as measured by
papers or citations received. We find that knowledge-flows uniformly increase papers and
citations1. This applies to all major knowledge-flows, including those from the same university
or field and from other universities or fields. Outside knowledge-flows from other universities
are more important than inside knowledge-flows from the same university. Moreover, the
importance of outside flows has increased at a faster rate than the importance of inside flows has
decreased, so that over time knowledge-flows contribute more to research output. Also,
knowledge-flows from the same field are more important than knowledge-flows from other
fields, though both contribute significantly to scientific discovery. The importance of flows from
the same field again increases, with most of this coming from other universities. Turning to
interdisciplinary flows, we find that knowledge-flows from other fields and the same university
are as important as flows from other fields and other universities. Thus interdisciplinary flows

1

Importance is measured by the output elasticity with respect to each knowledge-flow. In turn the output elasticity
is the percent change in research output per one percent change in a flow.

2

are more localized than same field flows. We also consider knowledge-flows from “hot”
interdisciplinary fields, whose share is increasing, separately from “cold” fields, whose share is
flat or decreasing. We find that the importance of “hot” fields in production does not rise
relative to “cold”, nor are “hot” fields consistently more important than “cold” fields.
Interdisciplinary research, while promising, does not assume a larger role in the production of
new scientific ideas during this period. Since interdisciplinary flows result from changes in
policy and search costs as well as production, their share in knowledge-flows could increase
slightly, even though their importance in production remains about the same.
This analysis has several implications. Since knowledge from the same university declines in
importance relative to knowledge from other universities, the private incentives of investigators,
as conditioned by policy and growth of cyber infrastructure, favor a more outward university
system, and that in turn has contributed to productivity. And since interdisciplinary knowledgeflows increase slowly relative to all flows and even decrease in some fields, then despite
encouragement from science policy, researchers are voting with their minds against looking
outside their discipline for knowledge thought to be instrumental to their success. Even so, in
coming years interdisciplinary research may grow in importance. The rising share of
interdisciplinary flows in engineering and mathematics could be an early sign of this change.
The rest of the paper is arranged as follows. Section II is a literature review and a review of
recent policies towards interdisciplinary research. Section III presents the analytical framework.
Data and variable construction take up Section IV, while Section V provides a descriptive
overview of the key variables. Section VI consists of regression analysis of the production of
scientific papers in universities, with emphasis on interdisciplinary research. Section VII
undertakes a brief comparative analysis for firms. Section VIII is a summary and conclusion.

3

II.

Review of the Literature
A. Conceptual Studies
The size of teams and the extent of collaboration have risen steadily over the 20th century

(Zuckerman and Merton, 1973; De Sola Price, 1986; Hicks and Katz, 1996), with clear
implications for citation patterns. Co-location of team workers is less common because of
growing cyber infrastructure, and likewise the composition of teams has become more
international in scope (Adams, Black, Clemmons and Stephan, 2005). Rosenblat and Mobius
(2004) suggest that cyber infrastructure promotes substitution of collaboration within disciplines
for collaboration between disciplines.
Interdisciplinary research in particular depends on collaboration to reduce the cost of
combining disciplines. Thus Katz and Martin (1997) point out that collaboration is logically
connected to specialization within conventional disciplines as well as research teams cutting
across disciplines and institutions. The U.S. National Academy of Sciences (Committee on
Science, Engineering, and Public Policy, 2004) considers interdisciplinary teams. The report
asserts, though it does not prove, that notable advances in science depend on this kind of
research. However, it admits that interdisciplinary research imposes high learning costs on team
workers, and that it reduces publication rates and the chance of winning tenure. Interdisciplinary
teams also impose higher internal communication costs (Jeffries, 2003).
Holton, Chang and Jurkowitz (1996) underscore these considerations in their remarkable
case study of high temperature superconductivity. Preconditions at IBM Zurich consisting of
high-quality, long term research in many disciplines helped make this discovery possible2. But
the quality and range of the co-discoverers, Muller and Bednorz, as well as the esthetic sense of

2

For other discoveries that entail a degree of interdisciplinary research, see Nelson (1962) for the transistor and
Hounshell and Smith (1988) for nylon and the artificial fibers.

4

Muller developed over several decades—these too were essential. So while interdisciplinary
research may figure into great discoveries, its costs exceed those of traditional research.
Corley, Boardman, and Bozeman (2006) find that large science projects spanning
multiple institutions and disciplines require a high level of development of knowledge and
organizational structure to provide rules for the collaboration. Adams, Chiang, and Jensen
(2001), and Boardman and Corley (2008) emphasize the role of university research centers for
outside research collaboration. Boardman and Corley (2008) find that the centers increase
collaboration, but that the structure of the centers matters for the composition of collaboration.
For example industry-linked centers encourage joint work with industry that substitutes for joint
work with academia. These papers are a sample of research on collaboration.

B. Policy Initiatives of the U.S. National Science Foundation
and the U.S. National Institutes of Health
Recent U.S. policies favor collaborative and interdisciplinary research. The National Science
Foundation (NSF), which supports research in universities, promotes this research through its
NSF-Wide Investments, of which the NSF Centers are a leading example:
Centers exploit opportunities in science, engineering, and technology in which the complexity of the research
problem or the resources needed to solve the problem require the advantages of scope, scale, duration,
equipment, facilities, and students. Centers are the principal means by which NSF fosters interdisciplinary
research. –National Science Foundation (2009b), “NSF Centers and Funding”

The programs (founding dates) are: Engineering Research Centers (1985), Science and
Technology Centers (1987), Materials Research Science and Engineering Centers (1994),
Centers for Analysis and Synthesis (1995), Centers for Chemical Innovation (1998),
Nanoscale Science and Engineering Centers (2001), and Science of Learning Centers

5

(2003). Weighted by funding shares, the average year of founding is 19923. The centers
involve high-risk, long-term, but high payoff research. Recognizing this, NSF provides
seed money for 8-10 years and one stated purpose of the centers is to educate graduate
students for the next generation.
Besides the centers NSF maintains the National Nanotechnology Initiative, whose
purpose is to understand and control matter at the atomic, molecular, and supra-molecular
levels, and which, as an NSF-wide investment has an interdisciplinary component. New
NSF-wide investments are Cyber-Enabled Discovery and Innovation, and Science and
Engineering beyond Moore’s Law. While U.S. policies towards interdisciplinary
research have existed since the 1980s they have clearly gained momentum over time.
Besides engineering programs NSF maintains a program in mathematical biology,
under Mathematical Sciences, that is designed to mesh with collaborating biology
programs. And the National Institutes of Health (NIH), which also supports universities,
operates Bioinformatics Resource Centers (NIH, 2009). These employ multi-disciplinary
teams of microbiologists, specialists in bioinformatics, and computer scientists. From
this discussion one would expect interdisciplinary citations to increase fastest in
engineering and mathematics and statistics. Section V finds that this is the case.

III. Knowledge Production Function for Science
The production of knowledge reflects a series of prior decisions. Among these are choices of
whether to carry out search within a discipline or between disciplines, and with which
disciplines. It is a question of which approach maximizes the life cycle utility of the scientist.
On the one hand, interdisciplinary research requires a more extensive division of labor and
coordination costs (Becker and Murphy, 1992). It imposes delays in carrying out research and it
3

In 2007 total funding for the centers was 232.5 million dollars.

6

entails an increased risk that combinations of diverse ideas will fail. On the other hand, it may
offer a better chance of research breakthroughs. Policies that subsidize interdisciplinary research
tilt scientists’ decisions in its favor. The state preference model (Hirshleifer and Riley, 1992)
seems capable of imbedding decisions on choice of productive method that reflect these
considerations. While space limitations preclude such modeling here, the choice of research
methods clearly depends on comparative costs and returns as well as policy.
In Section VI we estimate a knowledge production function for science using a panel of
fields, universities, and years. To create a bridge to the empirical work, in this section we briefly
explore the details of this function, which relates new discoveries to physical assets and to
knowledge used in research. Production takes place in a university-field, defined as field i and
university j at time t . Assume a Cobb-Douglas production function for scientific discoveries:
(1)

η

nijt = A exp( Z D′ δ ) R(ηijR) t −1 ∏w=1 ( S (wij ) t −1 )
W

w

exp(uijt )

The “output” of discoveries nijt is on the left: it is measured by papers or citations received. On
the right is A , output not elsewhere accounted for, and Z D′ , a vector of field, university, and time
fixed effects multiplied by coefficient vector δ 4. We include field fixed effects to absorb
differences in research output among disciplines. We use fixed effects for universities to absorb
permanent differences in institutional productivity. The university effects are fixed since the
universities that we study account for most academic R&D in the U.S. and are fixed in repeated
samples (Hsiao, 2003, Ch. 4). We include year fixed effects to capture secular changes in
research output not elsewhere accounted for. The inclusion of the different fixed effects is
standard practice in panel data econometrics for the reasons given. The stock of lagged R&D

R( ij ) t −1 captures tangible assets in a field and university: computers and laboratory equipment,
4

Fixed effects are dummy variables equal to 1 if something is true and 0 otherwise.

7

faculty release time, and student assistants, which accumulate in the course of past projects. In
contrast S (wij ) t −1 is a vector of lagged intangible knowledge-flows to a university-field from the
same and other universities; from the same and other fields; and from the same and other
universities and fields. The stock of R&D R( ij ) t −1 and the knowledge-flows S (wij ) t −1 are knowledge
inputs that are used to produce research output.
The output elasticitiesη R and η w are percentage changes in output per one percent change
in the knowledge inputs. They indicate importance in production. Sometimes we letη w vary
with time to account for factor-biased technical change. In (1) uijt is the error term
(2)

uijt = vi + v j + vt + eijt

The vi , v j , vt terms are permanent variance-components for field, university, and time that are
absorbed by the fixed effects Z D′ so that uijt = Z D′ δ + eijt . In (2) eijt is the “innovation” in the error.
If this is uncorrelated over time, then inclusive of Z D′ eijt should be uncorrelated with the
knowledge inputs. Estimates of the regression coefficients should be unbiased, or identified.
Taking logarithms of (1) and substituting (2) and uijt = Z D′ δ + eijt into the result we reach:
(3)

ln(nijt ) = β + Z D′ δ + ηR ln(R(ij ) t −1 ) + ∑w=1 ηw ln(S(wij ) t −1 ) + eijt
W

Here β is the logarithm of A shown in (1). We estimate (3) in Section VI for universities and in
Section VII for firms.

IV. Database
A. Data Sources
The underlying university data consist of 2.4 million unique scientific papers, published
during 1981-1999, that have at least one author from the top 110 U.S. universities. These

8

universities account for more than 80 percent of academic R&D in the U.S.5.
Papers consist of articles, reviews, notes, and proceedings. The data source is ThomsonReuters Scientific6. Papers are assigned to one of 88 fields according to the field classification
of the journal where they appear (see Adams and Clemmons, 2008 for a description). To link the
papers data to R&D expenditures in the National Science Foundation’s (NSF) CASPAR database
(NSF, 2009a) we assign each of the 88 fields to one of 12 NSF fields: agriculture, astronomy,
biology, chemistry, computer science, earth sciences, economics and business, engineering,
mathematics and statistics, medicine, physics, and psychology.
The Thomson-Reuters data record publication year, journal field, author names, and
address information that includes academic unit titles, as well as city, state and country.
Academic unit titles are assigned to universities by means of institutional directories developed
by Thomson-Reuters in the course of its construction of the Science and Social Science Citation
Indexes. The academic units are a compendium of administrative divisions of a university,
nearly all of which are departments or professional schools. Titles appear in addresses that are
separate from author names so that names cannot be assigned to universities. For this reason we
use academic units and not names to assign papers to universities. Consider a paper in medicine
that lists five addresses with five academic unit titles. Three are divisions of the Harvard
Medical School and Harvard University. The fourth is part of Yale and the fifth belongs to Johns
Hopkins. Given this assignment of academic units to universities, 3/5 of the paper is assigned to
Harvard, 1/5 to Yale, and 1/5 to Johns Hopkins. Let us now discuss the assignment of citations
5

National Science Board (2002), Appendix Table 5-4, shows that in 1999 the top 100 U.S. universities account for
$22.10 billion of R&D out of $27.49 billion of R&D for all U.S. universities. This equals 80.4 percent. National
Science Board (2008), Appendix Table 5-11 indicates that in 2006 the top 100 account for $38.09 billion out of
$47.76 billion for all U.S. universities. This equals 79.8 percent. Since the sample consists of the top 110 and not
the top 100, its share in R&D expenditures exceeds 80 percent.
6
The journal set consists of approximately 5500 journals that were active in 1999 as well as 1600 inactive (renamed
or discontinued) journals cited by active journals.

9

received. In the empirical work we use citations from the year of publication through the next
four years. We take out institutional self-citations. Then, to assign citations received by an
institution, we multiply the remaining citations received by the fraction of academic units that
belong to each university. In the example, suppose that Harvard receives 29 citations from other
universities, Yale receives 31; and Johns Hopkins 30. In this example we assign 3/5×29=17.4
fractional citations to Harvard, 1/5×31=6.2 to Yale, and 1/5×30=6 to Johns Hopkins.
To construct the dependent variables we aggregate fractional papers and citations to the
level of fields, universities, and years. This yields observable measures of “outputs” of new
scientific discoveries in a university-field. We use lagged, deflated R&D expenditures in a
university-field to construct stocks of R&D over the previous eight years. For 1985 papers and
citations, say, we construct R&D stocks based on R&D expenditures from 1978 to 1984. The
NSF CASPAR database of universities (NSF, 2009a) provides the university R&D data. R&D
consists of all research funding, both external and internal. About 75 percent of university R&D
consists of basic research, 22 percent consists of applied research, and four percent consists of
development (National Science Board, 2008, Chapter 5).
To create the knowledge-flows, we construct citations made by a field, university and
year to any field, university, and year and the number of papers that could have been cited.
Since the sample consists of the top 110 U.S. universities, citations occur among this set of
schools. The ratio of citations to papers potentially cited is a citation rate. We multiply this rate
by the stock of R&D in the cited field, university and year, where the R&D stock proxies for
stocks of knowledge produced. Then we sum the citation rates times cited R&D stocks for each
citing field, university, and year. This yields the knowledge-flows used in this paper.

10

In building the panel we consider only highly ranked departments, plus a remainder that
aggregates the rest, so that we retain all the data. Our reason for constructing the remainder is to
avoid empty cells where fields are small or non-existent7. To capture quality of research
program we rely on rankings of doctoral programs. National Research Council’s 1993 Survey of
Doctoral Programs (NRC, 1995) is the source of these rankings. We include a larger number of
ranked departments in larger fields since more of the programs are ranked. In fact we include
the top 25 universities in astronomy, the top 50 in agriculture, chemistry, computer science,
economics and business, earth sciences, mathematics and statistics, physics, and psychology; and
the top 75 in biology, medicine, and engineering. Summing across fields and noting that 48
formal schools of agriculture exist, the panel consists of 648 university-fields in a given year.
Adding the 12 remainders, one for each discipline, we arrive at 660 university-fields.
Although the data begin in 1981, backward references to scientific literature require at
least one lag, costing 1981, and a further lag of one year for the knowledge inputs costs 1982.
Thus the panel begins in 1983. It contains papers and citations received, lagged R&D stocks, and
lagged knowledge-flows for 660 university-fields in 12 sciences during 1983-1999. This implies
11,220 observations before exclusions due to missing values.

B. Specification of the Variables
Knowledge-flows are sums of cited R&D stocks multiplied by citation rates that
represent sampling rates8. We justify this by noting that the R&D stocks are correlated with
unobservable stocks of knowledge, so the product of the stocks and the citation rates yields a
measure of the proportion of knowledge that leaks out to a citing university-field9.

7

The remainder equals an average university-field in individual ranked departments. This reflects the positive skew
of academic R&D. For more on this see Adams and Griliches (1998).
8
For papers relating search to technological change see Nelson (1982) and Kortum (1997).

11

To express this in algebra note that the citation rate equals c ijtFkτ / nFkτ . The numerator c ijtFkτ equals
citations made by citing field i in university j in year t to cited field F in university k in prior
year τ ( τ < t ). It represents search effort10. Citations are divided by nFkτ , the count of scientific
papers in the cited field, university, and year. The resulting citation rate measures the intensity
with which researchers draw on knowledge stocks elsewhere. For a group of citing papers nijt the
citation rate c ijtFkτ / nFkτ is preferable to the citation probability c ijtFkτ / nijt nFkτ . For a single paper,
the citation probability captures the proportion of knowledge flowing from cited to citing groups
(Adams, Clemmons, and Stephan, forthcoming 2006). But if nijt papers cite nFkτ papers, then the
probability c ijtFkτ / nijt nFkτ times nijt equals the citation rate c ijtFkτ / nFkτ . This measures the
proportion of knowledge in the cited group that reaches a group of citing papers.
Citations made to the same citing university are inside citations; those made to other
universities are outside citations. Citations made within a science are same field citations, while
citations outside a science are interdisciplinary in nature.
The flow of inside knowledge from the same university is
(4)

SijtSame University = ∑F =1
M

∑τ

t −1
=1

(cijtFjτ / nFjτ )R Fjτ

It is the sum over all fields, previous years, and the same university, of citation rates multiplied
by R&D stocks. In (4) the stock of university and field R&D is
(5)

RFjτ = ∑z=1 r( Fj) τ −z (1 − d ) z
8

9

For a paper that demonstrates equivalence between the stock of R&D and the stock of knowledge for firms in a
model of growth of innovative firms and industries see Klette and Kortum (2004).
10
Since citations are distinguished by citing and cited field, university and year they are six dimensional. In our
notation subscripts stand for the three citing dimensions, while superscripts stand for cited dimensions. The order of
sub- (super-) scripts is always: field, university, and year.

12

This is the sum of R&D expenditures rkFτ − z in a university-field over the previous eight years, in
millions of ’92 dollars, and assuming a depreciation rate d = 0.15 . R&D flows are drawn from
NSF’s CASPAR database (NSF, 2009a). To reduce simultaneity bias we lag (5) in production
function (3). We enter (5) as a separate variable to account for past resources of a universityfield not captured by knowledge-flows, so that we use R&D stock of a university-field in two
distinct ways: first as an indicator of tangible resources in (5), and second as a stock of
knowledge produced by those resources in (4). This double-duty reflects the dual nature of past
research activity in a university-field.
The flow of outside knowledge from other universities is

SijtOther Universities = ∑F =1

∑ ∑τ

t −1

N
k =1
k≠ j

M

(6)

=1

(cijtFkτ / nFkτ )R Fkτ

It is the sum over all fields, other universities, and previous years.
The same field knowledge-flow is

SijtSame Field = ∑k =1
N

(7)

∑τ

t −1
=1

(cikijtτ / nikτ )Rikτ

In (7) the sum is taken over the same field, all universities, and previous years.
The knowledge-flow from other fields, or the interdisciplinary flow, is
(8)

S ijtOther Fields = ∑F =1
M

F ≠i

∑ ∑τ
N

k =1

t −1
=1

(c ijtFkτ / nFkτ )R Fkτ

It is the sum over other fields, all universities, and previous years. Besides (4), (6)-(8) we
consider mixtures: SijtSame Field , Same University , SijtOther Fields, Same University , SijtSame Field , Other Universities , and

SijtOther Fields, Other Universities . All these variables are citation-weighted R&D stocks but let us call them
knowledge-flows. Sometimes the flows equal zero, so to take logarithms we add 0.001 to each
of the flows.

13

For descriptive purposes we consider a scale-free measure of interdisciplinary research.
From (7) and (8) this is the interdisciplinary share in knowledge flows in field i at time t :
Other Fields
it

Share

(9)

SitOther Fields
= Same Field
Sit
+ SitOther Fields

Likewise, using (4) and (6), we consider the share of outside knowledge-flows:
(10)

ShareitOther Univs =

SitOther Universities
SitSame University + SitOther Universities

With all of our preparations complete, we are ready for the empirical work.

V.

Description of the Knowledge-Flows
A. Field Size Distribution
Figure 1 and 2 display average knowledge-flows to each of the citing fields. Figure 1

covers “large” R&D fields: engineering, chemistry, agriculture, physics, earth science, medicine,
and biology. Figure 2 covers “small” fields: mathematics and statistics, economics and business,
computer science, astronomy, and psychology. The smallest “large” field, engineering, has a
knowledge flow more than twice that of the largest “small” field, psychology. Flows to biology
and medicine exceed all the others. These differences follow the distribution of academic R&D
by field, since most citations occur within a field, and since, according to (7) and (8), the flows
are sums of cited R&D stocks weighted by citation rates11.

B. Sources of Interdisciplinary Knowledge-Flows
Table 1 examines sources of interdisciplinary knowledge-flows by citing field. The table
lists the three most cited fields for years 1983, 1991, and 1999. Biology and medicine become

11

National Science Board (2008), Appendix Table 5-4 contains the following data from 1999 on the percentage
distribution of R&D expenditures by field: agriculture, 7.4%; astronomy, 1.4%; biology, 18.3%; chemistry, 3.3%;
computer science, 3.1%; earth and environmental sciences, 6.1%; economics and business, 1.0%; engineering,
15.6%; mathematics and statistics, 1.1%; medicine, 29.1%; physics, 4.2%, psychology, 1.7%, and all other, 7.7%.

14

more important over time while engineering and physics become less important. This pattern
corresponds to the growing share of the life sciences in university R&D.

C. Changes in Interdisciplinary Shares over Time
Figures 3a to 3l depict time series of the interdisciplinary share by field. The share rises
in agriculture, biology, chemistry, earth sciences, engineering, mathematics, and psychology. It
increases most in engineering, where it rises by 77 percent of its 1983 value; and in mathematics
and statistics, where it rises by 70 percent. As Section II.B has shown, these fields are the
primary objectives of policies that seek to increase interdisciplinary research. But the share
declines in astronomy, computer science, and physics. Over the entire period there is no change
in economics and business or in medicine.
Figure 4 depicts time series of the average interdisciplinary share. It increases by 10
percent, from 0.22 to 0.24. In Figure 5 the outside share increases by 32 percent, from 0.62 to
0.82. The interdisciplinary share increases slightly, but the rise in the outside share is large.

D. The Engineering Subfields
The interdisciplinary share grows fastest in engineering (Figure 3h). To identify the sources
of this change we study the relationship between the engineering subfields and the rest of
engineering and science outside engineering—the remaining 11 fields in Figure 3. At this level
we cannot construct citation-weighted R&D, but we can construct citations. We use citation
shares for the same subfield, other engineering, and science to show relative importance. The
j
j
share is: CiteShare t = Citations t / ∑ i Citations

i
t

where i, j stand for same subfield, other

engineering, and science, and t stands for year. Table 2 shows long differences in citation shares
over the period 1983 to 1999. In 11 of 13 cases the citation share of the same subfield decreases
and in eight the decrease exceeds 0.1. In nine cases the share of science increases and in six it
15

increases by more than 0.1. Changes in other engineering are positive but small. Clearly
citations move towards science and away from engineering.
Science citation shares rise sharply in Artificial Intelligence, Robotics, and Automation; Civil
Engineering; Chemical Engineering; Environmental Engineering & Energy; Biomedical
Engineering; and Materials Science. Accordingly, Figure 6 examines knowledge-flows from
science outside engineering for these subfields12. The figures are area graphs that break out the
top five sciences and treat all others as a residual. Citations to computer science and biology rise
noticeably in Artificial Intelligence, Robotics, and Automation. In Civil Engineering flows from
biology and the earth sciences increase most. In Chemical Engineering biology, physics and
chemistry are the source of the increased role for science. The share of biology increases in
Environmental Engineering & Energy, while the share of medicine increases in Biomedical
Engineering. Citations to physics and biology increase markedly in Materials Science.

E. Mathematics and Statistics
Figure 3i shows that the interdisciplinary share rises sharply in mathematics. For this reason
Figures 7a and 7b take a closer look at the interdisciplinary share of citations for pure and
applied mathematics and statistics. Figure 7 is comparable to Figure 6.
The increase in the interdisciplinary share is slight in these fields compared with engineering.
In pure and applied mathematics (Figure 7a) most of this comes from physics, and other fields
stay the same. In statistics most of the increase derives from biology and medicine (Figure 7b).
The growing life science link is with statistics and not pure and applied mathematics.
We have seen that the interdisciplinary share increases in engineering, mathematics and a
few other fields. But idea-flows may increase because of policy push rather than demand pull. It

12

Figure 6 excludes citations to engineering since its purpose is to examine citations to science.

16

is critical to distinguish the productive importance of a field from its share in knowledge-flows,
as the following regression analysis points out.

VI. Regression Analysis of Universities
We turn now to estimates of knowledge production function (3) using the evidence on
U.S. universities described in Sections IV and V. Table 3 contains descriptive statistics.
Arithmetic means and standard deviations appear above, while values in logarithms appear in
parentheses below. About 200 papers are written per year. During their first five years, the
papers earn 440 citations from other U.S. universities.
Following (4)-(8), the mean knowledge-flow (of citation-weighted R&D) is 677 million
dollars. Three-fourths of this (519 million) occurs within a field, while one-fifth (144 million)
occurs within a university. As one might expect, same field and other universities dominate the
knowledge-flows. The average R&D stock of a university-field is 82 million dollars.
Table 4 reports regressions that divide knowledge-flows into flows from the same and
other universities. Equations 4.1-4.3 use the logarithm of papers as the dependent variable while
4.4-4.6 use the logarithm of citations received. All equations include fixed effects for field,
university, and year that absorb persistent errors that are correlated with the knowledge- flows
and the R&D stock. Knowledge inputs are lagged to avoid correlation with the transitory error

eijt . Standard errors are robust and adjusted for clustering by university. Equations 4.1 (4.4)
include logarithms of the R&D stock of a university-field and the total knowledge-flow. The
output elasticity of R&D stock is 0.17 (0.17), while the output elasticity of the total knowledge
flow is 0.40 (0.48), so that knowledge-flows are more important. Equations 4.2 and 4.5 break up
the knowledge-flows into inside flows from the same university and outside flows from other

17

universities13. The inside elasticities in 4.2 (4.5) are 0.07 (0.08), while the outside elasticities are
0.29 (0.35): outside flows are more important. Equations 4.3 and 4.6 explore whether inside or
outside knowledge-flows have become more or less important over time. To address this we
construct an indicator variable I ( year in the 1990 s) . I (•) equals one if a year is in the 1990s
and zero otherwise. We interact I (•) with the inside and outside knowledge-flows to see
whether the importance of a knowledge-flow changes in the 1990s, a period of rapid change in
information technology and in science policy. The specification is

ln(nijt ) = β + Z D′ δ + η R ln( R j , t −1 ) + ∑ w =1 η w ln(S(wij ) t −1 ) +
W

(11)

∑

W
w =1

φw I ( year in the 1990s ) • ln(S(wij ) t −1 ) + eijt

Coefficients of the interactions φ w will be positive (negative) if a given knowledge-flow has a
rising (falling) effect14. Notice that the interactions are in addition to time effects in Z D′ : they
represent the changing importance of knowledge-flows associated with technology and policy in
the 1990s, while time effects capture trends in papers that are not caught by the other variables.
The results appear in equation 4.3 (4.6). The main elasticityη w of knowledge-flows from
the same university equals 0.08 (0.09). The interaction elasticity for the 1990s is -0.05 (-0.08).
All effects differ significantly from zero. Note that inside knowledge-flows become less
important over time. The main elasticity of knowledge-flows from other universities in 4.3(4.6)
is 0.26 (0.32) and the interaction elasticity for the 1990s is 0.13 (0.21). Thus outside knowledgeflows become more important. Also, growth in the outside elasticity exceeds decline in the
inside elasticity so the importance of knowledge-flows increases. Another way to put this is that

13

Separation of the variables introduces additional errors in the variables, indicated by the decline in the sum of the
separate elasticities in 4.3 and 4.6 below the combined elasticities in 4.2 and 4.5, by a slight drop in R-squared, and
by a slight increase in the root mean squared error. A useful reference on this point is Hausman (2001).
14
Since the Cobb-Douglas does not capture factor-biased technological change, we have augmented the function by
including interactions of the elasticities with time.

18

knowledge-flows make a larger contribution to research output during the 1990s15. This growing
contribution is significant at the one percent level in 4.3 and 4.616. It almost surely reflects
advances in information technology and infrastructure (Adams et al., 2005).
Table 5 divides knowledge-flows into flows from the same field and other fields. 5.1-5.3
report findings for papers while 5.4-5.6 report findings for citations received. As before the
logarithm of R&D stock of the university-field is included to control for tangible resources. 5.1
and 5.4 include two knowledge-flows, from the same and other fields. 5.2 and 5.5 include four
flows: from the same and other fields and universities. Following equation (11), 5.3 and 5.6 add
interactions of logarithms of knowledge-flows from the same and other fields with a dummy for
the 1990s.
In equation 5.1 (5.3), the elasticity of same field knowledge-flows is 0.30 (0.37) while the
elasticity of flows from other fields is 0.08 (0.07). The same field elasticity is four times larger
than the elasticity of other fields, though both are significant.
In equation 5.2 (5.5) we see that the same field/same university elasticity is 0.04 (0.04)
while the same field/other university elasticity is 0.21 (0.27). Most of the productive impact of
knowledge from the same field comes from outside a university.
This is not true of interdisciplinary knowledge-flows. In 5.2 (5.5) the other field/same
university elasticity is 0.04 (0.03), while the other field/other university elasticity is 0.04 (0.04).
Importance of interdisciplinary flows is distributed equally across same and other universities.
This suggests that scientists from different fields must spend substantial time together and this
would explain the comparative localization of interdisciplinary flows.
15

The statement that knowledge-flows make an increasing contribution to scientific discoveries is not the same as
saying that productivity increases. In fact growth of university output slows down in the 1990s, despite the growing
contribution of knowledge-flows (Adams, forthcoming 2010).
16

Using (11), the F-statistic for the null hypothesis of the restriction

φInside + φOutside = 0 is F (1,109) = 96.4 in 4.3.

For 4.6 the F-statistic is F (1,109) = 159.5. In both cases the test decisively rejects the null.

19

Following (11) equations 5.3 and 5.6 examine changes over time. In 5.3 (5.6) we see that
the main elasticity of knowledge-flows in the same field is 0.28 (0.35), while the elasticity of the
interaction of this elasticity with the 1990s is 0.07 (0.11). All estimates differ significantly from
zero and the same field elasticity increases with time. In 5.3 (5.6), the main elasticity of
knowledge-flows from other fields is 0.09 (0.08). But the interaction elasticity is 0.01 (0.01)
and insignificant. While positive and significant, the interdisciplinary elasticity stays the same
over time. Therefore, the importance of same field knowledge-flows increases relative to that of
interdisciplinary flows.
Growth in the same field elasticity combined with an insignificant increase in the
interdisciplinary elasticity implies, just as in Table 4, that knowledge-flows are more important
in the 1990s. The sum of the interaction elasticities differs significantly from zero in 5.3 and
5.617.
Since engineering and mathematics are a focal point of policies favoring interdisciplinary
research, we analyze research output of the two fields using an equation like 5.3. The logarithm
of papers is the dependent variable:
Log ( Papers ) = 0.098 * * • Log ( Knowledge − Flow, Same Field )
(0.032)
+ 0.103 * * • I (Year in the 90 s ) • Log ( Knowledge − Flow, Same Field )

(12)

(0.032)
+ 0.017 * • Log ( Knowledge − Flow, Other Fields )
(0.008)
- 0.034 * • I (Year in the 90 s ) • Log ( Knowledge − Flow, Other Fields )
(0.015)
+ other terms

17

R 2 = 0.92 , N = 1,955

Using (11) the F-statistic for the null hypothesis of the restriction

φSame Field + φOther Field = 0 is F (1,109) = 98.5

in 5.3. For 5.6 the F-statistic is F (1,109) = 129.7. Again the tests decisively reject the null.

20

The elasticity of knowledge-flows in the same field doubles over time. In contrast, the
interdisciplinary elasticity declines. The productive importance of knowledge-flows in the same
field increases by a larger proportion in the very disciplines where interdisciplinary research is a
policy goal. This suggests that policies promoting interdisciplinary research, described in
Section II.B and reflected in growth of interdisciplinarity in Section V, Figure 3-h and 3-i, are
being overridden, perhaps by changes in information technology (see Section VIII below).
Returning to the broader sample, we explore the changing importance of outside fields
using an alternative specification. We are interested in whether growth in the share of
knowledge-flows from other fields individually indicates growing importance in the production
of scientific papers. Put differently, are “hot” fields more productive in fields that cite them and
does this advantage grow over time? The answer turns out to be, not consistently.
To identify “hot” fields, recall from Table 1 that shares of some outside fields increase in
knowledge-flows to particular sciences. A case in point is the rising share of biology in
knowledge-flows to agriculture18. Other examples include the rising importance of medicine in
biology, and of computer science, engineering, and medicine in mathematics. To define “hot”
fields we count all external fields, relative to each citing field, whose shares in knowledge-flows
increase by at least one percent from 1983 to 1999. All other fields are designated “cold” fields.
But if no outside field increases its share then there are no “hot” fields and knowledge flows
from “hot” fields equal zero.
Table 6 shows “hot” fields for each citing field. Biology, medicine, computer science
and engineering dominate among “hot” fields. Also notice that astronomy, computer science,
earth sciences, medicine, and physics have no “hot” fields assigned to them. The reason is that

18

This probably reflects the growing usefulness of genetic engineering in plant breeding (Ruttan 2001, Chapter 10).

21

the share of external fields in knowledge-flows declines over time for these disciplines. Using
the information in Table 6, consider the following specification:

(13)

Field
ln(nijt ) = β + Z D′ δ + η R ln(R j , t −1 ) + ηSame ln(S(Same
)+
ij ) t −1
" Other Fields
" Other Fields
η"Hot" ln(S("ijHot
) + η"Cold " ln(S("ijCold
) + eijt
) t −1
) t −1

A crucial test is whether the hypothesis η"Hot" = η"Cold" is accepted. If it is then “hot” fields are not
more productive than “cold” fields. This would cast doubt on the idea that “hot” fields underpin
growth in interdisciplinary research.
For some citing disciplines there are no “hot” fields and the logarithm is that of zero
(augmented by 0.001). We therefore modify (13) by adding an interaction of the logarithm of
knowledge-flows from “hot” fields with an indicator I (" Hot " Fields = 0 ) . This equals one if true
and zero otherwise. Although less common, we introduce a similar indicator for the absence of
knowledge flows from “cold” fields: I (" Cold " Fields = 0) . The revised specification is,
" Other Fields
Field
ln(nijt ) = β + Z D′ δ + η R ln( R j , t −1 ) + η Same ln(S (Same
) + η"Hot " ln(S ("ijHot
)+
) t −1
ij ) t −1

(14)

" Other Fields
" Other Fields
θ"Hot " I (" Hot" Fields = 0) • ln(S("ijHot
) + η"Cold " ln(S("ijCold
)+
) t −1
) t −1
" Other Fields
θ"Cold " I ("Cold " Fields = 0) • ln(S("ijCold
) + eijt
) t −1

The “zero interaction” terms θi absorb the effect of the absence of knowledge-flows from other
fields, which biases the main elasticities ηi towards zero.
Finally, it is useful to test for changes over time in the comparative importance of same
field as well as “hot” and “cold” other fields, by interacting logarithms of the knowledge-flows
with an indicator variable for the 1990s. This specification extends that of (14):
Field
" Other Fields
ln(nijt ) = β + Z D′ δ + η R ln( R j , t −1 ) + η Same ln(S(Same
) + η"Hot " ln(S("ijHot
)+
ij ) t −1
) t −1

(15)

" Other Fields
" Other Fields
θ"Hot " I (" Hot" Fields = 0) × ln(S("ijHot
) + η"Cold " ln(S("ijCold
)+
) t −1
) t −1
" Other Fields
θ"Cold " I ("Cold " Fields = 0) × ln(S("ijCold
)+
) t −1

∑

w∈"Same","Hot ","Cold "

φw I ( year in the 1990s) • ln(S(wij )t −1 ) + eijt
22

The summation in the last line consists of interactions of knowledge-flows with the 1990s
indicator. We shall use (13)-(15) together to study same, “hot”, and “cold” fields.
Table 7 shows the results. As in previous tables the dependent variable in 7.1-7.3 is the
logarithm of papers while in 7.4-7.6 it is the logarithm of citations received. All equations
include R&D stock and same field flows, but since results for these variables are the same, we
concentrate on “hot” and “cold” field elasticities. For papers the elasticity of “hot” fields is less
than that for “cold” fields, and this difference is sometimes significant. But for citations the
elasticity of “hot” fields exceeds that of “cold”. And yet the “hot” field elasticity is not
consistently greater than that for “cold” fields.
Following (13), 7.1 (7.4) introduce logarithms of these variables without interactions.
Following (14), 7.2 (7.5) introduce zero interactions. As expected the sign of the zero interaction
terms is negative and significant. Accounting for zero knowledge flows increases the main
elasticities of “hot” fields and “cold” fields in 7.2 but it does not change their relative size. In 7.3
(7.6) we use specification (15), which allows for a full set of interactions between the
knowledge-flows and the indicators for zero knowledge-flows and the 1990s. The elasticities of
“hot” and “cold” increase or decrease slightly but at the same rate. “Hot” fields are not becoming
more important over time relative to “cold” fields. Moreover, knowledge-flows from the same
field are becoming more important than either one. The hypothesis of an increasing role for
interdisciplinary research in the production of scientific research is rejected.

VII. Regression Analysis of Firms
So far we have considered the top 110 U.S. universities, emphasizing inside, outside, and
interdisciplinary knowledge-flows, and their role in the production of scientific papers. While
our main interest is in academic science, a comparison with firms is nevertheless useful. Table 8

23

repeats the analysis using a panel of firms, fields, and years19. The firms are the 200 largest U.S.based performers of R&D and citations take place among these firms. The dependent variable is
the logarithm of the firm’s fractional papers20. Table 8 for firms combines the main features of
Tables 5 and 7, which deal with interdisciplinary research in universities.
Equations 8.1 and 8.2 are counterparts to 5.1 and 5.3. In 8.1 the output elasticity of same
field knowledge-flows is 0.24, while the elasticity for other fields is 0.09. These estimates are
similar to the elasticities that equation 5.1 reported for universities, which are 0.30 and 0.08. As
with 5.3 for universities, in 8.2 for firms we add interactions of the knowledge-flows with an
indicator for the 1990s. The elasticity of knowledge-flows from the same field increases
significantly over time, from 0.21 in the 1980s to 0.26 in the 1990s. This is similar to the
increase from 0.28 to 0.34 observed in 5.3 for universities.
The rest of Table 8 concerns knowledge-flows from “hot” and “cold” external fields.
Equations 8.3-8.5 are analogous to the university equations 7.1-7.3. All equations include
logarithms of the firm’s basic research stock and of same field knowledge-flows, with similar
results to 8.1 and 8.221. Equation 8.3 includes logarithms of “hot” and “cold” fields, whose
elasticities are 0.04 and 0.09. The estimates are significant at the one percent level, but the
elasticity for “hot” fields is significantly less than that for “cold” fields. It is useful to include a
zero interaction between the logarithm of knowledge-flows from other fields and an indicator for
zero knowledge-flows. When this is done, in 8.4, the zero interactions are again negative and
significant, and main elasticities increase. The elasticity for “hot” fields (0.136) remains less than

19

See Adams and Clemmons (2008) for a detailed description of the firm panel.
Since citations received by firm papers exhibit a substantial number of zeroes, they require the use of Tobit
analysis. While there is nothing difficult about undertaking such an analysis or in comparing expected marginal
effects in Tobit analysis to regression coefficients, such an analysis lies outside the scope of the present paper.
21
As Adams and Clemmons (2008) show, total R&D stocks of firms are weighted by the share of basic research in
their primary industry to arrive at an estimate of the basic research stock for the firms.
20

24

that for “cold” fields (0.190) but the difference is not significant. Equation 8.5 adds interactions
between logarithms of knowledge-flows for the same, “hot”, and “cold” fields with the 1990s
dummy. The same field elasticity increases significantly, from 0.19 in the 1980s to 0.24 in the
1990s. The “hot” and “cold” field elasticities decline but the decline is not statistically
significant. The university and firm estimates agree in that elasticities of “hot” and “cold” fields
change rather little whereas the same field elasticity increases. The results for firms are similar
to those for universities, perhaps because underlying incentives are similar across sectors.

VIII. Summary, Discussion, and Conclusion
This paper finds that outside knowledge-flows from other institutions, and the importance of
outside knowledge for research output measured by scientific papers and citations received, have
risen relative to inside knowledge-flows from the same university (Table 4). Results on
knowledge-flows from the same field and other fields are more complex than this and more
tentative. Same field and interdisciplinary flows contribute positively and significantly to
scientific papers. The main facts to be reconciled are that interdisciplinary knowledge-flows in
universities increase slightly as a share of all knowledge-flows (Figure 4), but the importance of
interdisciplinary knowledge in the production of new ideas does not increase, even as the same
field elasticity increases (Table 5).22
When we break up knowledge-flows from other fields into “hot” (shares in knowledge-flows
rising) and “cold” (shares flat or declining) in Table 7 the importance of “hot” fields in
production also does not increase relative to “cold” fields. Besides this, “hot” fields are not

22

Importance in production is again measured by the elasticity of research output with respect to knowledge-flows.

25

consistently more important than “cold” fields23. These results hold for firms as well as
universities (Table 8).
The most important changes in the structure of production of scientific discoveries are as
follows. During the 1990s the structure of production shifts towards outside knowledge-flows
from other universities (Table 4) while at the same time it begins to favor same field knowledgeflows (Table 5). In both cases knowledge-flows make a larger contribution in the 1990s. At this
point we offer a few observations.
Adams et al. (2005) find that outside collaboration increases because of construction of the
Internet and its connection to networks in Europe and Asia in the late 1980s (Mowery and
Simcoe, 2002). In the 1980s the Internet became a policy initiative of the NSF and the same is
true of cyber infrastructure today (National Science Foundation, 2009b). Not merely
collaboration but also citation would shift outside a university as a result of this infrastructure.
More subtly, distant researchers in the same discipline become collaborators. They can replace
researchers in the same university but other disciplines (Rosenblat and Mobius, 2004).
It follows that growth of information technology could have brought about a decrease in the
importance of interdisciplinary research. To produce the increase in Figure 4, however slight,
would require at least one countervailing factor. From Section II.B, one candidate for such a
factor is the founding of university research centers starting in the 1980s, whose purpose is to
encourage interdisciplinary research (Adams, Chiang and Starkey, 2001). Since the 1980s many
other centers have been founded, including in nanotechnology. Many encourage industry
involvement and because industrial research tends to cut across fields, this too would encourage
interdisciplinary research (Boardman and Corley, 2008). Important as well are large government

23

Thirdly, the correlation by field between growth in the share of outside fields in knowledge-flows and the
importance of other fields in production of new ideas is probably low based on Figures 3a-3l and Table 6.

26

programs, such as the Human Genome Project, which marshal vast resources with one purpose
being that of encouraging scientists in different fields to combine their talents.
All of this tells a story of simultaneous pursuit of different goals with sometimes unforeseen
consequences. By supporting information technology NSF intended to connect, and did connect,
more researchers in joint research. By establishing university centers NSF meant to engage more
researchers in interdisciplinary research. This is because, given the growing complexity of
scientific questions, NSF strongly holds the view that interdisciplinary research leads to more
breakthroughs (National Science Foundation, 2009b). The unforeseen consequence was that
cyber infrastructure would promote research within the same field rather than interdisciplinary
research even though the goal of the centers was to promote interdisciplinary research (Rosenblat
and Mobius, 2004).
None of the findings in this paper should be seen as “closing the book” on
interdisciplinary research—far from it. We must not rush to judgment and argue that deliberate
subsidization of interdisciplinary research is mistaken but instead wait and maintain a patient
agnosticism until the results of the policy can be observed. While a final verdict is yet to be
rendered, one interpretation of the findings is that interdisciplinary research is still in its early
stages. Although interdisciplinary knowledge-flows have increased a little, this is partly because
of recent policies designed to support them. What we may not be seeing so far are the effects of
discoveries from this research that would increase the importance of interdisciplinary research in
the next generation of discoveries. Those events could still lie in the future. This would be true
if gestation lags on interdisciplinary work are long and variable, precisely because the work is
path-breaking. One must learn to live with ambiguities relating to new policies like those that
we study in this paper, just as with the study of new phenomena in general.

27

References
Adams, James D., “Is the U.S. Losing Its Preeminence in Higher Education?” , Cambridge, MA,
NBER Working Paper #15233, August 2009, forthcoming in Charles T. Clotfelter, editor,
American Universities in a Global Market, Chicago: University of Chicago Press for

the National Bureau of Economic Research, 2010
______________, Eric P. Chiang, and Katara Starkey, “Industry-University Cooperative
Research Centers,” Journal of Technology Transfer 26 (January 2001): 73-86
______________, “Comparative Localization of Academic and Industrial Spillovers,” Journal
of Economic Geography 2 (July 2002): 253-278

______________, and Zvi Griliches, “Research Productivity in a System of Universities,”
Annales D’Economie et de Statistique 49/50 (1998): 127-162

______________, Grant Black, J. Roger Clemmons, and Paula E. Stephan, “Scientific Teams
and Institutional Collaborations: Evidence from U.S. Universities, 1981-1999,” Research
Policy 34 (2005): 259-285

______________, J. Roger Clemmons, and Paula E. Stephan, “Standing on Academic
Shoulders: Measuring Scientific Influence in Universities,” forthcoming, Annales
D’Economie et de Statistique, 2006

__________________________________, and J. Roger Clemmons, “The NBER-Rensselaer
Scientific Papers Database: Form, Nature, and Function,” Cambridge, Mass., NBER
Working Paper 14575, December 2008
Becker, Gary S., and Kevin M. Murphy, “The Division of Labor, Coordination Costs, and
Knowledge,” Quarterly Journal of Economics CVII (November 1992): 1137-1160
Boardman, P. Craig, and Elizabeth Corley, “University Research Centers and the Composition of
28

Research Collaborations,” Research Policy 37 (2008): 900-913
Corley, Elizabeth, P. Craig Boardman, and Barry Bozeman, “Design and the Management of
Multi-Institutional Research Collaborations: Theoretical Implications from Two Case
Studies,” Research Policy 35 (2006): 975-993
Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy: National Academy of Sciences, National
Academy of Engineering, and Institute of Medicine, Facilitating Interdisciplinary
Research, Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2004

Hausman, Jerry, “Mismeasured Variables in Econometric Analysis: Problems from the Right and
Problems from the Left,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 15 (Fall 2001): 57-68
Hicks, Diana, and J. Sylvan Katz, “Science Policy for a Highly Collaborative Science System,”
Science and Public Policy 23: 39-44

Hirshleifer, Jack, and John G. Riley, The Analytics of Uncertainty and Information, New
York, Cambridge University Press, 1992
Holton, Gerald, Hasok Chang, and Edward Jurkowitz, “How a Scientific Discovery is made: A
Case History,” American Scientist 84 (July/August 1996): 364-375
Hounshell, David, and John Kenley Smith, Science and Corporate Strategy: DuPont R&D,
1902-1980, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988

Hsiao, Cheng, Analysis of Panel Data, 2nd Edition, Cambridge, UK and New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2003
Jeffrey, Paul, “Smoothing the Waters: Observations on the Process of Cross-Disciplinary
Research,” Social Studies of Science 33 (August 2003): 539-562
Katz, J. Sylvan, and Ben R. Martin, “What is Research Collaboration” Research Policy 26
(1997): 1-18

29

Klette, Tor Jakob, and Samuel Kortum, “Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation,” Journal
Of Political Economy 112 (October 2004): 986-1018

Kortum, Samuel, “Research, Patenting, and Technological Change,” Econometrica 65
(November 1997): 1389-1419
Mowery, David C., and Timothy Simcoe, “Is the Internet a U.S. Invention?—an Economic and
Technological History of Computer Networking” Research Policy 31 (2002): 1369-1387
National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
Bioinformatics Resource Centers, www.miaid.nih.gov/LabsandResources/brc
National Research Council, Research-Doctorate Programs in the United States: Continuity
And Change, Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1995

National Science Board, Science and Engineering Indicators 2002 (in two volumes),
Arlington, VA, National Science Foundation, 2002
___________________, Science and Engineering Indicators 2008 (in two volumes),
Arlington, VA, National Science Foundation, 2008
National Science Foundation, CASPAR (Computer-Aided Science Policy Analysis and
Research) Database, www.nsf.gov/statistics , Arlington, VA, 2009a

_______________________, “NSF-Wide Investments,” www.nsf.gov/news/priority_areas ,
2009b
Nelson, Richard R., “The Link between Science and Invention: The Case of the Transistor,” in
Richard R. Nelson, editor, The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic
and Social Factors, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press for NBER, 1962

_______________, “The Role of Knowledge in R&D Efficiency,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 97 (August 1982): 453-470

30

Price, Derek J. de Solla, Big Science, Little Science, and Beyond, Revised edition, New York:
Columbia University Press, 1986
Rosenblat, Tanya S., and Markus M. Mobius, “Getting Closer or Drifting Apart” Quarterly
Journal of Economics CXIX (August 2004): 971-1010

Ruttan, Vernon W., Technology, Growth, and Development, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2001
Zuckerman, Harriet, and Robert K. Merton, “Age, Aging, and Age Structure in Science,” in
Robert K. Merton, and Norman W. Storer, editors, The Sociology of Science:
Theoretical and Empirical Investigations, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1973

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

Table 1
Top Cited Fields by Share in Knowledge-Flows,
By Citing Field, Years 1983, 1991, and 1999

Citing Field

1983

1991

1999

Top Cited Fields
(Shares)

Top Cited Fields
(Shares)

Top Cited Fields
(Shares)

Agriculture

1. Biology (0.19)
2. Earth Science (0.06)
3. Medicine (0.05)

1. Biology (0.22)
2. Medicine (0.07)
2. Earth Science (0.05)

1. Biology (0.26)
2. Medicine (0.06)
2. Earth Science (0.05)

Astronomy

1. Earth Science (0.16)
2. Biology (0.09)
3. Physics (0.03)

1. Earth Science (0.11)
2. Biology (0.06)
3. Physics (0.04)

1. Earth Science (0.09)
2. Biology (0.05)
3. Physics (0.02)

Biology

1. Medicine (0.14)
2. Earth Science (0.03)
3. Agriculture (0.03)

1. Medicine (0.15)
2. Agriculture (0.03)
3. Earth Science (0.02)

1. Medicine (0.18)
2. Agriculture (0.03)
3. Earth Science (0.02)

Chemistry

1. Biology (0.13)
2. Physics (0.07)
3. Engineering (0.04)

1. Biology (0.14)
2. Physics (0.07)
3. Engineering (0.05)

1. Biology (0.19)
2. Engineering (0.07)
2. Physics (0.06)

Computer Science

1. Engineering (0.29)
2. Physics (0.01)
3. Mathematics and
Statistics (0.01)

1. Engineering (0.19)
2. Physics (0.02)
3. Mathematics and
Statistics (0.01)

1. Engineering (0.18)
2. Physics (0.01)
3. Mathematics and
Statistics (0.01)

Earth Science

1. Biology (0.06)
2. Astronomy (0.02)
3. Agriculture (0.01)

1. Biology (0.04)
2. Engineering (0.02)
3. Agriculture (0.01)

1. Biology (0.06)
2. Engineering (0.02)
3. Astronomy (0.01)

Economics and
Business

1. Psychology (0.05)
2. Mathematics and
Statistics (0.05)
3. Biology (0.02)

1. Mathematics and
Statistics (0.08)
2. Psychology (0.02)
3. Engineering (0.02)

1. Mathematics and
Statistics (0.06)
2. Psychology (0.03)
3. Medicine (0.02)

Engineering

1. Physics (0.05)
2. Medicine (0.03)
3. Earth Science (0.03)

1. Physics (0.05)
2. Computer Science (0.04)
3. Medicine (0.03)

1. Computer Science (0.06)
2. Medicine (0.05)
3. Earth Science (0.04)

Mathematics and
Statistics

1. Engineering (0.10)
2. Physics (0.06)
3. Computer Science (0.03)

1. Engineering (0.15)
2. Computer Science (0.08)
3. Physics (0.08)

1. Engineering (0.17)
2. Medicine (0.12)
3. Computer Science (0.08)

41

Table 1
Top Cited Fields by Share in Knowledge-Flows,
By Citing Field, Years 1983, 1991, and 1999

Citing Field

1983

1991

1999

Top Cited Fields
(Shares)

Top Cited Fields
(Shares)

Top Cited Fields
(Shares)

Medicine

1. Biology (0.19)
2. Engineering (0.01)
3. Agriculture (0.01)

1. Biology (0.22)
2. Psychology (0.01)
3. Engineering (0.01)

1. Biology (0.19)
2. Engineering (0.01)
3. Psychology (0.01)

Physics

1. Engineering (0.08)
2. Chemistry (0.03)
3. Astronomy (0.01)

1. Engineering (0.09)
2. Chemistry (0.03)
3. Earth Science (0.02)

1. Engineering (0.06)
2. Biology (0.02)
3. Chemistry (0.02)

Psychology

1. Biology (0.22)
2. Medicine (0.18)
3. Agriculture (0.01)

1. Medicine (0.24)
2. Biology (0.16)
3. Economics and
Business (0.02)

1. Medicine (0.29)
2. Biology (0.14)
3. Economics and
Business (0.02)

Notes: Top cited fields are the top three “outside” fields with the largest share in
knowledge-flows to a given science. Knowledge-flows are captured by citation-weighted
R&D stocks. See equations (4), (6)-(8) of the text for definitions of the knowledge-flows
and see (9) for definitions of shares of other fields in these flows.

42

Table 2
Changes in Citation Shares by Engineering Subfield, 1983-1999

Change in Share a

Engineering Subfield
Same Subfield

Other
Engineering

Science

-0.005

0.020

-0.014

AI, Robotics, and Automatic Control

-0.159 (N)

0.004

0.155 (P)

Civil Engineering

-0.161 (N)

0.022

0.138 (P)

Chemical Engineering

-0.126 (N)

-0.013

0.138 (P)

Environmental Engineering & Energy

-0.169 (N)

-0.117 (N)

0.286 (P)

Electrical Engineering

0.011

-0.002

-0.008

Engineering Mathematics

-0.091

0.073

0.019

Biomedical Engineering

-0.112 (N)

-0.040

0.152 (P)

Industrial Engineering

0.205 (P)

0.125 (P)

-0.330 (N)

-0.099

0.034

0.065

Metallurgy

-0.181 (N)

0.202 (P)

-0.022

Materials Science

-0.173 (N)

0.021

0.152 (P)

Nuclear Engineering

-0.101 (N)

0.034

0.067

Aeronautical Engineering

Mechanical Engineering

Notes:

a

Citation share in year t is CiteSharetj = Citationstj / ∑i Citationsti , where i, j =

engineering subfield, other engineering, and science. Change in the citation share is
ΔCiteShare99j ,83 = CiteShare99j − CiteShare83j . Symbol (N) indicates that the share
decreases by at least 0.1 and (P) indicates that the share increases by at least 0.1.

43

Table 3
Descriptive Statistics from a Panel of U.S. Universities, 1983-1999
For a Study of University Research Productivity
(Logarithms in Parentheses)

Variable

Mean
(in Logarithms)

St. Dev.
(in Logarithms)

196.5
(4.58)
440.1
(2.26)

345.0
(1.19)
1168.7
(5.30)

676.8
(5.19)
519.0
(4.88)
157.8
(3.57)
143.8
(3.53)
533.0
(4.89)
81.9
(3.31)

1550.3
(1.85)
1169.4
(1.92)
409.3
(2.18)
303.3
(2.12)
1269.5
(1.93)
134.7
(1.98)

Papers a
Citations Received b
Knowledge-Flows (in mill. of ’92 $):
Total
Same Field c
Other Fields c
Same University d
Other Universities d
R&D Stock (in Millions of ’92 $) e

Notes: Data are a three-dimensional panel of fields, universities of science and years.
The number of observations is N=11,220 before exclusions due to missing values.
Arithmetic means and standard deviations appear above while logarithmic means and
standard deviations appear below in parentheses. Knowledge-flows are citation-weighted
R&D stocks. See equations (4), (6)-(8) of the text for definitions of the flows. a Papers
are fractional counts of articles written in a university, field and year, where fractions are
adjusted for shared publication with other universities. b Citations received are all
citations received from other universities during the first five years of a paper including
the publication year, and are fractionalized in the same way as papers. c Same field
knowledge-flows occur when citing and cited fields are the same, while other field flows
occur when the two fields differ. d Same university knowledge-flows occur when citing
and cited universities are the same, while other university flows occur when the two
universities differ. e R&D stock is the sum of depreciated flows of R&D over the
previous eight years, expressed in l992 dollars and assuming a rate of depreciation of 15
percent.

44

Table 4—Scientific Papers of U.S. Universities:
Knowledge-Flows Within and Between Universities, 1983-1999
(Robust, Clustered Standard Errors in Parentheses)

Variable or Statistic

Log (Papers)
Eq. 4.1

Time Period
Log (Stock of Total R&D)
Log (Knowledge-Flow)

Eq. 4.3

Eq. 4.4

1983-1999
0.169**
(0.023)
0.400**
(0.040)

Log (Knowledge-Flow, Same
University)
I(Year in the 1990s)×
Log(Knowledge-Flow, Same
University
Log (Knowledge-Flow, Other
Universities)
I(Year in the 1990s)×
Log(Knowledge-Flow, Other
Universities
No. of Obs.
R-squared
Root Mean Squared Error

Eq. 4.2

Log (Citations Received)

9856
0.920
0.315

Eq. 4.5

Eq. 4.6

1983-1995

0.186**
(0.025)

0.187**
(0.024)

0.072**
(0.019)

0.172**
(0.032)
0.478**
(0.051)

0.203**
(0.032)

0.202**
(0.030)

0.080**
(0.017)
-0.045**
(0.016)

0.075**
(0.022)

0.085**
(0.020)
-0.077**
(0.019)

0.286**
(0.024)

0.259**
(0.024)
0.130**
(0.020)

0.347**
(0.035)

0.321**
(0.031)
0.212**
(0.023)

9856
0.917
0.320

9856
0.920
0.313

7534
0.919
0.457

7534
0.923
0.447

7534
0.921
0.453

Notes: Data are a panel of fields, universities, and years. All equations include fixed
effects for university, field, and year. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by
university. Method is OLS. Knowledge-flows are sums of citation-weighted R&D stocks
as defined in (4), (6)-(8) of the text. ** Coefficient is significantly different from zero at
the one percent level.

45

Table 5—Scientific Papers of U.S. Universities:
Knowledge-Flows Within and Between Fields, 1983-1999
(Robust, Clustered Standard Errors in Parentheses)

Log (Papers)

Variable or Statistic
Eq. 5.1

Time Period

Eq. 5.2

Log (Citations Received)
Eq. 5.3

Eq. 5.4

1983-1999

Log (Stock of Total R&D)
Log (Knowledge-Flow, Same Field)
I(Year in 1990s)× Log (Knowledge-Flow,
Same Field)
Log (Knowledge-Flow, Other Fields)

0.174**
(0.023)
0.296**
(0.034)

0.080**
(0.011)

I(Year in 1990s)× Log (Knowledge-Flow,
Other Fields)
Log (Knowledge-Flow, Same Field/Same
University)
Log (Knowledge-Flow, Same Field/Other
Universities)
Log (Knowledge-Flow, Other Fields/Same
University)
Log (Knowledge-Flow, Other Fields/Other
Universities)
No. of Obs.
R-squared
Root Mean Squared Error

0.205**
(0.025)

9856
0.921
0.320

Eq. 5.6

1983-1995
0.164**
(0.021)
0.275**
(0.033)
0.068**
(0.014)
0.086**
(0.010)
0.014
(0.014)

0.178**
(0.032)
0.370**
(0.048)

0.228**
(0.031)

0.072**
(0.013)

0.036*
(0.015)
0.211**
(0.024)
0.038**
(0.005)
0.037**
(0.008)
9856
0.919
0.315

Eq. 5.5

0.164**
(0.030)
0.349**
(0.046)
0.107**
(0.020)
0.081**
(0.012)
0.014
(0.018)

0.036*
(0.018)
0.267**
(0.029)
0.031**
(0.007)
0.037**
(0.011)
9856
0.922
0.309

7534
0.920
0.456

7534
0.918
0.461

7534
0.923
0.447

Notes: Data are a panel of fields, universities, and years. All equations include fixed
effects for university, field, and year. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by
university. Method is OLS. Knowledge-flows are sums of citation-weighted R&D stocks
as defined in (4), (6)-(8) of the text. ** Coefficient is significantly different from zero at
the one percent level. * Coefficient is significantly different from zero at the five percent
level.

46

Table 6
Matching of Citing Fields to “Hot” Fields

Citing Field

“Hot” Fields

Agriculture
Astronomy
Biology
Chemistry
Computer Science
Economics and Business
Earth Sciences
Engineering
Mathematics and Statistics
Medicine
Physics
Psychology

Biology, Medicine
<<None>>
Medicine
Biology, Engineering
<<None>>
Engineering ,Mathematics and Statistics
<<None>>
Biology, Computer Science, Earth Sciences, Medicine
Computer Science, Engineering, Medicine
<<None>>
<<None>>
Medicine

Notes: “Hot” fields are other fields whose share in knowledge-flows increases by at least
one percent between 1983 and 1999. Citing fields with no “hot” fields are those where
the share of knowledge-flows from other fields declines.

47

Table 7—Scientific Papers of U.S. Universities:
Citation-Weighted R&D, “Hot” and “Cold” Fields, 1983-1999
(Robust, Clustered Standard Errors in Parentheses)

Log (Papers)
Variable or Statistic

Eq. 7.1

Time Period

Eq. 7.2

Log (Citations Received)
Eq. 7.3

Eq. 7.4

1983-1999

Log (Stock of Total R&D)
Log (Knowledge-Flow, Same Field)
I(Year in 1990s)× Log (KnowledgeFlow, Same Field)
Log (Knowledge-Flow, “Hot” Fields)
I(“Hot” Fields=0)× Log(KnowledgeFlow, “Hot” Fields)
I(Year in 1990s)× Log (KnowledgeFlow, “Hot” Fields)
Log (Knowledge-Flow, “Cold”
Fields)
I(“Cold” Fields=0)× Log(KnowledgeFlow, “Cold” Fields)
I(Year in 1990s)× Log (KnowledgeFlow, “Cold” Fields)
No. of Obs.
R-squared
Root Mean Squared Error

0.175**
(0.023)
0.318**
(0.035)

0.167**
(0.021)
0.308**
(0.033)

0.020a **
(0.006)

0.054a **
(0.010)
-0.061**
(0.011)

0.032a **
(0.006)

0.071a **
(0.009)
-0.076**
(0.011)

9856
0.918
0.318

9856
0.921
0.312

Eq. 7.5

Eq. 7.6

1983-1995
0.160**
(0.020)
0.289**
(0.031)
0.043**
(0.009)
0.056a **
(0.010)
-0.054**
(0.011)
0.00019b **
(0.00004)
0.068a **
(0.008)
-0.063**
(0.011)
0.00021b **
(0.00004)
9856
0.924
0.306

0.181**
(0.032)
0.387**
(0.048)

0.175**
(0.030)
0.376**
(0.046)

0.045c **
(0.008)

0.091c **
(0.013)
-0.078**
(0.016)

0.022c **
(0.008)

0.053c **
(0.011)
-0.057**
(0.016)

7534
0.920
0.455

7534
0.922
0.451

0.161**
(0.028)
0.345**
(0.043)
0.148**
(0.017)
0.115d **
(0.015)
-0.088**
(0.016)
-0.012b **
(0.003)
0.061d **
(0.011)
-0.046**
(0.016
-0.031b **
(0.011)

Notes: Data are a panel of fields, universities, and years. All equations include fixed
effects for university, field, and year. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by
university. Method is OLS. Knowledge-flows are sums of citation-weighted R&D
stocks as defined in (4), (6)-(8) of the text. **Coefficient is significantly different from
zero at the one percent level. a Coefficients of “hot” and “cold” fields are not
significantly different at the five percent level. b Coefficients of “hot” and “cold”
interactions with the 1990s are not significantly different at the five percent level.
c
Coefficients of “hot” and “cold” fields are significantly different at the five percent
level. d Coefficients of “hot” and “cold” fields are significantly different at the one
percent level.

48

7534
0.925
0.442

Table 8—Scientific Papers of Top 200 U.S. R&D Firms:
Knowledge-Flows within and between Fields, 1983-1999
(Robust, Clustered Standard Errors in Parentheses)

Variable or Statistic

Log (Papers)
Eq. 8.1

Eq. 8.2

Time Period

Eq. 8.3

Eq. 8.4

Eq. 8.5

0.055**
(0.018)
0.224**
(0.012)

0.051**
(0.017)
0.204**
(0.010)

0.051**
(0.017)
0.179**
(0.011)
0.040**
(0.013)

0.044a **
(0.007)

0.136b **
(0.017)
-0.116**
(0.018)

0.088a **
(0.009)

0.190b **
(0.020)
-0.148**
(0.019)

0.138c **
(0.020)
-0.115**
(0.019)
-0.005d
(0.006)
0.207c **
(0.022)
-0.149**
(0.020)
-0.026d
(0.009)

5615
0.703
0.848

5615
0.727
0.814

1983-1999

Log (Stock of Basic Research)
Log (Knowledge-Flow, Same Field)
I(Year in 1990s)× Log (Knowledge-Flow,
Same Field)
Log (Knowledge-Flow, Other Fields)

0.055**
(0.020)
0.235**
(0.013)

0.094**
(0.010)

I(Year in 1990s)× Log (Knowledge-Flow,
Other Fields)
Log (Knowledge-Flow, “Hot” Fields)

0.057**
(0.020)
0.206**
(0.014)
0.049**
(0.014)
0.090**
(0.012)
0.006
(0.010)

I(“Hot” Other Fields=0)× Log(KnowledgeFlow, “Hot” Fields)
I(Year in 1990s)× Log (Citation-Weighted
R&D, “Hot” Fields)
Log (Citation-Weighted R&D, “Cold” Fields)
I(“Cold” Other Fields=0)× Log(KnowledgeFlow, “Cold” Fields)
I(Year in 1990s)× I(Year in 1990s)× Log
(Citation-Weighted R&D, “Cold” Fields)
No. of Obs.
R-squared
Root Mean Squared Error

5615
0.694
0.861

5615
0.696
0.858

5615
0.728
0.813

Notes: Data are a panel of firms, fields, and years. All equations include fixed effects for
firm, field, and year. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by firm. Method is OLS.
Knowledge-flows are sums of citation-weighted R&D stocks as defined in (4), (6)-(8) of
the text, but adapted to data on firms. **Coefficient is significantly different from zero at
the one percent level of significance. a The coefficients of “hot” and “cold” fields are
significantly different at the one percent level. b The coefficients of “hot” and “cold”
fields are not significantly different at the five percent level. c The coefficients of “hot”
and “cold” fields are significantly different at the five percent level. d Coefficients of the
“hot” and “cold” interactions with the 1990s are not significantly different at the five
percent level.
49

