NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BIDDING FOR BRAINS:
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND THE INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION OF KNOWLEDGE WORKERS
Carol McAusland
Peter J. Kuhn
Working Paper 15486
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15486

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2009

The authors thank Arthur Fishman, seminar participants at the Chinese University of Hong Kong,
and participants at the conference on Globalization and the Brain Drain at Bar-Ilan and Hebrew Universities,
December 9-11, 2008, for helpful comments. We also thank two anonymous referees for their useful
insights. Fanqing Ye provided excellent research assistance. Kuhn thanks UC Berkeley’s Center for
Labor Economics for their generous hospitality during the research on this project. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Carol McAusland and Peter J. Kuhn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Bidding for Brains: Intellectual Property Rights and the International Migration of Knowledge
Workers
Carol McAusland and Peter J. Kuhn
NBER Working Paper No. 15486
November 2009
JEL No. F22,J61,O34
ABSTRACT
We introduce international mobility of knowledge workers into a model of Nash equilibrium IPR policy
choice among countries. We show that governments have incentives to use IPRs in a bidding war for
global talent, resulting in Nash equilibrium IPRs that can be too high, rather than too low, from a global
welfare perspective. These incentives become stronger as developing countries grow in size and wealth,
thus allowing them to prevent the ‘poaching’ of their ‘brains’ by larger, wealthier markets.

Carol McAusland
Food and Resource Economics
337-2357 Main Mall
University of British Columbia
Vancouver BC
Canada V6T 1Z4
carol.mcausland@ubc.ca
Peter J. Kuhn
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara
2127 North Hall
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
pjkuhn@econ.ucsb.edu

1. Introduction
The notion that it is privately (but not globally) optimal for developing countries
to ‘free ride’ on technological innovations produced by the developed world is well
known in the intellectual property rights literature (see for example Chin and Grossman
1990). Over the years, this literature has also identified a number of factors that might
induce developing countries to protect intellectual property. These include the
inappropriateness of Northern technology for the South (Diwan and Rodrik 1991),
strategic reactions by Northern firms to the lack of Southern protection (Yang and
Maskus 2001), dynamic effects on innovation in the South (Helpman 1993; Chen and
Puttinanun 2005; Schneider 2005), the prospects of increased foreign direct investment or
licensing (Markusen 2001, Maskus 2005), and of expanded international trade (Maskus
and Penubarti 1995, Fink and Primo Baga 2005).
An equally well known idea—in a different literature—is the notion that an
outflow of skilled labor, or ‘brain drain’, hurts developing countries, due to diminished
opportunities for within-country trade and fiscal externalities (e.g. Berry and Soligo
1969; Bhagwati and Hamada 1974). Countervailing factors that might create benefits
from brain drain include increased incentives to acquire education in the sending country
arising from an ‘emigration lottery’ (Mountford 1997) and added discipline on the
sending country’s tax authorities (Bucovetsky 2003).
Perhaps surprisingly, the two literatures described above (on IPR policy in
developing countries and the brain drain respectively) have remained largely isolated
from each other. 1 This omission is particularly noteworthy in light of two key stylized
facts. First, immigrants—including those from developing countries—account for a large
fraction of U.S. innovative activity. For example, nearly one in five scientists and
engineers in the United States is an immigrant (Zakaria 2005), while foreign students
comprised 51 percent of U.S. science and engineering Ph.D. recipients in 2003 (Bound,
Turner and Walsh (2009). These counts probably understate immigrants’ contribution to
U.S. innovation, since immigrant college graduates patent at twice the U.S. native rate
(Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle 2009); immigrant graduate students also contribute
disproportionately to U.S. innovation (Chellaraj, Maskus and Mattoo 2008). 2 Second,
internationally mobile scientists can also represent a large share of sending countries’
innovative talent. According to Docquier and Rapaport (2009), these flows are
particularly high for countries that are both poor and relatively small, such as Guyana,

1

Mondal and Gupta (2008) introduce international labor mobility into Helpman’s (1993) model, but treat
IPR policy as exogenous and consider only the limiting case of perfect international labor mobility. Oettl
and Agrawal (2008) empirically study the patent flows that result from international labor mobility. To
our knowledge, no existing papers model the choice of IPR policy in the presence of internationally mobile
innovative talent.
2
At the extreme top tail of the innovation distribution, Weinberg (2008) documents the flow of ‘star’
scientists out of developing nations, reporting a steep recent rise (to 14% for the 1990s) in the share of
Nobel Prizes in Chemistry, Medicine and Physics awarded to researchers born in developing countries.
None of this prize-winning work was done in a developing country.

2
Haiti, and Kenya: In 2000, 89, 84, and 47 percent of these countries’ university-educated
natives were living in developed (OECD) countries.
The goal of this paper is to study the interactions between IPR policy and brain
drain. We do so by considering an IPR policy game between countries in a context
where workers who produce intellectual property are internationally mobile (at a cost),
and where innovations display some country-specificity in their usefulness or appeal. We
offer two main contributions. The first is to identify some hitherto unrecognized factors
affecting any country’s (privately) optimal IPR policy, and the consequences of these
factors for global efficiency. One such factor is what we term the “bidding for brains”
effect. Unless innovations are truly universal, governments have an incentive to
manipulate local policy to attract footloose innovators. In sharp contrast to the well
known “free riding” effect, “bidding for brains” induces countries to overprotect
intellectual property, as an outcome of a global bidding war for innovative talent.
We also identify an “expatriate brains” effect. When part (or all) of a country’s
intellectual workforce has departed to another country, the brain-sending country’s
incentives to protect intellectual property may be weakened, because the marginal
innovations produced by those innovators are less relevant to the Source country when
produced abroad. Thus, the ‘South’s’ incentives to set low IPRs may both be intensified
and, in part explained by the fact that many of the South’s brains live in the North.
A final contribution of our paper is to identify conditions in which each of the two
above effects is likely to be important. We show that the expatriate brains effect tends to
dominate when developing countries are small or poor: such countries have no hope of
contesting the outflow of their brains via strong protection of intellectual property and
instead, as predicted by the traditional IPR literature, are likely to choose zero protection
in a Nash policy equilibrium. The bidding-war effect is more likely to dominate as
developing countries grow in prosperity and innovative capacity to a point where their IP
laws are capable of having a quantitatively significant effect on the outflows of their
brains. In fact, as the South grows, we show that its Nash equilibrium IPR policy can rise
from zero to levels similar to North’s, and that at this equilibrium, both countries
overprotect intellectual property relative to globally efficient levels. We therefore
speculate that continued development in countries like China and India might one day
replace the debate over intellectual ‘free-riding’ by those countries with one about
excessive IPR protection in a global bidding war for the world’s top scientists, engineers
and artists. 3

3

We recognize, of course, that IPRs are only one of many factors affecting the location choices of
scientists, engineers and artists, and that IPR policy is affected by many factors (such as the hope for
additional foreign investment) other than the desire to attract scientists to one’s country (or to prevent their
departure). Our goal, instead, is to point out interactions between IPR policy and the international
migration of knowledge workers that have not, to our knowledge, been noted before, and that may have the
potential to be quantitatively significant, especially as developing countries grow in market size and
innovative capacity.

3
2. Related Literature
As noted, our paper contributes to two literatures, one of which examines the
determination and optimality of IPR policy in a group of nations. In an early contribution
to this literature, Chin and Grossman (1990) showed that low, or zero IPRs might be in
the interests of developing countries, since the benefits of consuming Northern
innovations at low cost override the gains to local innovators from stronger IPRs. One
cost to this ‘free-riding’ strategy, however, is the fact that relying solely on innovations
produced by the North may generate innovations that are particularly inappropriate for
the South (Diwan and Rodrik 1991).
Another cost of low Southern IPRs is the possibility that zero protection stunts the
development of innovative activity in the South, although Helpman (1993) has argued
that zero Southern IPR may be optimal even in a fully dynamic model with endogenous
Southern innovative capacity. Since then, Lai (1998) has shown that Helpman’s result
may depend on the way in which production is transferred to the South. In particular, if
production is transferred via foreign direct investment rather than imitation, the South can
benefit from raising its IPRs. In a similar vein, Glass and Wu (2007) show that whether
strong IPRs raise Southern innovation depends also on whether innovation takes the form
of improving existing products or developing new ones. Finally, Lai and Qiu (2003)
show that developing countries can gain from raising their IPR protection if this is
accompanied by trade concessions on other fronts by the North.
Two recent IPR papers that are closely related to ours are Grossman and Lai
(2004) and Boldrin and Levine (2005), henceforth GL and BL. 4 A key question in these
papers is the role of ‘scale effects’, which cause the optimal level of IPR protection under
autarky to vary with the size of the economy. In particular, if —as BL argue
empirically— optimal IPR falls (under autarky) with market size, the North’s Nash
equilibrium IPR protection can exceed the globally optimal level. Because our main
focus is on the interactions between IPR policy and international flows of brains, our
paper abstracts from scale effects. 5 Aside from this, our main departure from BL and
GL’s approach (other than to simplify various aspects to focus on essentials) is to
introduce international mobility of the workers who produce ‘ideas’. As already noted,
this can also lead to overprotection of intellectual property in Nash equilibrium, this time
by both the North and the South.
The earliest economics papers on brain drain (e.g. Berry and Soligo 1969), and
indeed on international factor mobility in general (e.g. Jones, Coelho and Easton 1986),
focused on induced changes in domestic factor prices and producer surplus. 6 Although
4

More recent versions of BL (e.g. 2009), no longer contain Section 7, which considers the international
IPR game. These results are, however, briefly described in Grossman and Lai (2006).
5
Specifically, in BL’s language and our notation, we assume that  =0 where  is essentially the
elasticity of ‘idea supply’ with respect to market size. Unlike the market size effect, the direction of the
new effects identified in our paper do not hinge on the sign of .
6
For recent reviews of the brain drain literature, see Commander et al. (2004), and Docquier and Rapaport
(2009).

4
there are exceptions 7 , in most of these models factor outflows reduce the welfare of
remaining residents because they reduce their opportunities to trade with differentlyendowed agents. Considerations that increase the damage from brain drain include fiscal
externalities stemming from the interaction of publicly-subsidized education and
progressive taxation (Bhagwati and Hamada 1974). Also, in an endogenous growth
framework, some authors have argued that an outflow of skilled workers will reduce a
country’s growth rate (Miyagiwa 1991, Wong and Yip 1999). 8
At the same time, however, the brain drain literature has identified a number of
potential benefits from skilled emigration. For example, Bhagwati and Rodriguez (1975)
have proposed that emigration provides a social “safety valve” for unemployed skilled
workers in less developed countries. Other potential benefits are remittances to the home
country (e.g. Ozden and Schiff 2006), and the return migration of brains who have
acquired new skills abroad. More recently, the “emigration lottery” argument (Stark,
Helmenstein and Prskawetz (1997, 1998); Mountford 1997) has raised the possibility that
foreign employment opportunities can raise the incentives to acquire education in lessdeveloped sending countries. If enough of the newly-skilled workers stay, ‘opening the
exits’ might ultimately raise a country’s stock of human capital and growth rate (Beine,
Docquier and Rapaport 2008). 9 Finally, the networks created by skilled migrants may
increase beneficial exchanges of goods, factors and ideas between the home and host
countries (Lopez and Schiff 1998; Kanbur and Rapaport 2005; Oettl and Agrawal 2008).
The closest paper to the current one in the “brain drain” literature is our own
(Kuhn and McAusland 2009). Unlike most of the brain drain literature, that paper
explicitly models ‘brains’ as mobile producers of patentable/copyrightable ideas, whose
relevance to consumers depends on the country in which those ideas were invented. That
paper’s main goal is to establish conditions under which brain drain might benefit a small
Source country. IPR policy is taken as exogenous, and Nash policy interactions between
countries are not modeled. 10 Thus, the current paper can be viewed either as
endogenizing IPRs in our own previous model of brain drain, or as introducing
international mobility of brains into BL or GL’s model of IPR determination.

7

For example, the two-good, two-factor small open economy model in which factor rewards are
independent of factor endowments, and the case of large countries whose terms of trade are advantageously
affected by a factor outflow.
8
Introducing a skilled worker outflow into more traditional growth models (where growth occurs purely
via either human or physical capital accumulation) has less dramatic negative long run effects (see, e.g.
Rodriguez 1975).
9
Even more recently, Bucovetsky (2003) and Haupt and Janeba (2004) have argued that the possibility of
skilled emigration may impose useful discipline on the tax authorities in skilled-worker “sending”
countries.
10
Other differences of the current paper from Kuhn-McAusland (2009) include a heterogeneous
population of potential migrants (KM consider only the effects or relocating a single ‘designer’), the fact
that we include Source’s designers (both resident and expatriate) in Source’s welfare function, and a greater
emphasis here on cases where translation costs are high (i.e. τ is low). Low τ seems more appropriate for
developing countries (which are our main interest here).

5
3. Model
We consider a world with two countries, Source and Recipient; values for
Recipient are denoted with asterisks. Let N, N* denote the number of consumers in each
country. Each country is endowed with a stock of designers D and D*; designers create
unique goods of endogenous quality but do not consume goods themselves. 11
Consumers are willing to pay more for goods the higher their quality, ρ, and
relevance, r. Specifically, we assume per capita inverse demand for a good is given by
rρp(q) where p(q) is a decreasing function of quantity consumed per capita, q.
1 p(q)
Let    dp ( q )
denote the elasticity of base demand; we assume ε is decreasing in q,
q
dq
thus ensuring each designer’s profit maximization problem has an interior solution.
We can interpret ρ as measuring intrinsic quality of a good; for example, ρ may
index the quality of graphics in a computer game, the speed with which a cold medicine
suppresses symptoms, or the number of laugh-out-loud moments in a movie. Relevance
measures the value of these attributes to consumers. While there may be some
innovations with close to universal relevance—e.g. instrumental music and some basic
scientific discoveries—, for many goods consumers will exhibit home bias: powerful
software for preparing US tax returns will have limited value to non-US consumers,
while jokes catering to moviegoers in one country may be less potent for audiences
abroad. 12 We assume home bias takes the form of an iceberg “translation” cost 1-τ,
where τ measures the fraction of a good’s value that survives translation to a foreign
market. Thus r = 1 if a good is consumed in the same country as it is developed and
equals τ otherwise. For the majority of this paper we treat τ as a parameter outside the
control of designers and governments.
We assume each designer develops a prototype for a distinct good, replicas of
which can be produced at zero cost. Define π = maxq p(q)q as the maximum per capita
base profits available in the Source market when a designer has monopoly power in
Source; define π* similarly. As reproduction is costless, each designer will choose per
capita deliveries such that ε=1 in each market. Given the separability of relevance,
quality and quantity in consumers’ demand functions, we can treat π as a parameter when
examining designers’ investment and location problems.
We follow Grossman and Lai (2004) in assuming that government enforces a
designer’s monopoly power in a probabilistic fashion. Specifically, let ω and ω* measure
the probability that an individual designer will have full monopoly power over sales of
her good in the Source and Recipient countries respectively. If her monopoly rights are
not enforced in a country, a designer faces competition from local competitive pirates; as
11

If instead designers also consumed goods, then their migration would shift the composition of global
demand. This demand shift would make the receiving market even more profitable, attracting additional
migrants from the sending country.
12
At the extreme end of the home bias spectrum, one can even imagine innovations (such as developing
certain kinds of weapons) that are of negative value to consumers in one country when invented in another.

6
marginal reproduction costs are zero, the designer earns zero revenues from sales of her
good in, for example, Source with probability 1-ω. We interpret ω as an index of the
strictness of Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) in the Source country.
We assume goods are traded freely between countries and rule out the possibility
of gray or parallel imports 13 . Using the definitions, we can rewrite the designer’s total
expected revenues from her global market when residing in Source as
Nωρπ+τN*ω*ρπ*. 14 To simplify matters, we assume π=π*, i.e. any differences between
Source and Recipient in the number or incomes of consumers are captured by differences
in N and N*. Define M≡ [Nω +τN*ω*]π. Using similar logic and definitions, when a
designer resides in Recipient, her expected revenues from supplying quality ρ* is given
by M*ρ* where M*≡[τNω+N*ω*]π. We can interpret M and M* as the effective
expected market sizes facing a designer according to where she resides. We will be
frugal and regularly omit the qualifier that revenues (and hence profits and welfare) are
all expected values, although this will be implicit in the analysis.
It is worth noting that, for the analysis from here forward, we could just as easily
think of N, N* as measuring market wealth, where N=nb(I), N*=n*b(I*), in which n and
n* are population counts while b(·) is an increasing function of (exogenous) per capita
income I, I*. 15 Accordingly, we will often refer to differences between N and N* as
arising from differences in country size or wealth.
3.1 Investment
Improving product quality is costly. It may require spending additional hours in
the laboratory, acquiring additional human capital, or hiring complementary inputs. We
will refer to all such actions as investments. Let c(ρ) measure the total cost of producing a
prototype of quality ρ. To make things simple we assume
c(ρ)=



1 

1 


where Ψ  (0,1]. 16

The designer chooses her quality/investment level before she knows whether her
intellectual property rights will be enforced in any given market; her optimal investment
13

That is, we assume consumers and third parties are prohibited from purchasing goods in one market for
consumption or resale in another market.
14
Consistent with the principle of National Treatment, we implicitly assume goods face the same
probability of property rights infringement, regardless of whether they are designed locally or abroad.
Moreover, only a product’s designer may take out a patent on that product, regardless of where the product
was designed/produced.
15
For example, if per capita inverse demand is b(I)ρtp(q) , then M=b(I)nω+τb(I*)n*ω*.
16
See Section 6 for a discussion of available evidence concerning Ψ. In addition to these empirical
considerations, our focus on the Ψ≤1 case is also motivated by our interest in the showing the potential for
one country’s IPRs to harm others, in contrast to most existing research. (Kuhn and McAusland 2009 show
that (for fixed IPRs) Ψ>1 is a necessary condition for brain drain to benefit the Source country.)

7
therefore depends on the size of her expected global market. When the designer lives in
Source she chooses ρ to
maxρ ρM - c(ρ).
The cost function’s convexity ensures the second order conditions for an interior
maximum hold; rearranging the first order condition M= c’(ρ) yields
ρ(M)=MΨ.

(1)

Similarly, when a designer resides in Recipient, she will provide quality ρ*=M*Ψ. Not
surprisingly, quality is increasing in effective market size. Define P(M) and P(M*),
respectively, as expected profits earned by a designer residing in Source or Recipient;
using (1) in the profit function yields
P(M ) 

M 1 
M *1 

and P ( M *)
.
1 
1 

3.2 Migration

Migrating is costly. Index each Source-born designer by her relocation cost z—the
monetary-equivalent of physical and psychological costs of leaving one’s native land and
setting up shop abroad. We assume z~[0, z ] and define f(z) and F(z) as the probability
and cumulative density functions for z with F( z )=1. Similarly, let  z * measure the cost
to Recipient-born designer of type z* of relocating to Source, where z*~[- z ,0] with
symmetric functions f* and F* for z*. We assume the distributions exhibit no mass
points. 17

Define g(M,M*)≡P(M*)-P(M) as the gap between profits available in Recipient
and Source; we will regularly suppress the arguments of g. Assuming indifferent
designers stay home, we can define ~
z as the lowest type designer who chooses to reside
in Source:
 ming , z  if g  0
~
z 
maxg , z  if g  0

(2)

Designers with type greater than or equal to ~
z will choose to reside in Source.
Provided the gap between profits is not too large, Source and Recipient IPRs
impact migration as follows: 18
17

We also examined a version of the model in which designers differ in their investment costs but face a
common relocation cost. Not surprisingly, this alternate model predicts the most talented designers are the
first to migrate while the least talented stay home. Although the mathematics are more complicated, in that
model governments face the same qualitative incentives as identified in section 4.
18
The full expressions for d ~
z /dω and d ~
z /dω* are provided in Appendix 1.

8

d~z
dg

 N  [  *   ]
d d
d~
z
dg

 N *  [  *  ] .
d * d *

4. Policy Game

We assume the governments of Source and Recipient each set domestic policy so
as to maximize the expected welfare, E(W) and E(W*), of local consumers from the
consumption of goods produced worldwide, plus profits (net of moving costs) of native
born designers. Although some readers may wonder whether governments weight the
welfare of emigrants the same as natives who stay home, we believe this is a sensible
approach as policy is set prior to emigration decisions in our model. 19 Following the
same principle, we assume host country governments put no weight on the welfare of
potential immigrants when setting IPRs.
We assume each government sets domestic IPRs taking the policy of its neighbor
as fixed. In the interest of brevity, we only write out only the portion of the first order
conditions and the like corresponding to ~
z ≥ 0. 20 Source, for example, solves maxω E(W)
where
E(W) = N   1     D1  F ( ~z )   * DF ( ~z )  D *
~z
 D 1  F ( ~
z ) P( M )  F ( ~
z ) DP( M *)  D f ( z ) zdz



0

(3)

and ~
z is as defined by (2), subject to the constraint ω  [0,1] and taking ω* as given.
In equation (3), φ and μ are base consumer surplus per capita for goods sold by a
monopolist and competitive firms, respectively; we assume base consumer surplus is
identical across countries: φ*=φ and μ*=μ. Under reasonable assumptions concerning
the implicit demand function p(q), μ is greater than π+φ. In what follows, μ-(φ+π)>0 will
represent the per capita (base) deadweight loss from monopoly power.
Assuming an interior solution, Source’s “non-cooperative” best response ω (ω*)
solves the following first order condition:

19

Excluding emigrants from Source’s welfare function (and including them in Recipient’s) would also
significantly complicate the model, because it could lead to possible dynamic inconsistencies in both
countries’ IPR policies. For example, designers will anticipate that, after migration takes place, the talentsending country will disown its emigrant talent (and the profits they earn) and weaken local IPRs
accordingly.
20
An unabbreviated statement of Source’s best response would of course allow for in-migration from
Recipient in cases where ω* is sufficiently small. The numerical simulations presented in Section 6 and 7
allow for migration in either direction.

9
dE (W )
 N       D 1  F ( ~
z )    * F (~
z )  D *  * (   )












d
Allocative Inefficiency
()

d
d *
dF ( ~
z)
z )  D *
 N   (1   )   [ D1  F ( ~z ) 
  DF ( ~
 D *   
]
d

d

d
 



Induced innovation
()

(4)

Brain retention
()

when set equal to zero.
Source’s government balances a variety of competing concerns when setting
domestic IPRs. Some of these concerns are well known from the literature on IPRs. For
example, strict IPRs give designers monopoly power, reducing allocative efficiency.
Conversely, strict IPRs allow designers to reap the benefits from investments in
innovation; in our model induced innovation ultimately raises the quality of goods
produced.
Finally, and unique to our analysis, strengthening Source IPRs stems the outflow
of designing talent: the brain retention effect of strong IPRs. As identified in Kuhn and
McAusland (2009), when τ<1, brain drain leads to relevance diversion: goods that would
have been 100% relevant to Source consumers (had their respective designers remained
Source residents) only have relevance τ <1 if the designer emigrates. Raising ω makes
Source a more attractive base of operations, encouraging the marginal emigrant to stay
home, thereby preventing relevance loss of 1-τ on that designer’s products. 21
Recipient balances similar concerns when setting local IPRs. Recipient’s
government chooses ω* to maximize
E(W*) = N *  *   1   *  D[1  F ( ~z )]   * [ DF ( ~z )  D*]  D * P( M *) ,
subject to the constraint ω*  [0,1] . Assuming an interior solution, Recipient’s best
response, ω*(ω) solves
~
~


dE (W *)





 N *      D1  F ( z )    *  DF ( z ) D *    * D *
d *










dF (~
z)

 *  ,
 N *  * (1  *)    2 D1  F ( ~z )  N *  *   * N *  DF (~z )  D *
D
M
M*
d *



(5)

when set equal to zero.
Above we assume interior solutions. However a corner solution to one country’s
IPR choice is quite possible. If, for example, Recipient is sufficiently large, then so long

21

Designer relocation to a larger market also raises the quality of goods produced, so quality-adjusted
relevance declines only by ρ-ρ*τ, which Kuhn and McAusland (2009) show to be positive whenever Ψ≤1.

10
as Recipient offers some IP protection, Source might prefer to free ride (setting ω=0)
rather than protect intellectual property domestically.22
Define ωeNCand ωe*NC as the IPRs that jointly solve the system formed by
equations (4) and (5) under the following complementary slackness conditions: [1ω]dE(W)/dω ≤ 0 ≤ ω, ωdE(W)/dω ≥ 0 ≤ 1-ω, [1-ω*]dE(W*)/dω* ≤ 0 ≤ ω*,
ω*dE(W*)/dω* ≥ 0 ≤ 1-ω*. ωeNC and ωe*NC are the equilibrium strategies played in a
non-cooperative policy game between Source and Recipient.
5. Bidding for Brains

As Grossman and Lai (2004) identify, when choosing policy stringency, each
country ignores the benefits that domestic IP protections confer on foreigners: strict
domestic IPRs raise the expected profits of foreign born producers, and spur innovation
which benefits overseas consumers. Each country’s failure to internalize these external
benefits of strict domestic IPRs suggests that, from a global welfare perspective, IPRs in
the Nash equilibrium may be too weak. The benefit-internalization failure is most
apparent in our model when translation costs are small. In what follows, define
E(WG)≡E(W)+E(W*) as expected Utilitarian Global welfare; define ωG(ω*) as the global
welfare maximizing Source IPRs when Recipient IPRs are ω*, with a similar definition
for ω*G(ω). Define ωeG and ωe*G as the IPRs that jointly maximize E(WG) subject to the
constraints ωG  [0,1] , ω*G  [0,1] .
Proposition 1: When translation costs are sufficiently small (i.e. τ sufficiently large)
(a) each country’s non-cooperative best response is to set weaker IPRs than would a
global welfare maximizer: ωNC(ω*)≤ ωG(ω*) and ω*NC(ω)≤ω*G(ω);
(b) if countries are symmetric then non-cooperative equilibrium policies ωeNC and
ωe*NC are (weakly) lower than joint welfare maximizing policies ωeG and ωe*G.
Proof: See Appendix 1.

When τ is large, designers have little incentive to emigrate. Even if some do
relocate from Source to Recipient, the resulting relevance diversion is small because little
is lost in translation. Accordingly, when the fraction of a good’s value that survives
22

For example, when z is finite, then whenever ω*>0 and N* is sufficiently large then g> z and F( ~
z )=1

for all values of ω, rendering

dF ( ~
z)
=0. Rewriting (4) gives
d

dE (W )
N  . As

 N *      D     D *   (1   )   [ D  D*] 
M * 
d

     D     D * is negative, then   (1   )   [ D  D*]  N sufficiently small—or,
M*
alternately stated, ω*>0 and N* sufficiently large—is a sufficient condition for dE(W)/dω<0 for all
ω  [0,1].

11
translation to a foreign market, τ, is high, each country’s Brain Gain/Retention motive is
small, freeing governments to set IPRs so as to balance traditional concerns over
allocative inefficiency and induced innovation, ignoring benefits to overseas consumers
and foreign-born producers. Consequently, when translation costs are low, countries err
on the side of under-protecting intellectual property relative to what would maximize
global welfare.
If translation costs are instead non-negligible, the power of weak IPRs to repel
footloose talent is more pronounced: when innovations are, to some extent, region
specific, designers will find it important to produce them in the market most likely to let
them collect the fruits of their labor. Recognizing this, each government has an incentive
to tighten domestic IPRs in a bid to attract footloose talent—the bidding for brains effect.
Because each government ignores one of the costs—the relevance diversion suffered by
consumers abroad—of this bidding, it follows that non-cooperative IPRs may be too
strong when viewed from a global welfare perspective.
The strength of the bidding for brains effect relative to traditional concerns
regarding free riding depends largely on τ. As per Proposition 1, if τ is large then the
amount of relevance lost when a designer emigrates is small and free-riding concerns
dominate. However, if translation costs are instead large, then free-riding is relatively
unimportant since products developed for one market offer little value to consumers
abroad; likewise, IPRs abroad offer little inducement to inventors at home. Relevance
diversion, on the other hand, will be significant, heightening incentives to poach foreign
talent via overly strict IPRs. This bidding effect induces the talent-sending country to
over-protect intellectual property, as per the following proposition.
Proposition 2: When translation costs are sufficiently high (i.e. τ sufficiently small),
Source’s non-cooperative best response to Recipient’s IPRs is too strict when viewed
from a global welfare perspective; i.e. ωNC(ω*) ≥ ωG(ω*) with inequality whenever
ωG(ω*)<1 and ωNC(ω*)>0.
Proof: See Appendix 1.

If Recipient and Source are sufficiently similar in size, they end up in a bidding war
characterized by sub-optimally strict IPRs.
Proposition 3: When translation costs are sufficiently high (i.e. when τ is sufficiently
low) and the countries are symmetric then both Source and Recipient set non-cooperative
IPRs that are too strict from a global welfare perspective provided ωeG<1, ωeNC>0.
Proof: See Appendix 1.

If countries are instead asymmetric, there is a final distortion that must be
considered. As noted above, as translation costs rise, the link between ω* and profits and
consumer surplus abroad weakens, suggesting that traditional concerns over free riding
become less important. However when talent is mobile, there will be one group of

12
Source-borns who benefit from strong Recipient IPRs even when τ is small: immigrant
talent. As Proposition 4 lays out, if Source’s market is sufficiently small, the brain drain
costs of beggar-thy-neighbor IPRs will also be small and the revenue-internalization
failure will dominate, rendering Recipient’s non-cooperative IPRs too weak from a global
welfare perspective.
Proposition 4: When Source is sufficiently small, Recipient’s policy is too weak from a
global welfare perspective.
Proof: See Appendix 1.

Combined, Propositions 2 and 4 suggest that, when countries are unequal in size
and translation costs are sufficiently high, it could well be the case that non-cooperative
IPRs are too strict in the small country and too weak in the large country when viewed
from a global welfare perspective. In this sense—Source’s IPRs are certainly too strict
when τ is low enough while Recipient’s IPRs may be too high or low depending on
relative market size—we can say that, perhaps surprisingly, Source’s incentives to raise
IPRs are qualitatively stronger than Recipient’s.
6. Examples

To explore additional properties of our model when countries differ in size and
innovative capacity, we consider a case where consumers’ inverse demand function, p(q),
is linear, and we normalize consumer surplus when a good is competitively supplied (i.e.
when the price is zero), to μ=1. It immediately follows that profits when the good is
monopolistically supplied, π, equal .5 and that consumer surplus under monopoly, φ, is
.25.
We then think of our two countries as the United States and China and solve for
Nash equilibria under what seem to be reasonable parameter values. Since N (and N*)
represent the size of the market for consumer goods in our model, we use GDP to
approximate these magnitudes. Normalizing N* =1, and using IMF GDP statistics for
2008 yields an N for China of ($4.4/14.3 billion), or about .3. D*/N* represents the
share of the U.S. population who are “designers”; we estimate this by the share of U.S.
research and development expenditures to GDP; according to Boldrin and Levine (2009,
p. 868) this was about 3 percent in 2002, thus D*=.03. To estimate the share of the
South’s population engaged in R&D, we note that, between 1975 and 1999, only 8
percent of U.S. patents were attributed to inventors not living in the U.S., European
Union or Japan (Griffith, Lee and Van Reenen 2007, Table 2). Optimistically assigning
one quarter of those patents to China yields a D of (.08/4).03 = .0006. 23

23

While it is clear that China accounts for fewer than one quarter of US patents by inventors outside the
US, EU and Japan, it is also clear that not all innovations result in US patents, in part because (as suggested
by our model) not all innovations are relevant to US consumers. Further it seems likely that the share of
innovations that do not result in US patents is higher in less-developed countries, including China. Overall,
we view our estimate of Chinese innovation at .08/4 = two percent of US innovation as a reasonable
estimate of relative magnitudes.

13
Boldrin and Levine make numerous attempts to estimate the elasticity of
inventive activity with respect to the reward to innovation, Ψ. For the largest market size
considered, (which is most applicable to our model, since our marginal inventor is
indifferent between moving to the U.S. and not), Figure 2 in their paper estimates Ψ to be
about .2. 24 As a point of reference for our results in the presence of brain drain, it is
worth noting that in our model Ψ =.2 leads to a privately optimal IPR level, ω, of .5
under autarky for any country, regardless of size and regardless of the ratio of designers
to consumers (D/N). 25
Empirical evidence on the magnitude of τ, the relevance of Northern innovations
to Southern consumers (and vice versa) is scarce. For a number of reasons, including
ecological specificities (see for example Kremer and Zwane 2005) 26 and lack of LDC
research infrastructure and tacit knowledge required to understand and implement
Northern innovations (Evenson and Binswanger 1978), we would expect the
transferability of Northern innovations to the South to be much less than the value of 2/3
estimated by Eaton and Kortum (1999) among the five most developed nations.
Acemoglu and Zilibotti (2001) report a case study where the same innovation was only
one quarter as productive in an Indian as a U.S. plant. Using data on manufacturing
industries, they estimate that output per worker would rise by a factor of 1.5 for LDCs as
a whole, and by a factor of 3.2 for the poorest LDCs, if new technologies were designed
for Southern rather than Northern skill mixes alone (leaving aside all other sources of
inappropriateness). 27 Taking all of the above considerations into account, we use τ =.25
as our baseline parameter. 28
Finally, we model the density of moving costs, f(z), as uniform on the interval [0,
1/a]. We choose a=5 so that, in the equilibrium of the base case of our model, a
substantial fraction of Source’s brains (just under half) live in the North. Since we do not
endogenize skill formation in our model, it seems reasonable to think of designers here as
persons who are currently capable of producing patentable inventions; by this measure
the share of South’s brains living in the North will be much higher than the emigration
rates of highly-educated workers reported for most countries in Docquier and Rapaport
(2009).
Source and Recipient’s reaction functions under the above assumptions are shown
by the thick lines in Figure 1.

24

Elsewhere in their paper they estimate both larger and smaller values of Ψ in a variety of contexts. In
their model, the only variation in innovative activity is on the extensive margin (number of inventors),
whereas (at least absent immigration) we model the intensive margin only. Nevertheless, Ψ measures the
response of interest in both cases.
25
Globally optimal IPRs are also .5 for all countries when countries are symmetric.
26
Sachs (2003) importantly points out that ecological specificities extend beyond agriculture, into areas
including health, construction and building materials, energy sources and uses, and infrastructure design.
27
Statistics are taken from row 2 of Acemoglu and Ziliibotti (2001) Table IV; specifically, 41/27 = 1.5 and
16/5 = 3.2
28
Appendix 2 and footnote 28 consider some cases with alternative values.

14

0

.2

omega
.4
.6

.8

1

Figure 1: Reaction Functions: N=.3, D=.0006

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

omegastar
Source
zeromigration
Recip

SourceOpt
maxmigration
RecipOpt

The set of all possible Source and Recipient IPRs forming the space in Figure 1 is
divided into three regions: To the northwest of the “zero migration” line, brain migration
is into Source from Recipient. This occurs despite Source’s smaller market size because
Source protects intellectual property much more than Recipient. To the southeast of the
“maxmigration” line (in the very bottom corner of the Figure), 100 percent of Source’s
designers have left; in between these boundaries there is positive (but not complete) brain
drain from Source into Recipient.
Source’s reaction function jumps downward at the “zero migration” boundary,
because the countries’ different population sizes create a discrete jump in the marginal
number of brains that are attracted (or retained) by raising ω. Beyond that, because of its
small size, in this example Source finds it optimal not to protect intellectual property, but
to free ride on Recipient’s inventions (even with τ = .25 the U.S.’s much larger R&D
sector makes ‘free riding’ very appealing). Recipient’s privately optimal IPRs (at around
.5) are relatively independent of Source’s IPRs, due to Source’s small market size. At the
Nash equilibrium (ω=0, ω*=.51) Recipient underprotects intellectual property relative
to the global optimum (ω=0, ω*=.55). (The RecipOpt curve shows the level of
Recipient’s IPR, ω*, that maximizes global welfare for every fixed ω and vice versa for
SourceOpt). Even though Recipient has an incentive to overprotect IP to ‘beggar
Source’s brains” (the bidding-for-brains effect), this effect is outweighed in the current
example by the fact, already noted, that Recipient ignores benefits of IPRs that accrue to
Source’s brains living in Recipient (i.e. the expatriate brains effect).
Figures 2 through 4 show what happens in our model as China’s market size and
innovative capacity (D and N) grow relative to to the U.S., holding the other parameters
of our model constant. In Figure 2, China has eliminated half the China-U.S. gap in both

15
market size and innovative capacity, so N=.65 and D=.015. Now, Nash equilibrium
protection is positive in both countries, but protection remains below the global optimum.
In Figure 3, about two thirds of the market-size gap is gone, and Source protection rises
dramatically (to about .5) in equilibrium. Both countries now overprotect intellectual
property relative to the global optimum. Finally, Figure 4 shows the limiting, symmetric
case where the two countries are identical. As we have demonstrated analytically,
equilibrium migration is zero in this case, with both countries now selecting much higher
levels of IPR than the global optimum (.79 versus .50), in an attempt to outbid each other
for the world’s footloose innovative talent. 29

0

.2

omega
.4
.6

.8

1

Figure 2: Reaction Functions: N=.65, D=.015

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

omegastar
Source
zeromigration
Recip

29

SourceOpt
maxmigration
RecipOpt

An important caveat to the over-protection result is that it will not necessarily hold if τ, the relevance of
Northern innovations to the South, rises sufficiently rapidly as the South expands in market size and
innovative talent. For example, if τ is a decreasing function of the gap between Northern and Southern per
capita incomes, then income growth in the South could reduce the extent to which migration generates a
relevance loss in the first place. In this case, a “race” between increasing cultural/technological proximity
and increasing market size will determine whether Southern IPR protection rises or falls as South grows.
However, we point out that, at least for countries with vastly different population sizes like China and the
United States, total market size, N, is likely to catch up to N* long before per capita incomes equalize.

16

0

.2

omega
.4
.6

.8

1

Figure 3: Reaction Functions: N=.8, D=.020

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

omegastar
Source
zeromigration
Recip

SourceOpt
maxmigration
RecipOpt

0

.2

omega
.4
.6

.8

1

Figure 4: Reaction Functions, Symmetric Countries ( N=1, D=.03)

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

omegastar
Source
zeromigration
Recip

SourceOpt
maxmigration
RecipOpt

1

17

7. Extensions
7.1 Can Brain Drain Explain LDCs’ Non-Protection of IPRs?

Thus far, we have shown that introducing international mobility of
scientists/designers might lead a developing country to overprotect IPRs—the “bidding
for brains” effect. We have also shown that the bidding-for-brains effect is more likely to
dominate the well known “free riding” effects when South’s market size grows to a point
where South can effectively contest the outflow of its brains by strengthening local IPRs.
In this section we change our focus to the case where South is small, and show –perhaps
surprisingly—that international mobility of scientists can, under certain conditions, also
help explain why small, poor countries do not protect intellectual property. This
countervailing tendency arises from what we call the expatriate brains effect.
To explore the possibility that out-migration causes weak IPRs, we begin by
rearranging the expression for dE(W)/dω in (4) to isolate terms containing F( ~
z ):

dE (W )
 ND        ND *  *    
d
 D  2 D *  * 
dF ( ~
z )





 N   (1   )   





N
N
D
(
1
)
*









M* 
d 
M
 2  *  
z )[ N   (1   )   
 DF ( ~
 N  N ( *   )     ] .




M
*
M

allocative inefficiency (  )
number















of
emigrants

(9)

induced innovation (  )

The final term in (9) measures a two-pronged expatriate brains effect of
migration. The first prong is as follows. Marginally increasing ω raises expected base
profits by Nπ for locals but only by τNπ for expatriates, with implications for induced
innovation: strict local IPRs buy less quality at the margin when talent operates abroad.
This effect of expatriate brains argues in favor of weaker Source IPRs. The other prong
concerns allocative inefficiency. When designers emigrate, the quality-adjusted
relevance of their goods to the Source market declines. In turn, the deadweight loss from
allowing monopoly power in the Source market shrinks, arguing in favor of stricter
Source IPRs. Thus, whether the net expatriate brains effect leads to stricter or weaker
policy depends on parameter values. For example, when Ψ=1, we find the final term in
(9) is negative for all ω<1 (and equal to zero when ω=1) whenever τ<1 provided 2φ+π >
μ. 30
In sum, in contrast to the ‘bidding-for-brains’ effect, which always raises a
country’s demand for IPRs, the ‘expatriate brains’ effect may shift the sending brainsending country’s IPR best response function inwards. This happens because Source’s
incentives to protect IPRs are weakened when a large share of its native designers reside
30

We have no qualms about this restriction, since 2φ+π>μ is also a necessary condition for each country to
offer less than full IPRs in autarky when Ψ=1.

18
abroad, producing innovations that are less relevant to Source’s consumers. A key
distinction between the two effects is that the bidding-for-brains effect operates whenever
a marginal, unilateral change in IPR policy would lead any brains to switch their location.
This includes the symmetric-country Nash equilibrium in which net migration is zero.
The expatriate brains effect, in contrast, does not require immigration flows to respond to
IPRs; it does however require a significant share of Source’s brains to be living abroad
(for whatever reason). Thus, we expect to see the two effects in different situations. This
is illustrated in Appendix 2, which reports simulations of our model in which shutting
down the possibility of international migration raises South’s Nash equilibrium IPRs
from zero to a positive level, due to an expatriate brains effect. 31 As expected, this
occurs in a situation where Source’s market size is small, when τ is low, but when Source
is relatively well endowed with innovative talent (this is needed to give Source an
incentive to protect intellectual property in the absence of international migration).
7.2 Endogenous Relevance

Our baseline model assumes that the relevance of Source-produced goods to
Recipient consumers is fixed at τ. This ignores the growing phenomenon of designers
developing products specifically for overseas markets. 32 We analyze this possibility by
introducing an intermediate stage into the game. Suppose that, after having chosen her
quality level, ρ, a Source-based designer can make an investment that increases the
relevance of her product to the overseas market. Critically, we assume it is cheaper for a
designer to provide goods of a given relevance to a market if she lives in that market.
Specifically, we assume a Source-residing designer achieves relevance r  [τ,1] in the
Recipient market at cost d(r)≥0, where d (τ)=0. We assume increased relevance to the
Recipient market simultaneously reduces relevance in Source, so that a Source-residing
designer’s effective market size is M(r)=πNω[1+τ-r]+πrN*ω*. 33 The designer’s
associated optimization problem—taking ω, ω*, residency, and ρ as given—is

max  N [1    r ]  rN * *  c(  )  d (r )
r

with accompanying first order condition for an interior solution

 N * *  N   d ' (r ) .

(10)

Assuming d′(τ)=0, limr→1 d′(r)=∞ and d″>0, it is straightforward to show that all
designers residing in Source choose the same relevance level, which is less than unity but
greater than τ provided N*ω*>Nω. Assuming the second order conditions for an interior
31

If an initial increase in development leads a large number of a country’s ‘brains’ to leave –perhaps
because educational quality has improved--, this mechanism might help explain Chen and Puttinanun’s
(2005) finding of a U-shaped relationship between development and IPRs.
32
Our thanks to an anonymous referee for suggesting this extension.
33
For completeness, note we assume designers residing in Recipient also have the option to shift the
relevance of their goods in favor of their overseas market. However, because relevance to the Recipient
market would simultaneously decline, Recipient-based designers will forego this opportunity—choosing
relevance levels 1 and τ in the Recipient and Source markets—whenever N*ω*>Nω.

19
maximum hold, designers continue to choose ρ to satisfy (1) in the preceding stage, and
Source-born designers for whom relocation costs are relatively small will emigrate.
We are interested in how the endogenous choice of r affects the incentives facing
governments when choosing local IPRs. As before, each government recognizes that
strengthening its IPRs reduces allocative efficiency, raises investment incentives, and
stems some relevance diversion by inducing the marginal migrant to stay home. When
relevance is endogenous, a fourth concern emerges. Strengthening Source IPRs has the
direct effect of raising expected profits available in the Source market. Designers rooted
in Source will take advantage of this increased profitability by increasing the relevance of
their products to the Source market.
If quality is relatively unresponsive to IPRs—i.e. if the induced innovation effect
of IPRs on ρ is weak—then it is straightforward to show that strict IPRs provide each
country with a means for retaining/stealing virtual brains via induced changes in r,
further incenting each country to set overly-strict IPRs.
If, instead, quality is responsive to IPRs, the story is a little less clear. An IPRinduced increase in ρ amplifies the gap between profits available in small and large
markets, making high r even more attractive to Source-based designers. As this indirect
effect favors the large Recipient country, it is straightforward to show dr/dω* is
unambiguously positive. Accordingly, endogenous relevance choice provides Recipient
with an added incentive to set strict local IPRs even when quality is responsive to IPRs.
For Source, the net effect is ambiguous: raising ω makes it more likely that
designers will receive monopoly rewards in exchange for catering to the Source market,
but the induced increase in ρ makes serving the Recipient market more attractive as well.
Although it is straightforward to find cases where the former effect clearly dominates—
consider the case where quality is exogenously determined—, we are unable to rule out
the possibility that, for some functional forms and parameter values, the latter effect may
dominate. In such cases, allowing market relevance to be endogenous would serve to
drive large- and small-country IPRs further apart, with large countries tightening their
IPRs in a bid to attract virtual talent, and small countries weakening their intellectual
protections in an attempt to stem the virtual outflow.
8. Conclusion

Existing models of two key policy issues affecting developing countries –
intellectual property protection and brain drain—have so far treated these issues largely
in isolation from each other. We study the interactions between these issues by
introducing (costly) international mobility of knowledge workers into a model of Nash
equilibrium IPR policy choice among countries. Our analysis identifies a number of
considerations affecting optimal IPR policy that have not, to our knowledge, been noted
before. One of these is a “bidding for brains” effect, which—in contrast to existing IPR
models—can generate excessive IPR protection in both sending and receiving countries,
as both countries attempt to ‘outbid’ each other in providing a hospitable IPR

20
environment for internationally mobile knowledge workers. We conjecture that the
“bidding for brains” effect may become empirically relevant as some developing nations
begin to contest the developed world’s attraction for their knowledge workers.
In addition, we also identify an ‘expatriate brains’ effect, which – like the well
known ‘free-riding’ effect—can give both brain-receiving and- sending countries
incentives to underprotect IPRs relative to the global optimum. Receiving countries will
underprotect to the extent that they not do fully value the welfare of immigrant brains
living in their country; sending countries can underprotect because the innovations
produced by their own emigrants are less appropriate to the needs of sending-country
consumers than innovations produced locally. Indeed we point out that one reason why
developing countries might prefer little or no IPR protection may be because their
knowledge workers have already departed to serve larger, richer markets, where those
workers produce ideas and goods that may no longer be valued by developing country
consumers.

21
References
Acemoglu, Daron and Fabrizio Zilibotti. “Productivity Differences”. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 116(2) (May 2001): 563-606.
Beine, Michel, Frederic Docquier, and Hillel Rapaport. “Brain Drain and Human Capital
Formation in Developing Countries: Winners and Losers”. Economic Journal 118(528)
(2008): 631-52.
Berry, R. and R. Soligo, “Some welfare aspects of international migration” Journal of Political
Economy 77 (1969).
Bhagwati, J. and K. Hamada, “The brain drain, international integration of markets for
professionals and unemployment: A theoretical analysis”. Journal of Development
Economics 1(1) (1974)
Bhagwati, J. and C. Rodriguez. “Welfare-Theoretical Analyses of the Brain Drain” Journal of
Development Economics 2 (1975) 195-221.
Boldrin, M. and D. Levine, “IP and Market Size” unpublished paper, University of Minnesota,
2005. http://www.micheleboldrin.com/Papers/scalenew.pdf
Boldrin, M. and D. Levine "Market Size and Intellectual Property Protection", International
Economic Review, 50: 855-881, 2009
Bound, John, Sarah Turner, and Patrick Walsh. “Internationalization of U.S. Doctorate
Education”. NBER working paper no. 14792, March 2009.
Bucovetsky, S. “Efficient Migration and Income Tax Competition” Journal of Public Economic
Theory. April 2003; 5(2): 249-78
Chellaraj, Gnanaraj, Keith E. Maskus, and Aaditya Mattoo. “The Contribution of International
Graduate Students to U.S. Innovation”. Review of International Economics 16(3) (2008):
444-462.
Chen, Yongmin and Thitima Puttitanun, “Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation in
Developing Countries” Journal of Development Economics. December 2005; 78(2): 47493
Chin, J.C., Grossman, G., 1990. Intellectual property rights and North–South trade. In: Jones,
R.W., Krueger, A. (Eds.), The Political Economy of International Trade: Essays in
Honor of Robert E. Baldwin. Blackwell, Cambridge, MA.
Commander, Simon, Mari Kangasniemi, and Alan L. Winters. “The Brain Drain: Curse or Boon?
A Survey of the Literature” in Baldwin,-Robert-E. and Winters,-L.-Alan, eds.
Challenges to globalization: Analyzing the economics. NBER Economic Research
Conference Report series. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 2004; 23572.
Diwan, I., Rodrik, D., 1991. Patents, appropriate technology, and North–South trade. Journal of
International Economics 30, 27– 48.

22

Docquier, Frédéric, and Hillel Rapaport. “Skilled Immigration: The Perspective of Developing
Countries” in Bhagwati, Jagdish and Gordon Hanson, editors, Skilled Immigration
Today: Prospects, Problems, and Policies. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009, pp.
247-284.
Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum. “International Technology Diffusion: Theory and
Measurement” International Economic Review 40(3) (August 1999): 537- 570.
Evenson, R. E. and Binswanger, H.P. “Technology Transfer and Research Resource Allocation” ,
in Binswanger, H.P. and V. W. Ruttan, eds., Induced Innovation: Technology,
Institutions and Development. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1978.
Fink, Carsten and Carlos A. Primo Baga. “How Stronger Protection of Intellectual Property
Rights Affects International Trade Flows”, in Carsten Fink and Keith E. Maskus, eds.,
Intellectual Property and Development: Lessons from Recent Economic Research. New
York: World Bank and Oxford University Press, 2005, pp. 41-73
Glass, Amy J., and Xiaodong Wu. "Intellectual property rights and quality improvement."
Journal of Development Economics 82 (2007): 393-415.
Griffith, Rachel, Sokbae Lee and John Van Reenen. “Is Distance Dying at Last? Falling Home
Bias in Fixed Effects Models of Patent Citations” NBER working paper no. 13338,
August 2007.
Grossman, Gene M. and Edwin L.-C. Lai. “International Protection of Intellectual Property”
American Economic Review (December 2004): 1635-1653.
Grossman, Gene M. and Edwin L.-C. Lai. “International Protection of Intellectual Property:
Corrigendum” American Economic Review March 2006; 96(1): 456.
Haupt, A. and E. Janeba. “Education, Redistribution, and the Threat of Brain Drain”. NBER
working paper no 10618, June 2004.
Helpman, E., 1993. Innovation, imitation, and intellectual property rights. Econometrica 61,
1247– 1280.
Hunt, Jennifer, and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle. “How Much Does Immigration Boost
Innovation?” NBER working paper no. 14312, September 2008.
Jones, R.W., I. Coelho and S. Easton, 1986, The theory of international factor flows: The basic
model, Journal of International Economics 20, 313-327.
Kanbur, Ravi and Hillel Rapaport. “Migration Selectivity and the Evolution of Spatial Inequality”
Journal of Economic Geography 5(1) (2005): 43-57
Kuhn, Peter and Carol McAusland. “Consumers and the brain drain: Product and process design
and the gains from emigration” Journal of International Economics 78 (2) (July 2009):
287–291.

23
Kremer, M. and A. P. Zwane. “Encouraging Private Sector Research for Tropical Agriculture”.
World Development 33(1) (2005): 87-105
Lai, Edwin L.-C. "International intellectual property rights protection and the rate of product
innovation." Journal of Development Economics 55 (1998): 133-153.
Lai, Edwin L.-C., and Larry D. Qiu. "The North's intellectual property rights standard for the
South?" Journal of International Economics 59 (2003): 183-209.
Lopez, Ramon and Maurice Schiff. “Migration and the Skill Composition of the Labour Force:
The Impact of Trade Liberalization in LDCs.” Canadian Journal of Economics 31(2)
(1998): 318-36.
Markusen, James R. “Contracts, Intellectual Property Rights, and Multinational Investment in
Developing Countries” Journal of International Economics. February 2001; 53(1): 189204
Maskus, Keith. “The Role of Intellectual Property Rights in Encouraging Foreign Direct
Investment and Technology Transfer”, in Carsten Fink and Keith E. Maskus, eds.,
Intellectual Property and Development: Lessons from Recent Economic Research New
York: World Bank and Oxford University Press, 2005, pp. 41-73
Maskus, Keith E. and Mohan Penubarti. “How Trade-Related are Intellectual Property Rights?”.
Journal of International Economics 39 (1995): 227-248.
Mondal, Debasis and Manashj Ranjan Gupta. “Innovation, imitation and intellectual property
rights: Introducing migration in Helpman’s model”. Japan and the World Economy 20
(2008): 369-394.
Mountford, A. (1997) “Can a Brain Drain be Good for Growth in the Source Country?” Journal
of Development Economics 53, 287-303.
Oettl, Alexander and Ajay Agrawal. 2008. “International Labor Mobility and Knowledge Flow
Externalities,” Journal of International Business Studies, 39(8), 1242-1260.
Ozden, Caglar and Maurice Schiff, eds. International Migration, Remittances, and the Brain
Drain Washington, D.C.: World Bank; Houndmills, U.K. and New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2006.
Rodriguez, C. (1975) “On the Welfare Aspects of International Migration” Journal of Political
Economy 1975.
Sachs, Jeffrey. “The Global Innovation Divide” in Jaffe, Adam, Josh Lerner, and Scott Stern, eds,
Innovation Policy and the Economy, volume 3 (2003). Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
131-141.
Schneider, Patricia Higino. “International Trade, Economic Growth and Intellectual Property
Rights: A Panel Data Study of Developed and Developing Countries” Journal of
Development Economics. December 2005; 78(2): 529-47

24
Stark, O., C. Helmenstein and A. Prskawetz (1997) “A Brain Drain with Brain Gain” Economics
Letters 55, 227-234.
Stark, O., C. Helmenstein and A. Prskawetz (1998) “Human Capital Depletion, Human Capital
Formation, and Migration: A Blessing or a Curse?” Economics Letters 60, 363-367.
Weinberg, Bruce. "Developing Science: Trends in Science in the Developing World"
unpublished paper, Ohio State University, 2008.
Wong, Kar-yiu and Chong Kee Yip. “Education, economic growth, and brain drain” Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control 23 (1999) 699-726.
Yang, G., and K. E. Maskus, 2001. “Intellectual property rights, licensing, and innovation in an
endogenous product cycle model”. Journal of International Economics 53, 169– 187.
Zakaria, Fareed. “The Wealth of Yet More Nations”. Review of T. Friedman, The World is Flat:
A Brief History of the Twenty-First Century, New York Times Book Review, May 1,
2005, pp. 10-11.

25
Appendix 1: Proofs

z /dω and d ~
z /dω*:
d~
The full expressions for d ~
z /dω and d ~
z /dω* are as follows:





d~
z
d~z
d~
z
d~
z
dg
 0 for g  [ z , z, ) ,
 0 for g  ( z , z ] ,


 N [  *    ]  0 otherwise
d
d
d
d
d

and





d~
z
d~
z
d~
z
d~
z
dg
 0 for g  [ z , z ) ,
 0 for g  ( z , z ] ,


 N *  [  *  ]  0 otherwise .
d *
d *
d *
d *
d *

Proof of Proposition 1.

Part (a). Differentiating E(WG) with respect to ω gives

dE (W G ) dE (W ) dE (W *)
.


d
d
d

dE (W G )
at Source’s non-cooperative best response, ωNC(ω*). Assume for now the
Evaluate
d
constraints ω≥0 and ω≤1 are non-binding on Source’s cooperative policy choice. Then
dE (W )
= 0. Differentiating E(W*) with respect to ω and evaluating at ωNC(ω*) gives
d   NC ( *)

dE (W *)
dP( M *)
 D*
d
d

d
d *
dF ( ~
z )

. (A1)
z )]
z )  D*]
 N * [ *   [1  *] ]D[1  F ( ~
 [ DF ( ~
 D[  *  ]
d
d
d 


z ) /dω and taking the limit as τ→1 yields
Substituting in for dρ/dω, dρ*/dω and d F ( ~
lim dE (W G )
N
 N *  *   (1  *)  D  D *
 
D **
N

  1 d   NC ( *) M
 Un  Internalized Benefits
Un  Internalized Benefits
To Recipient Consumers
of I nduced Innovation

to Recipient  Born Designers
from higher exp ected profits

in which the right-hand term is unambiguously positive. Thus, for ω* for which Source’s
non-cooperative policy is unconstrained, ωNC(ω*)<ωG(ω*).
For ω* such that the non-negativity binds Source’s non-cooperative policy
choice, then the claim ωG(ω*)≥ωN(ω*) holds trivially as a result of the non-negativity
constraint on ωG. Finally, for ω* such that the constraint ωNC≤1 binds, then
dE (W *)
dE (W G )
is greater than
, the latter of which is positive in the
d   NC ( *)
d   NC ( *)
limit as τ→1 by (A2); consequently, for any ω* such that ωNC(ω*)=1, ωG(ω*) similarly
equals unity by constraint.
In sum, for τ sufficiently large, Source’s non-cooperative best response function
lies everywhere either to the left of, or coincides with, ωG(ω*).
By similar arguments, it is straightforward to show that ω*G(ω)≥ω*NC(ω) with
G
ω* (ω)>ω*NC(ω) for ω such that ω*G(ω)>0 and ω*NC(ω)<1; i.e. Recipient’s non-

(A2)

26
cooperative best response function lies everywhere either below, or in coincidence with,
ω*G(ω).
Part (b): As per the proof of part (a), the non-cooperative best response functions lies
weakly inside/below the global welfare maximizing best responses. Thus, when N=N*
and equilibria are therefore symmetric, ωeNC= ωe*NC ≤ωeG= ωe*G (with ωeNC= ωe*NC
<ωeG= ωe*G when ωeG=ωe*G >0 and ωeNC=ωe*NC <1) when τ is sufficiently large.■
Proof of Proposition 2. Taking the limit of (A1) as τ→0 gives
~
lim dE (W *)
   * N * Df ( z ) N [ *   (1  *) ] < 0. Following steps

  0 d   NC ( *)
Brain Drain Costs
Inflicted On
Recipient Consumers

similar to those for the proof of Proposition 1 part (a) confirms ωNC(ω*) ≥ ωG(ω*) with
inequality whenever ωG(ω*)<1 and ωNC(ω*)>0 when τ is sufficiently small.■
Proof of Proposition 3: Differentiate WG with respect to ω*, evaluate at ω*NC(ω), and
take the limit as τ→0 to get
lim dE (W G )
z )  N [  (1   )  ] Df ( ~
z )]
  * N *  [ DF ( ~




  0 d *  **NC ( )
Un  Internalized
Brain Drain Costs
Revenues
Earned By
Immigrants

(A3)

Inflicted On
Source Consumers

provided the constraint ω*NC  [0,1] is non-binding. When countries are symmetric,
equilibrium values are also symmetric: ωeNC= ωe*NC, ωeG= ωe*G. When N=N* then
lim dE (W G )
~
is less than or equal to
z =0 and
  0 d *  **NC ( )
 N 2  2Df ( ~
z ) [  (1   )  ]  0 at any symmetric equilibrium whenever the ω*NC≤1
NC

constraint is non-binding. If instead ωe* = ωe

NC

lim dE (W G )
=1 then either
  0 d *  **NC ( )

is negative at the symmetric equilibrium, in which case ωe*G= ωeG<ωe*NC= ωeNC=1, or
lim dE (W G )
is non-positive, and so ωe*G= ωeG=ωe*NC= ωeNC=1. Finally, if
  0 d *  **NC ( )

the non-negativity constraint binds non-cooperative policy makers, then
ωe*G=ωeG=ωe*NC= ωeNC=0.■
Proof of Proposition 4: As N→0, the final term in (A3) goes to zero and F (z~ ) →
F(D(N*ω*π)1+Ψ/[1+Ψ]) >0, indicating Recipient’s non-cooperative policy is too weak
from a global welfare perspective provided D>0.

27
Appendix 2: Illustration of the Expatriate Brains Effect

Here we examine numerically the equilibrium implications of the expatriate
brains effect. As noted, this effect is more likely when Source’s market size is small,
when τ is low, but when Source is relatively well endowed with innovative talent. To
illustrate this effect—it does not apply to the China vs US parameterization of our
model—we assume τ =.1, and let D =.009; all other functional forms and parameter
values are the same as in Section 6. Reaction functions, shown in Figure A1, indicate a
Nash equilibrium in which the Source “free rides” at zero protection.

0

.2

omega
.4
.6

.8

1

Figure A1: Reaction Functions, N=.3, D=.009, τ=.1, a=5

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

omegastar
Source
zeromigration
Recip

SourceOpt
maxmigration
RecipOpt

In contrast, when we set a to zero (but maintain all other parameter values used to
generate Figure A1 simulation), we find Source now chooses to protect IPRs in the Nash
equilibrium; see Figure A2. In this sense, for the right parameter values, brain drain to
the North can “cause” low Southern IPRs. 34

34

Of course, there is no single developing country with a market (N) as large as China’s, but much better
endowed with innovative talent. Another example that produces the same outcome, however, would have
N=.1 (about the size of Russia), with τ=.03 and Russia as well endowed with innovative talent as the U.S.
(D=.003).

28

0

.2

omega
.4
.6

.8

1

Figure A2: Reaction Functions, N=.3, D=.009, τ=.1, a=0

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

omegastar
Source
zeromigration
Recip

SourceOpt
maxmigration
RecipOpt

1

