                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     A PREFERRED-HABITAT MODEL OF THE TERM STRUCTURE OF INTEREST
                               RATES

                                           Dimitri Vayanos
                                            Jean-Luc Vila

                                        Working Paper 15487
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15487


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2009




We thank Markus Brunnermeier, Andrea Buraschi, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, Peter DeMarzo, Giorgio
Fossi, Ken Garbade, Robin Greenwood, Moyeen Islam, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Jun Liu, Vasant Naik,
Anna Pavlova, Jeremy Stein, seminar participants at the Bank of England, Chicago Fed, ECB, LSE,
Manchester, New York Fed, Tilburg, Toulouse, UCLA, and participants at the American Finance Association
2008, Adam Smith Asset Pricing 2007, Brazilian Finance Association 2008, Chicago 2008, CRETE
2008, Gerzensee 2007, Imperial 2007, NBER Asset Pricing 2007, and SITE 2006 conferences for
helpful comments. We have especially benefited from an extensive set of insightful comments by John
Cochrane, and from a communication by Xavier Gabaix on linearity-generating processes. Financial
support from the Paul Woolley Centre at the LSE is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
in this paper are those of the authors and not of Bank of America Merrill Lynch, any of its affiliates,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Dimitri Vayanos and Jean-Luc Vila. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
A Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term Structure of Interest Rates
Dimitri Vayanos and Jean-Luc Vila
NBER Working Paper No. 15487
November 2009
JEL No. E4,E5,G1

                                              ABSTRACT

We model the term structure of interest rates as resulting from the interaction between investor clienteles
with preferences for specific maturities and risk-averse arbitrageurs. Because arbitrageurs are risk
averse, shocks to clienteles' demand for bonds affect the term structure---and constitute an additional
determinant of bond prices to current and expected future short rates. At the same time, because arbitrageurs
render the term structure arbitrage-free, demand effects satisfy no-arbitrage restrictions and can be
quite different from the underlying shocks. We show that the preferred-habitat view of the term structure
generates a rich set of implications for bond risk premia, the effects of demand shocks and of shocks
to short-rate expectations, the economic role of carry trades, and the transmission of monetary policy.


Dimitri Vayanos
Department of Finance, A350
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
and CEPR
and also NBER
d.vayanos@lse.ac.uk

Jean-Luc Vila
Bank of America Merrill Lynch
2 King Edward Street
London EC1A 1HQ
United Kingdom
Jean-Luc.Vila@baml.com
1     Introduction

What determines the interest rate for a given maturity? Standard economic theory links the in-
terest rate for a maturity T to the willingness of a representative agent to substitute consumption
between times 0 and T . This model of interest-rate determination contrasts sharply with a more
informal preferred-habitat view, proposed by Culbertson (1957) and Modigliani and Sutch (1966),
and popular among practitioners. According to that view, there are investor clienteles with pref-
erences for specific maturities, and the interest rate for a given maturity is influenced by demand
and supply shocks local to that maturity.1

     The preferred-habitat view is supported by numerous market episodes. One example is the
2000-2002 buyback program by the US Treasury. In January 2000, the Treasury announced its
intention to buy back long-term bonds through a series of reverse auctions.2 Within three weeks of
this announcement, yields on thirty-year bonds had dropped by 58bps (hundredths of one percent),
a price increase larger than ten percent. Moreover, the effect was confined to long maturities:
yields on five-year bonds dropped by only 9bps, while yields on two-year bonds rose by 9bps.
These effects are hard to rationalize within a representative-agent model: one would have to argue
that the buyback program signalled a significant drop in aggregate consumption in thirty years.
On the other hand, the effects are consistent with the preferred-habitat view since the buyback
program was a supply shock local to long maturities.

     Even though the preferred-habitat view is relevant in practice and has been proposed more than
half a century ago, it has not entered into the academic mainstream; it has typically been confined
to a short discussion in MBA-level textbooks. This might be partly because of the absence of a
formal model, and partly because of an impression that preferred habitat can conflict with the logic
of no-arbitrage. Indeed, an extreme version of the preferred-habitat view is that the interest rate
for a given maturity evolves independently of nearby maturities. This conflicts with no-arbitrage,
as pointed out by Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1985).

     In this paper, we build a formal model of preferred habitat. We assume that the term structure
   1
     The typical clientele for bonds with maturities longer than fifteen years are pension funds, seeking to hedge their
long-term pension liabilities. Life-insurance companies are typically located around the fifteen-year mark, while asset
managers and banks’ treasury departments are the typical clientele for bonds with maturities shorter than ten years.
   2
     The objective of the buyback program was to shorten the average maturity of government debt, which had
increased during the late 1990s because of the budget surpluses. (Expiring bond issues were not being replaced, and
most of them were short term.) The buyback program was conducted through 45 reverse auctions between March
2000 and April 2002. The maturities of the targeted issues ranged from 10 to 27 years, and an average of 14% of each
targeted issue was bought back. For accounts of this episode, see Garbade and Rutherford (2007) and Greenwood
and Vayanos (2009b). The latter paper discusses additional episodes supporting the preferred-habitat view: the 2004
pension reform in the UK and the 2008-2009 quantitative easing by the Federal Reserve.



                                                           1
of interest rates is determined through the interaction between investor clienteles with preferences
for specific maturities and risk-averse arbitrageurs. Arbitrageurs integrate maturity markets, ensur-
ing that bonds with nearby maturities trade at similar prices and the term structure is arbitrage-free.
But because arbitrageurs are risk averse, the demand shocks of clienteles affect the term structure.
Understanding how demand effects manifest themselves in the cross-section of maturities, and in a
way consistent with no-arbitrage, is central to our analysis. We show that demand effects can be
quite different from the underlying shocks, in ways that depend on arbitrageur risk aversion and
the underlying risk factors. Besides addressing the effects of demand shocks, our model generates
a rich set of implications for bond risk premia, the effects of shocks to short-rate expectations, the
economic role of carry trades, and the transmission of monetary policy.

    Our model, described in Section 2, is set in continuous time. The short rate follows an exoge-
nous mean-reverting process, and interest rates for longer maturities are determined endogenously
through trading between investors and arbitrageurs.3 Investors constitute clienteles with pref-
erences for specific maturities. We assume that preferences take an extreme form, whereby the
clientele for a given maturity demands only the zero-coupon bond with the same maturity.4 Thus,
in the absence of arbitrageurs, the term structure would exhibit extreme segmentation: the interest
rate for a given maturity would be influenced only by the demand of the corresponding clientele,
and would evolve independently of other maturities. Of course, such segmentation does not occur
in equilibrium because of arbitrageurs. We assume that arbitrageurs can invest in all maturities,
and maximize a mean-variance objective over instantaneous changes in wealth. Our assumptions
on investors and arbitrageurs ensure that the model has a tractable structure, with equilibrium
interest rates being affine in the state variables.

    Section 3 considers the case where clientele demands are constant over time. In the absence of
arbitrageurs, the term structure would also be constant, and disconnected from the time-varying
short rate. Arbitrageurs bridge this disconnect, incorporating information about current and future
short rates into bond prices. Suppose, for example, that the short rate increases, thus becoming
attractive relative to investing in bonds. Because investors do not venture away from their maturity
habitats, they do not take advantage of this opportunity. Arbitrageurs, however, do take advantage
by shorting bonds and investing at the short rate. Through this carry (“roll-up”) trade, bond prices
drop and yields rise.5 Conversely, a negative shock that lowers the short rate induces arbitrageurs
   3
     The short rate concerns borrowing and lending over an infinitesimal maturity. The assumption of an exogenous
short rate is common in the literature, e.g., Vasicek (1977). See also Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1985), who derive the
short rate from the exogenous return of a risky technology producing output over an infinitesimal maturity.
   4
     We tie clientele demands to optimizing behavior in Appendix B, in a setting where overlapping generations of
investors consume at the end of their life and are infinitely risk averse.
   5
     Carry trades are trades that are profitable if the market environment does not change. For example, shorting


                                                         2
to borrow at the short rate and buy bonds. Through this carry (“roll-down”) trade, bond prices
rise and yields drop. In both cases, the carry trades of arbitrageurs provide the mechanism through
which bond yields move to reflect changes in current and expected future short rates.

     Since carry trades are risky, they must offer positive expected returns to attract risk-averse
arbitrageurs. This has implications for bond risk premia. When the short rate is high, arbitrageurs
short bonds and invest at the short rate. Therefore, bonds earn negative premia, offering lower
expected returns than the short rate. Conversely, premia are positive when the short rate is low
because arbitrageurs borrow at the short rate and buy bonds. Our model thus offers an explanation
for the puzzling finding of Fama and Bliss (1987) that bond risk premia switch sign from positive
during times when the term structure slopes up to negative when it slopes down.

     Our analysis has implications for the transmission of monetary policy. Suppose that the Central
Bank conducts monetary policy through the short rate. Since the effects of this policy are propa-
gated along the term structure through the carry trades of arbitrageurs, the extent of propagation
depends on arbitrageur risk aversion. When, for example, risk aversion is high (e.g., arbitrageurs
are under-capitalized), propagation is limited and forward rates under-react severely to changes in
expected short rates. Note that in acting as conduits of monetary policy, arbitrageurs reap rewards
in the form of positive expected returns from their carry trades. Thus, monetary policy transfers
wealth to arbitrageurs in expected terms. For example, a policy that keeps the short rate low
transfers wealth to arbitrageurs through positive bond risk premia.6

     Section 4 considers the case where clientele demands are driven by one common mean-reverting
factor. Bond yields are then driven by two risk factors: short rate and demand. We allow the
demand factor to take a general form, e.g., it can be a local shock that impacts only the clientele
for a specific maturity, or a global shock that impacts all clienteles. One would expect that the
price effects of local shocks are not fully local because they are transmitted to nearby maturities
by arbitrageurs. But to what extent is transmission effective? And more broadly, how does the
location of demand shocks in the maturity space relate to their effect on the term structure?

     When arbitrageur risk aversion is low, the location of demand shocks matters only for the overall
magnitude of their effect but not for the effect’s relative importance across maturities. Compare,
for example, a decrease in demand of the twenty-year clientele to the same shock to the five-year
clientele. The twenty-year shock has a larger effect on the term structure because arbitrageurs
bonds and investing at the short rate is profitable if the short rate remains high. This trade is commonly referred to
as roll-up because it is a bet that the short rate will remain high, in which case bond yields will roll up to that high
value as bonds mature.
   6
     We are grateful to John Cochrane for suggesting this idea in his discussion of our work (Cochrane (2008)).


                                                           3
must be induced to buy twenty-year bonds, which are more sensitive to short-rate risk. Yet, both
shocks have the same relative effect across maturities: if, for example, the twenty-year shock has
its largest effect on the fifteen-year yield, the same is true for the five-year shock. The intuition is
that when arbitrageur risk aversion is low, the short rate is the dominant risk factor, and demand
shocks affect the term structure by altering the market price of short-rate risk. Bonds most heavily
affected by the shocks are those most sensitive to changes in the market price of short-rate risk, a
characteristic which is independent of the shocks’ location.

    Our model refines and qualifies the logic of limited arbitrage. Consistent with that logic, we
find that demand shocks affect prices because arbitrageurs’ risk tolerance is limited. Yet, even
with limited risk tolerance, arbitrageurs are able to eliminate riskfree arbitrage opportunities. As a
consequence, arbitrage—even limited—imposes tight restrictions on how demand shocks affect the
cross-section of bonds: the effects must be through the factor prices of risk. When arbitrageur risk
aversion is low, the restrictions are particularly tight because the short rate is effectively the only
risk factor. When instead arbitrageurs are concerned with multiple risk factors, the restrictions
become looser, and demand effects acquire a preferred-habitat flavor. Indeed, when arbitrageur risk
aversion is high, and so arbitrageurs are concerned with both the short-rate and the demand factor,
demand shocks located at longer maturities generate effects that are largest at longer maturities.
Moreover, when additional demand factors are introduced, in an extension sketched in Section 5,
the effects of local demand shocks tend to become more local.

    Our emphasis in this paper is mainly qualitative: use the closed-form solutions to understand
key intuitions and comparative statics. We conclude this paper in Section 6 by arguing that an
equally rich set of implications could be derived on the quantitative front. In particular, structural
estimation of the model could render it a valuable policy tool for addressing questions such as how
purchases of bonds by the Central Bank, or issuance by the Treasury, can affect the term structure.
Our model is uniquely able to address such questions because of its focus on demand and supply
shocks.

    A number of recent papers seek to explain the positive relationship between bond risk premia
and the slope of the term structure. In Wachter (2006), Buraschi and Jiltsov (2007) and Lettau and
Wachter (2009), a representative agent has habit formation, and periods of low consumption are
associated with high short rates and bond risk premia. The time-variation in premia generates a
positive relationship with slope, but in contrast to our model premia are always positive. In Gabaix
(2009), time-variation in premia arises because of the time-varying severity of rare disasters facing
a representative agent. In Xiong and Yan (2009), two agents hold heterogeneous beliefs about the


                                                   4
time-varying mean of the short rate. When agents are overly optimistic about the mean, they
undervalue the bonds, and this leads an econometrician who infers the mean correctly to observe
positive premia and positive slope. While we do not dispute the relevance of habit formation,
rare disasters, and heterogeneous beliefs for asset pricing, we believe that in episodes such as
the Treasury buyback, changes in risk premia were generated by an entirely different mechanism.
Considering this mechanism yields a new set of intuitions and predictions.

    A recent literature explores the empirical implications of preferred habitat, as well as the
implications for bond issuance. Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2008) find a strong neg-
ative correlation between credit spreads and the debt-to-gdp ratio, and argue that this reflects a
downward-sloping demand for government bonds. Greenwood and Vayanos (2009a) find that the
average maturity of government debt predicts positively excess bond returns, a result they also
derive theoretically in an extension of our model. Guibaud, Nosbusch and Vayanos (2009) show
that catering to maturity clienteles is an optimal issuance policy: a welfare-maximizing government
issues more long-term debt when the fraction of long- relative to short-horizon investors increases.
Greenwood, Hanson and Stein (2009) find that corporations engage in gap-filling behavior, issuing
long-term debt at times when the supply of long-term government debt is small.7

    Finally, our work is related to papers studying the pricing of multiple assets within a class when
arbitrage is limited. In Barberis and Shleifer (2003), arbitrageurs absorb demand shocks of investors
with preferences for specific asset styles. These shocks generate comovement of assets within a style.
In Pavlova and Rigobon (2008), style arises because of portfolio constraints, and can be the source
of international financial contagion.8 In Greenwood (2005), risk-averse arbitrageurs absorb demand
shocks of index investors. A demand shock for one stock affects other stocks through the covariance
with the arbitrageurs’ portfolio, a property confirmed empirically using data on index redefinitions.9
In Gabaix, Krishnamurthy and Vigneron (2007), the marginal holders of mortgage-backed securities
are risk-averse arbitrageurs, whose wealth is tied to a mortgage portfolio rather than to economy-
wide wealth. Consistent with this idea, pre-payment risk is found to be priced according to the
covariance with the mortgage portfolio. In Garleanu, Pedersen and Poteshman (2009), the marginal
traders in the options market are risk-averse market makers who absorb demand shocks of other
investors. This yields implications for how demand shocks should affect the cross-section of options,
which are confirmed empirically using measures of demand pressure.
  7
    See also Bakshi and Chen (1996) who derive preferred habitats from trading frictions, and Telmer and Zin (1996)
who link preferred habitats to investor portfolio holdings.
  8
    Kyle and Xiong (2001) derive contagion from the wealth effects of arbitrageurs with logarithmic preferences, and
Gromb and Vayanos (2002,2009) derive contagion from arbitrageurs’ margin constraints.
  9
    Hau (2009) extends this analysis by introducing unsophisticated liquidity suppliers alongside the arbitrageurs.


                                                         5
2    Model

Time is continuous and goes from zero to infinity. The term structure at time t consists of a
continuum of zero-coupon bonds in zero supply. The maturities of the bonds are in the interval
(0, T ], and the bond with maturity τ pays $1 at time t + τ . We denote by Pt,τ the time-t price of
the bond with maturity τ , by Rt,τ the spot rate for that maturity, and by ft,τ −∆τ,τ the forward
rate between maturities τ − ∆τ and τ . The spot rate is related to the price through

                 log(Pt,τ )
      Rt,τ = −              ,                                                                   (1)
                     τ

and the forward rate through
                                           
                                   Pt,τ
                       log       Pt,τ −∆τ
      ft,τ −∆τ,τ = −                            .                                               (2)
                                 ∆τ

The short rate rt is the limit of Rt,τ when τ goes to zero. We take rt as exogenous and assume that
it follows the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process

      drt = κr (r − rt )dt + σr dBr,t ,                                                         (3)

where (r, κr , σr ) are positive constants and Br,t is a Brownian motion. The short rate rt could be
determined by the Central Bank and the macro-economic environment, but we do not model these
mechanisms. Our focus instead is on how exogenous movements in rt influence the bond prices Pτ,t
that are endogenously determined in equilibrium.

    Agents are of two types: preferred-habitat investors and arbitrageurs. Preferred-habitat in-
vestors constitute maturity clienteles, with the clientele for maturity τ demanding the bond with
the same maturity. We assume that the demand for the bond with maturity τ , expressed in time
t dollars, is an increasing and linear function of the bond’s yield Rt,τ , i.e.,

      yt,τ = α(τ )τ (Rt,τ − βt,τ ).                                                             (4)

We impose no restrictions on the function α(τ ) except that it is positive.

    If preferred-habitat investors were the only market participants, then the term structure would
exhibit extreme segmentation: the yield for a given maturity would be influenced only by the
demand of the corresponding clientele, and would evolve independently of other maturities. Given
the demand (4) and bonds’ zero supply, the equilibrium yield for maturity τ would be Rt,τ = βt,τ .

                                                    6
Of course, such segmentation does not occur in equilibrium because of arbitrageurs. Arbitrageurs
integrate maturity markets, ensuring that bonds with nearby maturities trade at similar prices and
the term structure is arbitrage-free.

       In Appendix B we show that optimizing behavior yields the demand (4) with the slight dif-
ference that (4) concerns units of the bond rather than time t dollars.10 We assume that there
are overlapping generations of investors, who consume at the end of their life and are infinitely
risk averse. Infinite risk aversion ensures that investors demand only the bond that matures at the
end of their life.11 Therefore, each generation constitutes a clientele for a specific maturity. We
additionally assume that investors can save for consumption either through bonds or through a
private technology that is an imperfect substitute. This ensures that demand is elastic in the yield
Rt,τ , with βt,τ being the return on the private technology.

       Assuming that preferred-habitat investors demand only the bond corresponding to their ma-
turity habitat is, of course, extreme. This assumption, however, renders the analysis manageable,
while not detracting from our main focus which is how limited arbitrage can integrate segmented
maturity markets. Indeed, if preferred-habitat investors could move away from their maturity
habitat, they would do so when other bonds offer more attractive returns. Therefore, they would
contribute to the integration of markets, which in our model is done solely by arbitrageurs. This
would enlarge the set of arbitrageurs without affecting the qualitative features of our analysis. At
the same time, the analysis would become more complicated because the portfolio of each maturity
clientele would consist of a continuum of bonds rather than a single bond.

       While we preclude preferred-habitat investors from substituting across maturities, we allow
them to substitute outside the bond market through the private technology. This type of substi-
tution is important for some aspects of our analysis. At a fundamental level, our analysis centers
around how limited arbitrage can integrate segmented maturity markets. These segmented markets
can clear (at the yield βt,τ ) only if the demand of preferred-habitat investors is elastic in the yield
of the bond corresponding to their maturity habitat. Allowing for substitution outside the bond
  10
      Since the demand expressed in dollars is derived from that in units by multiplying by the bond price, the dollar
demand derived in Appendix B has the form (4) but with α(τ ) depending on t. We assume that the demand (4)
concerns dollars rather than units because when combining with an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck short-rate process, we find
equilibrium spot rates that are affine in the state variables. In Appendix B we present a modification of our model
where optimizing behavior by preferred-habitat investors yields a demand expressed in units that has the form (4)
except that it is linear and decreasing in the bond price rather than linear and increasing in the bond yield. When
combining with a short-rate process that belongs to the class of Gabaix’s (2009) linearity-generating processes, we
find equilibrium bond prices that are affine in the state variables.
   11
      More precisely, investors demand a riskless payoff at the end of their life. They can achieve this payoff by holding
either the bond that matures at the end of their life or a replicating portfolio. If the term structure is arbitrage-free,
as is the case in equilibrium, the replicating portfolio costs the same as the bond. Therefore, investors are indifferent
between the two, and we assume that they hold the bond.



                                                            7
market generates this elasticity. In later sections we show that elastic demand underlies some of
our main results, e.g., the effects of local demand shocks can be tied to the shocks’ location, and
bond risk premia switch sign according to the slope of the term structure.12                13



       We assume that the intercept βt,τ in the demand (4) takes the form

                     K
                     X
        βt,τ = β +         θk (τ )βk,t ,                                                                          (5)
                     k=1


where β is a constant, {βk,t }k=1,..,K are demand risk factors and {θk (τ )}k=1,..,K are functions charac-
terizing how each factor would impact the cross-section of maturities in the absence of arbitrageurs.
For example, when θk (τ ) is independent of τ , a change in βk,t would impact all maturities equally
and cause a parallel shift in the term structure. When instead θk (τ ) is single-peaked around a
specific maturity, a change in βk,t would impact that maturity the most, and can be interpreted as
a local demand shock. We impose no restrictions on the functions {θk (τ )}k=1,..,K .

       The demand factors can be given a number of interpretations. In Appendix B we interpret
them as returns on investments outside the bond market, e.g., real estate. Demand factors could
alternatively be interpreted as changes in the hedging needs of preferred-habitat investors (arising
because of, e.g., changes in pension funds’ liabilities or regulation), changes in the size or com-
position of the preferred-habitat investor pool, or changes in the supply of bonds issued by the
government. We assume that the demand factor βk,t follows the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process

        dβk,t = −κβ,k βk,t dt + σβ,k dBβ,k,t ,                                                                    (6)

where (κβ,k , σβ,k ) are positive constants and Bβ,k,t is a Brownian motion independent of Br,t and
Bβ,k′ ,t for k′ 6= k.14
  12
      Footnotes 15 and 23 explain why these results follow from elastic demand.
  13
      Substitution by preferred-habitat investors towards non-bond investments is relevant in practice. Consider, for
example, the 2004 pension reform in the UK, which required pension funds to evaluate their long-term pension
liabilities using market long rates. To hedge against changes in long rates, pension funds tilted their portfolios
towards long-term bonds, and this drove long rates to record low levels. The drop in long rates induced pension funds
to substitute towards both shorter-maturity bonds and non-bond investments. The non-bond investments included
real estate: for example, Marks & Spencer arranged for their pension fund to receive payments based on the leases of
their property portfolio. For accounts of the UK pension reform and its effect on the term structure, see the Barclays
Capital reports by Tzucker and Islam (2005) and Islam (2007), as well as Greenwood and Vayanos (2009b). The
Marks & Spencer deal is mentioned in Islam (2007), p.61. Tzucker and Islam (2005), p.10, emphasize the elasticity
of pension-fund demand for long-term bonds:
         ... The market experience has been that pension funds and other “real money” investors will be buyers
         of real yields on an outright basis when yields are higher than 1.50-1.60%. It is salutary to note that
         this “bid-only” level was 2.20-2.40% in the earlier half of this decade...
In our model, the buy threshold corresponds to the intercept βt,τ in the demand (4). Note that this threshold is
time-varying, and changed because of the pension reform.
   14
      Allowing demand factors to be correlated with each other and with the short rate complicates the formulas
without affecting the main results. See the discussion at the end of Section 4.


                                                          8
      Arbitrageurs choose a bond portfolio to trade off instantaneous mean and variance. Denoting
their time-t wealth by Wt and their dollar investment in the bond with maturity τ by xt,τ , their
budget constraint is
                                     T                               T
                                                                                  dPt,τ
                                Z                              Z
       dWt =          Wt −                xt,τ       rt dt +               xt,τ         .          (7)
                                  0                                0               Pt,τ

The arbitrageurs’ optimization problem is
                          h              a            i
           max                Et (dWt ) − V art (dWt ) ,                                           (8)
       {xt,τ }τ ∈(0,T ]                  2

where a is a risk-aversion coefficient, characterizing the trade-off between mean and variance.

      Because arbitrageurs render the term structure arbitrage-free, they eliminate riskfree arbitrage
opportunities. Therefore, their positions in equilibrium involve risk, and their returns derive from
the premium associated to that risk rather than from riskfree arbitrage opportunities. This describes
most of term-structure arbitrage, done by, e.g., hedge funds and proprietary-trading desks.

      We endow arbitrageurs with preferences over instantaneous mean and variance for analytical
convenience. One interpretation of these preferences is that there are overlapping generations of
arbitrageurs, each living for an infinitesimal time interval. Intertemporal optimization of long-lived
arbitrageurs with logarithmic utility would also give rise to preferences over instantaneous mean
and variance, but the risk-aversion coefficient a would depend on wealth. In taking a to be constant,
we suppress wealth effects. We appeal informally to wealth effects, however, when drawing some
of the model’s empirical implications.



3     One-Factor Model

This section studies the case where there are no demand factors (K = 0). The only risk factor is
the short rate rt , and the term structure is described by a one-factor model. The one-factor model
yields some of our main results, while being analytically very simple.


3.1     Equilibrium

We conjecture that equilibrium spot rates are affine in rt , i.e.,

       Pt,τ = e−[Ar (τ )rt +C(τ )]                                                                 (9)

                                                                                       9
for two functions Ar (τ ), C(τ ) that depend on maturity τ . Applying Ito’s Lemma to (9) and using
the dynamics (3) of rt , we find that the instantaneous return on the bond with maturity τ is

        dPt,τ
              = µt,τ dt − Ar (τ )σr dBr,t ,                                                        (10)
         Pt,τ

where

                                                            1
        µt,τ ≡ A′r (τ )rt + C ′ (τ ) − Ar (τ )κr (r − rt ) + Ar (τ )2 σr2                          (11)
                                                            2

is the instantaneous expected return. Substituting (10) into the arbitrageurs’ budget constraint
(7), we can solve the arbitrageurs’ optimization problem (8).

Lemma 1. The arbitrageurs’ first-order condition is

        µt,τ − rt = Ar (τ )λr,t ,                                                                  (12)

where
                        Z       T
        λr,t ≡   aσr2               xt,τ Ar (τ )dτ.                                                (13)
                            0



    Eq. (12) requires that a bond’s expected excess return µt,τ − rt is proportional to the bond’s
sensitivity Ar (τ ) to the short rate. The proportionality coefficient λr,t (which is the same for all
bonds) is the market price of short-rate risk. Eq. (12) follows solely from the absence of arbitrage,
without imposing any of the additional structure of our model. Indeed, since the short rate is the
only risk factor, a bond’s risk is fully characterized by the sensitivity to the short rate. Absence
of arbitrage requires that expected excess return per unit of risk is the same for all bonds. The
common value of this ratio is the market price of short-rate risk λr,t .

    While absence of arbitrage requires that risk is priced consistently across bonds, it imposes
essentially no restrictions on the common price of risk λr,t . We determine λr,t using the additional
structure of our model, namely, the specification of preferred-habitat investors and arbitrageurs.
The main economic insights coming out of our model can be traced to properties of λr,t (and of
the market price of demand risk in later sections).

    Since (12) is the arbitrageurs’ first-order condition, λr,t is the expected excess return that arbi-
trageurs require as compensation for taking a marginal unit of risk. This yields the characterization

                                                          10
in (13). In particular, arbitrageurs require high compensation for adding risk to their portfolio if
                                                RT
the portfolio is highly sensitive to risk, i.e., 0 xt,τ Ar (τ )dτ is high. Moreover, this effect is stronger
if arbitrageurs are more risk averse (a large) or the short rate is more volatile (σr2 large).

      The portfolio of arbitrageurs is determined endogenously in equilibrium. Since bonds are in zero
supply, arbitrageurs’ positions xt,τ are opposite to the positions yt,τ of preferred-habitat investors.
Setting xt,τ = −yt,τ in (13), we can write the market price of short-rate risk λr,t as
                          Z       T                                  Z       T
                  −aσr2                                      aσr2
                                                                                                              
       λr,t =                         yt,τ Ar (τ )dτ =                           α(τ ) βτ − [Ar (τ )rt + C(τ )] Ar (τ )dτ,   (14)
                              0                                          0

where the second step follows from (1), (4), (5), (9) and K = 0. Eq. (14) implies that λr,t is an
affine and decreasing function of the short rate rt , a property that underlies the main results of
this section. Substituting µt,τ from (11) and λr,t from (14) into (12), we find an affine equation in
rt . Setting linear terms in rt to zero yields
                                                                     Z       T
       A′r (τ )   + κr Ar (τ ) − 1 =                 −aσr2 Ar (τ )               α(τ )Ar (τ )2 dτ,                           (15)
                                                                         0

and setting constant terms to zero yields an equation for C(τ ). Eq. (15) is a linear differential
equation in Ar (τ ), with the unusual feature that the coefficient of Ar (τ ) depends on an integral
involving Ar (τ ). This is because of a fixed-point problem to which we return later in this section.
Proposition 1 reduces the fixed-point problem to a scalar non-linear equation, and determines the
functions Ar (τ ), C(τ ).

Proposition 1. The functions Ar (τ ), C(τ ) are given by
                                      ∗
                1 − e−κr τ
       Ar (τ ) =            ,                                                                                                (16)
                     κ∗r
                      Z τ
                                      σr2 τ
                                         Z
                 ∗ ∗
        C(τ ) = κr r       Ar (u)du −       Ar (u)2 du,                                                                      (17)
                         0            2 0

where κ∗r is the unique solution to
                                  Z       T
       κ∗r   = κr +   aσr2                    α(τ )Ar (τ )2 dτ,                                                              (18)
                                      0

and
                                                RT                       4 RT     R τ
                     (β − r)aσr2                   α(τ )τ Ar (τ )dτ + aσ2r 0 α(τ ) 0 Ar (u)2 du Ar (τ )dτ
                                                                                               
        ∗                                        0
       r ≡r+                                       h         RT       R τ                i              .                  (19)
                                                κ∗r 1 + aσr2 0 α(τ ) 0 Ar (u)du Ar (τ )dτ


                                                                                    11
      The parameters (r ∗ , κ∗r ) characterize the dynamics of the short rate under the risk-neutral
measure. In the proof of Proposition 1 we show that these dynamics are

       drt = κ∗r (r ∗ − rt )dt + σr dB̂r,t ,                                                          (20)

where B̂r,t is a Brownian motion under the risk-neutral measure. The risk-neutral dynamics are
thus Ornstein-Uhlenbeck, as are the true dynamics, with long-run mean r ∗ and mean-reversion rate
κ∗r . Eqs. (16) and (17) are the standard Vasicek (1977) equations, characterizing the term structure
when the risk-neutral dynamics are Ornstein-Uhlenbeck.

      Identifying how the risk-neutral parameters (r ∗ , κ∗r ) differ from their true counterparts (r, κr )
is central to our analysis. The difference between the two sets of parameters is closely related to the
properties of the market price of short-rate risk λr,t . Risk-neutral and true parameters obviously
coincide when arbitrageurs are risk neutral (a = 0), as can be seen from (18) and (19).

      When arbitrageurs are risk averse, the parameters (r ∗ , κ∗r ) depend on characteristics of the
arbitrageurs’ portfolio. Since arbitrageurs’ positions are opposite to those of preferred-habitat
investors, and the latter depend on spot rates, the parameters (r ∗ , κ∗r ) depend on the functions
Ar (τ ), C(τ ). This gives rise to the fixed-point problem solved in Proposition 1: the risk-neutral
parameters (r ∗ , κ∗r ) determine the functions Ar (τ ), C(τ ) through the Vasicek equations, but they
also depend on these functions.



3.2     Bond Risk Premia

In the one-factor model, the term structure in the absence of arbitrageurs is flat at β and dis-
connected from the time-varying short rate. Arbitrageurs bridge this disconnect, incorporating
information about current and future short rates into bond prices. Examining how arbitrageurs
perform this activity reveals key economic mechanisms of our model. It also yields implications
for bond risk premia, and ties back to properties of the risk-neutral parameters (r ∗ , κ∗r ) and the
market price of short-rate risk λr,t .

      Suppose that a positive shock raises the short rate above β. This makes investing in the short
rate attractive relative to investing in bonds. Because preferred-habitat investors do not venture
away from their maturity habitats, they do not take advantage of this opportunity. Arbitrageurs,
however, do take advantage by shorting bonds and investing at the short rate. Through this carry
(“roll-up”) trade, bond prices drop and yields rise. Conversely, a negative shock that lowers the

                                                     12
short rate induces arbitrageurs to borrow at the short rate and buy bonds. Through this carry
(“roll-down”) trade, bond prices rise and yields drop. In both cases, the carry trades of arbitrageurs
provide the mechanism through which bond yields move to reflect changes in current and expected
future short rates.

       Bond risk premia reflect arbitrageurs’ carry trades. When the short rate is high, arbitrageurs
are short bonds through the carry roll-up trade. Since arbitrageurs are the marginal agents, bond
risk premia are negative: bonds must offer negative expected returns relative the short rate so that
arbitrageurs are induced to short them. Conversely, when the short rate is low, arbitrageurs are
long bonds through the carry roll-down trade, and bond risk premia are positive.15

       Since the short rate is the only source of time-variation in the one-factor model, bond risk
premia are positively related to the slope of the term structure: a high (low) short rate implies
both a downward (upward) sloping term structure and negative (positive) bond risk premia. The
positive slope-premia relationship is consistent with the findings of Fama and Bliss (FB 1987). FB
perform the regression
                                  
         1           Pt+∆τ,τ −∆τ
           log                         − Rt,∆τ = αFB + γFB (ft,τ −∆τ,τ − Rt,∆τ ) + ǫt+∆τ .                         (21)
        ∆τ              Pt,τ

The dependent variable is the return on a zero-coupon bond with maturity τ held over a period ∆τ ,
in excess of the spot rate for maturity ∆τ . The independent variable is the forward rate between
maturities τ − ∆τ and τ , minus the the spot rate for maturity ∆τ . FB perform this regression for
∆τ = 1 year and τ = 2, 3, 4, 5 years, and find that in all cases γFB is positive and significant. This
means that bond risk premia tend to be positive when forward rates exceed spot rates, i.e., the
term structure is upward sloping, and negative when the term structure is downward sloping. The
time-variation is significant: the standard deviation of predicted premia is about 1-1.5% per year,
while average premia are about 0.5% per year. To show the positive slope-premia relationship in
our model, we compute γFB in the analytically convenient case where ∆τ is small.

Proposition 2 (Positive Premia-Slope Relationship). For ∆τ → 0 and for all τ , the regres-
                                          κ∗r −κr
sion coefficient in (21) is γFB =            κ∗r    > 0.


       The negative relationship between bond risk premia and the short rate is reflected in the behav-
ior of forward rates. Suppose, for example, that the short rate is high, in which case arbitrageurs
  15
     The assumption that the demand of preferred-habitat investors is elastic in the yield of the bond corresponding
to their maturity habitat is crucial for this result. Indeed, if the demand were inelastic, arbitrageurs would not trade
with preferred-habitat investors. Therefore their positions would be independent of the short rate, and so would bond
risk premia.


                                                           13
are short bonds and are subject to the risk that rates will decrease. Arbitrageurs are compen-
sated for that risk by the negative expected returns that bonds offer relative to the short rate.
Bonds are thus expensive and their yields are low compared to the expectations-hypothesis (EH)
benchmark where expected excess returns are zero. Since forward rates are increasing in bond
yields, they are also low compared to the EH benchmark, i.e., they are below expected spot rates.
Conversely, forward rates exceed expected spot rates when the short rate is low. Forward rates
thus under-react to changes in expected spot rates: they increase less than expected spot rates
following positive shocks to the current short rate and decrease less following negative shocks.16 A
related explanation for under-reaction, which is useful in later sections, is that in the absence of
arbitrageurs forward rates are independent of expected short rates. Arbitrageurs incorporate infor-
mation about expected short rates into forward rates, but their activity is limited by risk aversion.
As a result, information is not fully incorporated, implying under-reaction. Proposition 3 confirms
under-reaction by comparing how a shock to the short rate rt impacts the expected short rate at
time t + τ and the instantaneous forward rate ft,τ for maturity τ . The latter rate is defined as the
limit of the forward rate ft,τ −∆τ,τ between maturities τ − ∆τ and τ when ∆τ goes to zero:

                                     ∂ log(Pt,τ )
         ft,τ ≡ lim ft,τ −∆τ,τ = −                = A′r (τ )rt + C ′ (τ ),                                        (22)
               ∆τ →0                     ∂τ

where the second step follows from (2), and the third from (9).

Proposition 3 (Under-Reaction of Forward Rates). A unit shock to the short rate rt
                                                                ∂Et (rt+τ )
       • Raises the expected short rate at time t + τ by           ∂rt        = e−κr τ .

                                                                                   ∂ft,τ         ∗
       • Raises the instantaneous forward rate ft,τ for maturity τ by               ∂rt    = e−κr τ < e−κr τ .


       The properties of bond risk premia and forward rates are reflected in the risk-neutral parameters
(r ∗ , κ∗r ) and the market price of short-rate risk λr,t . Eq. (18) implies that the short rate mean-reverts
  16
     The under-reaction of forward rates to changes in expected spot rates is relevant in the context of recent events.
For example, short-rate cuts triggered by the 2007-2008 financial crisis rendered the US term structure steeply upward
sloping. According to a Barclays Capital report by Pradhan (2009), p.2., forward rates did not decrease enough to
reflect the low expected future spot rates, i.e., the forward-rate curve remained too flat. This point is made in the
context of the two-year rate: while the two-year spot rate is 258bps lower than the ten-year spot rate, the difference
between the same rates two years forward is only 93bps.
        ... In our opinion, forward steepeners still offer value; for instance, the 2s-10s swap curve 2y forward
        is trading at 93bp versus the spot level of 258bp. The flatness of the forward curve largely reflects the
        market pricing in aggressive Fed hikes, which we believe understates the severe depth of the current
        recession and its effect on the path of the fed funds rate...
The proposed strategy is to lend at the two-year rate two years forward and borrow at the ten-year rate two years
forward. Lending at the two-year rate two years forward is a simple carry roll-down trade: it amounts to shorting
two-year bonds and buying four-year bonds. Adding the position in the ten-year rate two years forward makes the
trade a butterfly. Such butterfly trades are consistent with our model, as we explain in Footnote 21.


                                                          14
faster under the risk-neutral than under the true measure (κ∗r > κr , a property that is used to derive
Propositions 2 and 3). To explain the intuition, suppose, for example, that the short rate is high, in
which case bond risk premia are negative and bond yields are low compared to the EH benchmark.
Since the EH holds under the risk-neutral measure, spot rates are expected to drop faster than
under the true measure, meaning that mean-reversion is faster.

     Eq. (14) implies that λr,t is an affine and decreasing function of the short rate rt . Therefore,
λr,t mirrors the behavior of bond risk premia, being negative when rt is large and positive when rt
is small. This functional form of λr,t has been proposed by Dai and Singleton (DS 2002) and Duffee
(2002) in the context of reduced-form modeling, and as part of the broader class of essentially-affine
specifications.17 We show that this functional form arises in an equilibrium model with segmented
maturity markets integrated by limited arbitrage. Moreover, because our model is equilibrium
rather than reduced form, we can give economic interpretations to term-structure factors, and relate
properties of the term structure to variables outside the set of bond yields, such as demand and
supply, and arbitrageur risk aversion. We examine the effects of demand and supply in later sections,
where we introduce demand risk factors.18 Corollary 1 shows that an increase in arbitrageur risk
aversion strengthens the positive relationship between bond risk premia and the slope of the term
structure, as well as the under-reaction of forward rates to changes in expected spot rates. The
intuition is that both effects arise because of risk aversion: when arbitrageurs are risk neutral, the
EH holds, bond risk premia are zero and forward rates react one-for-one to changes in expected
spot rates.

Corollary 1. When arbitrageurs are more risk averse (larger a):

    • The regression coefficient γFB of bond excess returns on term-structure slope, derived in Propo-
       sition 2, is larger.

    • The under-reaction of forward rates to changes in expected spot rates, derived in Proposition
       3, is stronger.


     Corollary 1 is a comparative-statics result because arbitrageur risk aversion a is constant in
our model. Stepping outside of the model, however, we can interpret the corollary as concerning
  17
     DS and Duffee show that specifications in which market prices of risk do not change sign, such as the one arising
in the equilibrium model of Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1985), fail to match important properties of the data. They
propose the class of essentially affine specifications, in which market prices of risk are affine functions of the state
variables. These specifications generate a better match with the data, while retaining the tractability of affine models.
  18
     When the short rate is the only risk factor, demand and supply manifest themselves through the parameter β,
which determines the level of the flat term structure in the absence of arbitrageurs. The parameter β affects the term
structure through the long-run mean r ∗ of the short rate under the risk-neutral measure (Eq. (19)).



                                                           15
the effects of time-variation in a. If, for example, a is decreasing in arbitrageur capital, then time-
variation in a could be measured by arbitrageur returns. Empirical proxies for the latter are the
returns of hedge funds or the profit-loss positions of proprietary-trading desks. But our model
suggests even more direct proxies (in the sense of requiring only term-structure data), derived
from arbitrageurs’ trading strategies. For example, at times when the term structure is upward
sloping, our model predicts that arbitrageurs are engaged in the carry roll-down trade. Therefore,
arbitrageur capital decreases when that trade loses money. Conversely, when the term structure is
downward sloping, arbitrageurs are engaged in the carry roll-up trade, and their capital decreases
when that trade loses money. Using proxies for arbitrageur capital based on this idea, Greenwood
and Vayanos (2009a) find empirical support for the predictions of our model.

     Our analysis offers a new perspective into the transmission of monetary policy. Suppose that
the Central Bank conducts monetary policy through the short rate. The effects of this policy are
propagated along the term structure through the carry trades of arbitrageurs, and more broadly of
intermediaries engaging in maturity transformation, such as banks. This propagation mechanism
is effective when arbitrageur risk aversion is low, e.g., arbitrageurs are well capitalized. When,
however, risk aversion is high, propagation is less effective and forward rates are not responsive to
changes in expected short rates (Corollary 1). In such circumstances, direct intervention into the
markets for long-term bonds might be more effective in influencing long rates.19

     In acting as conduits of monetary policy, arbitrageurs reap rewards in the form of positive
expected returns from their carry trades. Thus, monetary policy transfers wealth to arbitrageurs
in expected terms. For example, a policy that keeps the short rate low, and the term structure
upward sloping, transfers wealth through positive bond risk premia. The magnitude of this transfer
is small when arbitrageurs are not very risk averse because they compete away the premia, but can
be large when risk aversion is high.



4     Two-Factor Model

This section studies the case where there is one demand factor (K = 1). For notational convenience
we omit the factor subscript from quantities pertaining to that factor, e.g., use βt instead of β1,t .
The term structure is described by a model with two factors: the short rate rt and demand βt .
  19
     While we explore the effects of direct intervention in later sections, a full analysis of how to best influence long
rates is beyond the scope of our model.




                                                           16
4.1     Equilibrium


We conjecture that equilibrium spot rates are affine in (rt , βt ), i.e.,

        Pt,τ = e−[Ar (τ )rt +Aβ (τ )βt +C(τ )]                                                                (23)

for three functions Ar (τ ), Aβ (τ ), C(τ ) that depend on maturity τ . Applying Ito’s Lemma to (23)
and using the dynamics (3) of rt and (6) of βt , we find that the instantaneous return on the bond
with maturity τ is

        dPt,τ
              = µt,τ dt − Ar (τ )σr dBr,t − Aβ (τ )σβ dBβ,t ,                                                 (24)
         Pt,τ

where

                                                                                  1              1
   µt,τ ≡ A′r (τ )rt + Aβ (τ )βt + C ′ (τ ) − Ar (τ )κr (r − rt ) + Aβ (τ )κβ βt + Ar (τ )2 σr2 + Aβ (τ )2 σβ2 (25)
                                                                                  2              2

is the instantaneous expected return. Substituting (24) into the arbitrageurs’ budget constraint
(7), we can solve the arbitrageurs’ optimization problem (8).

Lemma 2. The arbitrageurs’ first-order condition is

        µt,τ − rt = Ar (τ )λr,t + Aβ (τ )λβ,t ,                                                               (26)

where
                        Z       T
        λr,t ≡   aσr2               xt,τ Ar (τ )dτ,                                                           (27)
                        0
                        Z       T
        λβ,t ≡ aσβ2                 xt,τ Aβ (τ )dτ.                                                           (28)
                            0



      Eq. (26) requires that a bond’s expected excess return µt,τ − rt is a linear function of the bond’s
sensitivities Ar (τ ) to the short rate and Aβ (τ ) to the demand factor. The coefficients λr,t and λβ,t
of the linear function (which are the same for all bonds) are the market prices of short-rate and
demand risk, respectively. Eq. (26) is the two-factor counterpart of (12), and follows solely from
the absence of arbitrage: the expected excess return per unit of each type of risk must be the same
for all bonds.

      The market prices of risk λr,t and λβ,t are the expected excess returns that arbitrageurs require
as compensation for taking a marginal unit of short-rate and demand risk, respectively. They are

                                                       17
linear and increasing in the covariance with the arbitrageurs’ portfolio. Since arbitrageurs’ positions
in equilibrium are opposite to those of preferred-habitat investors, and the latter are affine in spot
rates, λr,t and λβ,t are affine in (rt , βt ). Substituting (µt,τ , λr,t , λβ,t ) into (26), we find an affine
equation in (rt , βt ). Setting linear terms in (rt , βt ) to zero yields

      A′r (τ ) + κr Ar (τ ) − 1 = Ar (τ )M1,1 + Aβ (τ )M1,2 ,                                                 (29)

      A′β (τ ) + κβ Aβ (τ ) = Ar (τ )M2,1 + Aβ (τ )M2,2 ,                                                     (30)

where
              "                RT                                      RT                               #
                        −σr2 0 α(τ )Ar (τ )2 dτ                   −σβ2 0 α(τ )Ar (τ )Aβ (τ )dτ
      M ≡a           RT                                          RT                                       ,   (31)
                  σr2 0 α(τ ) [τ θ(τ ) − Aβ (τ )] Ar (τ )dτ   σβ2 0 α(τ ) [τ θ(τ ) − Aβ (τ )] Aβ (τ )dτ

and setting constant terms to zero yields an equation for C(τ ). Eqs. (29) and (30) constitute a
system of two linear differential equations in Ar (τ ), Aβ (τ ), in which the coefficients of Ar (τ ), Aβ (τ )
depend on integrals involving these functions. This is because of the same fixed-point problem
arising in the one-factor model: the risk-neutral measure (implicit in the matrix M ) determines the
functions Ar (τ ), Aβ (τ ), but it also depends on these functions. Proposition 4 reduces the fixed-point
problem to a system of four scalar non-linear equations.

Proposition 4. The functions Ar (τ ), Aβ (τ ) are given by

              1 − e−ν1 τ        1 − e−ν2 τ     1 − e−ν1 τ
                                                         
    Ar (τ ) =            + γr              −                ,                                                 (32)
                  ν1               ν2             ν1

                   1 − e−ν2 τ   1 − e−ν1 τ
                                          
    Aβ (τ ) = γβ              −              ,                                                                (33)
                      ν2            ν1

where the scalars (ν1 , ν2 , γr , γβ ) solve the system of (A.27)-(A.30). The function C(τ ) is given by
(A.31).


    The system of (A.27)-(A.30), which determines the functions Ar (τ ), Aβ (τ ), does not have a
simple closed-form solution as in the one-factor model. Nevertheless, closed-form solutions can be
derived in the polar cases where arbitrageur risk aversion is very low (a ≈ 0) or very high (a ≈ ∞).
We focus on these cases because they convey useful intuitions, and we complement our analysis by
highlighting additional effects derived for intermediate values of risk aversion.

    Proposition 5 determines the asymptotic behavior of the parameters (ν1 , ν2 , γr , γβ ) for a ≈ 0
and a ≈ ∞. The proposition reports mainly orders of magnitude (in terms of a). Full closed-form

                                                        18
solutions are in the Appendix, and solutions for some of the parameters are reported later in this
section when needed to illustrate our results.

Proposition 5. The asymptotic behavior of (ν1 , ν2 , γr , γβ ) is as follows:

       • When a ≈ 0: (ν1 , ν2 , γr , γβ ) ≈ (κr , κβ , a3 cr , acβ ), where cr and cβ are constants given by
         (A.39) and (A.38), respectively.
                                                  1             1
       • When a ≈ ∞: (ν1 , ν2 , γr , γβ ) ≈ (a 3 n1 , ν 2 , a− 3 cr , γ β ), where n1 , ν 2 , cr and γ β are constants
         given by (A.49), (A.48), (A.50) and (A.51), respectively. Furthermore, n1 > 0 and cr < 0.



4.2       Term Structure Movements

In the two-factor model, the term structure moves because of shocks to the short rate and to
demand. Examining the impact of these shocks reveals key economic mechanisms of our model and
yields new results. We examine how the shocks affect the term structure of instantaneous forward
rates rather than of spot rates. Recall that the instantaneous forward rate for maturity τ is the
limit of the forward rate ft,τ −∆τ,τ between maturities τ − ∆τ and τ when ∆τ goes to zero:

                                       ∂ log(Pt,τ )
         ft,τ ≡ lim ft,τ −∆τ,τ = −                  = A′r (τ )rt + A′β (τ )βt + C ′ (τ ),                        (34)
                 ∆τ →0                     ∂τ

where the second step follows from (2), and the third from (23). Since the spot rate for maturity
τ is the average of instantaneous forward rates up to that maturity (from (1) and (34)), the term
structure of instantaneous forward rates conveys the same information as that of spot rates. We
use instantaneous forward rates because they are directly comparable to expected short rates.20
Eq. (34) implies that the impact of short-rate and demand shocks on instantaneous forward rates
is characterized by the functions A′r (τ ) and A′β (τ ), respectively.

       When arbitrageurs are close to risk-neutral (a ≈ 0), Propositions 4 and 5 imply that a unit
shock to the short rate rt raises the instantaneous forward rate for maturity τ by

         A′r (τ ) ≈ e−κr τ .                                                                                     (35)

The effect is approximately the same as on the corresponding expected short rate. This is because
the expectations hypothesis (EH) holds when arbitrageurs are risk neutral.
  20
    Suppose, for example, that the 29- and 30-year spot rates are 4% and 3.88%, respectively. The forward rate
between maturities 29 and 30 is 0.46%, and can appear low to an arbitrageur in comparison to the expected one-year
spot rate in 29 years. Such a comparison, however, is not as transparent when looking at the 29- and 30-year spot
rates.


                                                           19
    Under the EH, the term structure is determined solely by current and expected future short
rates. Therefore, demand shocks have no effect when arbitrageurs are risk neutral. Examining the
effect of demand shocks close to risk neutrality, however, yields useful insights. Propositions 4 and
5 imply that when a ≈ 0, a unit shock to the demand factor βt raises the instantaneous forward
rate for maturity τ by

                            RT                   −κr τ
                     aσr2   0    α(τ )τ θ(τ ) 1−eκr      dτ
      A′β (τ )                                                e−κβ τ − e−κr τ .
                                                                             
                 ≈                                                                                     (36)
                                    κr − κβ

To illustrate (36), suppose that θ(τ ) is positive for a subset T of maturities, and zero for all others,
so an increase in βt represents a decrease in demand by investors whose habitats are in T. Eq. (36)
implies that A′β (τ ) > 0 for all τ , i.e., the decrease in demand raises instantaneous forward rates for
all maturities, including those not in T. This is because arbitrageurs accommodate the decrease in
demand by buying bonds. Therefore, they become exposed to the risk that bond prices decrease,
and require higher returns to hold bonds. This pushes bond prices down and forward rates up.

    We next examine how the effect of the demand shock depends on the function θ(τ ) that
characterizes the shock’s location T in the maturity space. The function θ(τ ) enters in (36) through
             RT                −κr τ
the integral 0 α(τ )τ θ(τ ) 1−eκr dτ . The term α(τ )τ θ(τ ) represents the dollar value of the bond
                                                                                            1−e−κr τ
with maturity τ bought by arbitrageurs in response to the shock, and is multiplied by         κr       , the
bond’s sensitivity to the short rate. This sensitivity is the counterpart of duration in our model, and
             RT                −κr τ
the integral 0 α(τ )τ θ(τ ) 1−eκr dτ can be interpreted as the duration of the portfolio bought by
arbitrageurs. When duration is high, the portfolio is risky, and the demand shock triggers a sharp
increase in required returns and forward rates. Note that duration is measured only in reference
to changes in the short rate. This is because when arbitrageurs are close to risk-neutral, demand
effects are small, and the short rate is the dominant risk factor.

    While θ(τ ) determines the magnitude of the demand effect, it is unrelated to the set of maturi-
ties for which the effect is largest. This is because the demand shock affects the term structure by
altering the market price of short-rate risk, which is common to all bonds because of the absence of
arbitrage. Bonds most heavily affected by the shock are those most sensitive to changes in the mar-
ket price of short-rate risk, and do not necessarily lie within the shock’s location T in the maturity
space. Thus, our model refines and qualifies the logic of limited arbitrage. Consistent with that
logic, we find that demand shocks affect prices because arbitrageurs’ risk tolerance is limited. Yet,
even with limited risk tolerance, arbitrageurs are able to eliminate riskfree arbitrage opportunities.


                                                                  20
As a consequence, arbitrage—even limited—imposes tight restrictions on how demand shocks affect
the cross-section of bonds, which is driven by one dominant risk factor. These restrictions become
looser when arbitrageurs are concerned with multiple risk factors, but they remain effective as we
show later in this section.

                          −κβ τ
                      e         −e−κr τ
    The function            κr −κβ        , which characterizes the relative importance of the demand effect

across maturities, is hump-shaped, and equal to zero for τ = 0 and τ = ∞. Therefore, the effect
of demand shocks is largest for intermediate or long maturities, while that of short-rate shocks
(characterized by the function e−κr τ ) is largest for short maturities. This is because the two types
of shocks work through different channels: short-rate shocks affect expected short rates, which are
the main determinant of instantaneous forward rates for short maturities, while demand shocks
affect risk premia, which become important for longer maturities.

    We next examine the effects of short-rate and demand shocks when arbitrageur risk aversion
is very high. Propositions 4 and 5 imply that when a ≈ ∞, a unit shock to the short rate rt raises
the instantaneous forward rate for maturity τ by

                      1              1
      A′r (τ ) ≈ e−a 3 n1 τ + a− 3 cr e−ν 2 τ .                                                         (37)

The first term in (37) represents an under-reaction of forward rates to changes in expected short
rates, also present in the one-factor model. Recall that under-reaction arises because information
about expected short rates is incorporated into forward rates through arbitrageurs’ carry trades,
which are limited because of risk aversion. When arbitrageurs are very risk averse, under-reaction
is extreme: information about expected short rates is incorporated into forward rates only for short
maturities because carry trades for long maturities involve long-term bonds and therefore high risk.
The extreme under-reaction of instantaneous forward rates for long maturities is reflected into the
                                                                                 1
first term in (37), which is positive but dies off to zero quickly (rate a 3 n1 ) as maturity increases.

    The second term in (37) represents a new effect arising in the two-factor model. Since cr < 0,
this term is negative. Moreover, because it dies off to zero more slowly (rate ν 2 ) than the first
term, it becomes dominant for long maturities. As a consequence, instantaneous forward rates
for long maturities move in the opposite direction to the short-rate shock (and to expected short
rates). This effect arises because of arbitrageurs’ hedging activity. Recall that in response to a
positive short-rate shock, arbitrageurs invest at the short rate and short bonds. When, in addition,
arbitrageurs are very risk averse, they limit their shorting activity to short-term bonds. Moreover,
because long-term bonds are highly sensitive to demand risk, arbitrageurs not only refrain from

                                                           21
shorting them, but instead buy them to hedge the demand risk of their short positions in short-term
bonds. The effect of this “butterfly” trade is to push prices of long-term bonds up and long rates
down.21

Corollary 2. When a ≈ ∞, a shock to the short rate rt moves instantaneous forward rates in the
same direction for short maturities but in the opposite direction for long maturities. The effect on
spot rates exhibits the same pattern.


    Propositions 4 and 5 imply that when a ≈ ∞, a unit shock to the demand factor βt raises the
instantaneous forward rate for maturity τ by
                    RT                  −ν τ
                        α(τ )τ θ(τ ) 1−eν 2 2 dτ
                                                                    1
                                                                             
                     0
      A′β (τ )   ≈ R            −ν τ 2
                                                       −ν 2 τ
                                                       e         −a 3 n1 τ
                                                                −e               .                              (38)
                      T         1−e 2
                     0  α(τ  )      ν2        dτ

The demand effect in (38) has similarities with its counterpart for a ≈ 0 in (36), but there are also
important differences. Suppose that θ(τ ) is positive for a subset T of maturities, and zero for all
others, so an increase in βt represents a decrease in demand by investors whose habitats are in T.
As in the case a ≈ 0, the decrease in demand raises instantaneous forward rates for all maturities.
Moreover, the effect is largest for intermediate maturities (if ν 2 < 0) or long maturities (if ν 2 > 0),
while the effect of short-rate shocks is largest for short maturities.

    A key difference with the case a ≈ 0 is that θ(τ ) influences not only the magnitude of the
demand effect, but also its relative importance across maturities. When a ≈ 0, absence of arbitrage
and the approximate one-factor structure impose tight restrictions on how the demand shock affects
the cross-section of bonds. To explain the intuition when a ≈ ∞, we start with a hypothetical
extreme case where there is a large number of risk factors. If the demand effect is largest for a
subset T ′ of maturities disjoint from the shock’s location T, this means that arbitrageurs buy bonds
with maturities in T and short bonds with maturities in T ′ . When arbitrageurs are very risk averse,
this portfolio must have zero exposure to all factors, which is infeasible with a large number of
factors. Thus, arbitrageurs are unwilling to integrate maturity markets, and the demand effect
remains localized at T.
   21
      Butterfly trades consist of positions in three maturities: two positions of the same sign at the extremes and a
position of the opposite sign at the middle. Such trades are common in term-structure arbitrage. Returning to the
example in Footnote 16, the trade proposed in Pradhan (2009) is to lend at the two-year rate two years forward and
borrow at the ten-year rate two years forward. The first leg of this trade amounts to shorting two-year bonds and
buying four-year bonds, while the second leg amounts to buying two-year bonds and shorting twelve-year bonds. The
second leg serves to hedge term-structure movements at intermediate maturities, and is for a smaller notional amount
since the twelve-year bond is more sensitive to such movements than the four-year bond. Therefore, the overall trade
amounts to shorting two-year bonds, buying four-year bonds, and shorting twelve-year bonds, i.e., a butterfly. This
puts upward pressure on the twelve-year spot rate, despite the trade being triggered by a rate drop at the short end
of the term structure.


                                                                22
       Formally, suppose that arbitrageurs start with a zero position in every bond. A unit shock
to the demand factor βt induces them to buy dollar value α(τ ) [τ θ(τ ) − Aβ (τ )] of the bond with
maturity τ .22 This generates portfolio exposures
         Z       T
                     α(τ ) [τ θ(τ ) − Aβ (τ )] Ar (τ )dτ,                                                                          (39)
             0
         Z       T
                     α(τ ) [τ θ(τ ) − Aβ (τ )] Aβ (τ )dτ,                                                                          (40)
             0


to the factors rt and βt , respectively. When arbitrageurs are very risk averse, they seek to set these
exposures to zero. If a large number of factors are added to (rt , βt ), the zero-exposure requirement
becomes very strict: integrals of the function τ θ(τ ) − Aβ (τ ) times a large number of different
functions must be zero. A natural conjecture, to which we return in Section 5, is that the function
τ θ(τ ) − Aβ (τ ) must be zero for all τ . This means that arbitrageurs hold zero positions in all bonds,
and the effect Aβ (τ )/τ of a demand shock on the spot rate is equal to the function θ(τ ) that
characterizes the shock’s location in the maturity space.23

       With two factors only, the zero-exposure requirement amounts to two scalar equations, and
does not imply that τ θ(τ ) − Aβ (τ ) is zero for all τ . In fact, Aβ (τ ) cannot coincide with a general
function τ θ(τ ) because absence of arbitrage and the two-factor structure restrict it to be an affine
function of two exponentials. The function θ(τ ), however, influences the variation of Aβ (τ ) across
maturities because it affects ν 2 . Proposition 6 shows that a shift in the demand shock’s location
towards longer maturities raises the maturity at which the shock’s effect A′β (τ ) is largest, from
intermediate to long.

Proposition 6. Suppose that a ≈ ∞, and consider a family of positive functions {θ(τ, x)}x∈(x,x)
such that

       • The function θx (τ, x)/θ(τ, x) is increasing in τ (i.e., higher values of x shift weight towards
         longer maturities).
                                          RT                                        R T −ǫ
                                                 α(τ )τ θ(τ,x)dτ                              α(τ )τ θ(τ,x)dτ
       • For all ǫ > 0, limx→x             RǫT                     = 0 and limx→x    0
                                                                                     RT                         = 0 (i.e., θ(τ, x) gives
                                            0    α(τ )τ θ(τ,x)dt                         0   α(τ )τ θ(τ,x)dt

         all weight to τ = 0 when x → x and to τ = T when x → x).
  22
    Eq. ∂xt,τ /∂βt = α(τ ) [τ θ(τ ) − Aβ (τ )] follows from xt,τ = −yt,τ , (1), (4), (5) and (23).
  23
    The assumption that the demand of preferred-habitat investors is elastic in the yield of the bond corresponding
to their maturity habitat is crucial for the argument. Indeed, if investors were buying or selling bonds inelastically,
market-clearing would require arbitrageurs to hold non-zero positions.




                                                                       23
Then, there exists x∗ ∈ (x, x) such that A′β (τ ) is increasing and then decreasing in [0, T ] if x < x∗ ,
and is increasing in [0, T ] if x > x∗ .


    Gathering results from a ≈ 0 and a ≈ ∞ yields the following corollary.

Corollary 3 (Preferred Habitat). A decrease in demand by preferred-habitat investors raises
the term structure of instantaneous forward rates and of spot rates.
   • When a ≈ 0, the demand shock’s location in the maturity space influences the magnitude of
      the demand effect but not its relative importance across maturities.

   • When a ≈ ∞, the demand shock’s location in the maturity space influences both the magnitude
      of the demand effect and its relative importance across maturities. In particular, a shift in the
      shock’s location towards longer maturities raises the maturity at which the effect is largest,
      from intermediate to long.


    When a is not close to 0 or ∞, the analysis of term structure movements becomes more com-
plicated because the system of (A.27)-(A.30) does not have a closed-form solution. In a parameter
region where κr > κβ , i.e., the short-rate mean-reverts faster than the demand factor, the solution
has similar qualitative features for small and large values of a. In particular, ν1 > ν2 and γr < 0,
implying that a short-rate shock moves instantaneous forward rates in the opposite direction for
long maturities.24 In a different parameter region where κr < κβ , the same result holds only for
large values of a, while for small values all forward rates move in the same direction as the shock.
Moreover, for intermediate values of a, the solution to (A.27)-(A.30) can be complex, meaning that
the functions Ar (τ ), Aβ (τ ) exhibit oscillation. This is because of the interplay between arbitrageurs’
hedging activity and price volatility. Recall from Corollary 2 that prices of short-term bonds co-
move negatively with the short rate, but comovement can be positive for long-term bonds because
arbitrageurs use them to hedge demand risk. Because of the positive comovement, expected returns
of bonds at even longer maturities do not increase as much when the market price of short-rate
risk increases, implying that these bonds are not as sensitive to demand risk. As a consequence,
arbitrageurs do not use these bonds to hedge demand risk, and their prices can comove negatively
with the short rate (which affects expected short rates far in the future when κr is small), leading
to an oscillating pattern. We leave a detailed study of these effects for future work.

    We finally draw the connection between our analysis of term structure movements and analyses
based on principal components (PCs). Empirical models often describe movements in terms of
 24
    The cutoff maturity below which forward rates move in the same direction as the short-rate shock goes to ∞
when a goes to zero.


                                                     24
three PCs: level, slope and curvature. The level PC is flat across maturities and explains about
90% of variation in bond returns. Adding slope and curvature explains almost 100% of variation
(Litterman and Scheinkman (1991)). In our two-factor model, the term structure moves because
of shocks to the short rate and to demand. These economic factors are independent, and their
relative impact varies across maturities: short-rate shocks impact mainly short maturities, while
demand shocks impact mainly long maturities. Yet, for most parametrizations of the model, the
first PC explains more than 90% of variation (and adding the second explains 100% because there
are only two factors). The first PC is a weighted average of short rate and demand, and can be
flat across maturities depending on the parametrization.25 Thus, while one PC explains most of
the variation in bond returns, this does not mean that returns are generated by one main economic
factor. Moreover, giving economic interpretations to PCs can be misleading, since they can be
linear combinations of underlying economic factors.



4.3      Bond Risk Premia

Bond risk premia depend on the short rate rt and the demand factor βt . The dependence on rt is
because of the same mechanism as in the one-factor model: premia are negative when rt is high
so that arbitrageurs are induced to engage in the carry roll-up trade, while premia are positive
when rt is low. The dependence on βt is what induces arbitrageurs to accommodate changes in
demand. Suppose, for example, that θ(τ ) is positive, so an increase in βt represents a decrease in
demand. Premia are then positive when βt is high so that arbitrageurs are induced to buy bonds
and accommodate the decrease in demand, while premia are negative when βt is low. Proposition
7 confirms these comparative statics using the closed-form solutions for a ≈ 0 and a ≈ ∞. The
proposition shows additionally that the market prices of short-rate and demand risk share the same
comparative statics as the premia.

Proposition 7. Suppose that θ(τ ) > 0 for all τ , and a ≈ 0 or a ≈ ∞.

       • The instantaneous expected excess return µt,τ − rt on the bond with maturity τ is decreasing
         in rt , increasing in βt , and affine in both variables.
  25
     Consider the following parametrization. Bond maturities go up to T = 30 years. Mean-reversion and diffusion
parameters are κr = κβ = 0.15 and σr = σβ = 0.02, respectively, meaning that short-rate and demand shocks
have a half-life of log(2)/0.15 = 4.62 years and annual standard deviation 2%. (The values of (κr , σr ) are consistent
with Chan, Karolyi, Longstaff and Sanders (1992).) The function θ(τ ) is equal to 1 for all τ , meaning that demand
shocks affect all maturities equally in the absence of arbitrageurs. Finally, α(τ ) = αe−0.1τ and aα = 1.5. A PC
decomposition of instantaneous returns on the sixty bonds with maturities τ = 0.5, 1, .., 29.5, 30 years yields a first
PC that explains 94.61% of variation and is flat across maturities. The flat PC obscures the different role played by
short-rate and demand shocks: short-rate shocks explain 99.92% of variation for the one-year bond, 92.20% for the
five-year bond, 65.22% for the ten-year bond, 18.50% for the twenty-year bond, and 4.79% for the thirty-year bond.
The first PC is the weighted average 0.44rt + βt of short rate and demand.


                                                          25
   • The market prices λr,t of short-rate risk and λβ,t of demand risk are decreasing in rt , increas-
      ing in βt , and affine in both variables.


    Proposition 7 suggests that the positive relationship between bond risk premia and slope of
the term structure, derived in the one-factor model, should carry over to two factors. Indeed, the
term structure is upward sloping when the short rate is low, or when bond prices are low because
demand is low. In both cases, bonds earn positive risk premia. Proposition 8 confirms the positive
premia-slope relationship in the context of the Fama-Bliss (FB) regression (21) with small ∆τ .
The proposition shows additionally that the coefficient γFB of this regression is increasing in the
variance of the demand factor.

Proposition 8. Suppose that a ≈ 0 or a ≈ ∞. For ∆τ → 0 and for all τ , the regression coefficient
γFB in (21) is positive and increasing in σβ2 /σr2 .


    The intuition why the premia-slope relationship is stronger in the presence of the demand
factor is that in contrast to the short rate, demand affects slope only through its effect on premia.
For example, a decrease in demand generates an upward sloping term structure because it triggers
an increase in premia and therefore a decrease in bond prices. An upward sloping term structure
is also generated by a decrease in the short rate, but this does not require a change in premia:
it happens simply because the current short rate moves below expected future short rates. That
the decrease in the short rate triggers an increase in premia only accentuates the increase in slope.
Therefore, an increase in slope predicts a larger increase in premia when caused by demand than
when caused by the short rate. Greenwood and Vayanos (2009a) build on this idea to show that
an increase in bond supply raises premia even controlling for slope, and find empirical support for
this prediction.

    The regression coefficient γFB estimated by FB is approximately equal to one. In our one-factor
                         κ∗r −κr
model, γFB is equal to      κ∗r ,   and therefore varies from zero when arbitrageurs are risk neutral, to
one when they are infinitely risk averse. In the presence of the demand factor, γFB is larger, and
varies from zero to a value larger than one.

    While our model predicts a positive premia-slope relationship, it also yields finer implications
on how premia are related to the shape of the term structure. Indeed, the underlying drivers of
premia are the short rate rt and the demand factor βt . Slope, defined in the spirit of FB as the
difference between forward rates and the short rate, is an imperfect measure of (rt , βt ), and therefore
might not be the optimal predictor of premia. Consider, for example, the case where a decrease in

                                                       26
demand has its maximum impact at intermediate maturities and generates a hump-shaped term
structure. Measuring demand based on the hump is then more informative than only looking at
the slope. This suggests a link between our analysis and Cochrane and Piazzesi (CP 2005), who
find that bond risk premia are best predicted by a tent-shaped combination of forward rates. Their
tent-shaped factor is positive when the term structure exhibits a hump, and in that case positive
premia are predicted. Such a hump could arise in our model in response to a decrease in demand,
and would predict positive premia consistent with CP. A fuller analysis of this issue would require
a calibration of our model, possibly in its multi-factor version, and is left for future work.

    The behavior of bond risk premia is related to the predictability of long-rate changes. Campbell
and Shiller (CS 1991) find that the slope of the term structure predicts changes in long rates, but to
a weaker and typically opposite extent than implied by the Expectations Hypothesis (EH). Their
regression is

                                         ∆τ
      Rt+∆τ,τ −∆τ − Rt,τ = αCS + γCS          (Rt,τ − Rt,∆τ ) + ǫt+∆τ .                          (41)
                                       τ − ∆τ

The dependent variable is the change, between times t and t+∆τ , in the yield of a zero-coupon bond
that has maturity τ at time t. The independent variable is an appropriately normalized difference
between the spot rates for maturities τ and ∆τ . According to the EH, the coefficient γCS should be
one. CS find, however, that γCS is smaller than one, typically negative, and decreasing in τ . This
finding is related to the behavior of bond risk premia documented in FB. Indeed, suppose that the
term structure is upward sloping. Because bonds earn positive expected excess returns, their yields
increase by less than in the EH benchmark, implying a regression coefficient γCS smaller than one.
That γCS is negative especially for long maturities can be viewed as evidence that premia of long-
term bonds are strongly time-varying, e.g., an upward sloping term structure predicts a decrease in
long rates because long-term bonds earn very high positive premia. Proposition 9 computes γCS in
our model, in the analytically convenient case where ∆τ is small, and shows that it is smaller than
one. The proposition shows additionally that when a ≈ ∞, γCS can be negative and decreasing in
τ . This decreasing pattern does not arise when a ≈ 0 (and for any value of a in the one-factor
model), and is because the demand factor generates strongly time-varying premia for long-term
bonds.

Proposition 9. Suppose that a ≈ 0 or a ≈ ∞. For ∆τ → 0 and for all τ , the regression coefficient
γCS in (41) is smaller than one. Moreover,
   • when a ≈ 0, γCS is close to one and increasing in τ .

   • when a ≈ ∞, γCS can be negative and decreasing in τ .

                                                  27
    The analysis of the two-factor model can easily be extended to the case where the factors
are correlated. The effect of correlation is to modify the formulas for the market prices of risk.
Denoting the instantaneous correlation between dBr,t and dBβ,t by ρ, and generalizing Lemma 2,
we find
                      Z       T
      λr,t ≡   aσr2               xt,τ [Ar (τ ) + ρAβ (τ )] dτ,
                        0
                      Z       T
      λβ,t ≡ aσβ2                 xt,τ [ρAr (τ ) + Aβ (τ )] dτ.
                          0

For example, the arbitrageurs’ willingness λr,t to take a marginal unit of short-rate risk depends not
only on the sensitivity of their portfolio to the short rate but also to the correlated demand factor.
Correlation renders the formulas more complicated, but the results in the cases a ≈ 0 and a ≈ ∞
remain the same. Indeed, when a ≈ 0, the short rate is the dominant risk factor, so the correlation
between the factors does not matter. When instead a ≈ ∞, arbitrageurs set the sensitivity of their
portfolio to each factor to zero, regardless of the correlation between the factors.



5    Multiple Demand Factors

In this section we sketch the extension of our analysis to multiple demand factors. We allow for
K > 1 demand factors {βk,t }k=1,..,K , which together with the short rate rt yield a model with K + 1
factors. We conjecture that equilibrium spot rates are affine in these factors, i.e.,
                                       PK
      Pt,τ = e−[Ar (τ )rt +              k=1   Aβ,k (τ )βk,t +C(τ )]
                                                                                                 (42)

for K + 2 functions Ar (τ ), {Aβ,k (τ )}k=1,..K , C(τ ) that depend on maturity τ . Generalizing Lemma
2, we find:

Lemma 3. The arbitrageurs’ first-order condition is

                                               K
                                               X
      µt,τ − rt = Ar (τ )λr,t +                       Aβ,k (τ )λβ,k,t ,                          (43)
                                                k=1


where µt,τ is given by (A.68),
                   Z T
                 2
       λr,t ≡ aσr      xt,τ Ar (τ )dτ,                                                           (44)
                              0
                          Z       T
      λβ,k,t ≡   aσβ2                 xt,τ Aβ,k (τ )dτ.                                          (45)
                              0


                                                                          28
    Eq. (43) is the multi-factor counterpart of (12) and (26), and follows solely from the absence
of arbitrage. Eqs. (44) and (45) determine the market prices of risk in terms of the arbitrageurs’
portfolio. Proceeding as in previous sections, we find that the functions Ar (τ ), {Aβ,k (τ )}k=1,..K solve
a system of K + 1 linear differential equations, in which the coefficients of Ar (τ ), {Aβ,k (τ )}k=1,..K
depend on integrals involving these functions. Proposition 10 reduces the problem to a system of
(K + 1)2 scalar non-linear equations.

Proposition 10. The functions Ar (τ ), {Aβ,k (τ )}k=1,..K are given by
                                            K
                  1 − e−ν1 τ X                         1 − e−νl+1 τ   1 − e−ν1 τ
                                                                                   
        Ar (τ ) =           +  γr,l                                 −                   ,                 (46)
                     ν1                                   νl+1           ν1
                                            l=1

                       K
                                          1 − e−νl+1 τ   1 − e−ν1 τ
                       X                                                 
      Aβ,k (τ ) =            γβ,k,l                    −                      ,                           (47)
                                             νl+1           ν1
                       l=1


where the scalars {νl }l=1,..,K+1, {γr,l }l=1,..,K , {γβ,k,l }k,l=1,..,K solve the system of (A.77)-(A.80). The
function C(τ ) is given by (A.81).


    The system of (A.77)-(A.80), which determines the functions Ar (τ ), {Aβ,k (τ )}k=1,..K , simplifies
in the polar cases where arbitrageur risk aversion is very low (a ≈ 0) or very high (a ≈ ∞). The
results when a ≈ 0 are closely related to their counterparts in the two-factor model. In particular,
a unit shock to the demand factor βk,t raises the instantaneous forward rate for maturity τ by

                              RT                       −κr τ
                       aσr2    0   α(τ )τ θk (τ ) 1−eκr        dτ
      A′β,k (τ )                                                    e−κβ,k τ − e−κr τ ,
                                                                                     
                   ≈
                                      κr − κβ,k

which coincides with (36) up to the factor subscript k. As in the case of (36), the location of the
demand shock in the maturity space determines the magnitude of the demand effect but not the
effect’s relative importance across maturities. Suppose, for example, that factors (ks , kℓ ) concern
demand shocks at short and long maturities, respectively. Because shocks to kℓ impact arbitrageurs’
positions in long-term bonds, they have a larger effect, relative to shocks to ks , on the duration
of arbitrageurs’ portfolio. Therefore, they have a larger effect on the market price of short-rate
risk λr,t and on the term structure. But if shocks to kℓ mean-revert faster than shocks to ks
(κβ,kℓ > κβ,ks ), their effect on λr,t is more short-lived, and therefore, their effect on long relative
to short maturities is smaller compared to shocks to ks . In other words, the relative effect of a
demand shock across maturities depends not on the shock’s location in the maturity space, but
only on the shock’s mean-reversion rate.

                                                                     29
    The results when a ≈ ∞ differ from their counterparts in the two-factor model. A natural
conjecture, sketched in Section 4.2, is that with a large number of demand factors, demand effects
are local to the maturities where shocks originate. Investigating this conjecture requires analyzing a
large system of non-linear equations, and is left for future work.26 We instead present a numerical
example with two demand factors, i.e., a three-factor model, to illustrate the effects of adding
factors. For simplicity, we assume that each demand factor concerns shocks at a specific maturity,
i.e., the functions {θk (τ )}k=1,2 are Dirac. We take the maturities corresponding to factors 1 and
2 to be five and twenty years, respectively, and set T = 30 years and α(τ ) = αe−0.1τ .27 Keeping
with the notation of the previous paragraph, we denote the “short-maturity” factor 1 by ks , and
the “long-maturity” factor 2 by kℓ . Figure 1 shows the effect of a decrease in demand associated to
each factor on the term structure of instantaneous forward rates. The light (red) lines correspond
to factor ks , and the dark (black) lines to factor kℓ . For each factor, the solid line represents the
effect of a shock in the three-factor model, and the dashed line represents the same effect in a
two-factor model where only that factor is present.


                                                                           3f short
                                                                           3f long
                                                                           2f short
              Instantaneous forward rate




                                                                           2f long




                                           0   5   10          15               20    25        30




                                                        Maturity (years)

           Figure 1: Effect of a decrease in demand on the term structure of instantaneous
           forward rates. The light (red) lines correspond to a “short-maturity” factor, concerning
           shocks at the five-year maturity, and the dark (black) lines to a “long-maturity” factor,
           concerning shocks at the twenty-year maturity. For each factor, the solid line represents
           the effect of a shock in the three-factor model, and the dashed line represents the same
           effect in a two-factor model where only that factor is present.

  26
     When a ≈ ∞, the system of (K + 1)2 non-linear equations in Proposition 10 reduces to K equations, i.e., one
equation per demand factor. The unknowns are the limit values of the scalars {νl }l=2,..,K+1 .
  27
     The parameters (κr , {κβ,k }k=1,2 , σr , {σβ,k }k=1,2 ) do not matter when a ≈ ∞.




                                                             30
    In the two-factor model, a decrease in demand raises all instantaneous forward rates, consistent
with Corollary 3. Moreover, consistent with Proposition 6, the effect is stronger for short maturities
in the case of ks , and for long maturities in the case of kℓ . In the three-factor model, a decrease
in demand does not raise all forward rates—only those for maturities up to seven years in the
case of ks , and those for maturities of three years and longer in the case of kℓ . Thus, the increase
in forward rates is more local. The reason why some forward rates decrease has to do with the
hedging activity of arbitrageurs. Following, for example, a decrease in demand for five-year bonds,
arbitrageurs buy these bonds and hedge their long position by shorting bonds of other maturities.
But while this hedge is effective when ks is the only factor, it ceases to be so when kℓ is added.
This is because arbitrageurs are left exposed to an increase in demand for twenty-year bonds, which
has its largest effect on long rates and therefore on arbitrageurs’ short positions. To hedge that
risk as well, arbitrageurs buy bonds of sufficiently long maturities, pushing down the corresponding
forward rates. Figure 1 suggests that hedging becomes increasingly complicated as the number
of factors increases. This, in turn, could imply that with a large number of factors, arbitrageurs
become unwilling to integrate maturity markets and demand effects remain fully local. We leave
an investigation of these issues for future work.



6    Conclusion

In this paper we build a preferred-habitat model of the term structure of interest rates. We assume
that the term structure results from the interaction between investor maturity clienteles and risk-
averse arbitrageurs. Because arbitrageurs are risk averse, shocks to clienteles’ demand for bonds
affect the term structure—and constitute an additional determinant of bond prices to current and
expected future short rates. At the same time, because arbitrageurs render the term structure
arbitrage-free, demand effects satisfy no-arbitrage restrictions and can be quite different from the
underlying shocks. We show that the preferred-habitat view of the term structure generates a rich
set of implications for bond risk premia, the effects of demand shocks and of shocks to short-rate
expectations, the economic role of carry trades, and the transmission of monetary policy.

    Our emphasis in this paper is mainly qualitative: use the closed-form solutions to understand
key intuitions and comparative statics. We believe, however, that an equally rich set of implications
can be derived on the quantitative front. Because of its affine structure, our model lends itself
readily to structural estimation. Structural estimation can identify underlying parameters of the
model such as the risk aversion of arbitrageurs and the demand shocks, which can then be linked
and compared to observables. Moreover, the model so estimated can be a valuable policy tool,

                                                    31
addressing what-if questions such as how purchases of bonds by the Central Bank, or issuance by the
Treasury, can affect the term structure. The policy relevance of such questions has been underscored
by recent events, e.g., the quantitative easing policies of Central Banks and the expansion of
government debt. Our model is uniquely able to address such questions because of its focus on
demand and supply shocks. Bringing the model to the data requires addressing a set of issues
such as distinguishing between the real and the nominal term structure, introducing inflation, and
determining the set of relevant risk factors. We believe that addressing these issues and performing
the structural estimation are worthy of future work.




                                                32
                                                                                 Appendix


A       Proofs

Proof of Lemma 1: Using (10), we can write (7) as

                   Z                            T                                        Z         T                
      dWt = Wt rt +                                  xt,τ (µt,τ − rt )dτ dt −                             xt,τ Ar (τ )dτ σr dBr,t ,
                                             0                                                    0


and (8) as
                         "Z
                                     T                                                        T                     2 #
                                                                    aσ 2
                                                                                     Z
            max                          xt,τ (µt,τ       − rt )dτ − r                            xt,τ Ar (τ )dτ           .            (A.1)
      {xt,τ }τ ∈(0,T ]           0                                   2                    0


Point-wise maximization of (A.1) yields (12).


Proof of Proposition 1: Substituting µt,τ from (11) and λr,t from (14) into (12), we find
                                                   1
      A′r (τ )rt + C ′ (τ ) − Ar (τ )κr (r − rt ) + Ar (τ )2 σr2 − rt
                                                   2
                       Z T
      = Ar (τ )aσr2
                                                          
                            α(τ ) βτ − [Ar (τ )rt + C(τ )] Ar (τ )dτ.                                                                   (A.2)
                                     0


This equation is affine in rt . Setting linear terms in rt to zero yields (15), and setting constant
terms to zero yields

                                                                                                      T
                            1
                                                                                              Z
      C (τ ) − κr rAr (τ ) + σr2 Ar (τ )2 = aσr2 Ar (τ )
        ′
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                          α(τ ) βτ − C(τ ) Ar (τ )dτ.   (A.3)
                            2                                                                     0


The differential equations (15) and (A.3) must be solved with the initial conditions Ar (0) = C(0) =
0. The solution to (15) is (16), provided that κ∗r is a solution to (18). Eq. (18) has a unique solution
        RT
because 0 α(τ )Ar (τ )2 dτ is positive and decreasing in κ∗r . The solution to (A.3) is

                                 τ                                       τ
                                                           σr2
                         Z                                       Z
      C(τ ) = zr                     Ar (u)du −                              Ar (u)2 du,                                                (A.4)
                             0                             2         0


where
                                         Z   T
                         aσr2
                                                                    
      zr ≡ κr r +                                    α(τ ) βτ − C(τ ) Ar (τ )dτ.                                                        (A.5)
                                         0


                                                                                           33
Substituting C(τ ) from (A.4) into (A.5), we find
                                          Z       T                                       Z       T           Z       τ           
      zr = κr r + aσr2 β                              α(τ )τ Ar (τ )dτ − aσr2 zr                      α(τ )                Ar (u)du Ar (τ )dτ
                                              0                                               0                    0

                                  T                            τ
                   aσr4
                          Z                           Z                         
             +                        α(τ )                        Ar (u)2 du Ar (τ )dτ
                    2         0                            0
                                                      RT                           4 RT      R τ
                    κr r + aσr2 β                           α(τ )τ Ar (τ )dτ + aσ2 r 0 α(τ ) 0 Ar (u)2 du Ar (τ )dτ
                                                                                                         
                                                      0
       ⇒ zr =                                                       RT        R τ                                 .
                                                           1 + aσr2 0 α(τ ) 0 Ar (u)du Ar (τ )dτ

The function C(τ ) coincides with (17) if zr = κ∗r r ∗ . Eq. (19) implies that zr = κ∗r r ∗ if

                    RT
           κr + aσr2 0 α(τ )τ Ar (τ )dτ
              RT     R τ                 = κ∗r .                                                                                              (A.6)
            2
      1 + aσr 0 α(τ ) 0 Ar (u)du Ar (τ )dτ

Eq. (A.6) follows from
                    Z     T
      κr +   aσr2             α(τ )τ Ar (τ )dτ
                      0
                          Z       T
       =   κ∗r   + aσr2                   α(τ ) [τ − Ar (τ )] Ar (τ )dτ
                              0
                                  Z       T                Z          τ             
       =   κ∗r   + κ∗r aσr2                   α(τ )                        Ar (u)du Ar (τ )dτ,
                                      0                            0


where the first step follows from (18) and the second from (16).

    To show that the risk-neutral dynamics are given by (20), we rewrite (A.2) as
                                                   1
      A′r (τ )rt + C ′ (τ ) − Ar (τ )κr (r − rt ) + Ar (τ )2 σr2 − rt
                                                   2
                       Z T                                      Z T                  
                    2                                                             2
                                                
      = Ar (τ )aσr           α(τ ) βτ − C(τ ) Ar (τ )dτ − rt          α(τ )Ar (τ ) dτ
                                      0                                                                 0

                                                      1
       ⇔ A′r (τ )rt + C ′ (τ ) − Ar (τ )κr (r − rt ) + Ar (τ )2 σr2 − rt = Ar (τ ) [zr − κr r − rt (κ∗r − κr )]
                                                      2
                                                         1
       ⇔ A′r (τ )rt + C ′ (τ ) − Ar (τ )κ∗r (r ∗ − rt ) + Ar (τ )2 σr2 − rt = 0,                                                                (A.7)
                                                         2

where the second step follows from (18) and (A.5), and the third from zr = κ∗r r∗ . The risk-neutral
dynamics are given by (20) because of (A.7).



                                                                                         34
Proof of Proposition 2: Eqs. (1), (2) and (9) imply that the dependent variable in (21) is

       1
         [Ar (τ )rt + C(τ ) − [Ar (τ − ∆τ )rt+∆τ + C(τ − ∆τ )] − [Ar (∆τ )rt + C(∆τ )]]
      ∆τ

and the independent variable is

       1
         [Ar (τ )rt + C(τ ) − [Ar (τ − ∆τ )rt + C(τ − ∆τ )] − [Ar (∆τ )rt + C(∆τ )]] .
      ∆τ

Therefore, the regression coefficient in (21) is

            Cov [[Ar (τ ) − Ar (∆τ )]rt − Ar (τ − ∆τ )rt+∆τ , [Ar (τ ) − Ar (τ − ∆τ ) − Ar (∆τ )]rt ]
    γFB =                                                                                             . (A.8)
                                  Var [[Ar (τ ) − Ar (τ − ∆τ ) − Ar (∆τ )]rt ]

Eq. (3) implies that

      Et (rt+τ ) = (1 − e−κr τ )r + e−κr τ rt ,                                                        (A.9)

which, in turn, implies that

      Cov(rt+∆τ , rt ) = Var(rt )e−κr ∆τ .

Substituting into (A.8), we find

              Ar (τ ) − Ar (τ − ∆τ )e−κr ∆τ − Ar (∆τ )
      γFB =                                            .
                  Ar (τ ) − Ar (τ − ∆τ ) − Ar (∆τ )

Taking the limit ∆τ → 0 and noting from (16) that Ar (∆τ )/∆τ → 1, we find

              A′r (τ ) + κr Ar (τ ) − 1   (κ∗r − κr )Ar (τ )   κ∗r − κr
      γFB →                             =                    =          ,                            (A.10)
                      A′r (τ ) − 1             κ∗r Ar (τ )         κ∗r

where the second step follows from (15). The proposition follows from (A.10) and κ∗r > κr .


Proof of Proposition 3: Eq. (22) implies that

      ∂ft,τ                 ∗
            = A′r (τ ) = e−κr τ ,                                                                    (A.11)
       ∂rt

where the second step follows from (16). Eq. (A.9) implies that

      ∂Et (rt+τ )
                  = e−κr τ .                                                                         (A.12)
        ∂rt

                                                      35
The proposition follows from (A.11), (A.12) and κ∗r > κr .


Proof of Corollary 1: The key observation is that the mean-reversion rate κ∗r under the risk-
neutral measure is an increasing function of a. Indeed, κ∗r is defined implicitly by (18), whose
left-hand side is increasing in κ∗r , and right-hand side is decreasing in κ∗r and increasing in a. The
first claim in the corollary follows from this observation and (A.10). The second claim follows from
this observation and (A.11).


Proof of Lemma 2: Using (24), we can write (7) as

              Z                       T                                  Z      T                                 Z          T                
 dWt = Wt rt +                             xt,τ (µt,τ − rt )dτ dt−                     xt,τ Ar (τ )dτ σr dBr,t −                      xt,τ Aβ (τ )dτ σβ dBβ,t ,
                                   0                                           0                                              0


and (8) as

                      "Z                                                                             2                                          2 #
                            T
                                                                 aσ 2           T                             aσβ2        T
                                                                          Z                                         Z
       max                         xt,τ (µt,τ          − rt )dτ − r                 xt,τ Ar (τ )dτ        −                   xt,τ Aβ (τ )dτ            . (A.13)
   {xt,τ }τ ∈(0,T ]     0                                         2         0                                  2      0


Point-wise maximization of (A.13) yields (26).


Proof of Proposition 4: Setting xt,τ = −yt,τ in (27) and (28), and using (1), (4), (5), (23) and
K = 1, we find
                           Z       T
                 aσr2
                                                                                                   
       λr,t =                          α(τ )           β + θ(τ )βt τ − [Ar (τ )rt + Aβ (τ )βt + C(τ )] Ar (τ )dτ,                                        (A.14)
                            0
                           Z       T
                 aσβ2
                                                                                                   
       λβ,t =                          α(τ )           β + θ(τ )βt τ − [Ar (τ )rt + Aβ (τ )βt + C(τ )] Aβ (τ )dτ.                                        (A.15)
                               0


Substituting µt,τ from (25), λr,t from (A.14) and λβ,t from (A.15) into (26), we find

                                                                               1              1
       A′r (τ )rt + Aβ (τ )βt + C ′ (τ ) − Ar (τ )κr (r − rt ) + Aβ (τ )κβ βt + Ar (τ )2 σr2 + Aβ (τ )2 σβ2 − rt
                                                                               2              2
                      Z T
       = Ar (τ )aσr2
                                                                                  
                           α(τ ) β + θ(τ )βt τ − [Ar (τ )rt + Aβ (τ )βt + C(τ )] Ar (τ )dτ
                                       0
                                Z          T
       + Aβ (τ )aσβ2
                                                                                                        
                                               α(τ )        β + θ(τ )βt τ − [Ar (τ )rt + Aβ (τ )βt + C(τ )] Aβ (τ )dτ.                                   (A.16)
                                       0




                                                                                       36
This equation is affine in (rt , βt ). Setting linear terms in (rt , βt ) to zero yields (29) and (30), and
setting constant terms to zero yields
                               1              1
      C ′ (τ ) − κr rAr (τ ) + σr2 Ar (τ )2 + σβ2 Aβ (τ )2
                               2              2
                      Z T                                            Z                                  T
      = aσr2 Ar (τ )       α(τ ) βτ − C(τ ) Ar (τ )dτ + aσβ2 Aβ (τ )
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                            α(τ ) βτ − C(τ ) Aβ (τ )dτ.
                               0                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                           (A.17)

The differential equations (29), (30) and (A.17) must be solved with the initial conditions Ar (0) =
Aβ (0) = C(0) = 0.

    Using the diagonalization

                                                            
          κr 0                            −1       ν1 0
                            −M ≡P                                  P,
          0 κβ                                     0 ν2

and can write the system of (29) and (30) as

              A′r (τ )
                                                                                  
                                       ν1 0                Ar (τ )                   1
      P                        +                   P                        −P               = 0.                                                          (A.18)
              A′β (τ )                 0 ν2                Aβ (τ )                   0

The solution to (A.18) with the initial condition Ar (0) = Aβ (0) = 0 is
                  " 1−e−ν1 τ            #  
          Ar (τ )         ν1         0           1
     P             =             1−e−ν2 τ   P
          Aβ (τ )         0         ν2
                                                 0

                                     1 − e−ν1 τ                        1 − e−ν2 τ   1 − e−ν1 τ
                                                                                                                                          
                  Ar (τ )                              1                                                            −1       0 0               1
      ⇒                            =                           +                  −                             P                      P               ,
                  Aβ (τ )               ν1             0                  ν2           ν1                                    0 1               0

and has the form in the proposition. To determine the scalars (γr , γβ , ν1 , ν2 ), we substitute (32)
                                                                                  1−e−ν1 τ              1−e−ν2 τ
and (33) into (29) and (30), and identify terms in                                  ν1         and        ν2     .       This yields

      (1 − γr ) (ν1 − κr + M1,1 ) − γβ M1,2 = 0,                                                                                                           (A.19)

      γr (ν2 − κr + M1,1 ) + γβ M1,2 = 0,                                                                                                                  (A.20)

in the case of (29) and

      γβ (ν1 − κβ + M2,2 ) − (1 − γr )M2,1 = 0,                                                                                                            (A.21)

      − γβ (ν2 − κβ + M2,2 ) − γr M2,1 = 0,                                                                                                                (A.22)



                                                                             37
in the case of (30). Combining (A.19) and (A.20), we find the equivalent equations

      ν1 + γr (ν2 − ν1 ) − κr + M1,1 = 0,                                                                                                (A.23)

      γr (1 − γr )(ν1 − ν2 ) − γβ M1,2 = 0,                                                                                              (A.24)

and combining (A.21) and (A.22), we find the equivalent equations

      γβ (ν1 − ν2 ) − M2,1 = 0,                                                                                                          (A.25)

      κβ − ν2 − γr (ν1 − ν2 ) − M2,2 = 0.                                                                                                (A.26)

Setting
                                  T                                       ′
                                            1 − e−ντ 1 − e−ν τ
                          Z
              ′
      F (ν, ν ) ≡                     α(τ )                    dτ,
                              0                ν        ν′

      F̂ (ν, ν ′ ) ≡ F (ν, ν ′ ) − F (ν, ν),

       ˆ
      F̂ (ν, ν ′ ) ≡ F (ν, ν) + F (ν ′ , ν ′ ) − 2F (ν, ν ′ ),
                          T
                                                    1 − e−ντ
                  Z
      G(ν) ≡                  α(τ )τ θ(τ )                   dτ,
                      0                                ν

      Ĝ(ν, ν ′ ) ≡ G(ν ′ ) − G(ν),

and using (31)-(33), we can write the system of (A.23)-(A.26) as

                                                                            ˆ
                                   h                                                    i
     ν1 + γr (ν2 − ν1 ) − κr − aσr2 F (ν1 , ν1 ) + 2γr F̂ (ν1 , ν2 ) + γr2 F̂ (ν1 , ν2 ) = 0,                                            (A.27)

                                                            ˆ
                                       h                                i
      γr (1 − γr )(ν1 − ν2 ) + aσβ2 γβ2 F̂ (ν1 , ν2 ) + γr F̂ (ν1 , ν2 ) = 0,                                                            (A.28)

                                                                                                         ˆ
                                             h                                   h                                   ii
      γβ (ν1 − ν2 ) −                 aσr2       G(ν1 ) + γr Ĝ(ν1 , ν2 ) − γβ       F̂ (ν1 , ν2 ) + γr F̂ (ν1 , ν2 ) = 0,               (A.29)

                                                           ˆ
                                       h                               i
      κβ − ν2 − γr (ν1 − ν2 ) − aσβ2 γβ Ĝ(ν1 , ν2 ) − γβ F̂ (ν1 , ν2 ) = 0,                                                             (A.30)


i.e., as a system of four scalar non-linear equations in the unknowns (ν1 , ν2 , γr , γβ ).

    The solution to (A.17) is

                                  τ                                τ
                                                                                 σ2        τ                 σβ2       τ
                          Z                                Z                          Z                            Z
                                                                                                    2
      C(τ ) = zr                      Ar (u)du + zβ                    Aβ (u)du − r            Ar (u) du −                 Aβ (u)2 du,   (A.31)
                              0                                0                  2    0                     2     0




                                                                                38
where
                                  Z    T
        zr ≡ κr r + aσr2
                                                          
                                           α(τ ) βτ − C(τ ) Ar (τ )dτ,                                           (A.32)
                                   0
                    Z       T
             aσβ2
                                               
      zβ ≡                      α(τ ) βτ − C(τ ) Aβ (τ )dτ.                                                      (A.33)
                        0


Substituting C(τ ) from (A.31) into (A.32) and (A.33), we can derive (zr , zβ ) as the solution to a
linear system of equations.


Proof of Proposition 5: Consider first the case a ≈ 0. Setting (γr , γβ ) = (a3 cr , acβ ), we can
write (A.27)-(A.30) as
                                                                                      ˆ
                                       h                                                          i
      ν1 + a3 cr (ν2 − ν1 ) − κr − aσr2 F (ν1 , ν1 ) + 2a3 cr F̂ (ν1 , ν2 ) + a6 c2r F̂ (ν1 , ν2 ) = 0,          (A.34)

                                                                 ˆ
                                         h                                   i
      cr (1 − a3 cr )(ν1 − ν2 ) + σβ2 c2β F̂ (ν1 , ν2 ) + a3 cr F̂ (ν1 , ν2 ) = 0,                               (A.35)

                                                                                   ˆ
                         h                                 h                                   ii
      cβ (ν1 − ν2 ) − σr2 G(ν1 ) + a3 cr Ĝ(ν1 , ν2 ) − acβ F̂ (ν1 , ν2 ) + a3 cr F̂ (ν1 , ν2 ) = 0,             (A.36)

                                                                 ˆ
                                            h                                i
      κβ − ν2 − a3 cr (ν1 − ν2 ) − a2 σβ2 cβ Ĝ(ν1 , ν2 ) − acβ F̂ (ν1 , ν2 ) = 0.                               (A.37)


The asymptotic behavior of (ν1 , ν2 , γr , γβ ) is as in the proposition if (A.34)-(A.37) has a non-zero
solution (ν1 , ν2 , cr , cβ ) for a = 0. For a = 0, (A.34) implies that ν1 = κr , (A.37) implies that
ν2 = κβ , (A.36) implies that

                        σr2 G(κr )
      cβ = cβ ≡                    ,                                                                             (A.38)
                        κr − κβ

and (A.35) implies that

                            σβ2 c2β F̂ (κr , κβ )
      cr = cr ≡ −                                   .                                                            (A.39)
                                 κr − κβ


                                                                          1       1
    Consider next the case a ≈ ∞. Setting (ν1 , γr ) = (a 3 n1 , a− 3 cr ), we can write (A.27)-(A.30) as

              2
                         1
                                   1        2
                                                  h  1         1
                                                                     
      n1 + a− 3 cr ν2 − a 3 n1 − a− 3 κr − a 3 σr2 F a 3 n1 , a 3 n1

                                                                                               ˆ 1
                                                               1
                                                                       1              2
                                                                                                           i
                                                          +2a− 3 cr F̂ a 3 n1 , ν2 + a− 3 c2r F̂ a 3 n1 , ν2 = 0, (A.40)


                                                                  39
                                                                                ˆ 1
                     1
                            1             1
                                                     h  1               1
                                                                                            i
      a−1 cr (1 − a− 3 cr ) a 3 n1 − ν2 + a 3 σβ2 γβ2 F̂ a 3 n1 , ν2 + a− 3 cr F̂ a 3 n1 , ν2 = 0,                                                      (A.41)


         2
              1             1
                                   h  1         1
                                                          1          
      a− 3 γβ a 3 n1 − ν2 − a 3 σr2 G a 3 n1 + a− 3 cr Ĝ a 3 n1 , ν2

                                                                                                               ˆ 1
                                                                                    h  1               1
                                                                                                                            ii
                                                                                 −γβ F̂ a 3 n1 , ν2 + a− 3 cr F̂ a 3 n1 , ν2     = 0, (A.42)

                                                                      ˆ 1
         h             1
                            1         i       h  1                            i
      a−1 κβ − ν2 − a− 3 cr a 3 n1 − ν2 − σβ2 γβ Ĝ a 3 n1 , ν2 − γβ F̂ a 3 n1 , ν2 = 0.                                                                (A.43)

The asymptotic behavior of (ν1 , ν2 , γr , γβ ) is as in the proposition if (A.40)-(A.43) has a non-zero
solution (n1 , ν2 , cr , γβ ) for a = ∞. Noting that
                                          Z T
              2
                    1          1
                                      1
        lim a F a n1 , a n1 = 2
              3         3       3             α(τ )dτ,
       a→∞                             n1 0
                                   Z T
             1
                 1             1           1 − e−ν2 τ
       lim a 3 F a 3 n1 , ν2 =         α(τ )            dτ,
      a→∞                       n1 0             ν2
                                Z T
             1
                 1          1
       lim a 3 G a 3 n1 =           α(τ )τ θ(τ )dτ,
      a→∞                     n1 0

we can write (A.40)-(A.43) for a = ∞ as
              " Z                                                                          2 #
                     T                 Z T                          Z T
                                                 1 − e−ν2 τ                     1 − e−ν2 τ
                                                                              
            2  1                     1                            2
     n 1 − σr          α(τ )dτ + 2cr       α(τ )            dτ + cr     α(τ )                dτ = 0,
               n21 0                 n1 0           ν2               0             ν2
                                                                                                                                                        (A.44)

                       T                                             T                              2
                                 1 − e−ν2 τ                                            1 − e−ν2 τ
                                                                                   
      1
              Z                                              Z
                           α(τ )            dτ + cr                      α(τ )                            dτ = 0,                                       (A.45)
      n1           0                ν2                           0                        ν2


                       T                                 T
      1                                                                             1 − e−ν2 τ
              Z                                  Z
                           α(τ )τ θ(τ )dτ + cr               α(τ )τ θ(τ )                      dτ
      n1           0                                 0                                 ν2
                                            "                                                                                              2    #
                                                             T                                                T
                                                                       1 − e−ν2 τ                                             1 − e−ν2 τ
                                                                                                                          
                                                1
                                                     Z                                                    Z
                                     − γβ                        α(τ )            dτ + cr                         α(τ )                         dτ = 0, (A.46)
                                                n1       0                ν2                              0                      ν2

              T                                                              T                            2
                               1 − e−ν2 τ                                                    1 − e−ν2 τ
      Z                                                              Z                   
                  α(τ )τ θ(τ )            dτ − γβ                                α(τ )                         dτ = 0.                                  (A.47)
          0                       ν2                                     0                      ν2

Using (A.45) to eliminate cr in (A.46), we find the following equation for ν2 :

                                                     RT            −ν τ 2
      RT                             −ν τ                          1−e 2
                  α(τ )τ θ(τ ) 1−eν2 2 dτ                0  α(τ )     ν2        dτ
          0
                  RT                      =                RT                      .                                                                    (A.48)
                                                                    1−e−ν2 τ
                   0 α(τ )τ θ(τ )dτ                         0 α(τ )    ν2    dτ

                                                                                         40
Eq. (A.48) has a solution ν 2 . Indeed, when ν2 goes to ∞, the left-hand side is

         "  RT              −ν2 τ dτ
                                     #
               α(τ )τ θ(τ )e
                                                 
      1      0                           1        1
          1− RT                        =     1+o      ,
      ν2                                 ν2       ν2
               0 α(τ )τ θ(τ )dτ


and exceeds the right-hand side, which is
         "  RT            −ν2 τ )e−ν2 τ dτ
                                           #      "                   #
      1        α(τ )(1 − e                     1         α(0)         1
          1− 0 RT                            =     1− RT          +o      .
      ν2                     −ν2 τ )dτ         ν2                     ν2
                0 α(τ )(1 − e                        ν2 0 α(τ )dτ

When instead ν2 goes to −∞, the left-hand side is

               RT
      e−ν2 T        α(τ )τ θ(τ ) eν2 T − eν2 (T −τ ) dτ   e−ν2 T α(T )T θ(T )
                                                                                    
               0                                                                       1
                                                        =    2                    +o      ,
                                                                                      ν22
                          RT                                    RT
       ν2                     α(τ )τ θ(τ )dτ               ν2      α(τ )τ θ(τ )dτ
                            0                                    0


and is smaller than the right-hand side, which is

            RT                              2
      e−ν2 T 0 α(τ ) eν2 T − eν2 (T −τ ) dτ
                     
                                                     e−ν2 T
                                                                 
                                                                 1
             RT                                    =        + o      .
       ν2                                            −2ν         ν
                                             
                α(τ )   eν 2 T − eν 2 (T −τ )   dτ        2        2
              0


Using (A.45) to eliminate cr in (A.44), we find

                                             hR                               i2  13
                                                    T             −ν τ
                  2
                     Z         T
                                                   0    α(τ ) 1−eν 2 2    dτ
                  3 
     n 1 = n 1 ≡ σr               α(τ )dτ − R                                       .       (A.49)
                                                                                    
                                                                         τ 2
                                                                         
                           0                   T               1−e−ν 2
                                              0    α(τ )          ν2           dτ


Eq. (A.45) implies that

                    RT       1−e−ν 2 τ
                1    0 α(τ )    ν2     dτ
     cr = cr ≡ − R          −ν τ 2 ,                                                        (A.50)
                n1 T        1−e 2
                   0 α(τ )     ν2         dτ


and (A.47) implies that

                     RT                    −ν τ
                     α(τ )τ θ(τ ) 1−eν 2 2 dτ
                      0
     γβ = γ β ≡ R            −ν τ 2         .                                               (A.51)
                   T         1−e 2
                  0  α(τ  )      ν2        dτ


Eq. (A.49) implies that n1 > 0 because of the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. Eq. (A.50) implies that
cr < 0.

                                                                  41
Proof of Corollary 2: Proposition 4 implies that the shock’s effect on instantaneous forward
rates is
                                                                   
                                                   γr
      A′r (τ )    −ν1 τ
                 =e       (1 − γr ) 1 +                 e(ν1 −ν2 )τ
                                                                      .
                                                 1 − γr

When a ≈ ∞, the term outside the square brackets is positive. Moreover, the term inside the
square brackets is positive for τ < τr and negative for τ > τr , where

                                                    1
                                                         
                                               − acr3
                        
             log − 1−γ r             log
                    γr
      τr ≡                       ≈          1                .
                 ν1 − ν2                   a 3 n1

Since τr ≈ 0, τr ∈ [0, T ].

    The shock’s effect on spot rates is Ar (τ )/τ and has the same sign as Ar (τ ). Since A′r (τ )
                                         RT
is positive and then negative, Ar (τ ) = 0 A′r (τ )dτ is positive, or positive and then negative.
Propositions 4 and 5 imply that when a ≈ ∞,

                                                                        1   RT                                                         
                                                                                             1−e−ν 2 τ        1−e−ν 2 τ       1−e−ν 2 T
                      1
                          
                              1       1    − e−ν 2 T
                                                                    a− 3   0    α(τ )         ν2               ν2        −      ν2           dτ
      Ar (T ) ≈ a− 3             + cr                            =                                                                                 < 0,
                              n1                ν2                                                                     τ 2
                                                                                         RT                            
                                                                                                             1−e−ν 2
                                                                                    n1       0   α(τ )         ν2            dτ


where the second step follows from (A.50). Since Ar (T ) < 0, Ar (τ ) is positive and then negative.


Proof of Proposition 6: We first show that ν 2 is decreasing in x. Recall that ν 2 solves (A.48),
which can be written as

                                                    −ν τ 2
                                                  RT
      RT                1−e−ν2 τ                     1−e 2
                                             α(τ )                dτ
       0 α(τ )τ θ(τ, x)   ν2          dτ   0            ν2
         RT                              − RT                        = 0,                                                                          (A.52)
                                                      1−e−ν2 τ
          0 α(τ )τ θ(τ, x)dτ                 0 α(τ  )    ν 2
                                                               dτ

and where the left-hand side is negative when ν2 goes to −∞ and positive when ν2 goes to ∞. The
solution to (A.52) is decreasing in x if the left-hand side of (A.52) is increasing in x. The derivative




                                                                            42
with respect to x has the same sign as
      Z T                                     Z T                          Z T                                    Z T
                            1 − e−ν2 τ                                                            1 − e−ν2 τ
           α(τ )τ θx (τ, x)               dτ        α(τ )τ θ(τ, x)dτ −           α(τ )τ θ(τ, x)               dτ       α(τ )τ θx (τ, x)dτ
       0                         ν2             0                            0                        ν2            0

                                θx (τ1 , x)                                           θx (τ1 , x)
         Z                                                     Z
      =            φ(τ1 )φ(τ2 )             f (τ1 )dτ1 dτ2 −            φ(τ1 )φ(τ2 )              f (τ2 )dτ1 dτ2
           [0,T ]2              θ(τ1 , x)                       [0,T ]2               θ(τ1 , x)
                                                                                                                               
                                         θx (τ1 , x)           θx (τ2 , x)            θx (τ1 , x)            θx (τ2 , x)
         Z
      =                  φ(τ1 )φ(τ2 )                f (τ1 ) +              f (τ2 ) −             f (τ2 ) −              f (τ1 ) dτ1 dτ2
           0≤τ1 ≤τ2 ≤T                    θ(τ1 , x)             θ(τ2 , x)              θ(τ1 , x)              θ(τ2 , x)
                                                                   
                                         θx (τ2 , x) θx (τ1 , x)
         Z
      =                  φ(τ1 )φ(τ2 )                −                 [f (τ2 ) − f (τ1 )] dτ1 dτ2 > 0,
           0≤τ1 ≤τ2 ≤T                    θ(τ2 , x)      θ(τ1 , x)

                                                      1−e−ν2 τ
where φ(τ ) ≡ α(τ )τ θ(τ, x), f (τ ) ≡                  ν2       , and the last inequality follows because θx (τ, x)/θ(τ, x)
and f (τ ) are increasing in τ .

     Since ν 2 is decreasing in x, it converges to limits when x converges to x and x. These limits
                                                                                    RT
                                                                                          α(τ )τ θ(τ,x)dτ
must be ∞ and −∞, respectively. Indeed, since limx→x                                RǫT                     = 0 for all ǫ > 0,
                                                                                     0    α(τ )τ θ(τ,x)dt

                RT                             −ν τ
                    0    α(τ )τ θ(τ, x) 1−eν2 2 dτ
       lim               RT                        = 0,
       x→x
                          0 α(τ )τ θ(τ, x)dτ


and therefore, the left-hand side of (A.52) is negative for x → x and any finite ν2 . Likewise, since
          R T −ǫ
                        α(τ )τ θ(τ,x)dτ
limx→x     0R
                T                         = 0 for all ǫ > 0,
                0   α(τ )τ θ(τ,x)dt

                RT                             −ν τ
                    0    α(τ )τ θ(τ, x) 1−eν2 2 dτ   1 − e−ν2 T
       lim               RT                        =            ,
       x→x                   α(τ )τ θ(τ, x)dτ            ν2
                          0


and therefore, the left-hand side of (A.52) is positive for x → x and any finite ν2 . Therefore, there
exists x∗ ∈ (x, x) such that ν 2 > 0 if x < x∗ and ν 2 < 0 if x > x∗ .

     Propositions 4 and 5 imply that when a ≈ ∞, A′β (τ ) is increasing and then decreasing if ν2 > 0,
and is increasing if ν2 < 0. The maximum of A′β (τ ) in the first case is
                                              1                         1
       log ν1 − log ν2                    log a 3 n1 − log ν 2        log a 3
                       ≈                        1                 ≈     1       ,
           ν1 − ν2                            a 3 n1 − ν 2             a 3 n1

and is in (0, T ). Therefore, A′β (τ ) is increasing and then decreasing in [0, T ] if x < x∗ , and is
increasing in [0, T ] if x > x∗ .

                                                                       43
Proof of Corollary 3: The shock raises instantaneous forward rates because A′β (τ ) > 0 for all
                                               RT
τ . It also raises spot rates because Aβ (τ ) = 0 A′β (τ )dτ > 0 for all τ . The rest of the corollary
follows from (36), (38) and Proposition 6.


Proof of Proposition 7: Eqs. (A.14) and (A.15) imply that (λr,t , λβ,t ) are affine in (rt , βt ).
Combining (A.14) and (A.15) with (31), we find
                    Z T
    ∂λr,t        2
          = −aσr          α(τ )Ar (τ )2 dτ = M1,1 < 0,                                                           (A.53)
     ∂rt              0
                 Z T
    ∂λr,t
          = aσr2        α(τ ) [τ θ(τ ) − Aβ (τ )] Ar (τ )dτ = M2,1 ,                                             (A.54)
     ∂βt           0
                     Z T
    ∂λβ,t         2
          = −aσβ          α(τ )Ar (τ )Aβ (τ )dτ = M1,2 ,                                                         (A.55)
     ∂rt               0
                 Z T
    ∂λβ,t      2
          = aσβ          α(τ ) [τ θ(τ ) − Aβ (τ )] Aβ (τ )dτ = M2,2 .                                            (A.56)
     ∂βt            0

When a ≈ 0, Propositions 4 and 5 imply that
                1 − e−κr τ
      Ar (τ ) =            + o(1),                                                                               (A.57)
                    κr

                      1 − e−κβ     1 − e−κr
                                           
      Aβ (τ ) = acβ            −              + o(a)
                         κβ           κr
                         RT                   −κr τ
                  aσr2        α(τ )τ θ(τ ) 1−eκr      dτ       1 − e−κβ   1 − e−κr
                                                                                        
                         0
              =                                                         −                    + o(a),             (A.58)
                                 κr − κβ                          κβ         κr

where the second step in (A.58) follows from (A.38). Substituting (A.57) and (A.58) into (A.54)-
(A.56), and using θ(τ ) > 0 for all τ , we find M1,2 < 0, M2,1 > 0 and M2,2 > 0. When a ≈ ∞,
Proposition 5 and (A.24)-(A.26) imply that
             cr n1
     M1,2 =         + o(1),                                                                                      (A.59)
              γβ
               1
                           1
     M2,1 = a 3 γ β n1 + o a 3 ,                                                                                 (A.60)
                                                                "RT                                    #
                                                                        α(τ ) 1 − e−ν 2 τ dτ
                                                                                         
      M2,2 = κβ − ν 2 − cr n1 + o(1) = κβ + ν 2                  R 0T                              − 1 + o(1),   (A.61)
                                                                  0     α(τ ) (1 − e−ν 2 τ )2 dτ

where the second step in (A.61) follows from (A.50). Since θ(τ ) > 0 for all τ , (A.51) implies that
γ β > 0. Since, in addition, n1 > 0 and cr < 0, (A.59) and (A.60) imply that M1,2 < 0 and M2,1 > 0.
Eq. M2,2 > 0 follows from (A.61) because the term in square brackets has the same sign as ν 2 .

                                                                  44
    Since the risk premium of the bond with maturity τ is Ar (τ )λr,t + Aβ (τ )λβ,t , it is affine in
(rt , βt ). When a ≈ 0, the risk premium is decreasing in rt and increasing in βt because the same
comparative statics hold for (λr,t , λβ,t ) and because (A.57) and (A.58) imply that Ar (τ ), Aβ (τ ) > 0.
To show the comparative statics for a ≈ ∞, we recall from (26) that the risk premium is µt,τ − rt .
Using (25) and Propositions 4 and 5, we find

      ∂(µt,τ − rt )
                    = A′r (τ ) + κr Ar (τ ) − 1 = −1 + o(1) < 0,                                               (A.62)
          ∂rt

                                                                1 − e−ν 2 τ
                                                                           
      ∂(µt,τ − rt )     ′                           −ν 2 τ
                    = Aβ (τ ) + κβ Aβ (τ ) = γ β e         + κβ               + o(1) > 0.                      (A.63)
          ∂βt                                                      ν2

Therefore, the risk premium is decreasing in rt and increasing in βt .


Proof of Proposition 8: Proceeding as in the proof of Proposition 2, we find that in the limit
when ∆τ → 0,
                                                                     h                     i
                [A′r (τ ) + κr Ar (τ ) − 1] [A′r (τ ) − 1] Var(rt ) + A′β (τ ) + κβ Aβ (τ ) A′β (τ )Var(βt )
      γFB →
                                                 [A′r (τ ) − 1]2 Var(rt ) + A′β (τ )2 Var(βt )

                                                              2                                  σ2
                                                                 h                     i
                [A′r (τ ) + κr Ar (τ ) − 1] [A′r (τ ) − 1] σκrr + A′β (τ ) + κβ Aβ (τ ) A′β (τ ) κββ
            =                                                                    σ2
                                                                                                       .       (A.64)
                                                               σr2
                                             [A′r (τ ) − 1]2   κr    + A′β (τ )2 κββ


    When a ≈ 0, Propositions 4 and 5 imply that the right-hand side of (A.64) is

                                                                     σ2
      ν1 − κr   a2 c2β (κr − κβ ) (e−κβ τ − e−κr τ ) κββ
                                                              2
                                                                
              +                            2             + o a    .
         ν1                 (1 − e−κr τ ) σr          κr


Proposition 5 and (A.27) imply that ν1 − κr is of order a, positive, and independent of σβ2 up to

order a3 . Therefore, γFB is positive and increasing in σβ2 .

    When a ≈ ∞, (A.62) and (A.63) imply that the right-hand side of (A.64) is

      σr2                                        σ2
                                   −ν τ
                                         
      κr    + γ 2β e−ν 2 τ + κβ 1−eν 2 2 e−ν 2 τ κββ
                                           σ2
                                                               + o(1).
                     σr2
                     κr    + γ 2β e−2ν 2 τ κββ


Therefore, γFB is positive and increasing in σβ2 .

                                                                      45
Proof of Proposition 9: Proceeding as in the proof of Propositions 2 and 8, we find
           h                                ih            i            h           h                   ii
             Ar (τ )     ′ (τ ) + κ A (τ )]    Ar (τ )                   Aβ (τ )      ′ (τ ) + κ A (τ )   Aβ (τ )
               τ     − [Ar         r r            τ    − 1  Var(rt ) +     τ     −   Aβ         β β         τ Var(βt )
    γCS →                                   h            i2            h        i2
                                              Ar (τ )                    A (τ )
                                                τ     − 1 Var(rt ) + βτ            Var(βt )

                                                                                                      2
                                                                                             A (τ ) σ
                                                 h            i 2 h                        i
                                                     Ar (τ )
                 [A′r (τ ) + κr Ar (τ ) − 1]           τ   − 1 σκrr + A′β (τ ) + κβ Aβ (τ ) βτ κββ
             =1−                                           i2 2 h                                       .   (A.65)
                                                                     A (τ ) 2 σβ
                                         h                                 i 2
                                              Ar (τ )
                                                τ       − 1 σκrr + βτ         κβ



    When a ≈ 0, Propositions 4 and 5 imply that the right-hand side of (A.65) is

             (ν1 − κr ) (1 − e−κr τ )
      1−          
                            −κr τ
                                   + o(a).
               κr 1 − 1−eκr τ

Since ν1 − κr is of order a and positive, γCS is smaller than and close to one. Moreover, γCS is
increasing in τ if the function

                            −x
              1 − 1−ex
      f (x) ≡
               1 − e−x

is increasing in x ≥ 0. The derivative f ′ (x) has the same sign as the function

                                   x
      g(x) ≡ 1 − e−x − xe− 2 ,

and the derivative g′ (x) has the same sign as

         x             x
      e− 2 − 1 +         > 0.
                       2

Therefore, g(x) > 0 and f (x) is increasing in x.

    When a ≈ ∞, (A.62) and (A.63) imply that the right-hand side of (A.65) is

             σr2                                               σβ2
                                          −ν τ
                                                    −ν τ
             κr    + γ 2β e−ν 2 τ + κβ 1−eν 2 2 1−eν 2 τ 2     κβ
      1−                                     2 σ 2                 + o(1).                                (A.66)
                          σr2     2 1−e−ν 2 τ     β
                          κr  + γ β    ν2τ       κβ


Therefore, γCS is smaller than one. To show that γCS can be negative and decreasing in τ , suppose
that ν 2 < 0 (which Proposition 6 shows to happen when θ(τ ) gives high weight to long maturities).
Since the second term in (A.66) converges to ∞ when τ → ∞, (A.65) and (A.66) imply that γCS is
negative and decreasing in τ for large τ .

                                                                46
Proof of Lemma 3: Applying Ito’s Lemma to (42) and using the dynamics (3) of rt and (6) of
βk,t , we find

                                                                        K
        dPt,τ                               X
              = µt,τ dt − Ar (τ )σr dBr,t −   Aβ,k (τ )σβ,k dBβ,k,t,                                                                                         (A.67)
         Pt,τ
                                                                       k=1

where
                                         K
                                         X                                                                            K
                                                                                                                      X
       µt,τ ≡A′r (τ )rt             +                A′β,k (τ )βk,t         ′
                                                                      + C (τ ) − Ar (τ )κr (r − rt ) +                      Aβ,k (τ )κβ,k βk,t
                                         k=1                                                                          k=1

                                                           K
                  1               1X
                 + Ar (τ )2 σr2 +    Aβ,k (τ )2 σβ,k
                                                 2
                                                     .                                                                                                       (A.68)
                  2               2
                                                          k=1

Using (A.67) and proceeding as in Lemmas 1 and 2, we can write (8) as

                       "Z
                                T                                                         T                    2      K                   T                      2 #
                                                                  aσ 2
                                                                                Z                                                Z
                                                                                                                      aX 2
        max                         xt,τ (µt,τ          − rt )dτ − r                          xt,τ Ar (τ )dτ        −   σβ,k                   xt,τ Aβ,k (τ )dτ          .
    {xt,τ }τ ∈(0,T ]        0                                      2                  0                               2                0
                                                                                                                      k=1

                                                                                                                                                             (A.69)

Point-wise maximization of (A.69) yields (43).


Proof of Proposition 10: Proceeding as in Propositions 1 and 4, we find that the functions
Ar (τ ), {Aβ,k (τ )}k=1,..,K solve the system of
                                                                                K
                                                                                X
       A′r (τ ) + κr Ar (τ ) − 1 = Ar (τ )M1,1 +                                      Aβ,l (τ )M1,l+1 ,                                                      (A.70)
                                                                                l=1

                                                                                      K
                                                                                      X
       A′β,k (τ )   + κβ,k Aβ,k (τ ) = Ar (τ )Mk+1,1 +                                         Aβ,l (τ )Mk+1,l+1 ,                                           (A.71)
                                                                                      l=1

where
                                         Z       T
             M1,1 ≡         −σr2                     α(τ )Ar (τ )2 dτ,                                                                                       (A.72)
                                             0
                                         Z       T
          M1,l+1 ≡ −σβ2                              α(τ )Ar (τ )Aβ,l (τ )dτ,                                                                                (A.73)
                                             0
                                    Z        T
          Mk+1,1 ≡          σr2                  α(τ ) [τ θk (τ ) − Aβ,k (τ )] Ar (τ )dτ,                                                                    (A.74)
                                        0
                                     Z       T
       Mk+1,l+1 ≡           σβ2                  α(τ ) [τ θk (τ ) − Aβ,k (τ )] Aβ,l (τ )dτ,                                                                  (A.75)
                                         0


                                                                                              47
for k, l = 1, .., K, and the function C(τ ) solves
                                                                             K
                              1               1X 2
      C ′ (τ ) − κr rAr (τ ) + σr2 Ar (τ )2 +   σβ,k Aβ,k (τ )2
                              2               2
                                                                            k=1

                            Z       T                                  K
                                                                       X                                                  Z       T
           aσr2 Ar (τ )                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                   
       =                                α(τ ) βτ − C(τ ) Ar (τ )dτ + a   σβ,k Aβ,k (τ )                                               α(τ ) βτ − C(τ ) Aβ,k (τ )dτ.
                                0                                                              k=1                            0
                                                                                                                                                               (A.76)

The differential equations (A.70), (A.71) and (A.76) must be solved with the initial conditions
Ar (0) = Aβ,k (0) = C(0) = 0. The same argument as in the proof of Proposition 4 implies that the
solution to the system of (A.70)-(A.71) has the form in the proposition. To determine the scalars
{νl }l=1,..,K+1 , {γr,l }l=1,..,K , {γβ,k,l }k,l=1,..,K , we substitute (46) and (47) into (A.70) and (A.71), and
                           1−e−νl τ
identify terms in            νl           for l = 1, .., K + 1. This yields

                 K                                                        K
                                !
                 X                                                        X
         1−              γr,l       (ν1 − κr + M1,1 ) −                             γβ,l′ ,l M1,l′ +1 = 0,                                                     (A.77)
                 l=1                                                      l,l′ =1

                                                  K
                                                  X
      γr,l (νl+1 − κr + M1,1 ) +                          γβ,l′ ,l M1,l′ +1 = 0,                                                                               (A.78)
                                                  l′ =1


in the case of (A.70) and
         K                                                          K                                  K
                  !                                                              !
        X                                                           X                                  X
            γβ,k,l (ν1 − κβ ) −                         1−                γr,l       Mk+1,1 +                    γβ,l′ ,l Mk+1,l′ +1 = 0,                      (A.79)
           l=1                                                      l=1                                l,l′ =1

                                                                          K
                                                                          X
       − γβ,k,l (νl+1 − κβ ) − γr,l Mk+1,1 −                                      γβ,l′ ,l Mk+1,l′ +1 = 0,                                                     (A.80)
                                                                          l′ =1


in the case of (A.71). Eqs. (A.77)-(A.80) constitute a system of (K +1)2 scalar non-linear equations
in the unknowns {νl }l=1,..,K+1, {γr,l }l=1,..,K , {γβ,k,l }k,l=1,..,K .

     The solution to (A.76) is

                     τ                    K                     τ                                  τ                     K  2 Z               τ
                                                                                         σr2                               σβ,k
                 Z                        X             Z                                      Z                         X
 C(τ ) = zr              Ar (u)du+               zβ,k               Aβ,k (u)du−                        Ar (u)2 du−                                Aβ,k (u)2 du, (A.81)
                 0                                          0                            2     0                                      2   0
                                          k=1                                                                            k=1




                                                                                        48
where
                                      Z    T
                          aσr2
                                                              
           zr ≡ κr r +                         α(τ ) βτ − C(τ ) Ar (τ )dτ,                        (A.82)
                                       0
                          Z       T
                    2
                                                     
         zβ,k ≡   aσβ,k               α(τ ) βτ − C(τ ) Aβ,k (τ )dτ.                               (A.83)
                              0


Substituting C(τ ) from (A.81) into (A.82) and (A.83), we can derive zr , {zβ,k }k=1,..,K as the solution
to a linear system of equations.



B        Demand of Preferred-Habitat Investors

There are overlapping generations of investors living for a time interval of length T , and of arbi-
trageurs living for a time interval of length dt. Thus, at each point in time there is a continuum of
investor generations and one arbitrageur generation. There are two goods: good 1 that arbitrageurs
and investors can consume and exchange for bonds, and good 2 that investors can produce from
good 1, can consume and cannot exchange. Bonds pay in terms of good 1 when they mature.

     Arbitrageurs and investors receive endowment W of good 1 at the beginning of their life.
Arbitrageurs use their endowment to buy bonds, and at the end of their life (i.e., after dt), they sell
the bonds and consume good 1. Investors use their endowment to buy bonds, and can also invest
good 1 in a private technology at any time prior to the end of their life. The technology yields
good 2 at the end of investors’ life, and investors consume goods 1 and 2 at that time.

     For notational simplicity, we consider an investor born at time 0. At time t < T , the investor
holds ŷt,τ units of the bond with maturity τ and invests dct units of good 1 in the private technology.

The investment in the private technology yields eβ̂t (T −t) dct units of good 2 at time T . The return
β̂t is

         β̂t = βt,T −t + ηt ,

where βt,T −t is given by (5) and ηt is investor-specific noise that averages out over the investor’s
generational cohort. The noise follows the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process

         dηt = −κη ηt + ση dBη,t ,

where (κη , ση ) are positive constants and Bη,t is a Brownian motion independent of all other un-
certainty in the model.

                                                                    49
       We write the investor’s budget constraint using as numeraire the bond maturing at time T .
Denoting by Ŵt the investor’s wealth expressed in units of that bond, the budget constraint is

                             T                          
                                                Pt,τ                      dct
                     Z
        dŴt =                   ŷt,τ d                     dτ −               .                             (B.1)
                         0                     Pt,T −t                Pt,T −t

The investor’s utility at time T is

                         Z       T
        u(CT ) +                     eβ̂t (T −t) dct ,                                                        (B.2)
                             0


where the first and second terms represent utility derived from consumption of good 1 and 2,
respectively. The utility u(CT ) derived from consumption of good 1 is an increasing and concave
function of CT . The utility derived from consumption of good 2 is equal to the consumption of that
good, which is derived from the accumulated investment in the private technology.28 The investor
has max-min preferences and at time 0 solves the optimization problem

                        Z                              T                   
                                                             β̂t (T −t)
        max min u(CT ) +                                    e             dct ,                               (B.3)
        ŷt,τ ,ct rt ,βt ,ηt                        0


subject to the budget constraint (B.1) and the terminal condition CT = ŴT . The minimum in
(B.3) is over sample paths of (rt , βt , ηt ), where βt ≡ (β1,t , .., βK,t ), and the maximum is over adapted
controls (ŷt,τ , ct ).

Proposition B.1. Assume that the term structure involves no arbitrage, i.e., (43) holds. At time
t, the investor holds

                                        h                         i
                                 ′ −1                β̂t (T −t)
        ŷt,T −t = (u )                     Pt,T −t e                                                         (B.4)


units of the bond maturing at time T and zero units of all other bonds, or a portfolio replicating
this position.


Proof: We can write the budget constraint (B.1) as

        dŴt = µŷ,t dt + σŷ,t dBt − dĉt ,                                                                  (B.5)
  28
    An alternative interpretation of (B.2) is that there is no good 2 and the second term represents utility derived
from intermediate consumption of good 1. Under this interpretation, eβ̂t (T −t) is a stochastic preference factor for
consumption of good 1 at time t relative to T .



                                                                                    50
where
                 T                          
                                    Pt,τ
         Z
                     ŷt,τ d                     dτ ≡ µŷ,t dt + σŷ,t dBt ,
             0                     Pt,T −t

        Bt′ ≡ (Br,t , Bβ,1,t , .., Bβ,K,t ),

                        dct
        ĉt ≡                      .
                     Pt,T −t


Integrating (B.5) from 0 to T and using the terminal condition CT = ŴT , we can write the investor’s
optimization problem (B.3) as

                       Z                                 T                     Z       T                        Z       T                    Z       T         
         max min u Ŵ0 +                                       µŷ,t dt +                    σŷ,t dBt −                      dĉt         +                zt dĉt ,                   (B.6)
        ŷt,τ ,cs rt ,βt ,ηt                           0                             0                                0                             0


where

        zt ≡ Pt,T −t eβ̂t (T −t) .


      For any sample path of (rt , βt ) and positive constant g, the sample path where zt = g for t > 0
is possible because ηt is independent of all other uncertainty in the model and can take any value.29
Therefore,
                    Z                          T                 Z       T                         Z       T                    Z       T                
          min u Ŵ0 +                                µŷ,t dt +                 σŷ,t dBt −                      dĉt         +                zt dĉt
         rt ,βt ,ηt                          0                         0                                 0                             0
                     Z                         T                  Z       T                                         Z       T                                   Z    T               
                                                                                                                                                                             ′
         ≤ min u Ŵ0 +                               µŷ,t dt +                 σŷ,t dBt − dĉ0 −                                dĉt         + z0 dĉ0 +                  u Ŵ0 − dĉ0 dĉt
                 rt ,βt                      0                          0                                                 0+                                           0+
                                         Z                                                     T                         Z      T                                 
         ≤ min u Ŵ0 − dĉ0 + u′ Ŵ0 − dĉ0                                                              µŷ,t dt +                        σŷ,t dBt            + z0 dĉ0 ,             (B.7)
                 rt ,βt                                                                          0                                0

                                                                                                             RT
where dĉ0 denotes a possible atom of dĉt at zero,                                                              0+   denotes integrals excluding the atom, the

first step follows by setting g = u′ (Ŵ0 − dĉt ), and the second step follows from the concavity of u.
If σŷ,t 6= 0, then the minimum in (B.7) is −∞ because the Brownian motion has infinite variation.
Therefore, σŷ,t = 0, i.e., the investor holds the bond maturing at time T and zero units of all other
bonds, or a portfolio replicating this position. Since absence of arbitrage requires that µŷ,t = 0,
 29
      More precisely, the sample path where zt = g for t > ǫ is possible for ǫ arbitrarily close to 0.




                                                                                                 51
(B.7) implies that
                                      Z   T                Z       T                 Z   T                 Z       T             
        max min                 u Ŵ0 +         µŷ,t dt +               σŷ,t dBt −           dĉt       +               zt dĉt
        ŷt,τ ,ct rt ,βt ,ηt            0                        0                     0                          0
             h                    i
        ≤ max u Ŵ0 − dĉ0 + z0 dĉ0 .                                                                                                   (B.8)
              dĉ0


Setting yt,τ = 0 for t ≥ 0 and τ 6= T − t, and dĉt = 0 for t > 0, in (B.6), we find that (B.8) holds
also in the reverse sense, and is therefore an equality. The optimal dĉ0 thus satisfies

                    
        u′ Ŵ0 − dĉ0 = z0 .                                                                                                             (B.9)


Since Ŵ0 − dĉ0 represents units of the bond maturing at time T that the investor holds at time 0,
(B.9) yields (B.4) for t = 0. The same argument yields (B.4) for t > 0.

    To derive the demand (4), we set u(CT ) = −e−CT . Proposition (B.1) implies that the investor
holds
                                
        − log eβ̂t (T −t) Pt,T −t = (T − t)(Rt,T −t − β̂t )


units of the bond that matures at time T . Therefore, the average demand across the generational
cohort is for

        yt,T −t = (T − t)(Rt,T −t − βt,T −t )

units of the bond, and has the form (4) with α(τ ) = 1.

    We next present a modification of our model where the demand of preferred-habitat investors is
derived from optimizing behavior and used—in its exact form—in the determination of equilibrium
bond prices. The modified model makes use of Gabaix’s (2009) linearity-generating processes.
For expositional simplicity, we consider the case where the short rate is the only stochastic factor
(K = 0). We assume that the short rate follows the linearity-generating process

        drt = (κr + r − rt )(r − rt )dt + dNr,t ,                                                                                       (B.10)

where (r, κr ) are positive constants and Nr,t is a martingale. To use the results of Cheridito and
Gabaix (2008) and Gabaix (2009), we must ensure that rt remains below a bound r̂ ∈ (r, r + κr ).
Moreover, our analysis requires that the instantaneous variance of the short rate is equal to a



                                                                            52
constant σr2 . The two requirements cannot be met simultaneously if Nr,t is a Brownian motion, but
can be met by introducing a jump component alongside the Brownian component.30

       We set u(CT ) = gCT − 12 CT2 for CT ≤ g and u(CT ) = g2 /2 for CT > g, where g is a positive
constant. Proposition B.1 implies that at time t the investor holds


        g − e(β+ηt )(T −t) Pt,T −t                                                                             (B.11)

units of the bond that matures at time T .31 Therefore, the average demand across the generational
cohort is for

        yt,T −t = g − f (T − t)Pt,T −t                                                                         (B.12)

                                                       1   2 2
units of the bond, where f (τ ) ≡ eβτ + 2 Ση τ and Σ2η is the intra-generational variance of ηt . We take

Σ2η to be constant over time and equal to its steady-state value.

       We conjecture that equilibrium bond prices are affine in rt , i.e.,

        Pt,τ = C(τ ) − Ar (τ )rt ,                                                                             (B.13)

for two functions Ar (τ ), C(τ ) that depend on maturity τ . Eqs. (B.10) and (B.13) yield the following
counterpart of (10):

        dPt,τ = µt,τ dt − Ar (τ )dNr,t ,                                                                       (B.14)

where

        µt,τ ≡ − C ′ (τ ) − A′r (τ )rt − Ar (τ )(κr + r − rt )(r − rt ).
                                     
                                                                                                               (B.15)


       We write the arbitrageurs’ budget constraint in terms of bond units rather than dollar invest-
ment. Denoting by xt,τ the units of bond with maturity τ held by arbitrageurs at time t, the budget
constraint is
                          Z   T                            Z   T
        dWt =       Wt −           xt,τ Pt,τ       rt dt +           xt,τ dPt,τ .
                           0                                 0
  30
     We are grateful to Xavier Gabaix for providing to us the process Nr,t . The construction of Nr,t is available upon
request.
  31
     Proposition B.1 can be generalized to accommodate linearity-generating processes and jump components. Eq.
(B.11) assumes that Pt,T −t > 0, which is the case in equilibrium because of no-arbitrage and bonds’ positive payoff.



                                                                         53
The arbitrageurs’ first-order condition is

      µt,τ − rt Pt,τ = Ar (τ )λr,t ,                                                                                      (B.16)

where λr,t is given by (13). Setting xt,τ = −yt,τ in (13), we can write λr,t as

                       Z       T                               Z       T
      λr,t =   −aσr2                 yt,τ Ar (τ )dτ =   aσr2               [f (τ ) [C(τ ) − Ar (τ )rt ] − g] Ar (τ )dτ,   (B.17)
                           0                                       0


where the second step follows from (B.12) and (B.13). Substituting µt,τ from (B.15) and λr,t from
(B.17) into (B.16), we find

      − C ′ (τ ) − A′r (τ )rt − Ar (τ )(κr + r − rt )(r − rt ) − rt [C(τ ) − Ar (τ )rt ]
                            

                         Z       T
       =   Ar (τ )aσr2               [f (τ ) [C(τ ) − Ar (τ )rt ] − g] Ar (τ )dτ.                                         (B.18)
                             0


Eq. (B.18) is affine in rt . Setting linear terms in rt and constant terms to zero yields two linear
differential equations in Ar (τ ), C(τ ).




                                                                               54
                                         References

Bakshi, G. and Z. Chen, 1996, “Market Frictions and the Preferred Habitat Theory of the Term
     Structure of Interest Rates,” working paper, University of Maryland.

Barberis, N. and A. Shleifer, 2003, “Style Investing,” Journal of Financial Economics, 68,
     161-199.

Buraschi, A. and A. Jiltsov, 2007, “Habit Formation and Macroeconomic Models of the Term
     Structure of Interest Rates,” Journal of Finance, 62, 3009-3063.

Campbell, J. and R. Shiller, 1991, “Yield Spreads and Interest Rate Movements: A Bird’s Eye
     View,” Review of Economic Studies, 58, 495-514.

Chan, K., G. Karolyi, F. Longstaff, and A. Sanders, 1992, “An Empirical Comparison of
     Alternative Models of the Short-Term Interest Rate,” Journal of Finance, 47, 1209-1227.

Cheridito, P. and X. Gabaix, 2008, “Regularity Conditions to Ensure the Existence of Linearity-
     Generating Processes,” working paper, Princeton University.

Cochrane, J., 2008, “Comments on ‘Bond Supply and Excess Bond Returns’ by Robin Green-
     wood and Dimitri Vayanos,” working paper, University of Chicago.

Cochrane, J. and M. Piazzesi, 2005, “Bond Risk Premia,” American Economic Review, 95,
     138-160.

Cox, J., J. Ingersoll, and S. Ross, 1985, “A Theory of the Term Structure of Interest Rates,”
     Econometrica, 53, 385-408.

Culbertson, J., 1957, “The Term Structure of Interest Rates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     71, 485-517.

Dai, Q. and K. Singleton, 2002, “ Expectations Puzzles, Time-Varying Risk Premia, and Affine
     Models of the Term Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 63, 415-441.

Duffee, G., 2002, “Term Premia and Interest Rate Forecasts in Affine Models,” Journal of Fi-
     nance, 57, 405-443.

Fama, E. and R. Bliss, 1987, “The Information in Long-Maturity Forward Rates,” American
     Economic Review, 77, 680-692.

Gabaix, X., 2009, “Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten Puzzles in
     Macro-Finance,” working paper, New York University.

                                               55
Gabaix, X., 2009, “Linearity-Generating Processes: A Modelling Tool Yielding Closed Forms for
     Asset Prices,” working paper, New York University.

Gabaix, X., A. Krishnamurthy, and O. Vigneron, 2007, “Limits of Arbitrage: Theory and
     Evidence from the Mortgage Backed Securities Market,” Journal of Finance, 62, 557-596.

Garbade, K. and M. Rutherford, 2007, “Buybacks in Treasury Cash and Debt Management,”
     Staff Report 304, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Garleanu, N., L. Pedersen, and A. Poteshman, 2009, “Demand-Based Option Pricing,” Re-
     view of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Greenwood, R., 2005, “Short- and Long-term Demand Curves for Stocks: Theory and Evidence
     on the Dynamics of Arbitrage,” Journal of Financial Economics, 75, 607-649.

Greenwood, R., S. Hanson, and J. Stein, 2009, “A Gap-Filling Theory of Corporate Debt
     Maturity Choice,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Greenwood, R. and D. Vayanos, 2009a, “Bond Supply and Excess Bond Returns,” working
     paper, Harvard University.

Greenwood, R. and D. Vayanos, 2009b, “Price Pressure in the Bond Market,” working paper,
     Harvard University.

Gromb, D. and D. Vayanos, 2002, “Equilibrium and Welfare in Markets with Financially Con-
     strained Arbitrageurs,” Journal of Financial Economics, 66, 361-407.

Gromb, D. and D. Vayanos, 2009, “Financially Constrained Arbitrage and Cross-Market Con-
     tagion,” working paper, INSEAD.

Guibaud, S., Y. Nosbusch, and D. Vayanos, 2009, “Preferred Habitat and the Optimal Ma-
     turity Structure of Government Debt,” working paper, London School of Economics.

Hau, H., 2009, “Global versus Local Asset Pricing: Evidence from Arbitrage of the MSCI Index
     Change,” working paper, INSEAD.

Islam, M., 2007, “The State that I am in...,” Barclays Capital, Equity Gilt Study 2007, 52-63.

Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen, 2008, “The Aggregate Demand for Treasury
     Debt,” working paper, Northwestern University.

Kyle, A., and W. Xiong, 2001, “Contagion as a Wealth Effect of Financial Intermediaries,”
     Journal of Finance 56, 1401-1440.

                                               56
Litterman, R. and J. Scheinkman, 1991, “Common Factors Affecting Bond Returns,” Journal
     of Fixed Income, 1, 54-61.

Modigliani, F. and R. Sutch, 1966, “Innovations in Interest-Rate Policy,” American Economic
     Review, 56, 178-197.

Pavlova, A. and R. Rigobon, 2008, “The Role of Portfolio Constraints in the International
     Propagation of Shocks,” Review of Economic Studies, 75, 1215-1256.

Pradhan, A., 2009, “Forward Steepeners Still Offer Value,” Barclays Capital, Global Rates Strat-
     egy, 5 June, 2-6.

Telmer, C. and S. Zin, 1996, “The Yield Curve: Terms of Endearment or Terms of Endow-
     ment?,” working paper, Carnegie-Mellon University.

Tzucker, R. and M. Islam, 2005, “A Pension Reform Primer,” Barclays Capital, Fixed Income
     Rates Strategy.

Vasicek, O., 1977, “An Equilibrium Characterization of the Term Structure,” Journal of Finan-
     cial Economics, 5, 177-188.

Wachter, J., 2006, “A Consumption-Based Model of the Term Structure of Interest Rates,” Jour-
     nal of Financial Economics, 79, 365-399.

Xiong, W. and H. Yan, 2009, “Heterogeneous Expectations and Bond Markets,” Review of Fi-
     nancial Studies, forthcoming.




                                                57
