NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRICING ADJUSTABLE RATE MORTGAGES

Patrjc H. Hendershott

Working Paper No. 15)-8

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1985

The research reported here is part of the NBER'S research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 1/1548
January 1985

Pricing Adjustable Rate Mortgages

ABSTRACT

This paper provides a framework for pricing adjustable rate mortgages and
summarizes some evidence on the prices (additions to the coupon rate) necessary
1—n

nr\-c,n

n'J nnn -4-- n,-1

1 ,—noon in -F inn,,,

-i--

-, n 1—, - ,- ,1 4 inn n-F tin-in -

nil in

4 in 1—n -inn in -i--

inn -1--

n onnin' inn

from mortgage default and foreclosure. Both interest rate and default risk are
shown to be heavily influenced by the form of the mortgage instrument as well
as the underlying drift and uncertainty in interest rates and house prices.

Patric H. Hendershott
Hagerty Hall
Ohio State University
1775 College Road
43210
Columbus, OH
(614) 422—0552

Pricing

*
Adjustable Rate Mortgages

Patric H. Hendershott

Adjustable rate mortgages (ARMs) may seem to some to be the panacea of

the thrift industry. With a direct matching of the repricing period on the
ARMs and the maturity of deposits, interest rate risk disappears and the

thrift is home free. Possibly managers can return to the old (but inflation
,

A

.

'.W

—a
...'

-I

4-

L

-.-. L.1i
... i1¼4 ,.-.—.
£) L1i

i ) —'

-—., .c L'JUL

1___.

J

Unfortunately for the thrift manager, the world of ARMs is not so

simple. Consumer acceptance may require teaser rates and interest rate or
payment caps, which reintroduce some interest rate risk and add a dash of
extra default risk for good measure. Numerous questions must be addressed.
What repricing or adjustment period should be chosen, which caps and teasers
should be offered, which index rate should be employed, and what margin over

the costs of funds must be charged for the ARM to be profitable? We had
better cancel that three o'clock tee time.
Investment in ARMs poses the dual problem of determining which ARM to
offer to purchase (which adjustment period to offer, caps to utilize, initial
charges to make, and index rate to employ) and how to price it (what full

margin to charge). A rational thrift would solve this problem in reverse
order. It would first calculate how a wide range of ARMs need to be priced in
order to be profitable in a risk—adjusted expected value sense; then it would

deduce which one or ones among this set households are likely to accept. This
deduction, which I label the marketing decision, depends partly on one's
competition (if a competitor is offering a specific ARM at a price below our

*

Presented at the Tenth Annual Conference of the Federal Home Loan Bank of San
Francisco, December 1984.

—2—

thrift's estimate of a profitable price, then our thrift is unlikely to be
able to market the ARM at its price) and partly on the tastes of household
borrowers (many might not even consider a mortgage without a life—of—loan

cap). The marketing decision will be solved by surveying the competition (and
possibly potential borrowers) and by trial and error, i.e., letting households
make their tastes known directly.

The marketing decision is not the topic of this paper. My topic is the
pricing decision: how does a thrift calculate the margin necessary for

profitability? I begin by laying out a general framework for determining the
correct margin. Within this framework, the margin is seen to depend on a
variety of costs and on expected income shortfalls caused by interest rate

caps and possible foreclosures. I then examine the determinants of these
shortfalls in detail and indicate the general magnitudes of the premia thrifts
should charge for likely losses due to interest rate caps and foreclosure on
differently structured ARMs.

I will not oversell my product; I am not able to say precisely what the
appropriate margin for a given ARM should be today; there has not been either
enough practical experience with ARMs or sufficient research on them to set

margins with full confidence. Moreover, even if I could specify today's
correct margin, I would not be able to specify tomorrow's because the

determinants of the margin change over time. I will, however, indicate both
the determinants and likely ranges of margins on different ARMs.

I. The Basics of ARM Pricing
A general framework is a necessary starting point for calculating ARM

prices.

This framework is also useful in identifying the advantages of

thrifts relative to other lenders in financing housing. After developing the

—3—

framework and briefly considering the relative advantages of thrifts, two
components of ARM pricing, measurement of the cost of debt and choice of the
index rate, are considered.

A. The General Framework
The basic question is at what minimum mortgage interest rate can a

specific lender offer credit to households and still earn a market return on
its equity? In the absence of taxes, the minimum interest rate must cover (1)
the marginal expected cost of funds (an average of the cost of debt and equity
finance) over the life of the mortgage, (2) expected losses due to default and

interest rate caps, (3) servicing costs and (4) operating/packaging costs. To
illustrate the latter, a depository institution must pay the costs of
collecting deposits, including having branches, paying employees, etc.;

Freddie Mac, on the other hand, pays the cost of marketing its participation
certificates.

When taxes are included, the analysis becomes more complicated. In
order to see things clearly, a few equations are helpful. The expected
after—tax profit ——
(it)

return

to equity ——

from a dollar investment in mortgages

can be expressed as

it

where

= (i—it) [mor

—

for

— cap —

y debt — ser — oper],

(1)

is the relevant business tax rate, mor is the promised return from

mortgage investment, for is expected losses due to foreclosure, cap is
expected losses due to interest rate caps, y is the fraction of the dollar

—4—

investment (say 0.95) that is debt—financed (deposits for thrifts, PCs for
Freddie Mac), debt is the cost of that debt, ser is servicing costs and oper

is operating or packaging costs. All variables are fractions per dollar of
mortgage investment, and all refer to present—value annual—equivalents over
the expected life of the mortgage investment.

The minimum mortgage yield acceptable to an investor, mor, is that at
which the institution would expect to earn an after—tax return on its equity

investment equal to the return required by investors, equ. Because there are
l/(i—), say 20, dollars of mortgage investment for every dollar of equity,

= equ,

when mor =

(2)

mor.

We solve for mor by equating (1) and (2):

mor =

for

+ cap + y debt + (l—y)equ + ser + oper.

(3)

T

The required margin on mortgage investments can be expressed as the
difference between the mortgage rate and the cost of debt:

mor — debt =

for

+ cap + ser + oper + (l—y)[egu—U—t)debt]

(4)

That is, the margin must cover the difference between promised and expected
mortgage returns (for + cap), expenses of investing in mortgages (ser + oper),
and a little extra because the after—tax required return on equity exceeds the

after—tax cost of debt. Differences in margins across industries could exist

—5—

owing to tax and regulatory advantages (differences in -r, y and debt) or to

technological or managerial advantages (differences in ser, oper and possibly
def) ;

by assumption, the required returns on equity are equal for all

institutions (the y's are assumed to be those which make the equity investment
equally risky for all industries) and all investors presumably suffer equal

losses from identical rate caps. The margin will vary across firms within an
industry because of differences in managerial skills (reflected in differences
in ser, oper and for)

Given unlimited access to funds, the industry with the lowest margin
will eventually drive all other industries out of the home mortgage business.
If access is limited (or diseconomies of scale exist)

,

such as was the case

with thrifts in the era of deposit rate ceilings, then the margin of firms in
the next "lowest cost" industry will determine the market home mortgage rate,
etc., until the demand for mortgage credit is satisfied (see Hendershott and
Villani, 1980, pp. 64—69) .

Institutions

that can supply credit at a rate

below the market equilibrium rate will earn excess profits; institutions that
cannot supply credit at the market equilibrium rate will not survive.
Historically, mortgage investment has been predominately undertaken by
the thrifts and Fannie Mae (sometimes labeled the world's largest savings and

loan). And for good reason. Owing to the Treasurys implicit (explicit?)
guarantee of Fannie Mae's debt and the inexpensive deposit insurance FSLIC
provides thrifts, Fannie Mae and the thrifts have been able to borrow short

and lend long at low cost. (Maturity intermediation is profitable, in the
absence of a continuing upward trend in interest rates, because short rates
are generally less than long rates —— 3—month bill rates have averaged nearly
a percentage point less than long—term Treasury rates over the past 15 years.)
In terms of equation (3), thrifts and Fannie Mae have had far lower debt costs

—6—

and higher loan—to—value ratios than purely private firms have had (no
institutions without deposit insurance or government guarantees have engaged
in significant maturity intermediation)

Thrifts also have the Section 593 bad debt allowance (although they
won't under many tax reform proposals) which lowers their effective tax rate

based upon (large) minimum investment in mortgages. When tnormal! profits
exist, this allows thrift to lend at a quarter to half percentage point below
the market rate and still make money (Hendershott and Villani, 1981) .

To the

extent that Fannie Mae and the thrifts have passed through their advantages to

households, the cost of housing finance has been below market. On the other
hand, raising funds through the deposit—branch system may be inefficient
relative to the passthrough security mechanism (the thrift industry may have

relatively high operating expenses). Also, builders can utilize installment
sale accounting with their builder bonds and thus can afford to engage in
builder buy downs.

B. Measurement of the Cost of Debt and Choice of Index Rate
Three of the six variables determining the minimum acceptable mortgage
rate in equation (3) are likely to vary significantly across AP.N types: the

cost of debt and expected losses from default and from the existence of rate

caps. The cost of debt is analyzed here, as is a companion issue, the choice
of the index rate; the expected loss components are considered in some detail
later in the paper.

The relevant cost of debt to employ in ARM pricing is the marginal

expected cost of debt financing until the ARM reprices. Note the adjectives
marginal and expected. Both indicate that the average cost of funds over the

—7—

most recent accounting period is not the correct measure of the debt cost.

The measure must be current ——
forward looking ——

the

the

cost of raising funds today —— and must be

expected cost until repricing occurs.

Application of this rule is simple in some cases. Say that a thrift
raises its funds with six—month deposits and is pricing a six--month ARM. The
correct cost of debt is today's cost of raising funds, today's six—month
deposit rate.

(This is not precisely correct; a slightly shorter term debt

rate is appropriate because the ARM amortizes slightly. On the other hand! if
the ARM has rate caps, a slightly longer term debt rate is relevant because

the ARM will not always fully reprice in six months.') Similarly, a thrift
financing a one—year ARM with one—year deposits would use today's one—year
deposit rate as the base debt rate in computation of today's one—year ARM

rate. But what about a thrift that finances one—year ARMs with six—month
deposits? Here the expected debt cost is an average of today's deposit rate
and that which the thrift expects to exist six months from now.

How might a thrift form expectations of this rate? Under the
assumptions that deposit rates will move with Treasury rates of the same
maturity and longer term Treasury rates are averages of current and expected
future short—term Treasury rates, the expected change in the six—month deposit
rate can be inferred from the relationship between the current yields on one—

year and six—month Treasuries. To illustrate, if the current one—year
Treasury rate is 12¼ percent and the current six—month rate is 12 percent,
then the market's expectation of the six—month rate six months from now is 12½

'In the extreme, a fixed—rate mortgage (an ARM with an rate—increase cap of
zero?) may be unable to reprice for up to 30 years. Thus an average of
expected six—month debt costs over a long future period is appropriate.

—8-.

percent.2

Because the six—month deposit rate is expected to be one—half

percentage point higher in six months, the base debt rate for setting the
one—year ARM coupon would be today's six—month deposit rate plus one—quarter

percentage point. That is,

one year
base rate

=

six—month

one—year

+

deposit rate

—

\ Treasury

six—rnonth
Treasury I

With a current six—month deposit rate of 11½ percent, the base rate is 11 3/4
percent.

This rule can be stated another way: the base rate for an ARM of given
repricing period should be the Treasury rate of that maturity plus the
difference between the deposit rate at which funds are being raised and the

Treasury rate of the same maturity as that deposit rate. In the previous
example, the base rate is .1225 +

(.115 — .12) = .1175.

More generally, if we

assume an ARM is financed with deposits of a variety of maturities, we can
write:

Base rate ARM

with repricing =
period of n

Treasury

rate

with
maturity n

+

w.
i

Treasury\
faeposit
( rate with — rate with J
\maturity i
maturity i/

where w. is the proportion of the ARM investment financed with deposits of

maturity i. To illustrate, if a six—month ARM were financed with equal
proportions of one, six and 12 month deposits, then the base rate would be the
current six—month Treasury rate plus an average of the differences between the
current rates on one, six and 12 month deposits and Treasuries.

21f investor's are earning a risk premium for committing funds fbr a year
instead of six months, then the expected six—month rate six—months in the
future is less than 12½ percent. Nonetheless, thrifts should treat it as 12½
percent because they should earn this risk premium for borrowing six—month
money and lending for a year.

—9-.

From the above analysis, the choice of the appropriate ARM

index

rate is

straight—forward: the Treasury rate with the same maturity as the repricing

period. With this index, an individual thrift will have the wherewithal to
compete for deposits in the future should interest rates rise. Moreover,
borrowers will not have an incentive to switch to other lenders should
interest rates decline.

The industry's aggregate cost of funds index, a popular alternative, has

a number of disadvantages. First, it is backward looking; its movement does
not reflect changes in the current marginal cost of debt funds but movements

in the average cost from some prior period (not that prior given how short the

average maturity of thrift liabilities has become). Second, the cost of funds
index reflects behavior of the industry, not the individual thrift. If, for
example, other institutions cease attracting deposits at above market rates or
if their relatively high cost longer term deposits roll over at lower rates,
then the cost of funds index, and thus rates on repricing ARMs, will decline,
even though the level of interest rates, and thus this thrift's cost of funds,

has not changed since the ARMs last repriced. The backward—looking nature of
the cost of funds index and its sensitivity to the behavior of thrifts, rather
than the general level of interest rates, probably explains the preference of
the secondary market for ARMs indexed to Treasury rates.

II. Expected Losses from Interest Rate Caps
Risk—adjusted expected losses from interest rate caps depend on the

likelihood that interest rates will rise sufficiently for the caps to bind and
the aversion lenders have to the caps binding while the cost of funds rises

unchecked. This problem is addressed in two ways. First, I indicate how an
option pricing model could be used with current market data to determine the

—10--

extra

margin to be charged for rate caps. Second, I examine interest—rate

data over the 1970—84 period to deduce what extra margins were necessary, ex

post, for lenders to avoid losses on capped ARMs

A.

relative

to uncapped ARMs.

The tTse of Option Pricing Models

Expected losses from interest rate caps depend on the expected "drift"

and "volatility" of interest rates. The higher is the drift, the more likely

are rates to risesufficiently to cause caps to bind. Similarly, the greater
the volatility, the more likely are rates to blip upward sufficiently to cause

the caps to come into play. Thus, margins on capped ARMs should vary over
time as the expected drift and volatility of rates vary.

Also relevant to the compensation for rate caps is risk aversion. Given
the existence of rates caps (and the effective early withdrawal option on
longer term deposits), a lender cannot match the effective maturities of its

assets and liabilities. A one—month ARM

with

a life of loan cap will have a

one—month effective maturity if interest rates are relatively stable but could
end up with a much greater effective maturity should interest rates rise

sharply and stay at a much higher average level. A risk—averse lender should
charge for this risk or for any hedging actions taken to limit it.

A single piece of market information, available daily in the Wall Street
Journal, reflects both the expected drift in interest rates and current market
risk aversion ——

the

term structure of interest rates. When the term

structure is upward sloping, whether due to an expected upward drift in
interest rates or to aversion to committing funds longer term, lenders should

charge more for rate caps. Similarly, if recent interest rate behavior

—ii—

reflects greater interest rate volatility than was previously the case, a

higher margin should be charged. And correct margins can be quite sensitive
to these parameters.

Table 1 contains the values of the extra premium required for adding a

five percent life of loan cap to a pure one—month ARM contract under different

term structure and rate volatility assumptions. These premia were computed
using an option pricing model (see Buser, Hendershott and Sanders, 1984).

When the yield curve is mildly upward sloping (the spread between long—term
and three—month Treasury rates is one percentage point) and rates are expected
to have average volatility, the premium for this cap is about ten basis

points. With a downward sloping yield curve or low rate volatility, the fair
margin approaches zero. However, a steeply upward sloping yield curve (long—
term less three—month Treasury spread of 2 3/4 percentage points) or high
expected rate volatility raises the premium to a quarter percentage point, and
the combination together puts the premium over half a percentage point.

Per period rate adjustment caps and initial period teaser rates are also

common in ARM contracts. Unfortunately, researchers have not yet solved the
problems inherent in valuing per period adjustment caps with option pricing
models, although the values of these caps are surely related to interest rate
expectations and volatility in the same way that the value of the life of loan

.3

cap is.

3Asay (1984) has simulated per—adjustment period cap values based upon
different term—structure and rate—volatility assumptions.

—12--

Table 1:

Option Pricing Model Values (in basis points) of 5 Percent Life of
Loan Cap on a One—Month ARM
(no per adjustment caps)

Slope of Term
Structure
Rate
Volatility

Downward
(—125)

Normal
(100)

Steeply Upward
(275)

low

0

0

15

average

0

10

35

10

25

60

high

—13—

B. Implications of 1970—84 Interest Rate Behavior
To shed some light on the values of different interest rate caps, alone
and in combination, Hendershott and Shilling (1984) analyzed how much higher
the coupon rates on hypothetical ARMs with various caps issued during the
1970—76 period would have had to have been in order for lenders to earn the
same return as would have been earned on uncapped ARMs with the same repricing

period. (The calculations assume a 7½

year

holding period and include a market

value adjustment at the end of the period if caps were then binding.) The
emphasis is on establishment of relationships among cap values that hold for

mortgages originated in all years. (Mortgage default was not considered ——

private

mortgage insurance was implicitly assumed to be sufficiently

comprehensive to reduce default risk to the lender to zero.)
The computed margins depend, of course, on the actual behavior of

interest rates in the years following the assumed origination date. Rates
oscillated around 7 percent in the 1970—77 period, rose sharply during 1978 and

1979, and then oscillated around 12 percent in the 1980—midl984 period. Thus
required ex post margins rose throughout the 1970—76 period. Hendershott and
Shilling present computations for: one—year undiscounted ARMs, one—year

discounted (two percent teaser) ARMs, and three— and five—year ARMs. Only the
results for one—year ARMs are summarized below.

One—Year Undiscounted ARMs
Table 2 presents the basic results for various interest rate caps with
and without interest rate floors on one—year ARMs originated in the years 1970

through 1976. I first discuss the capped only values and then turn to the
floors. The values of one and two percent caps per annual adjustment are
listed in the first two columns of Table 2. The average for the 1970—76 span

—14—

is given at the bottom of the table. The tight one percent cap is worth nearly
a full percentage point on average; the two percent cap is worth only a quarter

as much. This 4 to 1 ratio holds not only on average but also, roughly, for
mortgages originated in each year.

The values in the next three columns are for a five point life of loan

cap, both by itself and in combination with the annual adjustment caps. The
five percent life of loan cap alone has about as much value, on average, as the
two percent per year caps 28 basis points, but the range of the value of the

life cap is much wider. For mortgages originated in many years, the life of
loan cap will not bind at all; for other years, it will bind over much of the

period. When appended to the one point per adjustment cap, the five point life
of loan cap adds negligible value; unless interest rates were to rise sharply
and stay there for an extended period, the per adjustment cap binds prior to

the life of loan cap. When appended to the looser two point annual cap, the
life of loan cap adds about half of its value by itself, the two points per

year and five point life of loan caps together are worth 40 basis points, on
average. The half—of—its--value—alone rule for adding the 5 percent life of
loan cap to the two point annual cap holds, roughly, for mortgages originated
in all years, not just on average.

Comparison of the average values of interest rate caps when used in
conjunction with symmetric floors (the data in parentheses) with the values
calculated on ARMs without floors suggests that the introduction of a rate

floor lowers the required margin anywhere from 0 to 15 basis points. The
greatest effect, as one would expect, is for the one percent adjustment cap
with a five percent life of loan cap, although by itself the annual adjustment

cap yields similar results. The five percent life of loan floor never seems to
matter. Because borrowers will tend to prepay their mortgages if rates fall

0.34

1%

2%

Table

No Life of Loan Cap
Annual Cap

2

(1.44)

1.54

1.38

(0.66)

0.82

(0.40)

0.46

(0.40)

0.42

0.38

(0.18)

0,20

0.72

0.30

0.14

0.28

(—.10)

0.34

0.10

(—.02)

0.06

(0.40)

0.74

1.40

(0.66)

0.82

(0.48)

0.50

(0.22)

0.24

(0.68)

(1.14)

0.82
(1.52)

1.66

1.00

(0.38)

0.40

(1.62)

(0.85)

0.90

1.62

0.18

0.46

5% Life of Loan Cap
Annual Cap
No Cap
1%
2%

for Various Interest Rate Caps on 1—Year Default—Free ARMs, 1970—1976
Additional Margins Needed to
Compensate
(Percentage Points)

Year
1970

0

0

.02)

0.06

0.10

0.06

(—

0.46
(0.40)

0.16

(....lO)

1971

0.74

1.64

(1.12)

(1.62)

0.26

0.80

0.98

(0.21)

(0.68)

1972

1973

1974

1975

1976

AVERAGE

(0.83)

—16—

sufficiently below the minimum rate floor, the true values of the various rate

caps with floors are somewhere between the capped—only values and the capped—
with—floors values.

One—Year Discounted ARMs
Table 3 presents the same general calculations of the values of caps on
one—year ARMs but now for ARMs issued with a two percentage point annual

teaser. The tight one percentage point annual cap costs 160 basis points on
average. This includes 30 basis points needed over an eight year mortgage life
to recoup the 2 percent initial year discount (the 7 percent life of loan cap
on a mortgage issued in 1970 costs 30 basis points and we know from Table 2

that this cap never binds) and 130 basis points more for the cap. The 130 far
exceeds the 98 basis point cost of the same cap on an undiscounted one—year

ARM. This illustrates the general point that all rate caps are more likely to
bind when a teaser rate is used and thus the margins charged must be higher.

When a five percentage point life of loan cap is added to the one percent per
adjustment cap, the margin value rises, on average, by only 10 basis points.

When the annual adjustment is two percentage paints, the cap on the two

percent teaser ARM is worth 72 t 116 basis paints, the 72 being associated
with no life of loan cap and the 116 with the five point cap. Results for a
two point annual cap and a six point life of loan cap are also shown.

Comparing Tables 2 and 3, a one percent annual adjustment cap and five percent
life of loan cap on an undiscounted one—year ARM seems to have about the same
percentage point value as a two percent annual adjustment and six percent life

of loan cap on a two percent discounted one—year ARM. This is another result
that seems to hold for most every year, not just on average.

Year
1970

1971
1972

1973
1974

1975

1976

AVERAGE

(1.72)

1.74

(1.16)

1.20

(0.58)

0.64

1.48

(1.74)

1.76

(1.16)

1.20

(0.58)

0.64

Table
3

2% Per Adjustment Period Cap
Life of Loan Cap

0.90

0.50

0.38

0.94

1.14

0.56

0.38

5%

0.94

0.80

1.00

0.50

0.38

6%

1.76

1.10

0.64

0.64

0.44

0.30

5%

1.00

0.58

0.46

0.38

0.32

0.30

(0.74)

7%

0.68

1.20

1.42

No Cap

0.70

1.80

Life of Loan
Cap Only

Additional Margins Needed to Compensate for Various Interest Rate
Caps on 1—Year

1.40

(1.42)

(Percentage Points)

Default—Free ARMs When a 2% Discount Is Employed

1% Per Adjustment Period Cap
Life of Loan Cap

(1.34)

1.78

5%

1.66

(1.72)

No Cap

(1.58)

2.24

0.78

1.92

(2.60)

2.62

(1.90)

2.08

____

1.14

1.04

____

0.96

1.96
(0.90)

1.16

1.68

0.72

2.76

1.70

(0.69)

0.60

1.60

(1.66)

1.00
(1.55)

—18—

The next two columns in Table 3 contain calculations for life of loan

caps only of 5 and 7 percent. The 5 percent life of loan cap on a two percent
discounted one—year ARM seems to be worth about the same percentage point as it
does in conjunction with the one—percent annual adjustment cap on the
undiscounted one—year ARM.

Finally, Table 3 shows the combined effects of various interest rate caps

and floors. In general, the floors have negligible value because rates would
have to fall below the already discounted original coupon rate before they

would be expected to bind. In any event, only the tight annual adjustment caps
appear to have value; the one percent interest rate floor is worth about 5
basis points (see Tables 2 and 3)

III. Expected Losses from Foreclosures
Mortgage default depends critically on the downpayrnent of the borrower and

the scheduled amortization rate of the loan. The greater are these, the less
likely is default. But default also depends on whether an ARM is used rather
than a FRM and just what type of ARM is employed. How differences in the type
of mortgage affect the net (of foreclosure losses) returns to mortgage lenders

is crucial to the pricing of ARMs. I begin with presentation of an "intuitive"
model of how and why financing arrangements affect mortgage default and then
provide some illustrative historical calculations on the movement of the
determinants of default for different mortgages originated in 1977.

I conclude

with a discussion of lender losses stemming from foreclosures. Throughout, the
term default denotes borrower behavior that will lead to foreclosure.

—19—

A. Financing Arrangements and Mortgage Default
The owner of a house financed by mortgage debt will default on that debt

if the gains from doing so exceed the perceived costs. The gains are the value
of the mortgage debt wiped off the books and the free rent that can be obtained

between the time of default and actual foreclosure. The losses are the house
given up and "default costs": the dollar costs of moving, losses of attachable
assets and credit rating, and the psychological or moral cost of defaulting.

The dollar costs include moving one's family and belongings and purchasing

another house (if possible) or foregoing the advantages of ownership. The
default condition can be expressted algebraically as: default if

H<M—C,

(5)

where H is the value of the house given up, M is the market value of the
mortgage and C is net default costs (gross costs less the free rent gained).

While the default condition is similar in principle whether or not
households have to move, default costs are greatly reduced if the household has

to move in the absence of default. First, the emotional and dollar costs of
moving do not act as a deterrent to default. Second, the household must sell
the house if it chooses not to default. This negative cost of defaulting acts
as an incentive to default. Third, many households are forced to move because
of a personal tragedy ——

death of a member, severe illness, divorce, or

prolonged unemployment. At such moments the normal moral aversion to default
is likely weakened: the world is being cruel and it seems only fair that others
share the burden of the household's tragedy. For households that have to move,
the default condition is

—20—

H

<M—C m,

(6)

where net default costs of such households, C ,

m

are much less than those of

nonmovers, C.

From (5) and (6), default is clearly quite dependent on the uncertain time

path of individual house values. Other things being equal, defaults are more
likely to occur the more the value of a property declines.

(Of course, higher

loan—to—value and slower amortizing loans will experience' greater default.)

Default is also household specific because the default costs will vary from
household to household, depending on their moral aversion to default as well as
local laws regarding recourse to assets.

Consider a pool of identical loans made on initially equalvalued houses.
At some future date, there will be a distribution of the values of the houses

underlying the mortgages remaining in the pool. This distribution will depend
on both the process governing the evolution of house prices over time (the mean
house price inflation rate and the dispersion around it) and the manner in
which mortgages have been deleted from the pool (defaulted on) in earlier

periods. Figure 1 plots this distribution of house values at a date a number
of years after origination of the mortgages. The horizontal axis is dollar
values, and the vertical axis is the fraction of houses whose mortgages remain

in the pooi that have a particular value. M is the current value of the
outstanding mortgages. The fraction of houses of value H < M — C will all
default. In addition, households who have house values between M — C

m

and M —

C and have to move will default. That is, a fraction of households with house
values in this range, households that might be considered "potential default—

ers," will default.4 Few households (largely those with low aversion to

4For evidence that the household's net equity in the house is an important
determinant of default, see Foster and Van Order (1984).

0

Fraction of
Houses with
Mortgages
Still Out—
standing

All

Figure 1

$

of

e Prices

House Prices, Default Costs, Mortgage Value and Default

Some
Default

M-C

—21—

default) have house values less than M — C; most defaults come from the

potential defaulters. Thus default has been characterized as the intersection
of two bad events: a relatively sharp decline in house price and a tragedy that
forces a move.

An important question is when might default rates on adjustable—rate (ARM)

and fixed—rate (FRM) mortgages differ? The answer is when interest rates rise.
Increases in rates, ho1din C, Cm and the house price distribution constant,
will lower defaults on FRMs and raise them on uncapped ARMs. Because of this,
mortgage insurers can diversify away a substantial part of interest—rate
induced default risk by insuring the appropriate proportions of fixed and
adjustable rate mortgages.

Consider FRNs first. Intuitively, households that have below—market rate
mortgages are less willing to give them up (default) than are other households.
In terms of Figure 1, the increase in interest rates lowers the market value of
the fixed—rate mortgage, shifting M — C to the left. The M — Cm line will also
shift to the left if the mortgage is assumable, i.e., if a household that has
to move can capture the decline in market value of its debt via a higher house

price upon sale. If the mortgage is not assumable, the reduction in defaults
arises because a number of households who would have defaulted in the absence
of the increase in interest rates will now default only if they have to move.
With an uncapped short—term ARM, M does not decline in response to an

increase in interest rates. Moreover, increases in ARM rates will "force"
movement by households that cannot absorb payment shock, lowering default costs

and raising defaults. In terms of the figure, a greater portion of the
households with house values between M — C and M — C

m

thus will default.

will have to move and

—22—

Of course there are numerous types of ARMs, and each will be affected

differently by increases in interest rates. Five—year ARMs will be less likely
to default than one—year ARMs; the market value of the five—year ARM will

decline (although not as much as would an FRM), and payment shock will not hit
for five years (at which time inflation will likely have raised incomes and
shifted the house distribution to the right and amortization will have lowered

M). ARMs with rate caps will be less likely to default than otherwise
identical ARMs without caps for the same reasons: M will decline somewhat and

payment shock will be less. Teaser ARMs —— those with built—in interest rate
hikes ——

will

be more likely to default owing to greater payment shock.

What about declines in interest rates? In general, their differential
impact on the market values of FRM5 and ARMS and thus on default probabilities

is far less than the differential impact of £ncreases in rates. Declines in
rates will tend to raise the market value of outstanding FRMS, thus increasing
the likelihood of default (of H falling below the higher M — C), but the

increase in value and tendency to greater default is limited. Households do
not have to default in order to avoid large increases in the market value of
their debt; they can, and generally will, refinance their loans at the lower
market rates.

B. Some Calculations for Mortgages Originated in Early 1977
A follow up question is: do interest rates ever rise by enough to reduce

defaults on FRMs noticeably or to increase defaults on ARMs markedly? The
former would only occur in response to significant declines in the market value
of FRMs and the latter to significant increases in payment/income ratios for

ARM borrowers. To shed some light on this issue, mortgage market values and
payment/income ratios have been calculated for the 1977—84 period for a 30

—23—

year, fixed—rate loan carrying the early 1977 8.76 percent coupon and an

uncapped one—year ARM with a coupon of 7.06 percent that adjusts annually by
the change in the one—year Treasury rate (which was 5.56 percent in early
1977) .

The market value of the uncapped ARM is set equal to its book value

(initially $100,000) ; the market value of the FRM is computed by discounting

the mortgage cash flows by the current long—term mortgage coupon rate, assuming
a prepayment span that tends to decline as the mortgage ages but rise as the

difference between the market coupon rate and the 8.76 coupon increases. The
payment/income ratios assume that households had initial incomes to support
four times the initial mortgage payments and that income grows at 6 percent per
year (at the end of 7 years, incomes have risen by 50 percent).
The top panel of Table 4 contains the interest rates: the yield on the
one—year ARM (the one—year Treasury rate plus 1.5 percentage points) and the

coupon rate on conventional long—term fixed—rate loans. The second and third
panels contain the market values and payment/income ratios for these mortgages

and for a one—year ARM with a 7½ percent per year payment cap. The precipitous
decline in the value of a fixed—rate mortgage originated in 1977 between then

and 1982 is of no surprise to savings and loans. This one—third decline in
value (less than $4,000 was due to amortization) was why most savings and loans

(including FNMA) were substantially "underwater". Similarly, the failure of
the market value of the pure ARM to decline beyond normal amortization is no
surprise; this is the glory of ARMs and explains why many savings and loans
have been struggling to restructure their balance sheets toward ARMs.

From a default perspective, however, ARMs are not so attractive. First,
the low market value of the FRM means that households are unlikely to give it
up by defaulting (H — M is large) -

Second, the payment—to—income ratios

Market Values and Payment/Income Ratios

One—Year ARM

Long—Term FRM

One—Year ARM

100.0

100.0

8.76

7.06

1977

99.0

96.7

99.0

9.10

9.05

1978

.329

99.4

88.7

98.3

10.26

11.62

1979

.210

.357

101.6

85.1

97.8

10.75

13.61

1980

.264

.198

.392

105.5

69.3

97.4

13.91

16.07

1981

.268

.187

.359

111.7

63.6

97.1

15.27

15.56

1982

.272

.176

.243

117.5

75.8

96.8

12.63

10.52

1983

.276

.166

.259

117.5

76.7

95.8

12.45

12.29

1984

4:

Long—Term FRM
100.0

.283

.222

.261

Table

One—Year ARM with
7½% Payment Cap

.25

.236

.257

First Half of

One—Year ARM

.25

.254

Rates

Long—Term FRM

.25

Cap

Payment/Income Ratios

Market Values

One—Year ARM with
7½% Payment

—25—

suggest significantly greater default on ARMs. For fixed—rate mortgages, the
ratio falls from the initial one—quarter to one—fifth in the fourth year and

one—sixth in the seventh. In spite of rising income, the ratio rises by over
50 percent ——

from one—quarter to two—fifths ——

for

the ARM by the fourth year

and then declines to about the original one—quarter by the seventh year. Truly
enormous declines in house prices are required to create negative equity for
households with the fixed—rate mortgage: 10 percent a year for the first four

years would be insufficient. In contrast, 2 percent declines would be
sufficient to induce households with pure ARMs to default if they could not
handle the payments and many households would, indeed, find a fifty percent
increase in their payments difficult to handle.

ARMS with interest rate caps are a compromise between these extremes. The
decline in market value would be less than that of the FRM but more than that
of the pure ARM to the extent that the caps bind (or threaten to bind), and the

payment/income ratio would rise less than that of the pure ARM but more than

that of the FRM. Thus rate caps reduce the likelihood of default. The impact
of payment caps is uncertain. Payment caps do cushion the rise in the
payment—to—income ratio during a period like 1977—84 (see Table 4); the ratio
is between 26 and 27 percent in years 4 through 6, far less than the 35 to 40
percent ratio with an uncapped ARM. Thus households will be far less likely, to

have to move. But what about the other default variable, the market value of
the mortgage (relative to the value of the house)? During the 1978—83 period,
negative amortization would have led to continual increases in the mortgage

balance. By the beginning of 1983, the balance would have been up by 17½
percent (and would be even higher at the beginning of 1985) and would be 21

percent greater than that of an uncapped ARM. This would, of course, increase
the likelihood of default.

—26--

C. Foreclosures and Lender Losses
Of concern to lenders is not so much whether or not default occurs, but

what losses lenders will incur if it does. If default occurs because the
borrower has to move, not because of negative housing equity, and the lender
has private mortgage insurance, then the lender's loss will be small at most.
But if default is triggered by substantial negative equity, which is more

likely to be the case when substantial negative amortization can occur, then
lenders are likely to suffer significant losses even if they have standard

private mortgage insurance. Payment caps, then, are very desirable from the
viewpoint of mortgage insurers (the caps reduce defaults due to forced moves,

defaults that cost the insurers), but these caps are potentially costly to
lenders; the large cost of losses when negative amortization has occurred is
likely to far exceed the small savings from fewer losses due to forced moves.5
Interest rate caps will reduce lender losses, both by mitigating the rise
in the payment—to—income ratio and creating reduced mortgage value during

periods of increasing interest rates. Again, however, private mortgage
insurers (PMIs), rather than lenders, are the principalbeneficiaries of the
caps.

How large are expected lender (and insurer) losses from default on

different mortgage instruments? There is some evidence regarding fixed—rate
mortgages. In a five percent expected inflation world with 13 percent mortgage
rates, Cunningham and Hendershott (1984) calculate that the default premium
necessary to cover expected losses on an 80 percent loan—to—value mortgage is

only 5 to 10 basis points. On ninety and ninety—five percent loans,

5mis assumes that the insurer pays a flat percentage of the claim. If the
insurer will pay the amount of the claim above, say, 75 percent of the
original mortgage, then the insurer, not the lender, bears the risk of
negative amortization.

respectively, the premia rise to 20—40 and 50—75 basis points. These premia
are less at lower interest rates and, especially, at higher inflation rates.
The comparable premLta currently (November 1984) being charged by PMIs are 30
(80 percent), 40 (90 percent) , and 55 (95 percent) basis points (these premia

include amortization of large first—year premia over 12 years and cover
expenses, as well as losses)

As for the extra default premium on ARMs, we have little more to go on

than what PMI5 are charging. With tight interest rate caps, the additional
1LL.L UjIL L) V WL £ rrlR-.
£'¼110

- .-.
..L 0

.J

IOn
4-,-.
LflJ fr)C.L L,C1S _ S'.JiL L'd
V J_ ...i,,,,\
LAC J

4-,-. ifl (O(i
.A Qr
.1J taSLA
,'_I

L.'.d S '.1

percent) basis points. With payment caps, another 5 basis points are charged.
Recall, however, that lenders, not insurers, generally bear the burden of

increased potential losses due to payment caps (negative amortization). To
summarize, the default premium on an 80 percent loan—to—value ARM (or higher
loan—to—value loan with private mortgage insurance that leaves the effective
risk of the lender equal to that on an 80 percent loan—to-value loan) should
probably be 10 to 20 basis points and on a 90 percent loan—to—value ratio ARM
should be 45 to 65 basis points, with the larger values being appropriate when

payment caps are employed. These premia would be lower the greater is the
expected drift in house prices and the lower is the expected volatility.

IV. Summary
The margin on an ARM over the cost of debt must cover expected losses
owing to the use of interest rate caps and the likelihood of foreclosures, as

well as operating and servicing costs. Moreover, a little extra is needed to
give investors in risky equity a greater after—tax return than investors in

risk—free debt. The cost of debt upon which this margin is added is the
marginal expected cost until the ARM reprices, not the average cost of debt

—28—

over a recent accounting period. Current and expected future, not past, debt
rates are relevant. This logic suggests that the

appropriate

index rate is the

yield on par—value Treasuries with maturity equal to the repricing period of
the ARM.

Expected losses from interest rate caps depend on the expected drift and

volatility of interest rates. The higher is the drift and the greater the
volatility, the more likely are rates to rise sufficiently to cause caps to

bind. Risk—adjusted expected losses also depend on the aversion lenders have
to rate caps binding while the cost of funds continues to rise. Thus, margins
on capped ARMs should vary over time as risk aversion and the expected drift
and volatility of rates vary.

The observed term structure of interest rates reflects both the expected

drift in interest rates and current market risk aversion. The more upward
sloping is the term structure, whether due to an expected upward drift or to
aversion to committing funds longer term, the more should lenders charge for

rate caps. Similarly, the greater is interest rate volatility, the higher the

margin should be. Margins can be quite sensitive to these parameters. To
illustrate, the additional margin for a 5 percent life of loan cap suggested by
application of an options pricing model has ranged between 5 and 40 basis

points during the 1979—84 period. Analysis of how returns on capped one—year
ARMs would have performed over the 1970—84 period relative to an uncapped ARM

is consistent with this range. The extra margin for a 5 percent life—of—loan
cap necessary to earn lenders the same return as on an uncapped ARM varied from
0 to 80 basis points.

Default depends on the equity a borrower has in the house collateralizing

the mortgage and on the borrower's perceived default costs. Equity will be
lower, the lower was the initial downpayment, the less the mortgage has

declined in value and the more the house has fallen in value. Default costs
are lower if the household has to move (moving costs do not deter default and

costs of selling the house act as an incentive) than if it does not. These
considerations suggest that foreclosure losses on ARMs will be greater than
those on FRMs (assuming the same loan—to—value ratio and house price

distribution) during periods of rising interest rates. The market value of
FRMs will decline, raising homeowner's equity (households will not want to
relinquish a below—market interest rate) , and the payment—to—income ratio on

the ARM will rise, increasing the likelihood of forced moves. Foreclosure
losses on ARMs with tight rate caps will be less than those on ARMs with no or
loose caps because the former will decline in value, although by less than the
FRM, and will have smaller increases in payment—to—income ratios, but still
greater than the FRN.

The impact of payment caps on the incidence of default during a period of

rising interest rates is uncertain. Housing equity will decline as negative
amortization occurs, but the number of forced moves will also drop. Losses
from foreclosures seem certain to rise, however, because the negative
amortization will result in considerably greater losses when foreclosure does
occur.

With estimates of the expected cost of debt until repricing and the
necessary rate—cap and default premia, required coupon rates on a wide variety

of ARMs can be computed. Presumably some set of these will be attractive to
households. We are not certain of this, however.

An intense household

affordability problem and an ability of ARMs to address it have contributed

importantly to the acceptance of ARMs in 1984. ARMs will be more difficult to
market if the level of interest rates falls markedly, reducing the
affordability problem, or the term structure becomes sharply downward sloping,

—30—

restricting the ability of ARMs to increase affordability. If the yield curve
inverts, thrifts would be advised temporarily to reduce their share of the

mortgage market. If the level of rates drops sharply, a movement back toward
fixed—rate mortgages, presumably financed by longer term deposits (six— to
eight—year zero coupons?), may be necessary.

References

M.R. Asay, "Pricing and Analysis of Common ARM

Products,"

Mortgage Banking,

December 1984.

S.A. Buser, P,H. Hendershott and A.B. Sanders, "Pricing Rate Caps on Default—
Free Adjustable—Rate Mortgages," Journal of the American Real Estate and
Urban Economics Association, Summer 1985, forthcoming.

D. Cunningham and P.H. Hendershott, "Pricing FHA Mortgage Default Insurance,"
Housing Finance Review, October 1984.

C. Foster and R. Van Order, "An Option—Based Model of Mortgage Default,"
Housing Finance Review, October 1984.

P.H. Hendershott,.and J,D. Shilling, "Valuing Default—Free ARM

Rate

Caps:

Implications of 1970—84 Interest Rate Behavior," Journal of the American
Real Estate and Urban Economics Association, Summer 1985, forthcoming.

P.H. Hendershott and K.E. Villani, "Savings and Loan Usage of the Authority to
Invest in Corporate Bonds," Savings and Loan Asset Management Under

Deregulation, Procedings of the Sixth Annual Conference of the Federal
Home Loan Bank of San Francisco, 1981, pp. 149—167.

P.M. Hendershott and K.E. Villani, 'Secondary Residential Mortgage Markets and
the Relative Cost of Mortgage Funds,' Journal of the American Real
Estate

and Urban

Economics ssociatiOfl, Spring 1980, pp. 50—76.

