NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BY HOW MUCH DOES GDP RISE IF THE GOVERNMENT BUYS MORE OUTPUT?
Robert E. Hall
Working Paper 15496
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15496

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2009

Prepared for the Brookings Panel on Economic Activity, September 10, 2009. I am grateful to the
editors and discussants and to Robert Barro, Susanto Basu, Jordi Gall, Jonathan Parker, Fabrizio Perri,
Valerie Ramey, and Ricardo Reis for guidance and comments. A file containing the calculations is
available at my website. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Robert E. Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

By How Much Does GDP Rise if the Government Buys More Output?
Robert E. Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 15496
November 2009
JEL No. E24,E62
ABSTRACT
During World War II and the Korean War, real GDP grew by about half the amount of the increase
in government purchases. With allowance for other factors holding back GDP growth during those
wars, the multiplier linking government purchases to GDP may be in the range of 0.7 to 1.0, a range
generally supported by research based on vector autoregressions that control for other determinants,
but higher values are not ruled out. New Keynesian macro models have multipliers in that range as
well. On the other hand, neoclassical models have a much lower multiplier, because they predict that
consumption falls when purchases rise. The key features of a model that delivers a higher multiplier
are (1) the decline in the markup ratio of price over cost that occurs in those models when output rises,
and (2) the elastic response of employment to an increase in demand. These features alone deliver
a fairly high multiplier and they are complementary to another feature associated with Keynes, the
linkage of consumption to current income. Multipliers are higher—perhaps around 1 .7—when the
nominal interest rate is at its lower bound of zero, as it was during 2009.

Robert E. Hall
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
rehall@gmail.com

1

Introduction

Major contractions in economic activity bring policies of temporary expansions in government purchases of goods and services. The severe contraction that hit the U.S. and world
economies in 2008 was no exception. The need for fiscal expansion was particularly acute
because monetary policy had driven short-term safe interest rates down to zero without
heading off the contraction. Fiscal policy, including increases in federal purchases and in
state and local purchases financed by federal grants, has become an important part of the
government’s response to a severe recession.
I concentrate on a major issue: the magnitude of the increase in total output in the
U.S. economy when the government temporarily buys more goods and services. The ratio
of the output increase to the purchases increase is the government purchases multiplier. I
emphasize that my concern is with government purchases, not all of government spending.
Spending includes purchases plus transfers and interest payments. I assume in all cases
that the products the government purchases enter preferences in a separable fashion—they
do not affect the household’s marginal rates of substitution between consumption and work
or between consumption this year and any future year. Military spending is the obvious
example. If, on the other hand, the government provides consumers with goods and services
they would have purchased anyway, the resulting multipliers would be lower. In the extreme
case, where the government purchases consumption goods and provides them to consumers,
multipliers would be zero in the standard life-cycle model.
Note that I exclude effects that operate through externalities. One such effect is that
the government, as the nation’s agent for collective action, may have uses for output that
exceed the private value of the output. For example, law enforcement is under-provided by
private action and may be under-provided by current government action. If the increase
in government purchases includes more spending on law enforcement, its value exceeds its
direct contribution to GDP. I leave out that increased value, which could either be attributed
to the purchases or to the increase in GDP that would occur because production became
more efficient with more enforcement. Another example is road-building, where the benefits
would be mainly in the future, because roads are part of the public capital stock. I omit
benefits related to externalities not because I think they are unimportant, but because I want
to focus on a limited, macroeconomic question. Thus, as a general matter, I do not offer
a welfare analysis of government purchases, but one important piece of a welfare analysis,
2

having to do with the aggregate effects, mainly in the labor market, of the government’s
increase in product demand.
I assume that there are no special distortionary taxes that apply during the brief period
of the countercyclical purchases—the government balances its budget in the long run with
whatever taxes it normally uses.
I also do not comment on the other major branch of fiscal stimulus, tax reductions. An
analysis of fiscal stimulus in the form of higher transfers or lower taxes would make use of
the conclusion about the effects of higher purchases on overall economic activity, because it
is a fair presumption that the effects of higher consumer purchases are similar to the effects
of higher government purchases. But I do consider the effects of the subsequent financing of
increased government purchases, explicitly in the models I study and implicitly in empirical
work, where the public knew that eventually the government would need to service the debt
issued to pay for higher purchases. Here, my focus on temporary increases in purchases
is critical—permanent increases in purchases have a different effect because households cut
consumption in anticipation of permanent increases in taxes, the wealth effect. I demonstrate
the irrelevance of any wealth effect for temporary programs of higher government purchases.
My discussion describes a closed economy. In effect, it is about the world economy, though
I use data from the United States to find parameter values. In the context of the events of
2008 and 2009, a focus on the world economy is appropriate, because every major economy
has suffered substantial declines in employment and output and many have responded with
increases in government purchases.
I start with a discussion of the direct regression evidence about the output and consumption multipliers for government purchases. Based on the assumption that movements
in military purchases are exogenous and the fact that they account for much of the variation in government purchases, the natural approach is to study the econometric relation
between output and consumption, on the one hand, and military spending, on the other
hand. The resulting multipliers are about 0.5 for output and slightly negative for consumption. Though the standard errors of these estimates are agreeably small, they are under
suspicion for understating the multiplier, because the bulk of the evidence comes from the
command economy of World War II and may not be relevant to today’s market economy.
Omitting World War II from the sample yields similar multipliers with rather larger standard
errors, based largely on the Korean War buildup, but these too are questionable because the

3

buildup was accompanied by large increases in tax rates. Changes in military purchases
from Vietnam, the Reagan years, or the two wars in Iraq were not large enough to deliver
usable estimates of the multipliers. I conclude that the evidence on the magnitude of the
multipliers available from U.S. historical experience is persuasive only to make the case that
the multiplier is above 0.5.
Evidence from vector autoregressions finds fairly consistently that the output multiplier
is in the range from 0.5 to 1.0 and that the consumption multiplier is somewhat positive. To
varying extents, these estimates include adjustments for the factors such as taxes that may
correct downward biases in the simple regressions.
The paper then turns to models, specifically those derived from the blending of neoclassical and Keynesian macro theory that has flourished in the past decade under the name
New Keynesian. Following many earlier authors, I demonstrate that the purely neoclassical general-equilibrium model without unemployment yields the pretty much unshakable
conclusion that increases in government purchases come largely out of investment and consumption and do not raise total output substantially. The output multiplier—the response
of aggregate output to an increase in government purchases—is well under one and the consumption multiplier is quite negative. The reason is that increased output can only come
from increased employment. Without a reservoir of unemployed to draw down, any increase
in employment must drive the wage down, resulting in less labor supply. The neoclassical
model predicts small increases in output and fairly large declines in consumption.
A key idea of modern macroeconomics that results in more reasonable multipliers is that
the margin of price over cost falls during expansions—the markup ratio declines as output
rises. Often this property is expressed as stickiness of the price level—prices stay constant
during a boom that raises input costs. Other rationalizations based on oligopoly theory or
other principles deliver the result directly. The declining markup permits the wage to rise
or at least not fall as much as it would with constant markup during an expansion. Hence it
permits the household to supply much more labor when the government increases its claim
on output.
A second key idea of modern macroeconomics needed to rationalize a reasonably positive
output multiplier is elastic labor supply. Research based on household data is adamant that
the Frisch elasticity of labor supply is below one. Such an elasticity precludes a substantially
positive output multiplier with any reasonable response of the markup to changes in output.

4

It takes both a declining markup and elastic labor supply to generate a substantial output
multiplier.
My approach to rationalizing high wage elasticity of labor supply starts from the observation that most of the cyclical movements of work effort take the form of variations
in unemployment. I raise the elasticity of labor supply to incorporate the response of unemployment to changes in labor demand, following the the search-and-matching approach
to the labor market. A standard dynamic general-equilibrium model with a sufficiently responsive markup and realistically elastic effective labor supply (including the response of
unemployment) yields an output multiplier as high just below one, in accord with the direct
evidence.
One might think that the traditional Keynesian hypothesis of rigid wages might be a
close cousin of elastic labor supply, but this turns out to be quite wrong. An unresponsive
wage constrains the immediate effect of an increase in government purchases to zero, because
employment and thus output are determined entirely by the equality of the marginal product
of labor and the wage. This predetermination of output remains in an economy where the
markup ratio declines with higher output.
The standard model with responsive markup and elastic labor supply still generates a
negative consumption multiplier. I show that adding hours-consumption complementarity—
a topic of extensive recent research—can tame the negative multiplier. The logic is that
employed people consume significantly more market goods and services than do the unemployed, who have more time to create non-market equivalents. My preferred specification
for matching the observed positive multiplier for output and slightly negative multiplier for
consumption has substantial negative response of the markup of price over cost to output,
fairly elastic response of employment to labor demand, and a degree of complementarity of
consumption and work derived from the micro evidence.
Modern models generally embody the life-cycle model of consumption where households
use credit markets to smooth consumption. It is widely believed that replacing this feature
of models with a traditional consumption function linking consumer spending to current
income will boost the output and consumption multipliers. The issue becomes one of the
magnitude of the crowding out of investment by increased government purchases. Traditional
Keynesian models assume rigid real wages, in which case output is determined on the demand
side of the labor market by firms that equate the marginal product of labor to the fixed real

5

wage. With output unresponsive, crowding out is complete and the output multiplier is zero.
Adding partial borrowing constraints to an otherwise standard New Keynesian model does
boost the consumption multiplier.
Multipliers are not structural constants. They describe the responses of endogenous
variables to changes in the driving force of government purchases. Multipliers depend on
monetary policy. In normal times, monetary policy leans against the expansionary effect of
increases in government purchases, a factor that reduces the multipliers. But when monetary
policy lowers nominal interest rates to their minimum values of zero, the offsetting effect
disappears, so an economy at the lower bound has higher multipliers. In an economy with
an output multiplier of just under one in normal times, the multiplier rises to 1.7 when
monetary policy becomes passive with a zero nominal interest rate.
I conclude that the efficacy of stimulus from higher government purchases depends on
two features of the economy: (1) a markup of price over cost that declines as output expands
and (2) substantially wage-elastic labor supply or the equivalent. Both features are related
to traditional Keynesian views about price and wage stickiness—the negative response of
the markup can be viewed as price stickiness and elastic labor supply can be viewed as wage
stickiness. Both features appear to describe the U.S. economy, though research on this topic
is still far from definitive.
I review the evidence on the movements of the markup ratio as output expands. The
hypothesis of a negative response implies that the share of profit in total income should fall
during expansions. In fact, that share rises. The most promising rationalization involves a
substantial amount of wage smoothing. Then the observed increase in profit during booms is
the combination of a larger increase associated with a wage contract that gives management
the bulk of the benefit of higher revenue offset by the decline in profit per unit of output.
But this is pure guesswork—we lack any handle on measuring wage smoothing. There is
no meaningful factual support for the key hypothesis that the markup ratio declines with
output.
I show that the expansion of government purchases so far enacted to deal with the severe
current recession is far too small to add meaningfully to our knowledge on this subject and far
too little to offset much of the recession. A debate about whether the government purchases
multiplier is 1.0 or 1.5 is completely off the point in this respect.

6

2

Estimates of Output and Consumption Multipliers

2.1

Estimates from regressions on military purchases

The most direct way to measure the government purchase multipliers is to exploit large and
arguably exogenous fluctuations in military spending. I start with a review of that evidence
for the U.S. over the past 80 years. I use the following specification:
zt − zt−1
gt − gt−1
= mz
+ κz + t .
yt−1
yt−1

(1)

Here z is either y for the output multiplier my or c for the consumption multiplier mc .
κz is an inessential constant. Note that using the same denominator on the left and the
right preserves the normal definition of the multiplier as the dollar change in output or
consumption per dollar of government purchases.
In this approach I am treating the change in non-military government purchases as one of
the sources of the noise, t . Because these purchases grow smoothly, their difference has little
variability. The alternative of using military spending as an instrument for total purchases
gives essentially identical results.
I assume that the change in military spending g is uncorrelated with the non-g component
of the left-hand variable, t . This identifying assumption has two aspects. First, military
spending does not respond to forces determining GDP or consumption, such as monetary
or financial forces, but only to geopolitical events. I have long believed that this aspect of
the identifying assumption was among the more plausible made in macroeconomics. Second,
there are no other determinants of output or consumption growth that change when government purchases change. The basis for this aspect of the identifying assumption is much
weaker. In particular, when military spending rises substantially, two other policy responses
may occur: command-type interventions in the economy, including rationing, and increases
in taxes. Both of these presumably decrease consumption demand and thus reduce output
growth. The result is a failure of the identifying assumption in the direction of a negative
correlation of the disturbance t and thus a downward bias in the estimate of the multiplier
mz . I conclude that the value of the multiplier is probably better interpreted as a lower
bound than an unbiased estimate.
Because the movements in GDP and consumption induced by changes in government
purchases have essentially the same dynamics as the changes in purchases, it is not necessary (in fact, it is inefficient) to find the innovation in g and then track the response to the
7

innovation, as would occur in a vector autoregression. The advantage of a VAR is that it can
account for other influences, notably taxes, and isolate the causal effect of government purchases. The simple regression considered here confounds the effects of wartime increases in
purchases with the effects of accompanying tax increases. Temporary increases in purchases
for stimulus purposes are not accompanied by comparable tax increases. I discuss evidence
from VARs later in this section.
To form the differences in the data, I use the various versions of Table 1.1.6, Real Gross
Domestic Product, Chained Dollars, in the National Income and Product Accounts. Each
version of the table uses a different base year for the deflator. For the overlap years, I take the
average of the two measures of the two changes; these are usually identical to two figures.
I use this approach because the deflator for military spending drifts relative to the GDP
deflator and I wish to retain the usual interpretation of the multiplier as the effect of one
current dollar of purchases on GDP, also measured in current dollars.
Table 1 shows the results of the regressions for output and consumption. The top line
of the table shows that, over the entire sample, 1928 through 2008, the output multiplier is
just over a half, with a standard error of 0.08, and the consumption multiplier is close to
zero, though slightly negative, with a standard error of 0.03. The higher precision of the
consumption multiplier arises because the change in consumption has a much lower volatility
than does the change in real GDP.
As I noted earlier, estimates of the multiplier that include the huge changes in military
spending during World War II are biased downward because important parts of the economy
were run on command principles during the war. Direct controls on consumption through
rationing arguably held back consumption growth that would have occurred under freemarket conditions. Other factors, including the draft and the wartime surge in patriotism,
result in an upward bias. Although I am inclined to believe that the net bias is downward,
there is no solid evidence about the bias.
The other rows in Table 1 show the evidence from sub-periods. The second row starts the
sample in 1948, after the rise and fall of military purchases during the war. The multiplier
estimates are similar, but with much larger standard errors. The confidence interval for
the output multiplier runs from about zero to about one. The confidence interval for the
consumption multiplier remains fairly tightly concentrated near zero.
The third row of the table starts the sample in 1960, after the Korean War. It shows that

8

0

Period

GDP multiplier

Consumption
multiplier

1930-2008

0.55
(0.08)

-0.05
(0.03)

1948-2008

0.47
(0.28)

-0.12
(0.10)

1960-2008

0.13
(0.65)

-0.09
(0.29)

1939-1948

0.53
(0.07)

-0.05
(0.02)

1949-1955

0.48
(0.56)

-0.18
(0.05)

1939-1944

0.36
(0.10)

-0.11
(0.03)

1945-1949

0.39
(0.08)

-0.04
(0.05)

0
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6

Table 1: Estimates of Output and Consumption Multipliers for Military Spending

9

military spending did not move enough during the Vietnam war, the Reagan buildup, or the
two wars in Iraq, to identify the multipliers. The estimates are fully consistent with those
in the first two rows but are almost completely uninformative about the output multiplier.
They do rule out larger positive or negative values of the consumption multiplier.
The fourth row reinforces the message of the earlier rows by showing that the results for
just the period enclosing the World War II expansion and contraction of military spending
are virtually identical to those for the whole period—essentially all the identifying power
comes from the large movements during World War II.
The fifth row looks at the years enclosing the Korean War. The estimates ares similar
to those found for periods including World War II, but have much larger standard errors,
especially for the output multiplier.
The last two rows of Table 1 break World War II into its expansion phase, ending in 1944,
and a phase containing the military contraction and the resumption of normal economic
conditions, from 1945 to 1949. One of the strengths of the parsimonious specification I use
is its ability to deliver useful results with a small number of observations. The results are
interesting because many economists—most recently Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo
(2009)—believe that the multiplier is higher when the economy is slack. The U.S. economy
was extremely slack in 1939, the first year of the expansion phase in the table. The results
here give no support to the view of higher multipliers in a slack economy. The downward
multipliers found for the period from 1945 to 1949 are virtually identical to those for the
expansion from slack starting in 1939. Both are measured with good precision.
Barro and Redlick (2009) consider similar evidence in a regression framework that includes tax rates and other determinants of GDP along with government purchases. They
use data starting in 1917 and so take advantage of World War I as another period when the
military component of purchases rose dramatically. Their estimates of the output multiplier
lie in the range from 0.59 to 0.77; the estimate for all data starting in 1917 is 0.64 with
a standard error of 0.10. Their estimates of the consumption multiplier are close to zero.
They do not report results without tax variables, but it appears that their inclusion somewhat increases estimates of the multipliers. Thus tax increases with negative effects tend to
coincide with increases in government purchases.
The most important lesson from the data on military purchases is that all the real information comes from big wars. The standard errors in Table 1 reflect this fact. They blow

10

up when the big wars are omitted. Another way to see the point is to observe that the
regression coefficient is
mz

P
∆zt ∆gt
= Pt
2
τ (∆gτ )
P ∆zt
2
t ∆gt (∆gτ )
=
P
2
τ (∆gτ )
X ∆zt
=
wt
.
∆g
t
t

(2)
(3)

Here ∆zt is the change in real GDP or consumption as a fraction of earlier real GDP less
its mean and ∆gt is the change in military purchases as a fraction of GDP less its mean.
Thus the overall estimate of the multiplier is a weighted average of year-to-year observed
multipliers, where the weights wt depend on the squared values of the growth in military
purchases.
Figure 1 shows the weights calculated from the data on military purchases and real GDP.
The only visibly positive weights are for the two wars. Between the two, World War II is
vastly more informative. There is little hope of learning much about the multipliers from any
data after the mid-1950s. Note that the weights are the same for the output and consumption
multipliers.
I conclude that the regression evidence from big wars demonstrates that the government
purchases multiplier is probably at least 0.5, based on the hypothesis that the net effect of
biases is downward. World War II does not yield a higher estimate of the multiplier than
does the Korean war, despite the fact that the buildup starting in 1940 was from a much
more slack economy than was the one starting in 1950. Possible explanations for the failure
to find the expected relation between initial slack and the multiplier include more aggressive
command interventions in the earlier mobilization and the fact that World War II involved
enormous expansions in motor vehicles, ships, and aircraft, all highly specialized industries
with bottlenecks.

2.2

Estimates of multipliers from vector autoregressions

Vector autoregressions or VARs are a more powerful approach to measuring multipliers,
in principle. The regressions in the previous section take all the movements in real GDP
and consumption not attributable to changes in government purchases as noise, captured
by the residual. Even if these movements arise from driving forces that are uncorrelated
11

0.40
0.35
0.30

Weight

0.25
0.20
0 15
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
1930 1935 1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

Figure 1: Weights Implicit in Regression Estimates of Output and Consumption Multipliers
with military purchases, so that the estimated multipliers are unbiased, the estimates have
high sampling error. A VAR can soak up much of the noise by associating it with other
causal factors. Thus the precision of the estimates can be higher in a VAR than in a simple
regression. Further, a VAR can take account of effects that are correlated with changes in
government purchases that result in biases in the simple regressions. Probably the main
effect of this type is the tax rate, though this correlation can be captured in a regression as
in Barro and Redlick (2009). By far the biggest increase in government purchases over the
sample included in VARs occurred during the Korean War, when tax rates also increased
substantially.
Blanchard and Perotti (2002), Galı́, López-Salido and Vallés (2007), Perotti (2007),
Mountford and Uhlig (2008), and Ramey (2008) estimate VARs subject to a variety of
identification schemes, all of which basically rely on the exogeneity of the movements of
government purchases. Blanchard and Perotti consider two versions of their VAR, one with
a deterministic trend and the other with a stochastic trend. Ramey estimates elasticities
rather than multipliers; I convert these to multipliers by dividing by the ratios of government
purchases to GDP and to consumption of nondurables and services. Ramey’s innovation is
to identify shocks to government purchases from events presaging rises in military spending,
12

Variable
Y=GDP,
C=Consumption
Blanchard-Perotti, stochastic trend

Galí, et al.

Multipliers and standard
errors (in parentheses)
Impact

Y

0.90

0.55

0.65

(0.30)

(0.60)

(1.20)

Y

0.41

0.31

0.68

(0.18)

(0.54)

(0.72)

C

Perotti

0.07

0.11

0.49

(0.05)

(0.14)

(0.21)

Y

0.70

1.00

1.20

(0.20)

(0.50)

(0.50)

C

Mountford-Uhlig

Ramey, restated from elasticities

After 4
After 8
quarters quarters

0.10

0.30

0.40

(0.05)

(0.20)

(0.25)

Y

0.65

0.27

-0.74

(0.39)

(0.78)

(1.95)

Y

0.30

0.50

0.90

(0.10)

(0.25)

(0.35)

0.02

-0.17

-0.09

C

Source

Table IV, p. 1347

Table 1, p. 233

Figure 3, p. 43

Table 4, p. 18

Figure 10a, p. 52

Figure 10b, p. 53

Note: Ramey estimates separate C multipliers for durables, non-durables, and services, so no standard errors
are available for total consumption.

Table 2: Estimates of Multipliers from Vector Autoregressions
which she weighted by the present value of the predicted increase in military purchases.
Table 2 shows the estimated multipliers for real GDP (Y) and in some cases consumption
(C) for the five studies at three points in time after an innovation in government purchases:
on impact, after 4 quarters, and after 8 quarters. None of the estimated output multipliers
is as high as one. They range from 0.90 to −0.74. The variation arises from differences in
the identification strategies. Perotti and Galı́ and co-authors find consumption multipliers
as high as 0.49, while Ramey’s estimates are slightly positive or negative. The difference
arises from her identification strategy based on the time when a military expansion became
likely rather than the other authors’ use of the innovation in all government purchases.
The standard errors shown in parentheses indicate the wide range of uncertainty in the
responses, especially at longer lags. Note that all of these studies use the same data, so that
their estimated coefficients are highly correlated with each other. The standard errors are
indicative of the overall uncertainty from VARs—they would not be smaller for an average
across the various estimates.
One important difference between the earlier VAR estimates and the question pursued
13

in this paper is that government purchases rose very persistently in response to innovations,
over the period from 1948 to the present. The Korean War was the exception to the general
rule that military spending is transitory, as military spending remained high after the end
of that war because of the intensification of the Cold War. By contrast, the increase in
government purchases to offset a recession is intended to be transitory.

2.3

Conclusions on regression and VAR estimates of multipliers

Empirical work using simple regressions or more elaborate VARs finds output multipliers
in the range from 0.5 to 1.0, with a few exceptions, and consumption multipliers in the
range from somewhat negative to 0.5. All the empirical work is limited in its ability to
measure multipliers for the period from 1948 onward by the lack of variation in government
purchases, especially in the most exogenous component, military purchases. Figure 1 shows
that essentially all the information comes from the Korean War. The regressions and the
VARs infer the multipliers entirely or mainly from the rise in military spending starting in
1950 and in 1940 (regressions only) and the VARs are probably only partially successful in
adjusting for taxes and other confounding forces. Thus one could not say that the evidence
rules out multipliers above 1.0.
For the rest of the paper, I will speak as if the evidence supports an output multiplier a bit
below one and a consumption multiplier a bit negative, as if the evidence spoke somewhat
clearly on this point. To avoid painful repetition, I will not comment each time on the
weakness of the evidence on this point.

3

Multipliers Derived from Structural Macro Models

Today, most research-oriented macroeconomic models combine, in varying proportions, ideas
from dynamic optimization. In the majority of these models, households choose consumption
to balance present against future satisfaction, according to the life-cycle-permanent-income
principle, though some households may face binding borrowing constraints. In almost all
models, firms choose inputs to maximize firm values, subject to the wage for labor and the
rental price for capital. In many models, firms are price-setting monopolists facing fairly but
not fully elastic demand. A popular assumption is that a firm keeps price at a constant level
for an extended period of random length, after which the price pops to its value-maximizing
level. Few modern macro models embody any monetary sector. Rather, consistent with
14

modern central-bank practice, the economy has a Taylor rule relating the interest rate to the
rate of inflation. Finally, models view households as having preferences that govern labor
supply, but may permit a varying gap between labor demand and labor supply, with a view
that the wage is sticky in the shorter run but clears the labor market in the longer run.
I omit consideration of macro models used in proprietary forecasting. I do not have access
to information about the underlying economic principles of those models. In particular, I
do not comment on the analysis in Romer and Bernstein (2009), which uses an average
of multipliers from “a leading private forecasting firm” and the Federal Reserve’s FRB/US
model (page 12). I do find that their fairly high estimate of the output multiplier is in line
with the findings of a model applied to conditions of 2009 with the federal funds rate at its
lower bound of zero.
The class of models favored by academic macroeconomists and many central banks has a
neoclassical growth model at its core. With prices adjusted frequently to value-maximizing
levels and wages adjusted frequently to market-clearing levels, the economy grows reasonably
smoothly along a full-employment path, with some volatility associated with changing rates
of productivity growth, changing levels of market power, changing preferences, and other
driving forces. A topic of intense debate is how much of the observed volatility of output
and employment would occur without price and wage stickiness.
Two recent developments in general-equilibrium macro are worth noting. First is the
development of coherent theories of unemployment, which are replacing over-simplified ideas
that unemployment is just the gap between labor supply and labor demand. Second is
the recognition that the models are missing truly important features of financial markets,
especially the widening of spreads between private interest rates and safe government rates
that occurs in a financial crisis and recession.
My discussion of macro models and their implications for the output multiplier for government purchases adheres to the general philosophy of the class of models sketched above.
I begin with the neoclassical growth-model core. A single equation from that model—the
first-order condition for balancing consumption of goods and services against work effort—
has played a huge role in the literature on government purchase multipliers over the past 30
years. When that equation is given its full role, as in a neoclassical model, the consumption
multiplier for government purchases is quite negative. Much of the history of commentary
on government purchase multipliers looks for alterations in the model that boost the con-

15

sumption multiplier toward zero or even above zero, in accord with the empirical studies
that do not generally find very negative values.
The consumption-work tradeoff is irrelevant in a sticky-wage model, because workers
can be off the labor-supply function implied by the first-order condition. But an otherwise
neoclassical model with a sticky wage cannot have much of an output multiplier or a nonnegative consumption multiplier, as I will show.

3.1

The neoclassical starting point

Suppose people have preferences described by the within-period utility function
c1−1/σ
h1+1/ψ
−γ
.
1 − 1/σ
1 + 1/ψ

(4)

Here σ describes the curvature of utility with respect to the consumption of goods and
services, c; it is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution and the reciprocal of the coefficient
of relative risk aversion. The parameter ψ describes the curvature of utility with respect to
the volume of work, h, and is the Frisch elasticity of labor supply. Finally, the parameter γ
controls the overall disamenity of work.
With the price of goods and services normalized at one and a real wage of w, the firstorder condition for the optimal mix of consumption and work is
wc−1/σ = γh1/ψ .

(5)

Under what conditions will an increase in government purchases (or any other source of
higher employment and output) actually raise work effort h? If work effort does rise, the
real wage must fall, given that the capital stock is a state variable whose level cannot change
immediately. For h to rise, the left side of the equation must rise, despite the fall in the real
wage. The only way for the product to fall is for c−1/σ to rise by a higher proportion than
the wage falls. This rise requires, in turn, that consumption falls.
Much of the history of formal macroeconomics of the past three decades rests on this issue.
Any driving force that raises product demand and thus employment and output must depress
consumption, contrary to the evidence and common sense. The real business cycle model
broke the conundrum by invoking a stimulus that raised wages—it took bursts of productivity
growth to be the driving force of employment fluctuations, rather than the changes in product
demand that had generally been taken as the primary driving forces in earlier macro models.
16

But the real business-cycle model implies that an increase in government purchases achieves
an increase in hours of work and output by depressing consumption through wealth and
intertemporal substitution effects. The model is fundamentally inconsistent with increasing
or constant consumption when government purchases rise.
Parameter values that alleviate but do not avoid the property of consumption declines
with higher government purchases are low values of intertemporal substitution, σ, and high
values of the elasticity of labor supply, ψ. Advocates of the real business-cycle model have
adopted the second enthusiastically, but have been less keen on low σ, because σ = 1 (log of
consumption) is needed to match the absence of a trend in hours of work as real wages have
risen. Another helpful feature of preferences is to introduce complementarity of consumption
and hours, but, again, this cannot deliver an increase in consumption along with an increase
in hours of work. I discuss complementarity in a later section.
To see how the basic marginal-rate-of-substitution condition limits the multiplier, consider the simplest static general-equilibrium model. The technology is Cobb-Douglas:
y = hα .

(6)

Capital is fixed and normalized at one. The real wage is the marginal product of labor:
w = αh−(1−α) .

(7)

Output splits between consumption and government purchases g:
y = c + g.

(8)

Combining the first-order condition from equation (5) and the two previous equations, I get
a single equation to describe general equilibrium:
(y − g)−1/σ =

γ 1+1/ψ −1
y α
.
α

(9)

It is convenient to normalize the model, without loss of generality, so that output is one at
a designated level of government purchases g. This implies
γ = α(1 − g)−1/σ .

(10)

Then the output multiplier is
my =

dy
α
=
.
dg
α + σ(1 − g)(1 − α + 1/ψ)
17

(11)

Because α ≤ 1 and ψ > 0, the conclusion follows, under the assumptions so far, that the
output multiplier cannot exceed one. Further, the multiplier is an increasing function of the
labor supply elasticity ψ, an increasing function of the labor elasticity of production, α, and
a decreasing function of the consumption curvature parameter σ. Conditions under which
the multiplier is close to one are (1) labor supply highly elastic (ψ large) and low diminishing
returns to labor (α close to one), (2) high curvature of utility in consumption (σ close to
zero), or (3) government purchases close to all of output (g close to one).
Because all output is either consumed or purchased by the government, the consumption
multiplier is simply the output multiplier less one. Thus, under the assumptions I have made
so far, the consumption multiplier is never positive.
Note that the expansion in output that occurs in this economy with an increase in
government purchases g results in a lower wage—employers would not be willing to increase
employment and lower the marginal product of labor if the cost of labor did not decline.
The parameter ψ controls the response of labor supply to the lower wage. A higher value of
ψ results in a larger decline in hours from the decrease in the wage, in the substitution sense
(ψ is exactly the Frisch wage elasticity of labor supply). The reason that a higher value of ψ
results in a larger increase in hours when g increases is the income effect, which also depends
on ψ. The consumption curvature parameter σ also enters the income effect. For parameters
that bring the multiplier close to one, the income effect is swamping the substitution effect.
Notice as well that the labor elasticity α enters the multiplier because it controls the wage
depression accompanying the increase in output. With α close to one, diminishing returns
are weak and the substitution effect correspondingly smaller, so the there is less offset to the
income effect.
The elasticity of the production function with respect to labor input, α, is widely believed
to be around 0.7. The critical (and controversial) parameter in the model is the Frisch wage
elasticity of labor supply, ψ. Empirical work with household data places the elasticity in
the range from 0.2 to 1.0 (see the appendix to Hall (2009)). With σ at the fairly standard
value of 0.5 and g at 0.2, the output multiplier is about 0.4, at the low end of the range
of empirical findings, and the consumption multiplier is −0.6, out of line with all of the
empirical evidence.
I will now consider a set of modifications of the model that improve its match to the
evidence. These incorporate (1) variations in the markup of price over cost, (2) unemploy-

18

ment, (3) complementarity of consumption and hours of work, and (4) a negative response
of investment to government purchases. The last modification requires moving to a dynamic
model.

3.2

Endogenous markup of price over cost

The neoclassical model assumes competition in output and labor markets. The New Keynesian branch of macroeconomics drops that assumption in favor of market power in product
markets and makes the extent of market power depend on the state of the economy. Forces,
such as higher government purchases, that expand output also make the economy more
competitive, with a lower markup of price over cost.
New Keynesian and many other macro models take the product price as sticky. In
a monetary economy, this hypothesis can take the form of a sticky nominal price level
combined with variations in factor prices. My approach is to continue to normalize the price
of output at one, so the implication of price stickiness is that factor prices are inside the
competitive factor-price frontier. Firms have market power. That power is high in slumps
and low in booms—markups are countercyclical. The relation between price stickiness and
countercyclical markups has been noted by many authors, notably Rotemberg and Woodford
(1992).
Sticky-price models generally derive the variable markup from the Calvo pricing model
and Dixit-Stiglitz-Spence preferences, but I will take it for now as a primitive feature of the
economy. I build this feature into the earlier model with a constant-elastic relation between
the markup and output: µ(y) = y −ω . I continue to normalize the reference level of output,
the point where I take the derivative for the multiplier, at one. Now the wage equals the
marginal revenue product of labor,
w=

1
y −ω

αh−(1−α) .

(12)

The multiplier becomes:
my =

α
dy
=
.
dg
α + σ(1 − g)[1 − (1 + ω)α + 1/ψ]

(13)

The more responsive the markup to output (the higher the value of ω), the higher the
multiplier. Further, the multiplier can now exceed one and thus the consumption multiplier
can be positive. The condition for an output multiplier above 1 is:
ω>

1 − α + 1/ψ
.
α
19

(14)

If ψ = 0.5, the markup elasticity ω needed to deliver an output multiplier of 1 is 3.3, far
above the plausible range. With ω = 0.5, the output multiplier is 0.5 and the consumption
multiplier is −0.5.

3.3

Unemployment and the employment function

Even today, many general-equilibrium macro models struggle to explain the volatility of employment without explicit consideration of unemployment. But good progress has occurred
in this area. Merz (1995) and Andolfatto (1996) introduced unemployment as described by
in Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) into otherwise neoclassical models. Blanchard and Galı́
(2007) did the same for the New Keynesian model. With a Nash wage bargain, the wage is
sufficiently flexible that fluctuations in driving forces of reasonable volatility cause almost no
movements of unemployment, as Shimer (2005) showed in an influential paper. BlanchardGalı́ introduced sticky, non-Nash wages to generate realistic unemployment volatility. Hall
(2009) developed a more general framework based on a broad family of bargaining solutions
and with standard preferences to replace the linear preferences in Mortensen-Pissarides.
My framework describes an employment function n(w, λ) giving the fraction of the labor
force employed (one minus the unemployment rate). Here w is the wage in the sense of
the marginal product of labor—the actual compensation paid to workers may differ because
of two-part pricing and wage smoothing. λ is the marginal utility of consumption. The
second argument arises because of the diminishing marginal rate of substitution between
consumption and work. A second function, h(w, λ) is the Frisch supply function for hours of
work per employed worker (not to be confused with hours per person, the variable considered
in models that disregard unemployment). I assume that an efficient relationship between
worker and employer results in the setting of hours on the basis of the marginal product of
labor and show that the assumption results in a reasonable account of the movements of hours
per employed worker. For the purposes of studying a transitory alteration in the economy
such as countercyclical government purchases, λ can be taken to be roughly constant, so
the functions becomes n(w) and h(w). Further, the size of the labor force does not change
significantly in response to the forces causing the business cycle, so I can standardize it at one
and write the total volume of work effort as n(w)h(w). This object replaces the labor-supply
function in a general-equilibrium model.
I take the Frisch elasticity of hours per employed worker—the elasticity of h(w)—to be

20

0.7, based on research surveyed in the appendix to Hall (2009). This elasticity is a cousin
of the compensated elasticity of labor supply and must be non-negative according to the
standard theory of household behavior. This elasticity is far below the level needed to
explain the observed volatility of total hours of work per person.
The employment function n(w) is not the result of household choice. Rather, as in the
Mortensen-Pissarides model, it is determined by the interaction of job-seekers and employers
in the labor market. If the marginal product of labor rises and compensation paid to workers
does not rise as much (compensation is sticky), then employers put more resources into
recruiting workers, the labor market tightens, and unemployment falls. Thus, with sticky
compensation, n(w) is an increasing function of the marginal product of labor, w. The
stickier compensation, the higher the elasticity. I find that the elasticity is 1.2 (Table 1,
page 300). Compensation is quite sticky—under a Nash bargain, the elasticity would be
only barely positive.
The elasticity of work effort n(w)h(w) is, accordingly, 1.9. The conclusion of this analysis
is that the use of a standard labor-supply specification with a fairly high elasticity, namely
1.9, properly captures both the lower elasticity of the choice of hours by employed workers and
the elasticity resulting from sticky compensation in a search and matching setup following
Mortensen and Pissarides. For almost 30 years, a chorus of criticism (including, I confess,
my voice) fell upon Kydland and Prescott (1982) and the proponents of general-equilibrium
macro models with elastic labor supply. Now it turns out that their specification fits neatly
into the Mortensen-Pissarides framework with Nash bargaining replaced by some other type
of bargaining that results in a sticky level of compensation.
With the Frisch wage elasticity ψ raised to 1.9, the output multiplier becomes 0.8 and
the consumption multiplier −0.2, an important step toward realism.

3.4

Consumption-work complementarity

Though the empirical finding of a somewhat negative consumption multiplier is hardly
new—see Hall (1986)—the model considered here so far yields consumption multipliers
that are rather more negative than those from empirical studies. One further ingredient,
consumption-work complementarity, helps to close the gap. Bilbiie (2009) shows that complementarity cannot turn the consumption multiplier positive in models without a negative
response of the markup to increases in output, but can bring it close to zero.

21

Christiano et al. (2009) discuss the role of complementarity in connection with variable
markups and provide a number of cites of earlier treatments of this subject for preferences
that assume a particular pattern of complementarity.
In the Frisch framework, as laid out in Hall (2009), complementarity means that the
level of goods and services consumption rises when the wage rises, with marginal utility held
constant. Equivalently, it means that the marginal utility of consumption rises when an
individual moves from non-work to work or when the individual works more hours. I have
not found any studies of the cross-effect in a Frisch system or in other representation of
preferences. But the subject of the dependence of consumption on work levels, with wealth
or marginal utility held constant, has been the subject of an extensive recent literature.
Aguiar and Hurst (2005) is a well-known study of the subject. The “retirement consumption
puzzle”—the drop in consumption of goods and services upon cessation of work—is resolved
nicely by complementarity. A retired person relies more on home production and less on
purchases in the market, given the availability of time previously devoted to work. The same
point applies to changes in consumption during a spell of unemployment, with the possibly
important difference that retirement is more likely to be a planned, expected event than is
unemployment. Some of the decline in consumption observed among the unemployed may
be the result of imperfect insurance and lack of liquid savings.
Hall and Milgrom (2008) set out a family of preferences with complementarity:
c1−1/σ
h1+1/ψ
− χc1−1/σ h1+1/ψ − γ
.
1 − 1/σ
1 + 1/ψ

(15)

Positive values of the parameter χ introduce an increase in the marginal utility of consumption c that depends on the level of hours of work h (provided, as I assume, σ < 1). I use
the following parameter values: σ = 0.4, ψ = 1.54, χ = 0.334 and γ = 1.1. The Frisch
elasticities for these parameter values are:
• Own-price elasticity of consumption: −0.5
• Wage elasticity of hours of work: 1.9
• Elasticity of consumption with respect to wage: 0.4
See the appendix to Hall (2009) for a discussion of the household-level evidence on the
own-price elasticity of consumption and the cross-elasticity. In the latter case, the evidence

22

relates to the decline in consumption that occurs at retirement or upon unemployment. Hall
and Milgrom show how to calculate the cross-elasticity to match the consumption decline.
With the negative of the elasticity of the markup, ω, at 0.5, the output multiplier is
0.97 and the consumption multiplier is −0.03, figures easily consistent with the empirical
evidence.

4

Dynamic model

The output multiplier is relatively high in the static model because of the income effect. In
a dynamic version of the model, the analog of the income effect is the wealth effect—when
people feel poorer because of current and future government purchases, they work harder.
When the program of purchases is transitory, as I assume throughout this paper, the wealth
effect can be much smaller than the corresponding static income effect. Put differently, the
wealth effect would be comparable to the static income effect if the increase in purchases
were permanent, but if the increase is transitory, people will smooth their work effort and
consumption. They accomplish the smoothing by investing less. The economy pays for
temporary government purchases by cutting investment rather than by increasing output,
so the output multiplier is smaller.

4.1

Investment

To incorporate the investment effect, one needs a dynamic model that characterizes the
investment process. I will use James Tobin’s now-standard approach, based on the distinction
between installed capital and newly produced investment goods. The price of installed capital
is q in units of investment goods, which I take to be the same as consumption goods, in a
one-sector model. The flow of investment equates the marginal benefit of investment, the
price q, to the marginal installation and acquisition cost, which I take to be linear in the
flow of investment as a fraction of the earlier capital stock:
qt = κ

kt − kt−1
+ 1.
kt−1

(16)

The parameter κ measures capital adjustment cost—if κ = 0, q is always 1 and there are
no adjustment costs. If κ is large, most fluctuations in the demand for capital are absorbed
by the price of installed capital, q, rather than causing changes in the amount of installed
capital. In that case, the decline in investment when government purchases increase will be
23

small and the earlier analysis of a static economy will yield a fairly accurate estimate of the
output and consumption multipliers.
Capital rents for the price
bt = qt−1 (rt + δ) − ∆qt .

(17)

The interest rate rt is the net marginal product of capital. Capital demand in period t equals
capital supply as determined in the previous period:
(1 − α)

yt
= kt−1 .
µbt

(18)

At the beginning of a period, the stock of installed capital is kt−1 ; people choose hours of
work ht . At the end of the period, output yt becomes available and is allocated to government
purchases gt , consumption ct , and investment, including adjustment cost, resulting in the
new capital stock, kt . The law of motion for capital is
kt +

κ (kt − kt−1 )2
= (1 − δ)kt−1 + yt − ct − gt .
2
kt−1

(19)

I continue to consider only a real model and to embody sticky prices in the form that
matters for my purposes, the countercyclical markup that a sticky product prices implies.
Worker-consumers order their paths of hours and goods consumption according to the
utility function in equation (15). The first-order condition for the optimal mix of consumption and work is:




wc−1/σ 1 − χ(1 − 1/σ)h1+1/ψ = h1/ψ −χ(1 + 1/ψ)c1−1/σ − γ .

(20)

The economy’s discounter is
mt,t+1 = β

−1/σ

1 − χ(1 − 1/σ)ht+1

−1/σ

1 − χ(1 − 1/σ)ht

ct+1
ct

1+1/ψ
1+1/ψ

.

(21)

The Euler equation for consumption is
(1 + rt+1 )mt,t+1 = 1.

(22)

Government purchases decline from an initial level g + barg with a rate of persistence of
φ:
gt = ḡ + gφt .
24

(23)

Parameters

Case
Base

σ,
consumption
curvature
0.4

ψ, labor
χ, complesupply
mentarity
elasticity

γ, labor
weight

κ, capital
ω, markup
adjustresponse
ment cost

1.54

0.334

1.103

8

0.7

Constant markup

0.4

1.54

0.334

1.103

8

0

No adjustment cost

0.4

1.54

0.334

1.103

0

0.7

No complementarity

0.5

1.9

0

1.102

8

0.7

Less elastic labor supply

0.4

0.5

0.334

0.617

8

0.7

Table 3: Parameter Values
Capital at the end of period T is required to be at the economy’s stationary level: kT = k ∗ .
For a reasonably large value of T , the result is very close to the infinite-horizon solution.
Variables requiring initial values in period 0 before the government purchases shock are
capital k0 , I use the value k0 = k ∗ .
I use the solution to the non-stochastic perfect-foresight model as a (close) approximation
to the impulse response of a stochastic model to an innovation in government purchases in
an AR(1) equation with persistence φ. I take T = 80 quarters or 20 years but the model has
the turnpike property that makes T essentially irrelevant to the results as long as it is more
than a decade.
I take the parameter κ that controls capital adjustment cost to be 8 at a quarterly rate,
corresponding to 2 at an annual rate, a representative value from the literature on this
subject.
Table 3 gives parameter values for the base case and for a number of variants, to illustrate
the roles of the various features added to the original neoclassical model. I picked the value of
the markup response parameter, ω = 0.7, to yield a reasonable value of the output multiplier.
All the other parameters are drawn as described earlier from my review of earlier research.
For the cases described in Table 3, Table 4 shows some of the properties of the dynamic
model in terms of the impulse response functions, comparable to those shown earlier for
the structural VAR results. The left pair of columns, labeled “Impact”, are the multipliers,
defined as the immediate effects of $1 increased government purchases on output, measured
as dollars of real GDP. In the base case, the multipliers are 0.98 for output and −0.03 for
25

Government purchases impulse responses
Impact

4 quarters later

0.68

Consumption
-0.02

-0.16

0.41

0.98

-0.03

No complementarity

0.92

Less elastic labor supply

0.40

8 quarters later

0.48

Consumption
-0.01

-0.12

0.28

-0.10

0.69

-0.02

0.48

-0.01

-0.15

0.65

-0.10

0.46

-0.07

-0.25

0.24

-0.21

0.13

-0.18

Case

Output

Base

0.98

Consumption
-0.03

Constant markup

0.60

No adjustment cost

Output

Output

Table 4: Impulse Responses
consumption. After 4 quarters, the effects decline to 0.68 for output and −0.02 for consumption and after 8 quarters, decline even further. Recall that the increase in government
purchases declines at a 30-percent annual rate, so much of the decline in the response is the
direct result of the decline in the stimulus from the extra purchases.
Eliminating the New Keynesian property of a markup ratio that declines with output and
replacing it with a constant markup of zero (dropping ω from 0.7 to 0) alters the responses
dramatically. The impact multipliers become 0.60 for output and −0.16 for consumption,
both low relative to the earlier evidence. Again these become even smaller as the impulse
dies out in 4 and 8 quarters.
On the other hand, removing adjustment costs for capital formation has essentially no
effect. The reason is simple. If the output multiplier is about one and the consumption
multiplier is zero, the effect of government purchases on investment must be about zero
(here the closed economy assumption is important). To put it differently, one effect of the
government purchases is to drive up the real interest rate and inhibit investment. The second
effect is the accelerator—investment increases because businesses add capacity to serve the
demand for more output. In the base case, the two effects offset each other. Because nothing
happens to investment when government purchases increase, adjustment costs are irrelevant
to their effect on other variables.
The fourth line of Table 4 shows that dropping complementarity of work and consumption
has a small downward effect on the output response and a larger downward effect on the
consumption response, pushing it into unrealistic territory. Thus complementarity—a feature
26

of household production and preferences well supported by recent research—helps to make
the model’s properties fit the data.
The bottom line of the table shows the overwhelming importance of elastic labor supply
(including the large part of the elasticity arising from unemployment) in bringing the model
into agreement with the data. Without labor elasticity, all the other features of the model,
including the price stickiness that accounts for the variable markup, leaves its output response
at about a third of the realistic value and its consumption response deeply negative. Although
I favor modeling the elastic response with a labor supply function, the New Keynesian
literature (not to mention its other Keynesian predecessors) speaks of the same response as
wage stickiness. Some of this distinction is only one of vocabulary, but I will show later that
a sticky wage does not result in as realistic a model as does elastic labor supply.

5

Other Issues

5.1

Is an analysis without consideration of the price level appropriate?

In most modern macro models, including all of the ones discussed later in Section 8, the
central bank intervenes in the economy to stabilize the price level or rate of inflation. Consequently, the bank’s policy rule is part of the model and the government purchases multipliers
depend on the rule. The more draconian the response to inflation, the lower the multipliers.
The analysis in this paper does not ignore this point, but puts it in the background—the
central bank’s policy rule is one of the determinants of the elasticity ω of the markup of
price over cost.
To explore the relation between the standard New Keynesian model and the reducedform approach taken in this paper, based on the negative response of the markup ratio to
output, I created a version of the New Keynesian model embodying all the same features
and parameters as the benchmark model just discussed, altered to include the Calvo (1983)
sticky-price specification, with a parameter θ, the quarterly probability that a price remains
fixed, and an elasticity of demand of  = 5 facing each producer whose price is sticky. The
model also includes a standard Taylor Rule governing the path of the price level in relation
to the interest rate. The online appendix to this paper gives a full description and code for
the model.
In the New Keynesian model, the sticky price is the fundamental source of variations in
27

Elasticity of
Consumption
markup ratio,
multiplier
ω

Price persistence,
θ

Output
multiplier

0.60

0.60

-0.21

0.06

0.70

0.62

-0.20

0.13

0.80

0.68

-0.18

0.29

0.89

0.95

-0.07

0.75

0.90

1.02

-0.04

0.84

0.95

1.60

0.20

1.24

Table 5: Price Persistence, Multipliers, and Markup Elasticity in the New Keynesian Model
the markup of price over cost—variations in the markup occur when firms are hit by demand
surprises that raise marginal cost during the time when the price is fixed. Marginal cost rises
because firms move up their short-run marginal cost functions and because the wage rises.
Many New Keynesian models invoke sticky wages as well as sticky prices, but I continue
to rely on a high wage elasticity to explain larger movements in employment in the face of
small changes in wages.
Table 5 reports the multipliers corresponding to varying degrees of price stickiness, as
controlled by the parameter θ, the probability that a price remains fixed in a given quarter.
A value of θ between 0.8 and 0.9 delivers an output multiplier in the range just below one
and a consumption multiplier only barely negative. The implied frequency of price change
is between 20 percent and 10 percent per quarter. Christiano et al. (2009) take θ to be 0.85.
I conclude that the reduced-form approach taken in this paper, based on a negative elasticity of the markup ratio with respect to output, provides a reasonable basis for inferring
the effects of changes in government purchases on output and consumption. From the perspective of the issues studied in this paper, it is not necessary to take separate stands on
the various ingredients of a nominal model, including the frequency of price adjustment and
the response of the central bank. What matters is the reduction in the markup when output
expands. The model here is compatible with any explanation for that negative relation,
including those that do not depend on sticky prices, such as Rotemberg and Saloner (1986).

28

5.2

The importance of the state of the economy

The output and consumption multipliers are derivatives of two endogenous variables with
respect to an exogenous shock. They are not fundamental structural parameters of the
economy, invariant to the state of the economy. Quite the contrary, the multipliers are
themselves endogenous. The state of the economy in 2009 is a perfect example. With
extreme slack in the economy and the federal funds rate at essentially zero, there are good
reasons to believe that the government purchases multipliers are higher than in normal times.
Christiano et al. (2009) find that the government-purchases multiplier in a New Keynesian
model becomes large when an economy hits the zero nominal interest bound. In a model
with an output multiplier of 0.9 in normal times, the multiplier rises to 3.9 when the nominal
interest rate hits the lower bound of zero and the central bank loses the ability to stimulate
the economy to avoid deflation.
In the simple New Keynesian model of the previous section, the central bank sets the
nominal interest rate according to a Taylor rule that increases the nominal interest rate
by 1.5 percentage points for each percent of inflation. At the zero bound, the coefficient
becomes zero. The output multiplier rises from 0.95 to 1.72 and the consumption multiplier
from -0.07 to 0.26.

5.3

The wealth effect

Much of the modern literature on multipliers takes the key difference between neoclassical
(RBC) models and traditional models to be a wealth effect on consumption. Galı́ et al.
(2007) (page 228, footnotes omitted) provides a clear statement of the standard view of the
difference between the two models:
The standard RBC and the textbook IS-LM models provide a stark example
of such differential qualitative predictions. The standard RBC model generally
predicts a decline in consumption in response to a rise in government purchases
of goods and services (henceforth, government spending, for short). In contrast,
the IS-LM model predicts that consumption should rise, hence amplifying the
effects of the expansion in government spending on output. Of course, the reason for the differential impact across those two models lies in how consumers are
assumed to behave in each case. The RBC model features infinitely-lived Ricardian households, whose consumption decisions at any point in time are based on
29

an intertemporal budget constraint. Ceteris paribus, an increase in government
spending lowers the present value of after-tax income, thus generating a negative wealth effect that induces a cut in consumption. By way of contrast, in the
IS-LM model consumers behave in a non-Ricardian fashion, with their consumption being a function of their current disposable income and not of their lifetime
resources. Accordingly, the implied effect of an increase in government spending
will depend critically on how the latter is financed, with the multiplier increasing
with the extent of deficit financing.
A related issue is that some critics of the use of temporary increases in government
purchases have argued that their effect is blunted by the public’s expectation of higher future
taxes. The model says the opposite—the expectation of higher future taxes lowers wealth,
stimulates work effort, and discourages consumption. The output multiplier is higher and
the consumption multiplier is more negative in a model with the wealth effect than without.
Other critics believe that the public is unaware of the future burden of higher government
purchases and are skeptical of stimulus estimates that include the wealth effect. To evaluate
this issue, I examined the response of the model with elastic labor supply and an elasticity of
the markup with respect to output, ω, of 0.6 to an immediate increase in purchases followed
by a decline at a rate of 30 percent per year. This model embodies the wealth effect. I
compared the multipliers in that model to those in an otherwise identical model in which
the increase in immediate purchases was paid back, so to speak, by a decrease in purchases
at the end of the solution period with the same present value. Recall that the immediate
increase is g, the persistence rate is φ, and the economy’s discount factor is β. The repayment
in the last period is
 T
1
g
.
(24)
β
1 − βφ
This alteration in the model lowers the output multiplier by 0.022 and makes the consumption
multiplier 0.001 points more negative. These changes are in the expected direction but are
trivial in magnitude. I conclude that it hardly matters whether the public anticipates future
taxes needed to finance a temporary increase in government purchases. Ricardian neutrality
is irrelevant in this respect.
This calculation also demonstrates the unimportance of the wealth effect for temporary
increases in government purchases. The standard view, quoted above, applies to permanent
increases but not to the type of temporary increase that occurs in a countercyclical stimulus.
30

6

Sticky wage

The results in the paper so far rely on what I have called “equilibrium sticky wages” Hall
(2005). The wage and volume of work is an equilibrium in the bargain between worker
and employer, but because the wage does not respond much to labor demand, when demand is strong, employers find it desirable to recruit more aggressively and these efforts
tighten the labor market and reduce unemployment. An earlier view of wage stickiness
rejects the equilibrium concept and supposes that the wage can be sticky in the sense of
preventing a worker-employer pair from achieving bilateral efficiency. Hall (2009) argues
that the disequilibrium sticky-wage view is unnecessary to an understanding of employment
fluctuations—equilibrium stickiness is enough. Here, on the contrary, I explore briefly the
implications of an extreme form of disequilibrium sticky wages, a fixed real wage. For a
discussion of the details of a different and less extreme form in New Keynesian models based
on Calvo wage-setting, see Fernández-Villaverde and Rubio-Ramı́rez (2009).
This version of the model differs from the earlier version in that the consumption-work
effort condition of equation (20) no longer holds and the wage w is now fixed at its stationary
value for the baseline level of government purchases. The effect is to make labor supply
infinitely elastic at the fixed wage, rather than fairly elastic around a wage determined by
wealth.
The fixed-wage model implies that the output and consumption multipliers are exactly
zero. Absent the markup response, this proposition follows directly from the observation
that firms hire up to the point that the marginal revenue product of capital equals the wage.
The response of the markup does not alter this proposition. Putting the markup response
into the profit-maximization condition for the firm’s choice of labor input and restating in
terms of labor input h1 and capital k0 yields what I call the extended labor demand function:
 1
1 1−α(1+ω)
h1 =
.
(25)
w
With k0 at its historical, pre-shock level, the only potentially endogenous variable here is


(1−α)(1+ω)
αk0

the wage. If it is fixed, labor input in the first post-shock period is also fixed, and so output
and consumption are fixed.
By contrast, in the baseline model of this paper, where the wage is endogenous, a change
in the wage can alter the levels of employment and output. Now comes the surprise—the
labor demand function extended to include the markup response, in the above equation,
31

Respon
nse (dollarrs per initiaal dollar o
of governm
ment
purchaases)

1.8

Fixed wage

1.6

1.4

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

Elastic labor supply

0.2

0.0
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79

Quarter

Figure 2: Impulse Response Functions for the Fixed-Wage Model and the Baseline Model
with Elastic Labor Supply
slopes upward !. In the base case, α = 0.7 and ω = 0.7, so 1 − α(1 + ω) = −0.19 and the
exponent on the wage in the extended labor demand is more than 5. The baseline model
gets its brisk response of employment and output from a small wage increase that stimulates
both demand and supply.
In the fixed-wage case, a high response does emerge once time goes by and the capital
stock expands, thus increasing labor demand. Figure 2 compares the impulse response
functions for the fixed-wage and baseline models. The fixed-wage response builds slowly
for an extended period. Output remains high even 15 years after the shock in government
purchases, many, many years after purchases have returned to normal.

7

Departures from the Life-Cycle Model of Consumption

One of Keynes’s contributions to macro theory was the consumption function, where current
consumption depends mainly on current income. As the life-cycle model became the standard
framework for thinking about consumption behavior, researchers developed hybrid models
in which some households have full access to capital markets, so they smooth consumption
32

according to the life-cycle principle, while others—those who would borrow if they could—
are constrained to consume current income. Despite a quarter of a century of research in this
framework, substantial disagreement prevails about the fraction of consumption governed by
the life-cycle model. Note that the issue is the fraction of consumption, not the fraction of
consumers. Given that more prosperous households are surely less likely to be constrained,
the fraction of constrained consumption is less than the fraction of constrained consumers.
To the extent that the factual premise of this paper holds—that the output response
to government purchases is robust and close to dollar for dollar, whereas the consumption
response is essentially zero—the idea that consumption responds mainly to current income
is completely unsupported. The reason is that the ratio of the consumption response to the
output response is the perfect instrumental variables estimator of the marginal propensity
to consume if a simple consumption function links output (income) and consumption. If
one took the evidence in Table 1 seriously, the marginal propensity to consume is slightly
negative and estimated with precision, provided at least the Korean war is included in the
sample. Obviously a negative MPC is profoundly inconsistent with the idea of a consumption
function, so the appropriate conclusion is that important forces other than current income
determine consumption, such as the forces implicit in the life-cycle model. Despite the
problems with inference based on the behavior of consumption during wars, I think the
hypothesis that current income has a large effect on consumption faces an uphill battle with
the data.

7.1

Consumption constraints in a general equilibrium model

The standard view of the government purchases multiplier—as expressed, for example, in the
quote from Galı́ and co-authors in the previous section—is that a Keynesian consumption
function delivers fairly high multipliers.
If the consumption function reflects borrowing constraints for the unemployed, some
alteration of the labor-supply part of the earlier model is needed—the notion of a constraint
takes labor income as exogenous, not partly the choice of the worker. The development of a
full model with heterogeneous households, some facing more limited choices than discussed
earlier, is beyond the scope of this paper. Instead, I will pair the consumption function with
another assumption of many Keynesian models, that of wage rigidity, as discussed in the
previous section. Employers choose total hours of work, h, to equate the marginal revenue

33

product of labor to the prescribed wage. I drop both the consumption Euler equation (22)
and the first-order condition for labor supply, equation (20) and replace them with a Solowstyle consumption function,
ct = (1 − s)yt

(26)

and the earlier assumption that the wage is a constant, w̄. For consistency with the other
results in this paper, I choose the saving rate s to be its stationary value in the neoclassical
model, just under 0.2. Note that this is the saving rate out of gross output and includes
depreciation, which is why it exceeds normal ideas about net saving out of income net of
depreciation.
The relevant equations from the earlier model are the equation for employment conditional on the wage w, equation (25), evaluated at w = w̄, and the law of motion of the
capital stock,
kt +

κ (kt − kt−1 )2
= (1 − δ)kt−1 + yt − ct − gt .
2
kt−1

(27)

The model behaves as a Solow growth model, converging to stationary values of output,
capital, and consumption, which I take to equal their values in the baseline model.
Figure 3 shows the impulse response functions for the consumption-function model. Because the model embodies a fixed wage, the immediate response of output and consumption
is zero. The responses build over time, but are not as strong as in the case of a fixed wage as
shown in Figure 2. Not surprisingly, the simple consumption function delivers a distinctly
positive consumption multiplier, not far below the output multiplier. The intertemporal
substitution response that depresses consumption in the model with life-cycle consumption
is absent.
The relation between this model and the simple expenditure model of the purchases
multiplier is easy to explain. The simple expenditure model takes investment as exogenous.
Letting i denote investment and neglecting time subscripts,
y=

i+g
,
s

(28)

the standard expenditure solution with multiplier my = 1/s. But this model makes investment endogenous—it declines when output rises. Government purchases crowd out investment in the consumption-function model. Because consumption has to rise by more than 80
percent of the increase in output, crowding out is severe in the presence of a consumption
function.
34

Respon
nse (dollarrs per initiaal dollar o
of governm
ment
purchaases)

1.0

0.9

0.8

Response of output to
government purchases
shock

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

Response of
consumption

0.1

0.0
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79

Quarter

Figure 3: Impulse Responses for the Fixed-Wage Model with Consumption Proportional to
Output
A number of investigations of the role of partial borrowing constraints, discussed in the
next section, suggest that they can increase the output multiplier under conditions different
from the model studied here, which is extreme. This model takes wages as fixed for 20 years
and it assumes that all consumption is tied to current income, contrary to the conclusions
of the literature on borrowing constraints.

8

Multipliers Inferred from New Keynesian Structural
Models

The term New Keynesian refers to the class of models combining a full treatment of the
production side of the economy, life-cycle consumption behavior, sticky wages, and markup
ratios that respond negatively to output increases because of sticky prices. Another name
often used for the class is dynamic stochastic general equilibrium or DSGE models. These
models are widely used in recent macroeconomic research, especially at central banks. Although the characterization of the effects of monetary policy has been the main use of New
Keynesian models, four studies have examined responses to government purchases.

35

Galı́ et al. (2007) consider a fairly standard New Keynesian model, with one non-standard
element: a fraction of consumers λ simply consume all their labor income rather than follow
the life-cycle principle. Although they also consider a competitive labor market with a
flexible wage, I will discuss only their results for a sticky wage, for the reasons discussed
earlier in this paper—a sticky wage appears to be essential to generate meaningfully positive
government purchases multipliers. Their results confirm this proposition. In their baseline
model, they take the quarterly persistence of the effect of the government purchases shock to
be 0.9, about the same as the annual persistence of 0.7 that I used earlier. At their preferred
value of the fraction of consumption subject to rule-of-thumb behavior, λ = 0.5, the output
multiplier on impact is 1.9 and the consumption multiplier is 1.0 (Figure 3, page 250). With
life-cycle consumption behavior, λ = 0, the output multiplier is 0.75 and the consumption
multiplier is slightly negative. Intermediate values of λ = 0 come close to matching the
consumption multipliers found in the VARs reviewed earlier in this paper.
López-Salido and Rabanal (2006) find similar results in a model based on a leading New
Keynesian model, that of Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005). With some consumption governed only by current income and the remainder by the life-cycle principle, the
impact output multiplier is just above two and the consumption multiplier just below two
(Figure 1, page 19). With the standard New Keynesian specification where all consumption
follows the life-cycle principle, the output multiplier is 1.0 and the consumption multiplier
is slightly negative.
Coenen and Straub (2005) study the Smets and Wouters (2003) New Keynesian model,
an outgrowth of the Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans model. They consider the original
model and one altered so that about a quarter of consumption tracks current income rather
than following the life-cycle principle. For the original model, the consumption multiplier is
−0.14 on impact and the output multiplier for government purchases is 0.68 (one plus the
consumption multiplier of −0.14 plus the investment multiplier of −0.18) (Figure 1, page
457). With an estimate that about a quarter of consumption is constrained, the consumption
multiplier is −0.05 on impact and the output multiplier for government purchases is 0.77
(one plus the consumption multiplier of −0.05 plus the investment multiplier of −0.18).
Cogan, Cwik, Taylor and Wieland (2009) also use the Smets-Wouters New Keynesian
model to measure the output multiplier. The model assumes that all consumption follows
the life-cycle principle. For the transitory burst of government purchases in the February

36

2009 stimulus bill, they find an output multiplier of about 0.6 (Figure 2, p. 12).
The four papers make similar assumptions about the single most important feature of
a model with respect to multipliers, the response of the markup ratio to increases in output. The first two illustrate the importance of the controversial issue of the fraction of
consumption governed by the life-cycle principle. Absent a substantial departure from the
life-cycle principle, the models agree that the output multiplier is between 0.6 and 1.0 and
that the consumption multiplier is around zero, values consistent with the regression and
VAR evidence.

9

Negative Response of the Markup Ratio to Output

Rotemberg and Woodford (1999) provide a complete discussion as of a decade ago of the
many empirical and theoretical issues relating to variations in the markup ratio.

9.1

Earlier research on cyclical changes in the markup

Research on variations in the price/marginal cost markup falls into two categories: (1) models
where alteration in competition are a driving force of the business cycle or are part of a driving
force, and (2) models where markups fall passively when output expands, because product
prices are sticky but some elements of cost are not. For the purposes of understanding the
effects of fiscal policy, the issue is the markup, not price stickiness itself. Thus both strands
of research are relevant to the issue of the output multiplier for government purchases. One
easy way to tell the two strands apart is to see if sticky prices are derived, as in case (1),
or assumed, as in case (2). From the perspective of the fiscal issue, it does not seem to
matter which way the model gets to the property of a countercyclical markup. Rotemberg
and Woodford (1999), page 1112-1129, survey this literature thoroughly.

9.2

Theoretical models with countercyclical markup

Rotemberg and Saloner (1986) launched the modern literature on the relation between competition and economic activity. The starting point is a model of oligopoly in which a collusive
high price is an equilibrium because rivals will revert to competition to punish a deviator
who tries to capture a large volume of sales by beating its rivals’ price for one period. The
potential deviator compares the immediate profit in one period with the present value of its
share of the collusive profit. Deviation is more likely when demand is temporarily strong, so
37

the immediate profit exceeds the present value. Some episodes in oligopolies seem to fit the
model.
Rotemberg and Woodford (1992) carried on the idea of a declining markup in a boom in
a general-equilibrium setting. Since the publication of their well-known paper, it has been
understood that a countercylclical markup was an important ingredient in models that take
demand fluctuations as a driving force.
Kimball (1995) provides an extensive discussion of the role of markup variation in a
sticky-price New Keynesian setting.
Bils (1989) developed a model of countercyclical markups based on customer loyalty.
In an expanding economy where customers are seeking suppliers of products they have not
previously consumed, sellers compete aggressively and customers enjoy low prices. Markups
are low. In a slump, customers buy from their established suppliers and do not look for
suppliers of new goods. Sellers respond by setting higher prices to reflect the less elastic
demand of their customer bases.
Edmond and Veldkamp (2009) consider the effect of changes in the distribution of income
over the business cycle. They conclude that booms are periods when income shifts toward
lower-income, higher-elasticity consumers, so that the optimal markups of sellers fall. To the
extent that increases in government purchases compress the distribution income in the same
way as other driving forces, this mechanism would support the assumption in this paper
about the negative relation between output and markups.

9.3

Empirical research on the cyclical movements of the markup
ratio

If the markup ratio falls in booms and rises in recessions, the share of income captured by
labor should rise in booms and fall in recessions, given that the markup adds to the income
of business owners. In other words, labor’s share should be procyclical. To formalize this
idea, note that marginal cost is
w
,
∂Y /∂L

(29)

where w is the wage, Y is output, and L is labor input. This relationship comes from the
envelope theorem property that a firm minimizing cost is indifferent among increases in any

38

of its inputs. Then the markup ratio, µ, is
µ =

p
w
∂Y /∂L

pY L ∂Y
wL Y ∂L
α
,
=
s

=

(30)
(31)

where α is the elasticity of output with respect to labor input and s is the share of labor
compensation wL in total revenue pY . If the elasticity α is constant—the Cobb-Douglas
production function—the intuition about the relation between labor’s share and the markup
is confirmed: a countercyclical markup requires a procyclical labor share.
To check this proposition against U.S. data, I create two series from BLS data. One is
the reciprocal of the BLS index of labor’s share (BLS series PRS84006173), which I call the
Cobb-Douglas index of the markup ratio. The other is the employment rate, 100 minus the
standard unemployment rate (BLS series LNS14000000). According to the simplest version
of the countercyclical markup hypothesis, the markup index should move in the opposite
direction from the employment rate—as employment grows in a boom, the markup index
should decline.
Figure 4 shows the two series. Though their relation is far from systematic, it is clear
that they tend to move in the same direction—booms are times when the markup index
rises along with employment and recessions are times when the markup index falls with
employment. To put it differently, business owners’ share of income does not fall in booms,
on account of lower markups, but rather their share rises. The two most recent expansions
are the leading examples of declining labor and rising business shares; the markup index
reached an all-time high at the most recent cycle peak at the end of 2007.
Figure 4 is only a first cut at testing the countercyclical markup hypothesis. Research
has focused on two factors omitted from the figure. One is the measurement of the share. In
the numerator of the share, wL, the appropriate measure of the wage is the marginal cost to
the firm of adding another hour of work. If the incremental hour are more expensive than
the average hour, the use of the average wage in the numerator will understate the true value
of labor’s share. If the understatement were the same in booms and slumps, it would not
affect the conclusion of the figure. But if the incidence of higher marginal wages is greater in
booms than in slumps, the properly calculated share would be less countercyclical than the
one based on the average wage and the Cobb-Douglas index would be less procyclical or it
39

1.04

Cobb‐Douglas Index of Markup Ratio (left scale)
107

0.99
102

0.94
97

0.89

92

E l
Employment
R
Rate
(right
( i h scale)
l )
0.84

87

1948 1953 1958 1963 1968 1973 1978 1983 1988 1993 1998 2003 2008

Figure 4: Cobb-Douglas Index of Markup Ratio and Employment Rate, 1948-2009
might even be countercyclical, as the hypothesis requires. Bils (1987) pursued this approach.
The second factor omitted from the figure is variation in the elasticity of the production
function, α. If the elasticity of substitution between labor and capital is less than one,
the elasticity falls if the labor/capital ratio rises—low substitution means that production
saturates in one input if that input rises relative to another. The markup ratio is the
elasticity divided by the share. If the elasticity falls more than in proportion to the share as
the economy expands, the true markup ratio could fall even though the Cobb-Douglas index
of the markup ratio rises. Nekarda and Ramey (2009) pursue this approach. They conclude
that the variation in the labor elasticity of the production function with an elasticity of
substitution of one-half is insufficient to deliver a countercyclical markup ratio.
Bils (1987) estimated the cyclical movements in the markup ratio by estimating the
changes in the marginal cost of labor and applying the envelope theorem to infer changes in
the marginal cost of output. He found that a larger fraction of workers are subject to the
50-percent overtime premium requirement of the Fair Labor Standards Act in booms than
in recessions. Given that employers could have avoided the increase in the marginal cost of
labor by using more of other factors, but did not, he inferred a corresponding increase in
the marginal cost of output. Then he found that prices are not as cyclical as marginal cost,
leading to the inference that the markup of price over marginal cost must shrink in booms

40

and widen in recessions. Nekarda and Ramey (2009) revisit Bils’s findings in much the
same framework, but with new, broader data and sufficient alterations to reverse the finding
in favor of procyclical markup ratios. They discuss evidence that the effective overtime
premium is not the statutory 50 percent that Bils used, but rather may be 25 percent.
They also question the definition of the business cycle that Bils employed. Extension from
manufacturing to the entire economy appears to be the most important factor distinguishing
their work from Bils’s.
The framework in Bils’s and Nekarda-Ramey’s work is robust in a number of important
ways. First, it makes no assumptions about the supply of capital services. The results apply
with any type or magnitude of capital adjustment costs and variable utilization of installed
capital—see Rotemberg and Woodford (1999), page 1079. Second, it applies for any type
of pricing, including customer pricing where the choice of the price depends on complicated
intertemporal factors. The price is taken as data. Customer pricing should be visible in
the data as higher profits and lower labor shares in slack markets, when firms are exploiting
their installed bases. Firms should forego profit in strong markets, when it pays to set low
prices to sign up new customers who will remain loyal when conditions weaken.
One important factor bearing on the measurement of cyclical fluctuations in markup
ratios has escaped empirical consideration so far, to my knowledge. Employers may smooth
wage payments to their workers, rather than paying a wage equal to current marginal revenue
product, as assumed in the research on the cyclical behavior of the wage share. Thomas and
Worrall (1988) is a representative model where employers insure workers against some of
the idiosyncratic risk of working for a particular firm. In their model, the wage payment
remains constant as long as it remains within the bargaining set of the worker and the firm.
For employment relationships with substantial match-specific capital, the wage can remain
constant despite large changes in demand for the firm’s products. The result is a substantial
bias in favor of a countercyclical labor share and thus procyclical markup ratio. Although
this issue is well understood, no good solution has appeared so far.
Pissarides (2009), surveys the literature on wage flexibility and finds a strong consensus
that the wages of newly hired workers are more sensitive to the business cycle than are the
wages of continuing workers. This finding supports the hypothesis of wage smoothing.
I conclude that the cyclical behavior of the labor share does not provide direct support
for the hypothesis of a countercyclical markup ratio. The simple Cobb-Douglas markup

41

ratio derived from the labor share is distinctly procyclical. Attempts to adjust it through
improved measurement of the marginal wage and through consideration of fluctuations in
the labor elasticity of the production function do not seem to deliver big enough adjustments
to overcome the procyclical character of the simple measure. In the absence of effective adjustments for wage smoothing, however, I believe the hypothesis of a countercyclical markup
ratio is still an open issue.

9.4

Indirect evidence on the cyclical behavior of the markup ratio

Bils and Kahn (2000) use inventory movements to shed light on the cyclical movements
of marginal cost. Earlier research, based on a fixed target ratio of inventories to sales,
had concluded that pro-cyclical inventory investment showed that marginal cost falls in
booms, else firms would schedule the investment during times when production was cheap,
in times of low output. The paper demonstrates that the movements of marginal cost
cannot be big enough to induce such rescheduling of production. It goes on to show that
countercyclical markups do alter inventory holding cost enough over the cycle to explain the
movements of inventories if the target inventory/sales ratio is itself sensitive to the holding
cost, given an extreme assumption about the cost of labor. The assumption is that all
of the procyclical movement of measured productivity is actually variation in work effort.
Under this assumption, labor becomes cheap in booms of the type that last occurred in the
early 1980s, in the recovery following the recession of 1981-82. Not only is that assumption
extreme, it is unverifiable. In any case it fails to account for the events of the following three
business cycles, when productivity rose during recessions. It strains credulity that people
were working harder than usual in the troughs of 1991, 2001, and today.
Research on the response of prices to cost increases has some bearing on the behavior of
the markup ratio. To the extent that prices remain fixed when costs rise, the markup ratio
falls. As I noted earlier, models incorporating the popular Calvo price-stickiness mechanism
have this property. Bils and Chang (2000) studied highly disaggregated prices. They found
stronger responses of prices to materials and fuel costs than to wages, productivity, and
output (taken as a measure of the position of the firm on its marginal cost schedule). The
weaker response to wages is consistent with wage smoothing, which introduces an error of
measurement. The quick response to certain categories of cost is inconsistent with the Calvo
model. Bils and Chang favor theories of price stickiness based on modern limit pricing

42

models, where firms deter entry of rivals by depressing the profits available to entrants.

10

Application to the Government Purchases Stimulus
of 2009

The stimulus measure passed in February 2009 included increases in federal purchases of
goods and services. The top row of Table 6 gives the CBO’s estimates for likely purchases
under the measure by fiscal year (October through September). The second row restates
the figures by calendar year, with equal spending within fiscal year by quarter. The third
row gives rough estimates of GDP for the three years 2009, 2010, and 2011, and the fourth
row states the stimulus purchases as percents of GDP. The fifth line shows the results of
inserting the fourth row into the model with the preferred parameter values—these are the
base-case values in Table 3 but with the markup-response parameter ω at the value of 1.29
to match the response in the New Keynesian model at the constant nominal interest rate of
zero that prevailed when the policy was adopted in February 2009. I substitute the fourth
row into the model in place of the exponentially declining pattern used in the earlier runs
of the model. This line shows the powerful anticipation effects in the model, based on the
assumption that, as of the beginning of 2009, decision makers believed that purchases of the
magnitude shown in the table would materialize in the three years. The purchases stimulus
raised GDP in 2009 by 1.10 percent, with further effects of 1.28 percent in 2010 and 0.70
percent in 2011. The model disputes the common view that the long ramp-up in purchases
will delay the effects of the stimulus until long after they would be most beneficial. Rather,
announcing future purchases delivers immediate stimulus. Back-loading is a desirable feature
of a stimulus program. All this according to a simple model that overlooks many potentially
important features of the economy. The calculations also rest critically on the projection
that the stimulus purchases will ramp down in 2011 and end in 2012, a proposition under
dispute.
The bottom two rows of Table 6 show the effects of an alternative front-loaded time
pattern of stimulus purchases. I assume, as in the earlier runs of the model, that a burst
of new purchases dies off at 30 percent per year, rather than rising in the second year.
Unlike the earlier runs, here the purchases go to zero in the fourth year, to make the policy
more comparable to the three-year horizon of the stimulus measure of February 2009. I
standardize the front-loaded policy to have the same total amount of purchases over the
43

2009

2010

2011

Sum

Stimulus purchases,
fiscal year

34.8

110.7

76.3

221.8

Stimulus purchases,
calendar year

62.5

102.1

57.2

221.8

13,700

14,043

14,604

Stimulus as a percent
of GDP

0.46

0.73

0.39

1.57

Effect on GDP,
percent

1.10

1.28

0.70

3.08

Front-loaded stimulus
as a percent of GDP

0.71

0.50

0.35

1.56

Effect on GDP,
percent

1.35

0.94

0.62

2.90

GDP

Table 6: Effects of Stimulus Measure of February 2009 and of an Alternative Front-Loaded
Measure with Equal Total Purchases
three years. The effect in 2009 is somewhat larger in the front-loaded case compared to the
actual back-loaded policy, but the sum of the effects on GDP of the front-loaded policy is
smaller than the sum for the actual policy. The model suggests that the much criticized slow
ramp-up of the stimulus was actually beneficial.
Table 6 makes it clear that the purchases component of the stimulus package passed in
February 2009 could not possibly have closed much of the shortfall of GDP from normal
levels. The shortfall is around $1.2 trillion for 2009. There is no conceivable multiplier that
could permit $62.5 billion of added purchases to close much of a gap of that magnitude.

11

Concluding Remarks

I am persuaded that GDP rises by roughly the amount of an increase in government purchases
and possibly rather more when monetary policy is passive because of the zero bound. I am
aware that neoclassical models have no hope of explaining such a high multiplier, even if
extended to include unemployment along the lines discussed in this paper. I am impressed by
the success of New Keynesian models in matching the observed multiplier, for the following
reason: The models were developed for rather different purposes and estimated using data
containing essentially no variation in government purchases.
44

Notwithstanding this success, I am concerned about the weak factual support for the
key mechanism underlying the New Keynesian explanation of the multiplier, the decline in
the markup ratio that accompanies an increase in output. The behavior of profit margins
suggests on its face that the markup ratio rises with output. The only plausible way for
falling markups to fit the data is a lot of wage smoothing. I think there is room for new
ideas outside the New Keynesian framework to explain the high value of the multiplier along
with other mysteries about aggregate economic behavior.

45

References
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst, “Consumption versus Expenditure,” Journal of Political
Economy, October 2005, 113 (5), pp. 919–948.
Andolfatto, David, “Business Cycles and Labor-Market Search,” American Economic Review, 1996, 86 (1), 112–132.
Barro, Robert J. and Charles J. Redlick, “Macroeconomic Effects from Government Purchases and Taxes,” September 2009. NBER Working Paper 15369.
Bilbiie, Florin O., “Non-Separable Preferences and Frisch Labor Supply: One Solution to a
Fiscal Policy Puzzle,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2009, Forthcoming.
Bils, Mark, “The Cyclical Behavior of Marginal Cost and Price,” American Economic
Review, December 1987, 77 (5), 838–855.
, “Pricing in a Customer Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1989,
104 (4), 699–718.
and James Kahn, “What Inventory Behavior Tells Us about Business Cycles,” American Economic Review, June 2000, 90 (3), 458–481.
and Yongsung Chang, “Understanding How Price Responds to Costs and Production,”
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, June 2000, 52, 33–78.
Blanchard, Olivier and Jordi Galı́, “Real Wage Rigidities and the New Keynesian Model,”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2007, 39 (1), 35–66.
and Roberto Perotti, “An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic Effects of
Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, November 2002, 117 (4), 1329–1369.
Calvo, Guillermo A., “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, September 1983, 12 (3), pp. 383–398.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans, “Nominal Rigidities
and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Jounal of Political Economy,
2005, 113 (1), 1–45.
46

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, “When Is the Government
Spending Multiplier Large,” 2009.
Coenen, Günter and Roland Straub, “Does Government Spending Crowd in Private Consumption? Theory and Empirical Evidence for the Euro Area,” International Finance,
2005, 8 (3), 435–470.
Cogan, John F., Tobias Cwik, John B. Taylor, and Volker Wieland, “New Keynesian versus
Old Keynesian Government Spending Multipliers,” February 2009. Hoover Institution,
Stanford University.
Edmond, Chris and Laura Veldkamp, “Income dispersion and counter-cyclical markups,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 2009, 56, 791–804.
Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús and Juan F. Rubio-Ramı́rez, “A Baseline DSGE Model,” October 2009. University of Pennsylvania.
Galı́, Jordi, J. David López-Salido, and Javier Vallés, “Understanding the Effects of Goernment Spending on Consumption,” Journal of the European Economic Association,
March 2007, 5 (1), 227–270.
Hall, Robert E., “The Role of Consumption in Economic Fluctuations,” in Robert J. Gordon,
ed., The American Business Cycle: Continuity and Change, University of Chicago Press
for the National Bureau of Economic Research 1986, pp. 237–55.
, “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,” American Economic
Review, March 2005, 95 (1), pp. 50–65.
, “Reconcilling Cyclical Movements in the Marginal Value of Time and the Marginal
Product of Labor,” Journal of Political Economy, April 2009, 117 (2), 281–323.
and Paul R. Milgrom, “The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the Wage Bargain,”
American Economic Review, September 2008, 98 (4), 1653–1674.
Kimball, Miles, “The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist Model,” Journal
of Money Credit and Banking, November, Part 2 1995, 27, 1241–1277.
Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott, “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,”
Econometrica, November 1982, 50 (6), 1345–1370.
47

López-Salido, J. David and Pau Rabanal, “Government Spending and Consumption-Hours
Preferences,” November 2006. Working Paper 02/2006, la Caixa, Barcelona.
Merz, Monika, “Search in the Labor Market and the Real Business Cycle,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 1995, 36 (2), pp. 269–300.
Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher Pissarides, “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 1994, 61 (0), 397–415.
Mountford, Andrew and Harald Uhlig, “What are the Effects of Fiscal Policy Shocks?,”
December 2008. NBER Working Paper 14551.
Nekarda, Christopher J. and Valerie A. Ramey, “The Cyclical Behavior of the Price-Cost
Markup,” July 2009. University of California, San Diego.
Perotti, Roberto, “In Search of the Transmission Mechanism of Fiscal Policy,” June 2007.
NBER Working Paper 13143.
Pissarides, Christopher A., “The Unemployment Volatility Puzzle: Is Wage Stickiness the
Answer?,” Econometrica, 2009. Forthcoming.
Ramey, Valerie A, “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: Its All in the Timing,”
September 2008. Department of Econoomics, UC San Diego.
Romer, Christina and Jared Bernstein, “The Job Impact of the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Plan,” January 2009. Available from otrans.3cdn.net.
Rotemberg, Julio J. and Garth Saloner, “A Supergame-Theoretic Model of Price Wars
during Booms,” American Economic Review, June 1986, 76 (3), 390–407.
and Michael Woodford, “Oligopolistic Pricing and the Effects of Aggregate Demand
on Economic Activity,” The Journal of Political Economy, December 1992, 100 (6),
1153–1207.
and

, “The Cyclical Behavior of Prices and Costs,” in John B. Taylor and Michael

Woodford, eds., Hanbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1B, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1999,
chapter 16, pp. 1051–1135.

48

Shimer, Robert, “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,”
American Economic Review, 2005, 95 (1), 24–49.
Smets, Frank and Raf Wouters, “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium
Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association, September
2003, 1 (5), 1123–1175.
Thomas, Jonathan and Tim Worrall, “Self-Enforcing Wage Contracts,” Review of Economic
Studies, October 1988, 55 (4), pp. 541–553.

49

