NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BANKING DEREGULATIONS, FINANCING CONSTRAINTS, AND FIRM ENTRY
SIZE
William Kerr
Ramana Nanda
Working Paper 15499
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15499

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2009

Comments are appreciated and can be sent to wkerr@hbs.edu and rnanda@hbs.edu. We thank Stefano
DellaVigna, an anonymous referee, and participants at the European Economic Association meetings
for their very helpful comments. The research in this paper was conducted while the authors were
Special Sworn Status researchers of the US Census Bureau at the Boston Census Research Data Center
(BRDC). Support for this research from NSF grant (ITR-0427889) is gratefully acknowledged. Research
results and conclusions expressed are our own and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Census
Bureau, the NSF, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by William Kerr and Ramana Nanda. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Banking Deregulations, Financing Constraints, and Firm Entry Size
William Kerr and Ramana Nanda
NBER Working Paper No. 15499
November 2009
JEL No. E44,G21,L26,L43,M13
ABSTRACT
We examine the effect of US branch banking deregulations on the entry size of new firms using micro-data
from the US Census Bureau. We find that the average entry size for startups did not change following
the deregulations. However, among firms that survived at least four years, a greater proportion of
firms entered either at their maximum size or closer to the maximum size in the first year. The magnitude
of these effects were small compared to the much larger changes in entry rates of small firms following
the reforms. Our results highlight that this large-scale entry at the extensive margin can obscure the
more subtle intensive margin effects of changes in financing constraints.

William Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu
Ramana Nanda
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 221
Boston
MA 02163
rnanda@hbs.edu

1

Introduction

Do changes in …nancing constraints for startups impact their entry sizes? Theoretical models like Evans and Jovanovic (1989) predict that …nancing constraints
should impact both the intensive margin of entry (i.e., the initial sizes of startups)
and the extensive margin (i.e., the number of new …rms). This proposed link
of credit access to initial …rm employment is further thought to a¤ect broader
product market traits. For example, Cabral and Mata (2003) argue that the evolution of the …rm size distribution is driven more by startup …nancing constraints
than by subsequent competition and selection among entrants. Michelacci and
Silva (2007) …nd that better …nancial access explains why local entrepreneurs
operate larger …rms than entrepreneurs migrating to a region.
This entry size prediction, however, has not been systematically tested with
micro-data on …rm entry sizes before and after a sharp change in local …nancial
conditions.

We use data from the US Census Bureau to examine entry sizes

before and after US branch banking deregulations. These reforms were enacted
across states at di¤erent times. Prior work documents the substantial e¤ects of
these deregulations on US product markets. They are linked to changes in entry
rates (Black and Strahan, 2002, Kerr and Nanda, 2009), the …rm size distribution
(Cetorelli and Strahan, 2006), the fragility of new entrants (Cetorelli, 2009),
and productivity/growth (Jayaratne and Strahan, 1996). Recent work further
associates these reforms with changes in crime rates (Garmaise and Moskowitz,
2008), racial discrimination (Levine et al., 2008), and similar outcomes.
Given this far-reaching bite, the US banking reforms are an ideal laboratory
for studying entry size e¤ects. This has yet to undertaken, however, with the
closest work being Cetorelli and Strahan’s (2006) investigation of changes in the
…rm size distribution within manufacturing.
declines.

They …nd that average …rm size

Our work complements theirs by analyzing startup entry sizes, as

opposed to average …rm size, and by including all sectors of the US economy.
Similarly, Kerr and Nanda (2009) examine the dynamics of …rm entry and exit
around the deregulations. They do not, however, study the intensive margin of
entry in detail. Most of our analyses below focus on the particular theoretical

1

prediction that better credit conditions allow startups to enter closer to their
optimal or mature size.

We are not aware of any other studies that evaluate

this prediction in the context of the US reforms or otherwise.
Prior to these reforms, US banks faced multiple restrictions on geographic
expansion both within and across states. The 1970s through the mid 1990s experienced a signi…cant liberalization in US banking regulations. First, intrastate
deregulations allowed banks to expand within the passing state if they were licensed to operate there.

This allowed for more competition in local banking

markets, in some cases breaking-up e¤ective monopolies that existed prior to
these liberalizations. Second, interstate deregulations allowed banks to acquire
branches in other states with which their home states had negotiated bilateral
agreements.

This class of reforms further reduced the monopoly power of local

banks and improved markets for corporate control.
Our evidence suggests that the US deregulations induced small changes in
startup entry sizes or none at all.

As a simple statistic, the average size of

entrants did not change after the reforms. This test, however, may be biased as
the average size metric is also in‡uenced by extensive margin changes. We thus
perform several tests using initial employment levels of …rms and their subsequent
employment growth to their size at maturity. These within-…rm comparisons,
motivated by models like Evans and Jovanovic (1989), are an attractive way to
model intensive margin e¤ects when extensive margin e¤ects are also occurring.
We …nd that among startups that survived for at least four years, a greater
fraction entered at their maximum size after interstate deregulations than around
the time of the reform. The remaining long-term entrants also entered closer to
their maximum sizes and reached their maximum sizes quicker. These changes,
however, are small in magnitude (e.g., a 2% increase in relative entry size) and
similar to conditions several years before the reforms.

Thus, while our inves-

tigation …nds evidence of the theoretical link between …nancing constraints and
entry size, the cumulative evidence suggests that the intensive margin channel is
relatively small. This is particularly true in comparison to the large changes following US deregulations measured on other economic dimensions noted above.1
1

Ardagna and Lusardi (2009, 2010) and Da Rin et al. (2009, 2010) undertake related

2

2

Data and Empirical Results

The Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) provides annual employments for
every private-sector US establishment with payroll from 1976 onwards.

Ap-

proximately four million establishments and 70 million employees are included
in the average year of our sample. The LBD’s complete accounting of very small
…rms across all sectors of the economy is very important for our analysis of entry
sizes following banking deregulations. The LBD assigns unique, time-invariant
identi…ers for each establishment that can be longitudinally tracked.

We use

these identi…ers to both identify new entrants and track their subsequent employment growth. We include in our sample the entry of new …rms but exclude
new facilities opened by multi-unit …rms. More than 400 thousand new establishments are opened each year in our sample, and about 80% of these startups.
Startups enter at smaller sizes than new establishments of existing …rms, averaging just six employees compared to 24 workers. Only 15% of startups enter with
more than ten employees, compared to 62% of new multi-unit facilities. Glaeser
and Kerr (2009) further describe entry patterns in the LBD.
We model the impact of the reforms using a format akin to event studies. We
include a series of indicator variables for the timings of both the intrastate and
interstate deregulations. We estimate the e¤ects of the two reforms jointly as
most states introduced both deregulations during our sample period. The statelevel timings are su¢ ciently di¤erent, however, that we obtain similar results
when treating each reform individually. Perhaps even more important for our
empirical design, one cannot predict the state-level timings of the reforms using
pre-existing entry traits.

Our indicator variables stretch ten years before and

after the associated deregulation. The end points include earlier and later years
than our 20-year window.

We omit the indicator for the …rst full year of the

deregulation, so that all e¤ects are measured relative to this year. Regressions
include state and year …xed e¤ects, cluster standard errors by state, and weight
states by their log 1977–1985 startup employment.

We …nd similar results

intensive margin exercises in their policy evaluations. Most other work regarding …nancing
constraints for entrepreneurship considers individual-level transitions (e.g., Nanda, 2008).

3

in unweighted regressions, and we have separately con…rmed that no state or
industry is overly in‡uential in the results reported below.2
Figure 1A graphs the log mean entry size of startups around the interstate
deregulations using this technique. The solid line provides point estimates, and
the dashed lines plot 95% con…dence intervals.

As the dependent variable is

measured in logs, coe¢ cients report the mean percentage change in the average
startup size for a forward or lagged year relative to the reform year. Leading into
the interstate reforms, there is perhaps a small upward trend in startup entry
size. Most years, however, are not statistically di¤erent from the reform year.
This pattern does not change signi…cantly after the interstate deregulations, and
mean entry sizes remain very similar to the time of the reform.
This null response for average entry size stands in sharp contrast to the e¤ect
of the interstate reforms on the extensive margin. Figure 1B demonstrates the
noticeable change after the interstate deregulations. Entry rates three years or
later after the reforms are at least 20% higher than at the time of the deregulation. This shift is also evident in comparison to the pre-period. Combined,
Figures 1A and 1B thus suggest that the interstate reforms acted upon states in
a timing that was not systematically related to pre-existing changes in entry sizes
or entry rates. The reforms, and their associated changes in …nancial conditions,
brought about extensive margin growth but not intensive margin adjustments.
Unreported coe¢ cients for intrastate deregulations do not exhibit meaningful
changes in either average entry size or entry counts.

As this null …nding for

intrastate reforms holds true for the other outcomes examined in this paper,
we only document the results from interstate reforms. We further discuss this
consistent, null e¤ect in the conclusions.
While a starting point, regressions examining average entrant size may be
biased for measuring intensive margin e¤ects. Average entry size is appropriate
when comparing entry sizes before and after the reforms for …rms that would have
2

The LBD is collected on March 1 of each year. We thus date reforms such that a passage
of the intrastate deregulations in 1987, for example, is coded as changing from zero to one in
1988. Thus, the forward one value may include a partial e¤ect from the reform. Following
Autor et al. (2007), we also include an interaction of the reforms with Economic Census years
to control for di¤erences in collection procedures.

4

entered regardless of deregulations. Figure 1B shows, however, large growth in
entrant counts after interstate deregulations, and we cannot distinguish which
…rms would have entered regardless of the reform. We are particularly worried
about induced entry at the lower end of the entrant size distribution. Smaller
…rms are also likely candidates for growth in entry size due to greater bank
access.
We therefore depart from prior work by considering within-…rm employment
patterns. Conditional on surviving four years, startup …rms enter on average at
60% of the maximum employment size they will achieve in the …rst four years.
This compares to approximately 70% for new facilities of multi-unit …rms. This
lower relative entry size for startups may directly re‡ect …nancing constraints on
the intensive margin, but the di¤erential may include other factors like increased
caution due to greater uncertainty or a noisy signal about entrepreneurial ability.
Theory suggests that relaxing …nancing constraints should lead …rms to enter
closer to their optimal size, and we examine whether entry employment sizes of
startups are closer to their maximum sizes following the reforms.
The advantage of this approach is that it can better isolate the e¤ect of
reforms on …rm entry size because it is less in‡uenced by changes in entrant
types. A disadvantage is that it conditions on startups that survive a certain
period. Thus, the longer the time frame used to measure maximum or mature
sizes of new entrants, the lower the share of entrants that can be analyzed.
Figures 2A and 2B describe these dynamics in greater detail.

Figure 2A

begins with cumulative failure rates of startups. The solid bars report traits of
the total sample, while the lighter bars report traits for manufacturing entrants.
While the latter sector represents less than 10% of entrants, many studies of
…nancing constraints focus on this sector. Over 20% of startups fail within their
…rst year (i.e., we only observe a single LBD record).

Approximately 50% of

entrants fail within four years of entry, and 70% fail by the tenth year.

We

select for our sample those entrant who survive four years or longer. This group
represents about 55% of all entrants.3
3
Failure rates are calculated over entrants from 1977 to 1986. Failure distributions are quite
similar across sectors. The most noticeable deviation is a higher fraction of services entrants

5

Figure 2B documents for these long-term entrants the fraction that reach
their maximum employment size in their …rst, second, third, and fourth years of
operation, respectively. Maximum employment is only calculated over the …rst
four years of the startup’s life to maintain a consistent window for each cohort
from 1977 to 1996. 37% of long-term entrants begin with the largest employment
they will obtain over their …rst four years of operation. Shares for the second and
third years are about 20%, while the fourth year share is 23%. Thus, substantial
heterogeneity exists in growth patterns. Manufacturing displays greater within…rm growth, with its initial share being the lowest among sectors at 28%. It is,
in fact, the only sector whose fourth year share is greater than the initial share.
This di¤erence may be important in comparing studies of entry sizes and growth
using manufacturing data to economy-wide studies.
We analyze the within-…rm growth in two steps. Figure 3 …rst plots the share
of long-term entrants by state-year that enter at their maximum size in the …rst
year around the interstate deregulations. Relative to the reform year, there is
a 1% to 3% higher share of entrants who start at their maximum size.

This

e¤ect is statistically signi…cant to a 10% level, and it is economically meaningful
to the average …rst year share of 37%. It suggests reduced …nancing constraints
allowed a greater share of …rms to enter at their optimal size. Weighing against
this conclusion, however, is that the increase after the reforms is comparable to
greater shares that existed prior to the reforms. While the reforms are associated
with a strong break in the downward trend evident, we cannot say whether this
trend would have continued absent the reforms. The structures that econometric
speci…cations place on this pre-trend will govern the extent to which an intensive
margin e¤ect is measured.
As a second step, Figures 4A and 4B consider within-…rm growth of longterm entrants who do not enter at their optimal sizes.

Panel A presents the

log ratio of entry size to maximum size, while Panel B considers the log time
required to reach the maximal size. These dependent variables are again means
by state-year.

The entry ratio pattern does suggest some growth in relative

who reach their tenth year of operation. We have con…rmed in unreported estimations that
similar results are obtained when conditioning on three-year or …ve-year survival.

6

entry size after the reform. The 2% gain in the entry size ratio is statistically
signi…cant through about seven years after the reform. The point estimates are
also mostly larger than pre-reform values, which are not statistically di¤erent
from the reform year. There is again, however, a trend leading into the reform
that moves in the opposite direction to the results. Panel B shows that longterm entrants obtain their maximum size faster after the reforms. This e¤ect,
however, is only in contrast to the rising trend in the time to achieve maximum
size that existed prior to the reform.4
The patterns documented in these …gures, as well as Figures 1 and 2, are representative of a wide range of speci…cations that we examined. Most importantly,
the outcomes are not due to unmodeled industry-level changes. We present our
results using state-year aggregates for transparency, but these …ndings are also
evident when using state-industry-year variation and removing industry trends.
We have also compared entrants in …nancially dependent sectors to those in non…nancially dependently sectors, and we again …nd limited di¤erences for changes
in entry size. The one dimension on which we …nd stronger e¤ects is to narrow
the sample more around smaller, growth-oriented …rms (e.g., entrants with fewer
than ten employees who are not at their optimal sizes).

3

Conclusions

We …nd limited evidence for intensive margin e¤ects following the US banking
deregulations.

No response is evident for intrastate reforms, and evidence for

growth in entry sizes after interstate reforms only exists when looking at within…rm employment patterns and growth to optimal sizes. These latter e¤ects are
interesting in that they are the margin most strongly predicted by theoretical
models of …nancing constraints. Even here, however, the results are not conclusive due to pre-period e¤ects of similar magnitude to the period after the reform.
Moreover, to the extent that intensive margin e¤ects do exist, they are relatively
4

As a rough calculation, the 2% higher entry size after the deregulations would have resulted
in at most 50,000 created jobs. Note, however, that this e¤ect is temporary as it relative to
optimal size reached by the …rm. Unreported estimations do not …nd any systematic changes
in optimal entrant size after the deregulations.

7

small in economic magnitude and ultimately swamped by the large changes in
entry rates.
As we noted in the introduction, a large body of research …nds substantial
product market e¤ects following the US deregulations using empirical approaches
more or less similar to our event study diagrams.

This large bite, extending

from the …rm size distribution to racial discrimination, suggests to us that the
US experience was an ideal candidate for looking for intensive margin changes.
The fact that we do not …nd stronger evidence in the data with our variety of
approaches leads us to conclude that entry size was not a very important channel
for how product markets were impacted by branch banking deregulations in the
US context. Many studies of US deregulations can be puzzled by why e¤ects are
evident after one class of deregulations versus another. Here, the bigger issue is
that neither reform greatly in‡uenced entrant size.
We hope that others will also study entry size e¤ects around other sharp
changes in …nancial conditions. Some aspects of the US experience have been
shown to be di¤erent than in other countries (e.g., incumbent …rm e¤ects).
While a variety of studies and techniques have documented entry rate changes
after …nancial reforms, more evidence on the intensive margin is required.

If

the limited response continues to hold relative to other dimensions, this will have
important implications for our models of …nancing constraints and entrepreneurship. It will also suggest that intensive margin changes are second-order for how
…nancial markets impact product markets.

References
[1] Ardagna, Silvia, and Annamaria Lusardi (2009). “Where Does Regulation
Hurt? Evidence From New Businesses Across Countries.” Harvard University Working Paper.
[2] Ardagna, Silvia, and Annamaria Lusardi (2010). “The E¤ect of Regulation on Entrepreneurship: Evidence Across Countries.”Journal of European
Economic Association, forthcoming.
[3] Autor, David, William Kerr, and Adriana Kugler (2007). “Does Employment Protection Reduce Productivity? Evidence from US States.”Economic
Journal, 117, 189-217.

8

[4] Black, Sandra, and Philip Strahan (2002). “Entrepreneurship and Bank
Credit Availability.” Journal of Finance, 57, 807-833.
[5] Cabral, Luis, and Jose Mata (2003). “On the Evolution of the Firm Size
Distribution.” American Economic Review, 93, 1075-1090.
[6] Cetorelli, Nicola (2008). “The Impact of Banking Market Structure on the
Life-cycle Dynamics of Non-Financial Industries.” Working Paper.
[7] Cetorelli, Nicola, and Philip Strahan (2006). “Finance as a Barrier to Entry:
Bank Competition and Industry Structure in Local U.S. Markets.”Journal
of Finance, 61, 437-461.
[8] Da Rin, Marco, Marina Di Giacomo, and Alessandro Sembenelli (2009).
“Entrepreneurship, Firm Entry, and the Taxation of Corporate Income:
Evidence from Europe.” CentER Working Paper.
[9] Da Rin, Marco, Marina Di Giacomo, and Alessandro Sembenelli (2010).
“Corporate Taxation, Firm Entry Rates, and Entrants’Size: Evidence from
Europe.” Journal of European Economic Association, forthcoming.
[10] Evans, David, and Boyan Jovanovic (1989). “An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice Under Liquidity Constraints.” Journal of Political Economy, 97, 808-827.
[11] Garmaise, Mark, and Tobias Moskowitz (2006). “Bank Mergers and Crime:
The Real and Social E¤ects of Bank Competition.”Journal of Finance, 61,
495-538.
[12] Glaeser, Edward, and William Kerr (2009). “Local Industrial Conditions
and Entrepreneurship: How Much of the Spatial Distribution Can We Explain?” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 18, 623-663.
[13] Jayaratne, Jith, and Phillip Strahan (1996). “The Finance-Growth Nexus:
Evidence from Bank Branch Deregulation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 639-670.
[14] Levine, Ross, Alexey Levkov, and Yona Rubinstein (2008). “Racial Discrimination and Competition.” NBER Working Paper 14273.
[15] Kerr, William, and Ramana Nanda (2009). “Democratizing Entry: Banking
Deregulations, Financing Constraints and Entrepreneurship.” Journal of
Financial Economics, 94, 124-149
[16] Michelacci, Claudio, and Olmo Silva (2007). “Why So Many Local Entrepreneurs?” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89:4, 615-633.
[17] Nanda, Ramana (2008). “Entrepreneurship and the Discipline of External
Finance.” Harvard Business School Working Paper.

9

Fig. 1. Startup entry sizes and counts around interstate reforms
The figures plot coefficients from regressions of log mean entry sizes and log entry counts on annual indicator variables for 10 years before and after US banking deregulations.
The end points include all earlier and later years. The indicator variable for the first full year of the reform is omitted, so that coefficients are measured relative to entry sizes and
entry rates in that year. State and year fixed effects are included in regressions. Underlying regressions jointly estimate dynamics for intrastate and interstate reforms, but only
the latter are reported. The interstate reforms are associated with large increases in entry rates but no substantial changes in mean entrant size. No effect is found on entry sizes or
entry counts after intrastate reforms. The dashed lines present 95% confidence intervals, with standard errors clustered by state.

1B: Log Entry Count
Log entry counts relative to reform year

Log mean entry size relative to reform year

1A: Log Mean Entrant Size
0.2

0.1

0.0

-0.1

-0.2

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3

-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10

-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1

Years relative to interstate deregulations

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10

Years relative to interstate deregulations

Fig. 2. Startup entry size and survival probabilities
The figures detail startup survival probabilities and entry sizes. Panel A plots the cumulative share of entrants who exit within a given year of operation or earlier. The black
lines are for the total sample; the lighter shaded lines are for manufacturing entrants. For example, approximately 50% of new firms exit within four years of entry. Panel B
selects entrants who survive to their fourth year of operation or beyond. For these entrants, we identify the year in which the firm achieved its maximum employment size during
its first four years of operation. 37% of all startups who will survive four years or longer enter at their largest employment levels; the fraction for manufacturing is 28%.

2B: Entrant Size Categories
Share of startups reaching max size in year

Cumulative share of entrants exiting by year

2A: Survival Probabilities
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1st Yr.

2nd

3rd

4th

5th

6th

Year of operation

7th

8th

9th

10th

40
35
30

Solid series is total sample,
gray series is manufacturing

25
20
15
10
5
0
Entry Yr.

Yr. 2
Yr. 3
Year of operation

Yr. 4

Fig. 3. Share of firms entering at max size around interstate reforms
See Figures 1 and 2. This figure plots coefficients from a regression of entry shares on indicator variables for before and after US banking deregulations. The dependent variable
is the fraction of new entrants who enter at the maximum size that they will achieve in their first four years of operation. The sample is restricted to entrants that survive four
years or longer. The period after the interstate reforms is associated with more long-term entrants entering at their maximum four-year size compared to the reform period. The
higher share is similar to the share that existed two years before the reform and earlier. No effects are evident for intrastate deregulations.

Share entering at max size relative to reform yr.

Share Entering At Max Size
0.10

0.05

0.00

-0.05
-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10

Years relative to interstate deregulations

Fig. 4. Startup entry conditions for growth firms around interstate reforms
See Figures 1 and 2. The figures plots coefficients from regressions of entry conditions for firms growing from their initial entry size on indicator variables for before and after
US banking deregulations. The dependent variable in Panel A is the log size of entry in the first year relative to the maximum size that will be achieved over four years. The
dependent variable in Panel B is the log time required to achieve this maximum size. The sample is restricted to entrants that survive four years or longer and those entrants that
did not enter at their maximum size in the first year. The period after the interstate reforms is associated with entry closer to maximum four-year sizes compared to the reform
period. Likewise, the time required to reach the maximum size decreases. Both effects, and especially growth time to max size, are comparable in economic magnitude to
conditions existing several years before the interstate reforms. No effects are evident for intrastate deregulations.

4b: Log Time from Entry to Max Size
Log time to max size relative to reform year

Log entry size ratio relative to reform year

4A: Entry Size Relative to Max Size
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00
-0.01
-0.02
-0.03
-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1

1

2

3

4

5

Years relative to interstate deregulations

6

7

8

9 10

0.04

0.02

0.00

-0.02

-0.04

-0.06

-0.08
-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1

1

2

3

4

5

Years relative to interstate deregulations

6

7

8

9 10

