NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FAMILY VIOLENCE AND FOOTBALL:
THE EFFECT OF UNEXPECTED EMOTIONAL CUES ON VIOLENT BEHAVIOR
David Card
Gordon Dahl
Working Paper 15497
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15497

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2009

This research was supported by a grant from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
(1R01HD056206-01A1). We are extremely grateful to Stefano DellaVigna, Botund Koszegi, and
Matthew Rabin for advice on an earlier draft, and to seminar participants at Claremont McKenna,
the Saint Louis Federal Reserve, SITE, UC Berkeley, UC Irvine, UC Santa Barbara, UC San Diego,
and the University of Stavanger Norway for comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by David Card and Gordon Dahl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Family Violence and Football: The Effect of Unexpected Emotional Cues on Violent Behavior
David Card and Gordon Dahl
NBER Working Paper No. 15497
November 2009
JEL No. D03
ABSTRACT
Family violence is a pervasive and costly problem, yet there is no consensus on how to interpret the
phenomenon of violence by one family member against another. Some analysts assume that violence
has an instrumental role in intra-family incentives. Others argue that violent episodes represent a loss
of control that the offender immediately regrets. In this paper we specify and test a behavioral model
of the latter form. Our key hypothesis is that negative emotional cues – benchmarked relative to a
rationally expected reference point – make a breakdown of control more likely. We test this hypothesis
using data on police reports of family violence on Sundays during the professional football season.
Controlling for location and time fixed effects, weather factors, the pre-game point spread, and the
size of the local viewing audience, we find that upset losses by the home team (losses in games that
the home team was predicted to win by more than 3 points) lead to an 8 percent increase in police
reports of at-home male-on-female intimate partner violence. There is no corresponding effect on
female-on-male violence. Consistent with the behavioral prediction that losses matter more than gains,
upset victories by the home team have (at most) a small dampening effect on family violence. We
also find that unexpected losses in highly salient or frustrating games have a 50% to 100% larger impact
on rates of family violence. The evidence that payoff-irrelevant events affect the rate of family violence
leads us to conclude that at least some fraction of family violence is better characterized as a breakdown
of control than as rationally directed instrumental violence.

David Card
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu
Gordon Dahl
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
gdahl@ucsd.edu

I. Introduction
Violence by men against their partners and children is one of the most common
yet perplexing forms of violent behavior. 1 Building on a rational choice perspective
(Becker, 1968), economists have interpreted family violence as instrumental behavior
(Chwe, 1990; Tauchen, Witte and Long, 1991; Bowlus and Seitz, 2006) or assumed that
men like to commit violence and women tolerate it in return for higher transfers (e.g.,
Aizer, forthcoming). 2 An alternative interpretation is that family violence represents
expressive behavior that is triggered when conflictual interactions escalate out of
control. 3 Recently, economists have developed models with a similar risk of breakdown
in rationality to explain present bias in inter-temporal consumption (Fudenberg and
Levine, 2004; Benhabib and Bisin, 2004), drug use by addicts (Bernheim and Rangel,
2004), and other failures of self-control (Loewenstein and O’Donohue, 2007). 4
In this paper we specify and test a simple behavioral model in which violence
arises when interactions between the members of conflict-prone families escalate to the
point of physical danger. Our key hypothesis is that the risk of violence is affected by the

1

The estimated number of physical assaults inflicted on adult women in the U.S. by their intimate partners
ranges from 2.5 to 4.5 million per year (Rand and Rennison, 2005): the implied risk of physical assault by
an intimate partner is on the order of 1 percent per year. Wilt and Olsen (1996) estimate that at least 5% of
all injured women treated at hospital emergency departments are victims of family violence. About onethird of female homicide victims are killed by their husband or partner (Fox and Zawitz, 2007).
2
Chwe (1990) presents a principal-agent model in which the agent (the male partner) does not directly
prefer violence. Tauchen Witte and Long (1991) and Bowlus and Seitz (2006) allow a positive preference
for abuse. Agency models of violence are similar in spirit to Dobash and Dobash’s (1979) “patriarchal”
model of the use of violence by men to control their partner and children. Farmer and Tiefenthaler (1997)
analyze a model similar to the one of Tauchen Witte and Long (1991). Bloch and Rao (2002) propose a
model of family violence as a credible signal to a woman’s family.
3
This interpretation of family violence is stressed in Straus, Gelles, and Steinmetz (1980), Gelles and
Straus (1988), and Straus, Gelles, and Smith (1990), who argue that the high rate of violent incidents
committed by women against men is inconsistent with simple instrumental theories.
4
Thaler and Shefrin (1981) present an early economic model that emphasizes issues of self-control. There
is an extensive psychology literature on “loss of control” or failure of self-regulation: see e.g., Baumeister,
Heatherton and Tice (1994) and Baumeister and Heatherton (1996).

1

gain-loss utility associated with salient emotional cues. 5 Specifically, we assume that
negative cues – based on realizations relative to expected outcomes – increase the risk of
violence. We test this hypothesis using police reports of family violence incidents on
Sundays during the regular season of the National Football League (NFL). We use a
Poisson regression framework to analyze National Incident Based Reporting System
(NIBRS) data from states that are home to six different NFL teams, focusing on the effect
of wins and losses of the home team on reported family violence incidents. Building on
Koszegi and Rabin (2006) we assume the reference point for the emotional cue
associated with the game outcome is the expected probability of a win, which we infer
from the pre-game Las Vegas point spread. 6
Our focus on the impact of professional football games is motivated by two
considerations. On the one hand, many fans feel a strong emotional attachment to local
NFL teams. Home games on Sunday afternoons typically attract a quarter of the
television audience in markets with a local NFL team. 7 Team affinity is reinforced by
extensive pre- and post-game coverage by local news and entertainment media. On the
other hand, the existence of a well-organized betting market allows us to infer the
expected outcome of each game. 8 Assuming that a game outcome is random, conditional

5

A number of previous studies have modeled the effect of external cues on choice behavior, including
Laibson (2001), Bernheim and Rangel (2004) and Ariely and Lowenstein (2005).
6
There is a growing empirical literature on reference point-driven behavior, including Camerer et al.
(1997), Crawford and Meng (2009), Genosove and Mayer (2001), Lutmer (2005), Mas (2006), Fehr and
Goette (2007), and Farber (2008). See DellaVigna (2009) for a comprehensive review.
7
In 2008, NFL Sunday football games were the highest-rated local programs in 88% of the market-weeks.
Nationally, the top 10 television programs for 18-49 year old men in 2008 were all NFL football games
(NFL and Nielsen Media Research, cited in Ground Report, January 7, 2009).
8
Football betting uses a point spread, rather than odds, to clear the betting market (see Levitt, 2004 for a
good description of the institutions involved). Previous research (e.g., Pankoff, 1968; Gandar et al., 1988)
has shown that the point spread is an unbiased (and relatively accurate) predictor of game outcomes, though
there is some evidence that the betting market is not fully efficient. See Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2004) for a
general discussion of betting and related markets, and Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2007) on the information
aggregating property of betting markets.

2

on the pre-game point spread, we can interpret any difference between the rate of family
violence following a win or loss as a causal effect of the outcome of the game.
Moreover, we can easily define the strength of the emotional cue associated with a win or
a loss in a given game.
Our empirical analysis points to four main conclusions. First, controlling for
location fixed effects, the pre-game point spread, seasonality and weather factors 9 , and
the size of the local viewing audience, we find that an “upset loss” by the home team (a
loss when the team was predicted to win by more than 3 points) leads to an 8 percent
increase in the number of police reports of at-home male-on-female intimate partner
violence. The spike in violence is concentrated in a narrow time window after the end of
the game. Second, consistent with the standard behavioral prediction that losses matter
more than gains (i.e., loss aversion) “upset wins” (a win when the team was expected to
lose by more than 3 points) have at most a small effect in reducing family violence. 10
Third, upset losses in more salient games (those involving a traditional rival, or occurring
when the home team is still in playoff contention) have a larger effect on the rate of
intimate partner violence, as do unexpected losses after games involving an unusual
number of sacks, turnovers, or penalties. Fourth, we find that NFL game outcomes have
little or no effect on police reports of female-on-male intimate partner violence. We also
find no significant effect on violence against children, though the low rate of policereported violence against children limits the power of this analysis. 11
9

The effect of weather on crime rates is documented in Jacob, Lefgren, and Moretti (2007). Simonsohn
(forthcoming) documents the effect of weather on the decision of what college to attend.
10
As discussed below, our model suggests that the most violence-prone families will avoid watching a
game together (or take other protective action) when a loss is likely. This behavior will reinforce the
asymmetric response to unexpected losses and unexpected wins.
11
In a recent paper Rees and Schnepel (2009) analyze the effect of upset and other wins and losses on
crime rates in college towns on days when there is a home game. Interestingly, they find that many types

3

Our estimate of the effect of unexpected losses in local football games on the rate
of violence against female partners is large: an 8 percent impact is comparable to the
effect of a hot day (over 80 degrees Fahrenheit), and is about one-fourth the magnitude of
the spike in violence on a major holiday like Thanksgiving or the Fourth of July. 12 The
strong impact of random external factors on the rate of family violence provides
compelling evidence that at least some portion of family violence arises through a
breakdown of control, rather than as instrumental behavior driven by purely rational
choice.
The next section presents a simple model of emotional cues and violence that
provides an interpretative framework for our empirical analysis. Section III describes the
NIBRS data on family violence incidents and the NFL data that we combine into an
estimation sample. Section IV presents our econometric model and our main estimation
results. We then discuss a number of extensions and robustness checks in Section V, and
conclude in Section VI with a discussion of our results.

II. A Simple Model of Emotional Cues and Family Violence
a. Basic Setup
In this section we present a simplified one-period model of the impact of external
emotional cues on observed rates of family violence. We combine ideas from the “family
conflict” paradigm in sociology (Straus, Gelles, and Steinmetz, 1980) with an hypothesis
about the effect of emotionally engaging external events, based on a gain-loss framework
of crimes are affected by both upset wins and upset losses, including assaults, vandalism, disorderly
conduct, and liquor-related offenses.
12
Vazquez, Stohr and Purkiss (2005) analyze NIBRS data for one state (Idaho) and show that intimate
partner violence rates are typically higher on holidays. We summarize our own investigation of the pattern
of family violence across different days of the year in Section VI below.

4

with a rational reference point (Koszegi and Rabin, 2006). As in Bernheim and Rangel’s
(2004) model of drug use, we assume that agents who are at risk of committing a violent
act can take action to avoid exposure to emotional cues that may trigger violence.
We focus on the risk of violence by an adult male with a female spouse or other
intimate partner. 13 For a given couple, we assume that the probability of a conflictual
interaction (a heated disagreement or argument) is q (0≤q≤1), and that q is distributed
across the population with distribution function F(q). We assume that with some
probability h ≥ 0 a conflictual interaction escalates to violence (i.e., the agent “loses
control”). Thus, for a given couple the probability of violence is qh.
The agent can choose whether or not to watch a locally televised NFL game. The
outcome of the game is a binary indicator y with p=P(y=1) representing the probability
of a home team victory. At the conclusion of the game an agent who has watched the
game experiences an emotional cue that depends on y−E[y] = y−p. We assume this cue
in turn affects the probability of losing control during a conflictual interaction. In
particular, we assume that
(1)

h = h0 − μ( y−p) ,

where μ is the gain-loss utility associated with the cue, with
μ( y−p) = α ( y−p) , y−p < 0
=

β ( y−p) , y−p > 0 ,

for positive constants α and β. Loss aversion predicts that α > β, i.e., that the marginal

13

Strictly speaking our model focuses on the risk of violent interactions between partners: the outcome of
such interactions could involve injuries to both partners. In our data (described below) about 80% of the
victims of intimate partner violence are women. A similar fraction of female victims is reported in the
National Crime Victimization Survey. We therefore discuss the model as if the primary agent is a potential
male perpetrator of family violence against his spouse or partner.

5

effect of a positive cue is smaller than the marginal effect of a negative cue. 14
Recognizing that y is binary, the implied probabilities of a loss of control are
(2)

hL = h0 + αp

if y=0 (a loss)

hW = h0 − β(1−p)

if y=1 (a win) .

The functions hL(p) and hW(p) are graphed in Figure 1. The upper line is the probability
of violence in the event of a loss. At p=0 a home-team loss is fully anticipated and there
is no emotional cue, so hL = h0. For any other p>0 a loss is “bad news”, with a stronger
negative cue the higher is p, implying that hL is increasing in p. The lower line in the
figure is the probability of violence in the event of a win. A win when p=0 is the “best
possible” news, leading the lowest probability of violence h0 − β. At higher values of p a
win is increasingly likely and the deviation of the risk of violence from the baseline rate
h0 is smaller. At p=1 a win is expected and there is no emotional cue so hW = h0. Notice
that when α > β, the gap between the risk of violence in the event of a win and the event
of a loss is increasing in p.
At the beginning of the period the agent has to decide whether to watch the game
(and be exposed to the emotional cue) or not. We assume the agent’s preferences do not
directly depend on the emotional cue, although he rationally anticipates the consequences
of a win or loss if he decides to watch the game. The expected utility of an agent of type
q for not watching the game, watching the home team win, and watching the home team
lose is
uj − qhjv

14

for j = 0 (not watching), W (a win), and L (a loss)

See Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler (1991) for an overview of the evidence of loss aversion in a variety
of contexts. In a review and synthesis of the literature on aggressive behavior or groups of spectators at a
sporting event, Branscombe and Wan (1992) discuss the possible effects of winning and losing on
aggression. They conclude the empirical findings in the literature are inconclusive.

6

where v>0 is the utility cost of a violent episode. 15 We assume that uW≥ u0≥ uL, and that
uW> uL, so the agent strictly prefers to watch a win rather than a loss.16 Combining the
expressions for expected utility with equation (2), the expected payoff of watching the
game (relative to not watching) is
(3)

G(p; q) = puW + (1−p) uL − u0 − (α−β)p(1−p)qv .

Note that if α=β the expected payoff from watching the game does not depend on the
agent’s type (q) or the cost of violence (v). In this “linear” case the increased risk of
violence in the event of a loss for an agent who decides to watch the game is just offset
by the decreased risk of violence in the event of a win. When a negative emotional cue
from a loss has a larger effect than the positive cue from a win, however, then the payoff
from watching is decreasing in q and v.
Inspection of equation (3) shows that an agent in a conflict-free relationship (q=0)
will watch the game if p> pc and not watch if p< pc, where
pc = [ u0 − uL ] / [uW − uL ] , with

0 ≤ pc< 1 .

Among the set of agents with some probability of a conflictual interaction, there is a
cutoff type q*(p), such that those with q≤ q*(p) will watch a game with a probability p of
a home-team victory and those with q> q*(p) will not. This cutoff is defined by
(4)

q*(p) = [ puW + (1−p) uL − u0 ] / (α−β)p(1−p)v.

The cutoff type has the properties that: (i) for p< pc, q*(p) = 0 (i.e., no types watch the

15

The cost of violence includes costs of harm to the partner as well as the risk of arrest. See Iyengar (2009)
for an interesting analysis of the effect of mandatory arrest laws, which require police to arrest the
perpetrator when called to a family violence incident.
16
As we show in Section III, below, the local television audience is larger for games that the home team is
more likely to win, so this appears to be a plausible assumption.

7

game); and (ii) for p> pc, q*(p) is strictly increasing in p. Thus, as the probability of a
home team victory increases, men with a higher risk of violence are drawn to watch the
game. 17
In our empirical analysis we compare the effects of wins and losses on the rate of
family violence, controlling for the probability p of a home-team victory. In the event of
a loss the probability of a violent episode is
(h0+αp)q

for agents with q≤ q*(p) who watched ,

h0q

for agents with q > q*(p) who did not watch.

In the event of a home team win, on the other hand, the risk of violence is:
(h0−β(1−p))q
h0q

for agents with q≤ q*(p) who watched,
for agents with q> q*(p) who did not watch.

Thus the difference in the expected rate of violence following a loss, relative to a win, is
(5)

Δ(risk | p) = [ β + (α−β) p] ∫

q*(p)
q dF(q) .
0

Assuming that α > β this expression is increasing in p for two reasons. First, as shown in
Figure 1, for those who watch the game the deviation in the predicted rate of violence
between a loss and a win is increasing in p. Second, when p is higher more men – and in
particular more men in more conflict-prone relationships – will watch the game.

b. Testing the Model
Our model predicts there will be a higher rate of family violence following a
17

Another interpretation is that when p is low, the partners and children of higher-risk men leave the home
or take other defensive actions. Data on the numbers of male and female viewers for a subset of the NFL
games in our sample suggest that the relative fraction of female viewers is unaffected by the probability of
a home team victory, inferred from the point spread. Gender-specific viewing data are only available for a
subset of media markets, however, so the sample is relatively small.

8

home team loss than a home team victory. The maximum relative effect is predicted for
an “upset” loss (a loss when the home team had a high probability of victory). The
predicted relative effect of loss when the home team was very likely to lose – or
equivalently, the relative effect of an “upset win” – is smaller, both because of lossaversion in the gain-loss function that generates the emotional cue of a game outcome,
and because we expect relatively risk-prone agents to avoid watching a game when the
likelihood of a loss is high.
We test these predictions using a Poisson model for the number of police-reported
episodes of family violence in a set of cities, towns, and municipalities in states with a
“home” NFL team. To keep the analysis as simple as possible we limit attention to
violence reports on Sundays during the fall regular NFL season. As discussed in more
detail below we classify games based on the Las Vegas point spread into three categories:
home team likely to win, opposing team likely to win, or a game expected to be close.
We then fit models that include the full set of interactions between the ex ante
classification and whether the game was a won or lost by the home team (3×2=6
categories), treating the non-game days (i.e., a day where the home team is has a bye
week or is playing on another day of the week) as the base case. (We also fit a model
with a polynomial in the point spread, interacted with the game outcome.)
Our key identification assumption is that the outcome of the game is random,
conditional on the information contained in the Las Vegas spread. Under this
assumption, we can interpret any difference between the rate of family violence
following a win or loss conditional on the pre-game spread as a causal effect of the
outcome of the game itself. As in a classical randomized controlled trial, the assumption

9

that the game outcome is “as good as random” conditional on the spread has the
prediction that one should obtain the same effect of the game outcome, regardless of
whether we condition on other control variables or not. As we show, this is in fact the
case: although other factors, such as the weather, have a significant effect on the rate of
family violence, our estimates of the effect of the game outcome, conditional on the range
of the point spread, are quite stable.

III. Data Sources and Sample Construction
a. Measuring Family Violence: NIBRS Data on Police-Reported Violence
Our empirical analysis is based on police reports of family violence in the
National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS). Incidents in the NIBRS system are
reports of crime to individual police agencies.18 A report does not have to be associated
with an arrest to be included in NIBRS. 19 Each incident report includes information on
the victim (age, gender, etc.), the offender (gender, relationship to the victim), and the
nature of the incident (including date, time of day, location, and whether the victim was
injured).
NIBRS has several advantages as a source of information on family violence.
Most importantly for our purposes, it represents the universe of family violence incidents
recorded by a given agency, with information on the date and time of day of the incident.
Since family violence is relatively rare, a complete count is needed to accurately study
crime rates on specific days in specific locations. NIBRS incident reports are also

18

We analyze incident reports for city and county agencies, and exclude college, state police, and special
agencies.
19
About half of family assaults in the NIBRS result in an arrest (Durose et al, 2005; Hirschel, 2008).
Direct arrests by police officers with no intervening report of a crime are also included in NIBRS.

10

collected in real time, so the information on the date and time of the incident is relatively
precise. In contrast, most other sources of information on family violence are based on
recall of occurrences over the previous month or year, and cannot be used to measure
daily crime rates.
A limitation of NIBRS is that it only includes police-reported family violence. 20
Nevertheless, a comparison of the implied rate of intimate partner violence (IPV)
experienced by women age 18-54 in the NIBRS to the rate in the 1995 National Violence
Against Women Survey (NVAWS) suggests that NIBRS captures a relatively high
fraction of serious violence – episodes that would be classified as assault (either simple or
aggravated assault) or intimidation. Specifically, we calculated that the implied annual
risk of IPV is approximately 1.6 % per year in the 2000 NIBRS, versus 1.3 % per year
(for assaults and intimidation) in the NVAWS (1995-96). 21
A second limitation of the NIBRS data is that participation by individual police
agencies is voluntary. Although participation rates have risen steadily over the past 15
years, many states still have no agencies in the program, including California, Illinois,
and New York. Moreover, in some participating states only a fraction of police agencies
report to NIBRS. Typically the largest cities in a state are absent, at least in early years
of the sample. As a result of these features, the total fraction of the U.S. population
covered by NIBRS was only 4% in 1995, but rises to approximately 25% by 2006.
Table 1 provides summary statistics for IPV incidents in the NIBRS dataset. IPV
20

Among adult female respondents to the National Crime Victimization Survey who report being a victim
of assault by their spouse or partner, only about 55% report that the incident was reported to police (Durose
et al., 2005).
21
Using a variety of published data sources, we calculated the incidence rates for violence by an intimate
partner against women, aged 18-54. For the NIBRS, we inflated the number of incidents for which
information on the identity of the perpetrator is available, assuming information is missing at random.
NIBRS data for available agencies were inflated to the national level.

11

is defined by the type of crime and the relationship of the victim and offender. Our
measure of violence includes simple assault, aggravated assault, and intimidation. Our
definition of an intimate partner is a spouse (including a common-law or ex-spouse) or
boyfriend/girlfriend. Our main dependent variable in the empirical analysis is at-home
male-on-female IPV occurring between the hours of 12 PM and midnight Eastern Time,
although we explore other IPV incidents as well. Panel A summarizes the rates for this
main dependent variable for the set of NIBRS agencies used in our analysis (i.e., agencies
in the set of states that we match to NFL teams, as described in the next section). Across
all days of the year, the rate is .70 per 100,000 (total population). 22 As has been noted in
other studies using NIBRS data (e.g., Vazquez, Stohr and Purkiss, 2005) the rate of
violence varies both by day of the week and season of the year. Weekends, especially
Saturdays and Sundays, have the highest rate of IPV; rates are also somewhat higher in
summer. In view of the important day-of-week and seasonal patterns in family violence,
and the relatively small number of games on days other than Sunday, we have elected to
simplify our empirical analysis by limiting our sample to the 17 Sundays during the
regular NFL season. This restricted sample has the important advantage that we observe
rates of violence reported by a given agency on the same day in different years, and rates
reported by multiple agencies on the same day in a given year.
Panels B and C of Table 1 provide summary statistics for our estimation sample
of Sundays during the regular football season. In Panel B we present rates of intimate

22

The hours between 12 PM and midnight account for 61% of at-home male-on-female IPV. Ideally the
rate of intimate partner violence would be expressed relative to the number of intimate partner couples. In
2000 there were approximately 21 intimate partnerships per 100 people in the U.S. population: thus on
average the rate per couple is approximately 4.8 times the rate per person (U.S. Census Bureau, Census
2000 Summary File 1). In our empirical analysis, this is not an issue as we use models based on counts that
include police agency fixed effects.

12

partner violence by location and victim-offender relationship. Most of the victims of
intimate partner violence are women (82%) and a majority are victimized at home
(84%). 23 For these reasons, our main analysis focuses on male-on-female at-home
violence. Within this class of incidents, violence by husbands against their wives
accounts for 54% of incidents and violence by men against unmarried female partners
accounts for 46%.
Panel C narrows the focus to male-on-female violence occurring at home. To
crudely characterize the severity of an incident, we classified all aggravated assaults and
other incidents involving physical injury as “serious assaults.” 24 The remainder (simple
assaults and intimidation with no injuries) are classified as “minor assaults.” Using this
classification just over one-half (52%) of male-on-female at-home IPV incidents are
serious assaults, while the balance are minor assaults.
Alcohol (and drug) use is a mechanism that is widely believed to contribute to
violent crime, and which might be expected to amplify the effects of emotional cues. 25
Unfortunately, there is only limited information on alcohol and drug use by offenders in
the NIBRS dataset. Police can report whether the offender was suspected of using drugs
or alcohol during or shortly before the offense. Overall, about 20% of at-home male-on-

23

The relative fraction of female victims of intimate partner violence is controversial because some sources
of information on family violence (in particular, questionnaires that use behavioral checklists to ask about
past episodes of slapping, pushing, throwing articles) often find that men and women are equally likely to
be “victimized” (e.g., Straus, Gelles, and Steinmetz, 1980). As discussed by Hamby (2005) victimization
surveys, police reports, and other sources that measure more serious episodes of violence all find far higher
rates of female victims – typically in the range of 70-90% (Hamby, 2005, Table I).
24
The NIBRS dataset uses the FBI classification of aggravated assault, which is an unlawful attack where
the offender wields a weapon or the victim suffers obvious severe or aggravated injury. Simple assault is
also an unlawful attack, but does not involve a weapon or obvious severe or aggravated bodily injury
(minor injuries such as bruises or cuts often accompany simple assault, however). Intimidation is placing a
person in reasonable fear of bodily harm without a weapon or physical attack.
25
Klostermann and Fals-Steward (2006) present a comprehensive review of the literature on the interrelationship of alcohol use and IPV. In general, alcohol use appears to be positively correlated with the risk
of IPV. The causal effect is less clear.

13

female incidents of IPV list alcohol or drugs as a contributing factor. (The rate for
serious assaults is a little higher, 24%). The relatively low rate of alcohol and drug
involvement could reflect under-reporting, or a tendency by police to cite alcohol and
drugs as contributing factor only in cases with high levels of intoxication.

b. Matching NFL Team Data to NIBRS Violence Data
We link the NIBRS data to the team records for “local” NFL franchises. Since
NIBRS data are not yet available for most major cities, relatively few NFL teams can be
matched to crime incidents in the city or county directly surrounding their home stadium.
As an alternative, we focus on reports from police agencies in states where there is a
single NFL team. We then assign all jurisdictions within a state to that team. 26
Following this approach, and imposing the restriction that at least 4 years of data are
available for a given team, a total of six NFL teams can be matched to roughly 800
different NIBRS agencies.
Our decision to assign all residents of a state to their “local” NFL team is likely to
diminish the average strength of the emotional cue associated with a game outcome for
that team. Arguably, these cues are stronger for people who live close to a team’s home
city and are routinely exposed to media coverage of the team, and weaker for those in
other areas of a state. Weaker emotional cues presumably lead to attenuated estimates of
the effect of wins versus losses, relative to the effect for people who live in the home city.
Thus, we suspect that our assignment procedure is likely to lead to a conservative
assessment of the effect of emotional cues on family violence.

26

We match the New England Patriots to three states: Massachusetts, Vermont, and New Hampshire.

14

Table 2 shows the six football teams in our sample, with the associated NIBRS
states listed in parentheses. For each team we also show the win-loss record in the
sample years for which NIBRS data are available, and the number of reporting agencies
in the state in that year. Three teams (the Carolina Panthers, Detroit Lions, and New
England Patriots) have NIBRS data available for all 12 years, starting in 1995 and
continuing to 2006. The remaining three teams (the Denver Broncos, Kansas City
Chiefs, and Tennessee Titans) enter the NIBRS sample in later years. Note that within a
state the number of reporting agencies in NIBRS tends to rise, though there are
fluctuations up and down in some later years as agencies drop in or out.
The win-loss records reported in Table 2 display wide variation, with some teams
making the playoffs more often than others. Detroit had a poor win-loss record for most
of the sample period, while Denver and New England were very successful teams. Even
within a team, however, there is a fair amount of year-to-year variation. For example,
Denver had a 14-2 win-loss record in the 1998 season (and won the Superbowl), but had
a losing season in 1999. Since predicted game outcomes tend to be based on recent past
performance, these patterns hint at the prevalence of both upset losses (e.g., during the
Denver Broncos’ 1999 season) and upset wins (e.g., during the Kansas City Chiefs’ 2003
season). We characterize upset losses and upset wins more formally using the Las Vegas
point spread in the next subsection.
In all, the 6 teams in our sample can be matched to 993 regular season football
games and 53 playoff games. The characteristics of these games are shown in the upper
panel of Table 3. The vast majority (87%) of the regular season games were played on
Sundays. As noted earlier, given the seasonal and intra-week variation in family violence

15

rates, we elected to simplify our empirical design by focusing on regular-season Sunday
games. The characteristics of these games and their associated local television market are
summarized in panels B and C of Table 3.

c. Expected Outcomes from Betting Markets
A key feature of NFL football is the existence of a well-organized betting market
that allows us to infer the expected outcome of each game. The main betting market for
NFL games is run by Las Vegas bookmakers, who equilibrate the demand on each side of
a bet using a “point spread,” rather than odds (as in pari-mutuel betting). 27 If the point
spread is -3 for one team against another, the team must win by 3 points or more in order
for a bet on that team to pay off. The market assessment of the outcome of a game is
contained in the closing value of the point spread (the “closing line”). 28
Previous research has suggested that the point spread is an unbiased predictor of
the actual outcome of the game (e.g., Gandar et al., 1988). To verify this conclusion, we
collected data on point spreads and final scores for all 3,725 NFL football game played
during the 1995 to 2006 seasons. Figure 2 shows the relationship between the actual and
predicted point spread in each game. As expected, the actual spread is “noisier” than the
predicted spread, but the two are positively correlated. In fact, a regression of the actual
spread on the predicted spread yields a coefficient of 1.01 (s.e. = 0.03). Thus, there is no
evidence against the null hypothesis of an efficient prediction. Moreover, the R-squared
27

There is an extensive literature on the economics of NFL betting, including Pankoff (1968), Gandar et al
(1988), and Levitt (2004).
28
As discussed by Levitt (2004), point spreads adjust relatively infrequently from their opening values and
bookmakers sometimes take relatively large positions in particular games. Levitt argues that these features
arise because bookmakers are better predictors than other bettors (i.e., that the “market” of individual
betters is biased). For our purposes the key feature of the spread is that it is the “best” prior estimate of
the outcome of the game.

16

of the relationship is relatively strong (0.20) suggesting that the Las Vegas point spread is
a reasonably informative predictor of game outcomes.
The vertical lines in Figure 2 divide the predicted spreads into three regions,
depending on whether the home team is predicted to win by more than a field goal (a
spread of -3), predicted to have a close game (a spread of -3 to 3), or predicted to lose by
more than a field goal (a spread of +3). Roughly one-third games fall into each of these
regions. In our empirical analysis we use these three categories to classify games as
“predicted wins”, “predicted close games”, and “predicted losses” for the home team. 29
Our theoretical model is written in terms of the ex ante probability of a hometeam win, rather than the point spread. The mapping between the two is shown in Figure
3. To derive this relationship we regressed the probability of a victory by the home team
on a third order polynomial in the spread. The fitted relationship follows the expected
“inverse S-curve” shape and is symmetric. For spreads of ±14 points (a range that
includes 98% of games) the probability of a win is approximately linear, with each onepoint increase in the spread translating into a 3% decrease in the probability of a win. For
games with a spread of less than -3 points (“predicted wins”) the probability of a home
team victory is 60% or greater. For “predicted losses” (spread > 3) the probability of a
win is 41% or less.
Panel B of Table 3 summarizes the predicted outcomes of the 866 regular-season
Sunday games in our IPV analysis sample. Of these games, 316 (36%) were predicted
wins for the home team, 245 (28%) were predicted losses, and 305 (35%) were predicted
close games. The greater number of predicted wins than losses reflects the inclusion in
29

Few games have a spread of zero, and there are no games with a spread of -0.5 or 0.5. This likely
reflects the fact that given the NFL’s overtime rules, tie games are rare events; only three games ended in a
tie during the entire period from 1995-2006.

17

our sample of two relatively successful teams (Denver and New England). We also
report the actual outcomes of the games: 70% of the predicted wins were in fact victories
for the home team, while only 32% of the predicted losses resulted in a victory. The
predicted close games are almost evenly split, consistent with the unbiasedness property
of the point spread.
Panel B also shows two other important characteristics of the games in our
estimation sample that we exploit in later analyses: the starting time, and the likely
emotional salience of a game. The majority of games in the sample had a 1:00 PM
starting time, 26 percent had a 4:00 PM start time, and only 6% were nighttime games
(8:00 PM start time). We consider three measures of emotional salience: whether the
home team is still in playoff contention; whether the game was played against a
traditional “rival” team; and whether the game involved an unusually high number of
sacks, turnovers, or penalty yards. 30 A majority of games (70%) are played when the
team is still in playoff contention. Some 20% are played against a traditional rival. And
about 40% of games involve a relatively high number of sacks, turnovers, or penalty
yards. We define “highly salient” games as contests in which the home team was still in
playoff contention and either played against a traditional rival or had an unusual number
of sacks, turnovers, or penalty yards. By this criterion about 40% of the games in our
sample are highly salient.

30

To develop an indicator for being in contention, we fit a series of models that related the likelihood of
advancing to the playoffs to the team’s win-loss record after various numbers of games played. We
classify a team as out of contention once the predicted probability (based on the historical record for teams
with a similar win-loss record at the same point in the season) is under 10%. We identify traditional
rivalries using information from Wikipedia. A list of the rival team pairs we use is available on request.

18

d. Fan Attachment to Local NFL Teams
Another important feature of NFL football is that the games attract a lot of fan
interest. NFL Sunday football games are often the highest-rated program in a local
market (see footnote 5). To gauge the strength of fan attachment to the local teams in our
dataset, we purchased data on local television viewership from Nielsen Media Research
(“Nielsen”) for the six television markets that match the teams in our sample. Nielsen
measures viewership in each of these local markets (known as Designated Market Areas)
using metering devices attached to a random sample of television sets. The company
provides ratings information for each program shown in a local market: each rating point
represents 1% of all television households in a local market (whether or not a household’s
television is turned on).
Panel C of Table 3 shows the Nielsen ratings for regular season Sunday football
games in the Designated Market Areas associated with the 6 teams in our estimation
sample. On average, one-fourth of all households watch their local team play on a typical
Sunday. For particularly compelling games, nearly one-half of all television households
tune in to watch. The strength of fans’ attachment to their local NFL team is illustrated
by the fact that on a Sunday with no home game, the viewing audience is only one-third
as large. These television viewing patterns suggest that emotional cues from local
football games should both be salient and affect a large number of intimate partners.
Figure 4 plots the number of households watching a game versus the spread, for
the subset of games for which we were able to collect Nielsen data. Our model is
predicated on the assumption that fans strictly prefer to watch a win rather than a loss.
Consistent with this assumption, the local audience size is decreasing in the spread (i.e.,

19

increasing in the probability of a home-team victory). The regression line drawn in the
graph illustrates that for each one point increase in the spread, local audience size falls by
0.4 percentage points.

IV. Econometric Model and Main Estimation Results
a. Econometric Model
Given the incident-based nature of NIBRS data, we specify a Poisson regression
model for the number of incidents of intimate partner violence reported by a given police
agency on a given Sunday of the regular NFL season. Specifically we assume that
(6)

log(μjt) = θj + Xjtγ + f(pjt, yjt; λ) ,

where μjt represents the expected number of incidents of IPV reported by agency j in time
period t, θj represents a fixed effect for the agency (which controls for the size and
overall characteristics of the population served by the agency), Xjt represents a set of
time-varying controls (e.g., seasonality variables, local weather variables, or the size of
the local television audience), and f(pjt, yjt; λ) is a general function of pjt, the probability of
a victory by the “home” NFL team for a game played on date t, and yjt,the actual game
outcome, with parameters λ. We assume that pjt = p(Sjt) where Sjt is the observed point
spread for the game, allowing us to write the model as
(6′)

log(μjt) = θj + Xjtγ + g(Sjt, yjt; λ) .

Our primary interest is in the effect of a loss or win by the home team, controlling for the
spread. Assuming that the Las Vegas betting market provides efficient forecasts of NFL
game outcomes, the actual outcome of a game is “as good as random” when we control
for the spread, and a specification like (6′) yields unbiased estimates of the causal effect

20

of a loss relative to a win. 31
An advantage of a Poisson specification is that fixed effects can be included
without creating an incidental parameters problem (see Cameron and Trivedi, 1998).
This is potentially important in the NIBRS context because there are many small police
agencies with relatively low counts of family violence incidents. A second useful
property of a Poisson specification is that consistency of the maximum likelihood
estimates of the parameters of log(μjt) associated with the time-varying covariates (and in
particular, the parameters λ) only requires that we have correctly specified the conditional
mean for log(μjt) (Cameron and Trivedi, 1986). Consistency does not require that the
arrival process for IPV incidents is actually Poisson.

b. Baseline Empirical Results
Table 4 presents results for our baseline Poisson regressions for at-home male-onfemale intimate partner violence occurring between the hours of 12 PM and 12 AM on
Sundays of the NFL regular season. In these specifications we assume that
g(Sjt, yjt , λ) = λ1·1(Sjt < −3)

+

λ2·1(Sjt < −3) 1(yjt = 0)

+ λ3·1(−3≤ Sjt ≤ 3) +

λ4·1(−3≤ Sjt ≤ 3) 1(yjt = 0)

+ λ5·1( Sjt > 3)

λ6·1( Sjt > 3) 1(yjt = 1) ,

+

i.e., we include dummies for three ranges of the spread (predicted home team win
(Sjt<−3); predicted close game (−3≤ Sjt ≤ 3); predicted home team loss ( Sjt > 3)) and
interactions of these dummies with a game outcome indicator. The main coefficients of
interest are λ2, λ4, and λ6, which measure the effects of an upset loss, a close loss, and an
31

Formally, for a binary random variable y with mean p, E[ y | p, Z] = E[ y | p] for any Z, so conditioning
on p, y is independent of Z. Assuming the mapping p(S) from the spread to p is invertible and does not
depend on Z, E[ y | S, Z] = E[ y | p, Z] = E[ y | p], so y is independent of Z conditioning on S.

21

upset win on the rate of IPV. The coefficients associated with the range of the spread
(λ1, λ3, λ5) are also potentially interesting, but less easily interpreted, since variation in S
may be correlated with other factors (like the size and composition of the viewing
audience) that affect the likelihood of IPV.
The basic model in column 1 of Table 4 includes the spread and outcome
variables and municipality fixed effects. Columns 2-5 add in three sets of time-varying
covariates: year, week, and holiday dummies; local weather conditions on the day of the
game; and the Nielsen Rating for the local NFL game broadcast. The Nielsen data are
only available for the 90% of the game days in our sample that occur in 1997 or later. To
check the sensitivity of our results to the sample, we show in column 4 a specification
identical to the one in column 3 (with municipality fixed effects and date and weather
controls) but fit to the subsample with Nielsen data.
Focusing on the coefficients associated with the game outcome (in the first three
rows of the table) notice that the estimates are quite stable across specifications, as would
be anticipated if the game outcomes are orthogonal to other covariates, conditional on the
spread. 32 The estimates suggest that an upset loss leads to an approximately 8% increase
in the rate of male-on-female at-home IPV. The point estimate of the effect of a loss
when the game is predicted to be close is about one-half as large in magnitude and not
significantly different from zero. The estimated effects of an upset win are positive but
again not significantly different from 0 in any of the models.
The signs and relative magnitudes of these estimates are consistent with the
predictions of our simple model. Recall from equation (5) that the effect of a loss relative

32

Estimates of the coefficients associated with the weather, seasonality, and holiday variables are jointly
significant and available on request from the authors.

22

to a win is predicted to be most negative when the ex ante probability of victory is high,
reflecting two complementary channels. When the home team is expected to win, more
violence-prone men are predicted to watch the game, and among watchers the emotional
cue of a loss is most negative when the probability of victory was high. Taken literally,
our estimates suggest the interaction effect is quite powerful: though an upset loss has a
fairly big effect on the rate of IPV, we see only small (1-2%) effects of an upset win.
In column 5 we explore the effect of controlling for the number of households
tuned in to watch a local game. The Nielsen audience ratings are a significant factor in
game day violence, with intimate partner violence rising by almost 1% for each
percentage point increase in the number of households watching the game. Importantly,
however, the addition of this proxy for the number of couples at home together during a
game has no effect on the estimated impacts of the game outcomes. Since the results
with and without viewership controls are similar and the Nielsen data does not exist for
the first two years of our NIBRS dataset, in most of the remaining analyses, we do not
include the viewership controls. 33
The models in Table 4 control for the pre-game point spread using a simple set of
indicators for 3 ranges of the spread. As an alternative, we fit a model with a second
order polynomial in the point spread and an interaction of this polynomial with a dummy
for a home team loss. (All other control variables are the same as in column 3 in Table 4.)
The implied effects of a home team loss for each value of the point spread are plotted in
Figure 5. As in the specifications in Table 4, the increase in at-home male-on-female
violence is a declining function of the spread. The pointwise confidence intervals

33

Expanded results with Nielsen viewership ratings as controls are similar and available on request from
the authors.

23

indicate that this difference is significantly different from zero for spreads less than
approximately −3, which coincides with our definition of a predicted win. For predicted
close games (spreads between −3 and 3), there is a positive but declining impact of a loss
versus a win, which is not statistically different from zero. Finally, the curve is close to
zero for spreads greater than 3 (the predicted loss category).

V. Extensions and Robustness Checks
a. Intra-day Timing of Violence Reports
Our baseline specifications examine the effect of NFL game outcomes on the rate
of IPV in the twelve hour period starting at 12 PM on the day of the game. Using NIBRS
information on the timing of incident reports (which is coded to the hour of the day) we
can refine these models and check whether the distribution of incidents over the day is
consistent with a causal effect of the game outcome. Since about 70% of games in our
sample started at approximately 1 PM Eastern Time and another 25% started at
approximately 4 PM ET, we fit separate models for incidents in various 3 hour time
windows, allowing separate coefficients for games starting at 1 PM versus 4 PM. 34 The
models – presented in Table 5 – include the Nielsen rating for the number of households
watching a game, although the estimated coefficients of the game outcomes are very
similar when this variable is excluded.
Each column of Table 5 shows the effects of game outcomes on violence in a
different time window. For the 12 PM to 3 PM window (column 1) there is no significant

34

We do not include separate coefficients for games starting at 8 PM for two reasons. First, there are very
few of these games (6% of the sample), so there are only a handful of upset losses, close losses, and upset
wins. Second, until 2007, these games were broadcast on cable/satellite, and therefore exposure to the
night games is much lower (see Table 3, Panel C).

24

effect of game outcomes on that day, regardless of when the football game actually
occurred. This is perhaps to be expected, since the game outcome has not yet been
decided for either the 1 PM or the 4 PM games. By comparison, for the 3 PM – 6 PM
window (column 2) there is a significant effect of the game outcomes for games that
started at 1 PM, but no significant effect of outcomes for 4 PM games. Interestingly, the
effect of the Nielsen rating of the game is also significant for 1 PM games, but not 4 PM
games. Since the 3 PM – 6 PM window includes the last hour or so of the 1 PM games
and roughly 2 post-game hours, but only the first half of the 4 PM games, we infer that
the violence associated with an unexpected loss occurs mainly after the game is over.
Between the hours of 6 and 9 PM (column 3) there is no significant effect of an
upset loss for the 1 PM games, but a sizeable effect (a 34% increase in violence) for the 4
PM games. Interestingly, the upset win coefficient for the 4 PM games also provides the
first sign of a protective effect from a positive emotional cue (a 24% reduction in
violence) although the coefficient estimate is rather imprecise. Finally, during the 9 PM
to midnight interval (column 4), neither of the two upset loss coefficients is statistically
significant. In sum, while the standard errors are fairly large, especially for the lessnumerous 4 PM games, the data suggest that the spike in violence after an upset loss is
concentrated in a narrow time window surrounding the end of the game.

b. Emotionally Salient Games
If the link between NFL game outcomes and violence arises through the impact of
emotional cues, as assumed in our model, then one might expect more “emotionally
salient” games to have larger effects on the rate of intimate partner violence. The

25

models in Table 6 explore the relative effects of game outcomes for more salient games
(upper panel) and less salient games (lower panel) using the measures of salience
introduced in Table 3. 35 In column 1, we define salience by whether the home team is
still in playoff contention (based on having at least a 10% chance of making the playoff).
Among such games the effect of an upset loss rises to 10%, while the effect of a close
loss rises to 6% and is also significant. In contrast, when the home team is no longer in
playoff contention the effect of an upset loss is small and statistically insignificant. As
shown in the third-to-last row in the table, the upset loss coefficients for the two game
types are statistically different from each other at the 10% level.
Column 2 looks at games against a traditional rival team. Interestingly, the effect
of an upset loss is nearly twice as large for a rivalry game compared to a non-rivalry
game (14% versus 7%), although the difference is not statistically significant. There is
also a marginally significant increase in violence following an upset win against a rival –
a pattern that is inconsistent with our model, or with the overall finding that upset wins
tend to have a weak negative effect on IPV.
Games that are particularly frustrating could also generate a larger emotional
response to an upset loss. In column 3 we look at the effect of 3 potentially frustrating
and relatively unusual occurrences: 4 or more sacks, 4 or more turnovers, or 80 or more
penalty yards. At least one of these events happens in 39% of the games in our sample.
For frustrating games defined in this manner, the estimated effect of an upset loss is 15%.
This effect is significantly different from the estimated 3% increase for non-frustrating
games.

35

We fit the models in each column with a full set of interactions between the salience indicator and the 6
dummies representing the pre-game spread and its interaction with the game outcome.

26

In the final column of Table 6, we restrict the sample to teams still in playoff
contention, and which are either playing a traditional rival or experience an unusual
number of sacks, turnovers, or penalties. While 72% of games have the local team still in
playoff contention, the percentage of playoff-contention games drops to 40% when
limited to traditional rivalries or frustrating games. The effect of an upset loss is now a
15% increase in IPV, compared to a 10% increase for all playoff-contention games in
column 1. Moreover, the effect of an upset loss is virtually zero for games which do not
fit these criteria, with a reasonably small standard error. The p-value for the difference in
the coefficients appearing in row (a) and row (b) is 0.01. We conclude that the overall
rise in IPV that we measure following upset losses is largely driven by the effect of losses
in games that “matter” more to fans.

c. Variation in Alcohol-Related Violence and Minor versus Serious Assaults
Incidents of IPV vary substantially in their nature and severity. To gain some
insights into the kinds of incidents that are most affected by the emotional cues of NFL
game outcomes, we fit separate Poisson models for incidents with alcohol and/or drugs
involved, and for serious versus minor assaults. 36 The results are summarized in Table 7.
The results in column 1 suggest that alcohol-related incidents of IPV are somewhat more
affected by an upset loss than IPV incidents as a whole, though the standard errors of this
model are relatively large. The rate of minor assaults appears to be more responsive than
the rate of serious assaults (columns 2 and 3), though again the power of our sample is
limited. Overall, our reading is that all forms of IPV rise following an upset loss, with
36

Recall that in about 20% of incidents the reporting officer notes that alcohol or drugs were a contributing
factor in the incident – these are the incidents with “alcohol involved.” Serious assaults include aggravated
assaults and all other incidents in which the victim was physically injured.

27

some indication that alcohol-related incidents rise more. We stress that this does not
necessarily mean that upset losses lead to greater alcohol use that causes more violence.
Instead, the emotional cue of an upset loss may be larger for men who have been drinking
heavily, causing a bigger rise in their rate likelihood of an interaction with their spouse or
girlfriend that escalates to violence. Some evidence on the latter channel is suggested by
Exum (2002), who presents an experimental demonstration that alcohol use amplifies the
effect of anger on intentions to commit aggressive behavior by young men.

d. Results by Location and Victim-Offender Relationship
So far, we have focused on intimate partner violence against women occurring at
home. Table 8 examines the effect of NFL game outcomes on other categories of
intimate partner violence. For reference, the first column of Table 8 reproduces the
estimated effects for male-on-female at-home IPV from column 2 of Table 4. The
second column examines male-on-female violence away from home (which represents
about 20% of total male-on-female IPV). Perhaps surprisingly, the point estimate of the
effect of an upset loss on away-from-home violence is negative and marginally
significant (t=1.8). One (after-the-fact) explanation for this result is that couples who
have been out tend to return home earlier following the unhappy event of an upset loss,
shifting the venue for subsequent interactions that lead to violence. 37 Column 3 presents
a pooled model for all forms of male-on-female IPV, regardless of where it takes place.
Here we find a roughly 5% increase in violence for an upset loss, but no effect for the
other unexpected game outcomes.
37

Note the number of municipalities falls to 583 compared to 765 in the model for at-home violence. This
occurs because agencies that appear in NIBRS for only a few years can have all zeros for away-from-home
male-on-female violence for every observation.

28

As noted earlier, a major controversy in the family violence literature concerns
the victimization of men by their female partners. Female-on-male IPV is only about
one-fifth as prevalent as male-on-female IPV in the NIBRS. The model in column 4 of
Table 8 shows that NFL game outcomes have no large or significant effect on the rate of
female-on-male violence. This could be because women are less likely to be emotionally
engaged in professional football, or because women’s aggression is less responsive to
emotional cues.

Finally, the last two columns of Table 8 break out at-home male-on-

female IPV into violence against wives (column 5) and violence against girlfriends and
unmarried partners (column 6). Both forms of violence increase following an upset loss,
with a larger estimated effect on wives. The standard errors on the effects are large
enough, however, that we cannot reject an equal effect (t=0.9).

e. Robustness to Sample Definitions and Other Issues
One issue with NIBRS is that agencies sometimes fail to provide data for one
reason or another, creating “gaps” in coverage. Unfortunately, with the public use files
there is no way to distinguish between a reporting gap and a period during which there
were no reported crimes. This problem mainly affects smaller agencies (e.g., police
forces in small towns or sheriff departments in small rural areas). For larger agencies, a
period with no reported incidents of crime is very unlikely. In our main analysis we have
assumed that the data for days where an agency does not report a crime incident of any
type (not just family violence) for an entire 24 hour window is “missing at random”.
As a robustness check, we alternatively set the rate of violence to zero for these
days. Reassuringly, our main results are very similar whether we treat “no crime” days

29

as missing or true zeros: treating the “no crime” days as missing at random yields our
baseline estimate of 0.080 on the rate of male-on-female at-home IPV, while treating the
“no crime” days as zeros yields an estimate of 0.078 (see Appendix Table 1, column 2).
We also re-estimated the model, limiting the sample to agencies with no “no crime” days
for the entire 17 weeks of any given season. As shown in column 3 of Appendix Table 1,
the estimated effect falls slightly to 0.067, although this is partly due to the fact that upset
losses appear to have a smaller effect on the rate of IPV in larger cities than in smaller
cities (see columns 4 and 5 of the Appendix Table), and cities without any missing crime
data are on average larger.
As is well known, the Poisson model implies that the mean number of events and
the variance of the number of event are equal – a restriction that is often violated.
Typically, instead, researchers find that the variance is larger than the mean, a condition
known as “over-dispersion.” With fixed jurisdiction effects this problem may be less of
an issue, as much of the variation will be absorbed by the fixed effects. To assess
whether over-dispersion is likely to be an issue even after adding in fixed effects,
however, we estimated a Negative Binomial model with agency fixed effects (see column
6 of Appendix Table 1). 38 The estimates are very similar to the baseline Poisson
estimates, with the estimated effect of an upset loss equal to an 8.4% increase in IPV.
Our baseline model includes fixed effects for year (12 years), week of the football
season (17 weeks), and several holidays which occur during the regular football season (9
holidays). As an alternative, we saturate the Poisson regression with dummies for each of

38

A negative binomial specification is appropriate if the mean of the Poisson process includes an
unobserved random effect that is distributed as a Gamma random variable. This model includes an
additional parameter (related to the variance of the random effect) that shifts the variance of the counts in
any observed area and time period relative to the mean.

30

the different Sundays included in our sample (204 Sundays). The results are again
similar to the baseline (see column 7). With the full set of Sunday fixed effects, the
estimated effect of an upset loss is .074 compared to the baseline estimate of .080. The
standard error on the upset loss coefficient increases by roughly 20 percent, which is
perhaps to be expected since there are only 1,054 local regular season Sundays
distributed over the 204 Sundays in our sample.
Finally, we also estimated separate models for different age categories of
offenders and for violence against a victim other than an intimate partner. In columns 8
and 9, we classify incidents of male-on-female IPV by the age of the offender (i.e., the
male partner). We find that the effect of upset losses have a slightly larger effect on the
rate of violence committed by offenders under the age of 30 (9.7%) than those over age
30 (7.5%) but the gap is not statistically significant. In column 10, we consider violence
committed against any family member other than an intimate partner, such as violence
against a child, sibling, parent, or in-law. We find no evidence that unexpected emotional
cues from football games affect family violence defined in this way. Although not
shown, we also find no evidence that upset losses matter for the narrower category of
violence against a child, although the estimates are imprecise given the relative rarity of
such incidents. In the final column of the Appendix Table, we examine violence where
the victim is not a family member or intimate partner, but otherwise known to the
offender (e.g., a friend or neighbor). Interestingly, the pattern of coefficients in column
11 is very similar to what we find for intimate partner violence. An upset loss increases
“friend” violence by a statistically significant 7.7%, while a close loss has a 5.1% effect,
and an upset win has hardly any effect.

31

VI. Discussion
Our empirical results show a roughly 8% effect of an upset loss by the local NFL
team on the rate of male-on-female at-home intimate partner violence. To provide some
context for the magnitude of this effect we estimated a set of Poisson models for the rate
of IPV on all days of the year for the 6 states of our estimation sample. These models
included agency fixed effects, an expanded set of holiday dummies, dummies for the day
of the week, the month, and the sample year, and the same set of weather controls
included in our main models. 39 The resulting estimates (available on request) show large
and precisely estimated effects of major holidays on the rate of IPV: for example,
Christmas day +17%, Thanksgiving +22%, Memorial Day +30%, New Year’s Day
+19%, New Year’s Eve +32%, and the Fourth of July +28%. They also show a
significant positive effect of hotter weather: relative to a day with a maximum
temperature less than 80 degrees, IPV is 8-10% higher when the maximum temperature is
over 80. Thus, an upset loss is comparable to the effect of a hot day, or about one-quarter
of the effect of a holiday like Memorial Day or New Years Eve. We view the magnitude
of the cueing effect attributable to an upset loss as rather large, considering that only a
fraction of the population are serious football fans, and that our samples largely exclude
the cities in which the NFL teams are located (though they often include nearby suburbs).
From a broader perspective we draw two main conclusions from our findings.
First, at least a fraction of intimate partner violence appears to represent expressive
behavior that is triggered by payoff-irrelevant emotional shocks, rather than strategic
instrumental violence that is used to control an intimate partner. We emphasize that we

39

These models, like our main results in Table 4, are fit using data on male-on-female at-home incidents
from noon to midnight only.

32

are not arguing against an instrumental interpretation of an important share of family
violence. Rather, our results show that a loss-of-control paradigm may be useful in
understanding some part of intimate partner violence. Second, there appears to be
empirical support for use of a gain-loss utility framework (with a “rational” reference
point) for interpreting the effect of emotional cues on the loss of control in intimate
partner interactions. We suspect that the same framework may prove useful in other
settings where economists are trying to model the effect of visceral influences on
observed behavior.

33

References
Aizer, Anna (forthcoming). “The Gender Wage Gap and Domestic Violence.” American
Economic Review.
Ariely, Dan and George Loewenstein (2005). “In the Heat of the Moment: The Effect of
Sexual Arousal on Sexual Decision Making," Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
18(1), pp. 1-12.
Baumeister, Roy F., Todd F. Heatherton and Dianne M. Tice (1994). Losing Control:
How and Why People Fail at Self Regulation. San Diego: Academic Press.
Baumeister, Roy F. and Todd F. Heatherton (1996). “Self Regulation Failure: An
Overview.” Psychological Inquiry 7 (1), pp. 1-15.
Becker, Gary S. (1968). “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach.” Journal of
Political Economy 76 (March/April), pp. 169-217.
Benhabib, Jess and Alberto Bisin (2004). “Modelling Internal Commitment Mechanisms
and Self Control: A Neuroeconomics Approach to Consumption-Saving Decisions.”
New York University Department of Economics Unpublished Working Paper. February.
Bernheim, B. Douglas and Antonio Rangel (2004). “Addiction and Cue-Triggered
Decision Responses.” American Economic Review 94 (December), pp. 1558-1590.
Bloch, Francis and Vijayendra Rao (2002). “Terror as a Bargaining Instrument: A Case
Study of Dowry Violence in Rural India.” American Economic Review 92 (September),
pp. 1029-1043.
Bowlus, Audra and Shannon Seitz (2006). “Domestic Violence, Employment and
Divorce.” International Economic Review 47 (November), pp. 1113-1149.
Branscombe, Nyla R. and Daniel L. Wann (1992). “Role of Identification with a Group,
Arousal, Categorization Processes, and Self-esteem in Sports Spectator Aggression.”
Human Relations 45 (10), pp. 1013-1033.
Camerer, Colin F., Linda Babcock, George Loewenstein, and Richard H. Thaler (1997).
“Labor Supply of New York City Cab Drivers: One Day at a Time.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 111 (May), pp. 407-441.
Cameron, A. Colin and Pravin K. Trivedi (1986). “Econometric Models Based on Count
Data: Comparisons and Applications of Some Estimators and Tests.” Journal of Applied
Econometrics 1 (January), pp. 29-53.
Cameron, A. Colin and Pravin K. Trivedi (1998). Regression Analysis of Count Data.
Cambridge University Press.

34

Chwe, Michael (1990). “Why Were Workers Whipped? Pain in a Principal-Agent
Model.” Economic Journal 100 (December), pp. 1109-1121.
Crawford, Vincent P. and Juanjuan Meng (2009). “New York City Cabdrivers’ Labor
Supply Revisited: Reference-Dependent Preferences with Rational-Expectations Targets
for Hours and Income.” University of California, San Diego Working Paper.
DellaVigna, Stefano (2009). “Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field.”
Journal of Economic Literature 47 (June), pp. 315-372.
Dobash, Russell E. and Rebecca Dobash (1979). Violence Against Wives. New York:
Free Press.
Durose, Matthew R., Harlow, Caroline Wolf, Langan, Patrick A., Motivans, Mark,
Rantalal, Ramona R., and Erica L. Smith (2005). Family Violence Statistics. U.S.
Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs Report No. NCJ 207846. Washington
D.C.: USGPO, June.
Exum, M. Lyn (2002). “The Application and Robustness of the Rational Choice
Perspective in the Study of Intoxicated and Angry Intentions to Aggress.” Criminology
40 (4), pp. 933-966.
Farber, Henry S. (2008). “Reference-Dependent Preferences and Labor Supply: The
Case of New York City Taxi Drivers.” American Economic Review 98 (June), pp. 1069–
82.
Farmer, Amy and Jill Tiefenthaler (1997). “An Economic Analysis of Domestic
Violence,” Review of Social Economy 55(3), pp. 337-358.
Fehr, Ernst and Lorenz Goette (2007). “Do Workers Work More if Wages Are High?
Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment.” American Economic Review 97
(March), pp. 298-317.
Fox, James Alan and Marianne W. Zawitz (2007). “Homicide Trends in the United
States.” United States Department of Justice Bureau of Justice Statistics. Washington
D.C.: National Archive of Criminal Justice Statistics.
Fudenberg, Drew and David K. Levine (2004). “A Dual Self Model of Impulse Control.”
American Economic Review 96 (December), pp. 1449-1476.
Gandar, John, Richard Zuber, Thomas O’Brien and Ben Russo (1988). “Testing
Rationality in the Point Spread Betting Market.” Journal of Finance 43(4), pp. 9951008.

35

Genesove, David and Christopher Mayer (2001). “Loss Aversion and Seller Behavior:
Evidence from the Housing Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(November),
pp. 1233-1260.
Hamby, Sherry L. (2005). “Measuring Gender Differences in Partner Violence:
Implications from Research on Other Forms of Violent and Socially Undesirable
Behavior.” Sex Roles 52 (June), pp. 725-742.
Hirschel, David (2008). “Domestic Violence Cases: What Research Shows About Arrest
and Dual Arrest Rates.” National Institute of Justice Research Report.
Iyengar, Radha (2009). “Does the Certainty of Arrest Reduce Domestic Violence?
Evidence from Mandatory and Recommended Arrest Laws.” Journal of Public
Economics 93 (February), pp. 85–98.
Jacob, Brian, Lars Lefgren, and Enrico Moretti (2007). “The Dynamics of Criminal
Behavior: Evidence from Weather Shocks.” Journal of Human Resources 42 (3), pp.
489-527.
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch and Richard H. Thaler (1991). “The Endowment
Effect, Loss Aversion, and Status Quo Bias: Anomalies.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 5 (Winter), pp. 193-206.
Klosterman, Keith C. and William Fals-Stewart (2006). “Intimate Partner Violence and
Alcohol Use: Exploring the Role of Drinking in Partner Violence and its Implications for
Intervention.” Aggression and Violent Behavior 11 (6), pp. 587-597.
Koszegi, Botond and Matthew Rabin (2006). “A Model of Reference-Dependent
Preferences.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (November), pp. 1133-1165.
Laibson, David (2001). “A Cue-Theory of Consumption.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 116 (February), pp. 81-119.
Levitt, Steven (2004). “Why are Gambling Markets Organized So Differently from
Financial Markets?” Economic Journal 114 (April), pp. 223-246.
Loewenstein, George and Ted O’Donoghue (2007). “The Heat of the Moment: Modeling
Interactions between Affect and Deliberation.” Carnegie Mellon University Department
of Social and Decisions Sciences Unpublished Working Paper. March.
Lutmer, Erzo (2005). “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (August), pp. 963-1002.
Mas, Alexander (2006). “Pay, Reference Points, and Police Performance.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 121 (August), pp. 783-821.

36

Pankoff, Lyn D. (1968). “Market Efficiency and Football Betting.” Journal of Business
41 (April), pp. 103-114.
Rand, Michael R. and Callie Marie Rennison (2005). “Bigger is Not Necessarily Better:
An Analysis of Violence against Women Estimates from the National Crime
Victimization Survey and the National Violence Against Women Survey.” Journal of
Quantitative Criminology 21 (September), pp. 267-291.
Rees, Daniel I. and Kevin T. Schnepel (2009). “College Football Games and Crime.”
Journal of Sports Economics, Vol. 10, pp. 68-86.
Simonsohn, Uri (forthcoming). “Weather to Go to College.” Economic Journal.
Straus, Murray A., Gelles, Richard J., and Susan K. Steinmetz (1980). Behind Closed
Doors: Violence in the American Family. Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor/Doubleday.
Straus, Murray A., and Richard J. Gelles (1986). “Societal Change and Change in Family
Violence from 1975 to 1986 as Revealed by Two National Studies." Journal of Marriage
and the Family 48, pp. 465-479.
Strauss, Murray A., Gelles, Richard J., and Christine Smith (1990). Physical Violence in
American Families; Risk Factors and Adaptations to Violence in 8,145 Families. New
Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Publishers.
Tauchen, Helen V., Anne Dryden Witte and Sharon K. Long (1991). “Domestic
Violence: A Non-random Affair.” International Economic Review 32 ( ), pp. 491-511.
Thaler, Richard H. and H. M. Shefrin (1981). “An Economic Theory of Self Control.”
Journal of Political Economy 89 (May), pp. 392-406.
Vazquez, Salvador, Mary K. Stohr, and Marcus Purkiss (2005). “Intimate Partner
Violence Incidence and Characteristics: Idaho NIBRS 1995-2001 Data.” Criminal Justice
Policy Review 16 (March), pp. 99-114.
Wilt, Susan, and Sarah Olson (1996). “Prevalence of Domestic Violence in the United
States.” Journal of the American Medical Women’s Association 51 (May/June): 77-82.
Wolfers, Justin and Eric Zitzewitz (2004). “Prediction Markets.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 18 (2), pp. 107-126.
Wolfers, Justin and Eric Zitzewitz (2007). “Interpreting Prediction Markets as
Probabilities.” University of Pennsylvania Wharton School, Unpublished Working Paper
(January).

37

Table 1. Summary Statistics for Intimate Partner Violence, NIBRS data, 1995-2006.
Daily Rate for the hours of
12 PM to 11:59 PM
Per 100,000 Population

Intimate Partner Violence

A. All Days of the Year, Male on Female Occurring at Home
Day of Week and Season
All Days
Monday – Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Regular Football Season (approx. Sept-Dec)
Summer (June, July, Aug)

.70
.65
.80
.87
.68
.71

B. Sundays During Regular Football Season
Location and Victim-Offender Relationship
Male on Female
Occurring at Home
Against Spouse
Against Girlfriend
Occurring Away from Home
Female on Male

1.07
.87
.47
.40
.20
.24

C. Sundays During Regular Football Season, Male on Female, Occurring at Home
Alcohol Use and Assault Severity
Alcohol Involved
Minor Assault
Serious Assault

.17
.42
.45

Time of Day (all times Eastern Time)
12 PM to 2:59 PM
3 PM to 5:59 PM
6 PM to 8:59 PM
9 PM to 11:59 PM

.17
.19
.26
.26

Municipality Size
Smaller Cities or Counties (pop<50K)
Larger Cities or Counties (pop≥50K)

.91
.74

Age
Younger Offenders (age<30)
Older Offenders (age≥30)

.33
.53

Notes: Data are reports of intimate partner violence to local police agencies in the National Incident-Based
Reporting System (NIBRS). Intimate partner is defined as a spouse (including common law and ex spouse) or a
boyfriend/girlfriend. Violence is defined as aggravated assault, simple assault, or intimidation. See notes to Table 7
for definitions of alcohol use and assault severity.

Table 2. NFL Football Teams Matched to NIBRS Agencies.

Carolina Panthers (SC)
Regular Season W-L Record
# of reporting agencies
Pop. coverage (thousands)
Denver Broncos (CO)
Regular Season W-L Record
# of reporting agencies
Pop. coverage (thousands)

1997

1998

1999

Season
2000 2001

1995

1996

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

7-9
12
737

12-4* 7-9 4-12 8-8
7-9 1-15 7-9 11-5* 7-9 11-5* 8-8
51
62
27
59
60
53
58
63
69
65
62
1,912 2,522 1,039 2,147 2,408 2,064 2,528 2,745 2,305 2,436 3,034
12-4* 14-2* 6-10 11-5* 8-8
9-7 10-6* 10-6* 13-3* 9-7
23
21
20
20
22
23
23
21
25
29
1,454 1,413 1,385 1,469 1,530 1,558 1,640 1,746 1,900 1,990

Detroit Lions (MI)
Regular Season W-L Record
# of reporting agencies
Pop. coverage (thousands)

10-6* 5-11 9-7* 5-11 8-8* 9-7 2-14 3-13 5-11 6-10 5-11
21
40
76
69
69
63
73
61
77
74
81
711 1,644 3,065 2,982 3,016 2,575 2,996 2,846 3,464 3,516 4,258

3-13
85
4,386

Kansas City Chiefs (KS)
Regular Season W-L Record
# of reporting agencies
Pop. coverage (thousands)

7-9
28
669

9-7*
32
1,057

New England Patriots (MA, NH, VT)
Regular Season W-L Record 6-10 11-5* 10-6* 9-7*
# of reporting agencies
10
11
18
21
Pop. coverage (thousands)
328
403
688
724
Tennessee Titans (TN)
Regular Season W-L Record
# of reporting agencies
Pop. coverage (thousands)

8-8
23
631

8-8
21
759

6-10
29
627

8-8
30
745

13-3* 7-9
31
32
1,032 1030

10-6
20
917

5-11 11-5* 9-7 14-2* 14-2* 10-6* 12-4*
25
40
37
56
62
66
62
877 1,311 1,350 1,790 2,163 2,375 2,272

13-3* 13-3* 7-9 11-5* 12-4* 5-11 4-12
52
77
94
87
104
111
107
1,343 2,786 4,151 3,990 4,570 4,709 4,788

8-8
111
4,861

Notes: A * next to a regular season record indicates that the team played in the postseason. Reporting agencies can be either
city or county municipalities within the state indicated in parentheses.

Table 3. Summary Statistics for NFL Football Games and Nielsen Television Ratings.
Number
of Games

Fraction in Category
or Subcategory

A. All NFL Football Games, 1995-2006
Day of Week and Season/Postseason
Regular Season Games
Sunday Games
Monday Night Football
Thursday, Friday, or Saturday Games
Postseason Games (36 on Sunday, 17 on Saturday)

993
866
68
59
53

.95
.87
.07
.06
.05

B. Sunday Regular Season NFL Games, 1995-2006
Outcome
Loss
Win

414
452

.48
.52

Predicted and Actual Outcomes
Predicted Win: Point spread < -3
Actual Win
Actual Loss (Upset Loss)
Predicted Close: -3 ≤ Point Spread ≤ 3
Actual Win
Actual Loss (Close Loss)
Predicted Loss: Point Spread > 3
Actual Win (Upset Win)
Actual Loss

316
222
94
305
151
154
245
79
166

.36
.70
.30
.35
.50
.50
.28
.32
.68

No Sunday Game
Played on another day of the week
“Bye” week

127
62

.67
.33

By Time of Day
1 PM ET start time
4 PM ET start time
8 PM ET start time

587
224
55

.68
.26
.06

Exciting or Frustrating Games
(a) Still in Playoff Contention
(b) Against a Traditional Rival
(c) Sacks≥4, Turnovers≥4, or Penalties>80 yds
(d) Highly Salient: (a) and [(b) or (c)]

623
201
341
344

.72
.23
.39
.40

C. Nielsen Media Research Local Television Ratings, 1997-2006
Percent of Local TV Households Watching Game
Local Team Playing
1 PM Game
Local Team Playing
Local Team not Playing that Sunday
4 PM Game
Local Team Playing
Local Team not Playing that Sunday
8 PM Game (ESPN games only)
Local Team Playing
Local Team not Playing that Sunday

Average (%)
24.2

Max (%)
47.9

23.1
8.1

47.2
17.7

29.4
12.3

47.9
22.2

10.1
8.3

19.0
21.4

Notes: Starting times of games are approximate. See notes to Table 6 for definitions of “Exciting or Frustrating
Games.” Nielsen ratings begin in 1997 for Carolina, Denver, Detroit, and New England; 1998 for Tennessee; and
2000 for Kansas. The Nielsen ratings for the 8 PM games do not include the 2006 season, as the broadcasts
switched from cable/satellite (ESPN/TNT) to an over the air network (NBC) in 2006. Average ratings for the 8 PM
games in 2006 are 33.9% and 9.1% when the local team is playing and not playing, respectively.

Table 4. Emotional Shocks from Football Games and Male-on-Female Intimate Partner Violence
Occurring at Home, Poisson Regressions.
Intimate Partner Violence, Male on Female, at Home
Baseline
Model
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Coefficient Estimates
Loss * Predicted Win (Upset Loss)
Loss * Predicted Close (Close Loss)
Win * Predicted Loss (Upset Win)
Predicted Win
Predicted Close
Predicted Loss
Non-game Day
Nielsen Rating
Municipality fixed effects
Year, week, & holiday dummies
Weather variables
Nielsen Data Sub-sample
Log likelihood
Number of Municipalities
Observations

.083
(.026)
.031
(.023)
-.002
(.027)
-.004
(.022)
-.012
(.023)
-.000
(.022)
---

.077
(.027)
.034
(.024)
.011
(.027)
-.019
(.032)
-.017
(.032)
-.004
(.031)
---

.080
(.027)
.036
(.024)
.021
(.028)
-.015
(.032)
-.016
(.032)
-.011
(.031)
---

.074
(.028)
.024
(.025)
.013
(.029)
.000
(.033)
-.007
(.034)
.006
(.033)
---

.076
(.028)
.026
(.025)
.011
(.029)
-.068
(.044)
-.074
(.044)
-.057
(.042)
--.009
(.004)

X

X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

-42,890
765
77,520

-42,799
765
77,520

-42,784
765
77,520

-39,430
749
71,798

-39,428
749
71,798

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Predicted win indicates a point spread less than -3 (negative spreads indicate
the number of points a team is expected to win by); predicted close indicates a point spread between -3 and +3
inclusive; predicted loss indicates a spread more than +3. Municipalities are the NIBRS reporting agencies and can
be either cities or counties. The holiday variables include indicators for Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, New Year’s
Eve, New Year’s Day, Halloween, as well as Thanksgiving, Labor, Columbus, and Veterans Day weekends.
Weather variables include indicators for hot, high heat index, cold, windy, rainy, and snowy days. The Nielsen data
subsample is limited to observations with available television ratings; for earlier seasons, not all local markets were
tracked by Nielsen Media Research (see footnote to Table 3).

Table 5. Timing of Shocks and Violence.
Intimate Partner Violence, Male on Female, at Home
Assaults Occurring Between (Eastern Time):
12 PM to 3 PM
(1)

3 PM to 6 PM
(2)

6 PM to 9 PM
(3)

9 PM to 12 AM
(4)

.024
(.071)
.004
(.061)
-.018
(.075)
-.031
(.107)
.011
(.104)
-.057
(.098)
.000
(.011)

.142
(.066)
-.022
(.060)
-.018
(.069)
-.107
(.103)
-.098
(.100)
-.020
(.093)
.021
(.011)

.042
(.060)
.010
(.052)
.055
(.061)
.096
(.088)
.077
(.086)
.057
(.080)
-.005
(.009)

.049
(.060)
.094
(.051)
.004
(.060)
-.180
(.090)
-.154
(.087)
-.107
(.081)
.020
(.009)

Non-game Day

-.066
(.189)
-.003
(.141)
.085
(.140)
-.311
(.182)
-.323
(.185)
-.150
(.156)
.019
(.017)
---

.182
(.163)
.120
(.136)
-.008
(.142)
.019
(.172)
-.069
(.176)
-.001
(.150)
-.002
(.017)
---

.347
(.130)
.007
(.113)
-.245
(.127)
-.027
(.144)
-.044
(.147)
-.019
(.128)
.013
(.014)
---

.108
(.139)
.031
(.117)
.029
(.120)
.008
(.147)
-.085
(.151)
-.113
(.131)
.006
(.014)
---

Groups
Observations

562
62,459

592
63,913

624
66,155

624
66,043

Games starting at 1 PM
Loss * Predicted Win
(Upset Loss)
Loss * Predicted Close
(Close Loss)
Win * Predicted Loss
(Upset Win)
Predicted Win
Predicted Close
Predicted Loss
Nielsen Rating
Games starting at 4 PM
Loss * Predicted Win
(Upset Loss)
Loss * Predicted Close
(Close Loss)
Win * Predicted Loss
(Upset Win)
Predicted Win
Predicted Close
Predicted Loss
Nielsen Rating

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. See notes to Table 4. Each column is a separate model which allows for
separate coefficients for games starting at 1 PM versus 4 PM.

Table 6. Shocks from Emotionally Salient Games.
Intimate Partner Violence, Male on Female, at Home
Game Type =
Traditional
Rivals
(2)

Game Type =
Sacks≥4,
Turnovers≥4, or
Penalties>80 yds
(3)

Game Type =
Highly Salient:
(1) & [(2) or (3)]
(4)

.102
(.030)
.062
(.030)
.022
(.039)
-.019
(.033)
-.041
(.035)
-.017
(.035)

.138
(.062)
.047
(.056)
.145
(.067)
-.040
(.046)
-.030
(.048)
-.051
(.054)

.152
(.046)
.016
(.040)
.068
(.045)
-.060
(.045)
-.014
(.043)
-.019
(.034)

.154
(.041)
.063
(.043)
.015
(.053)
-.038
(.040)
-.057
(.045)
.017
(.040)

Non-game Day

-.031
(.069)
-.011
(.040)
.022
(.040)
-.001
(.049)
.033
(.041)
-.002
(.035)
---

.067
(.023)
.032
(.027)
-.007
(.031)
-.009
(.033)
-.013
(.034)
-.005
(.032)
---

.032
(.038)
.056
(.032)
-.007
(.036)
-.006
(.033)
-.017
(.034)
-.002
(.035)
---

.007
(.038)
.030
(.030)
.023
(.032)
-.010
(.034)
-.005
(.034)
-.023
(.033)
---

p-value for row (a) – row (b)
Groups
Observations

.08
765
77,520

.30
765
77,520

.04
765
77,520

.01
765
77,520

Game Type =
Still in Playoff
Contention
(1)
More Salient Games (Game Type = 1)
(a) Loss * Predicted Win
(Upset Loss)
Loss * Predicted Close
(Close Loss)
Win * Predicted Loss
(Upset Win)
Predicted Win
Predicted Close
Predicted Loss
Less Salient Games (Game Type = 0)
(b) Loss * Predicted Win
(Upset Loss)
Loss * Predicted Close
(Close Loss)
Win * Predicted Loss
(Upset Win)
Predicted Win
Predicted Close
Predicted Loss

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. See notes to Table 4. Each column is a separate model which allows for
separate coefficients by game type. Still in playoff contention indicates that a team has a greater than 10% chance of
making the playoffs given their current win-loss record, based on the probability that any NFL team made the
playoffs with such a win-loss record between 1995 and 2006. Traditional rivals indicates a game between
traditional rivals, as defined by “Rivalries in the National Football League” on Wikipedia. The row labeled “p-value
for row (a) – row (b)” reports the p-value for the test of whether the coefficient reported in row (a) is significantly
different from the coefficient reported in row (b).

Table 7. Alcohol Use and Assault Severity.
Intimate Partner Violence, Male on Female, at Home
Alcohol Involved

Minor
Assault

Serious
Assault

(1)

(2)

(3)

Non-game Day

.127
(.063)
.045
(.057)
.015
(.065)
-.063
(.074)
-.065
(.076)
-.074
(.073)
---

.096
(.040)
-.017
(.035)
-.011
(.040)
-.020
(.047)
.048
(.047)
.008
(.046)
---

.063
(.099)
.099
(.034)
.068
(.038)
-.053
(.044)
-.098
(.045)
-.040
(.044)
---

Groups
Observations

527
61,543

633
71,142

657
72,859

Loss * Predicted Win
(Upset Loss)
Loss * Predicted Close
(Close Loss)
Win * Predicted Loss
(Upset Win)
Predicted Win
Predicted Close
Predicted Loss

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Alcohol involved indicates the reporting officer noted that either alcohol or
drugs were a contributing factor in the incident. Minor assault is defined as simple assault or intimidation without
injury; serious assault is defined as aggravated assault or any assault with a physical injury.

Table 8. Location and Victim-Offender Relationship.
Intimate Partner Violence, Male on Female, at Home
At Home,
Total
Female on
Away from
Male on
Male on
Male, at
Female (M-F) Home, M-F Female (M-F)
Home

Spouse, at
Home, M-F

Girlfriend,
at Home,
M-F

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Non-game Day

.080
(.027)
.036
(.024)
.022
(.028)
-.015
(.032)
-.016
(.032)
-.011
(.031)
---

-.114
(.063)
-.028
(.055)
.004
(.063)
.111
(.074)
.087
(.075)
.075
(.073)
---

.049
(.025)
.026
(.022)
.018
(.025)
.005
(.029)
.001
(.030)
.003
(.029)
---

.0162
(.0585)
-.0513
(.0506)
-.0356
(.0596)
.0648
(.0694)
.0960
(.0698)
.0528
(.0679)
---

.126
(.044)
.037
(.030)
-.031
(.046)
-.015
(.048)
.032
(.046)
.025
(.048)
---

.075
(.040)
.042
(.035)
.041
(.040)
-.040
(.046)
-.053
(.047)
-.057
(.045)
---

Groups
Observations

765
77,520

583
68,498

775
77,985

607
69,830

551
57,561

670
73,608

Loss * Predicted Win
(Upset Loss)
Loss * Predicted Close
(Close Loss)
Win * Predicted Loss
(Upset Win)
Predicted Win
Predicted Close
Predicted Loss

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. At home indicates the incident occurred at a residence/home; away indicates
all other locations. Spouse is defined as the victim being a current spouse, a common-law spouse, or an ex-spouse;
girlfriend is defined as the victim being the offender’s girlfriend.

Appendix Table. Robustness Checks and Additional Results.

Baseline
Model
(1)
Coefficient Estimates
Loss * Predicted Win
(Upset Loss)
Loss * Predicted Close
(Close Loss)
Win * Predicted Loss
(Upset Win)
Predicted Win

Treat
Subsample Smaller
Larger
Missings with No Agencies Agencies Negative
as Zeros Missings (pop<50K) (pop≥50K) Binomial
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Date
Fixed
Effect
(7)

Younger
Older
Offenders Offenders
(age<30) (age≥30)
(8)
(9)

Non-IP
Family
Violence
(10)

Non-IP
Friend
Violence
(11)

Non-game Day

.080
(.027)
.036
(.024)
.022
(.028)
-.015
(.032)
-.016
(.032)
-.011
(.031)
---

.078
(.027)
.042
(.024)
.029
(.028)
-.006
(.032)
-.021
(.032)
-.010
(.032)
---

.067
(.030)
.037
(.026)
.027
(.030)
-.004
(.036)
-.006
(.036)
.001
(.035)
---

.096
(.043)
.034
(.038)
-.009
(.043)
-.045
(.050)
-.073
(.051)
-.034
(.049)
---

.070
(.035)
.037
(.031)
.040
(.036)
.007
(.042)
.026
(.042)
.010
(.041)
---

.084
(.029)
.038
(.026)
.019
(.029)
-.014
(.034)
-.019
(.035)
-.013
(.033)
---

.074
(.032)
.038
(.027)
.019
(.031)
-.015
(.026)
-.020
(.028)
-.006
(.026)
---

.097
(.044)
.029
(.038)
.064
(.044)
.004
(.052)
.008
(.053)
-.006
(.051)
---

.075
(.035)
.037
(.031)
-.006
(.036)
-.038
(.041)
-.029
(.042)
-.014
(.040)
---

.002
(.030)
.020
(.025)
.043
(.029)
.015
(.035)
.024
(.035)
.045
(.033)
---

.077
(.029)
.051
(.024)
.005
(.028)
-.002
(.033)
-.020
(.033)
.011
(.031)
---

Number of Municipalities
Observations

765
77,520

765
93,029

447
39,492

651
60,766

134
16,736

765
77,520

765
77,520

651
72,315

723
76,132

733
76,229

711
75,279

Predicted Close
Predicted Loss

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. See notes to Table 4. In columns 1-9, the dependent variable is at-home, male-on-female intimate partner violence. In
the baseline model, if there is a day with no crime of any type (not just IPV) reported to NIBRS, that day is dropped and treated as missing at random. Column 2
alternatively treats these missing days as days with zero IPV. Column 3 only includes municipalities in a given season if the agency reports incident data for all
17 Sundays of the regular football season; this subsample is composed primarily of larger municipalities. Column 7 includes dummies for the different Sundays
included in our sample (204 Sundays). The final three columns use different dependent variables for incidents occurring at home: column 10 uses violence
committed against any family member except an intimate partner (for example, a child, sibling, parent, or in-law), column 11 uses violence against a friend,
acquaintance, neighbor, or otherwise known victim who is not a family member or intimate partner.

Figure 1: Risk of Violence Following Loss or Win

Risk of Violence (h)

h0+α

hL = risk following loss

h0

h0−β

hW = risk following win

0

Probability of Victory (p)

1

Realized Score Differential
−45 −30 −15 0
15 30 45

Figure 2: Final Score Differential versus the Pre−Game Point Spread

predicted
close

predicted win

−21

−14

−7

−3 0
3
Spread

predicted loss

7

14

Notes: Realized score differential is opponent’s minus home team’s final score. The plotted
regression line has an intercept of .09 (s.e.=.21) and a slope of 1.01 (s.e.=.03).

21

Probability of Victory
.5

1

Figure 3: Probability of Victory as a Function of the Spread

predicted
close

0

predicted win

−21

−14

−7

−3

0
3
Spread

predicted loss

7

14

Note: Curve is fit from a regression of the probability of victory for the home team on a third order
polynomial in the spread.

21

10

Nielsen Rating
20
30

40

50

Figure 4: Television Audience for Local Games and the Spread

0

predicted win

−14

predicted close

−7

−3

0
Spread

predicted loss

3

7

Note: Each rating point equals 1% of the total number of television households in the local market.
The plotted regression line has an intercept of 24.74 (s.e.=.28) and a slope of −.38 (s.e.=.04).

14

Increase in IPV (log scale)
0
.1
.2

Figure 5: Differential Increase in Violence for a Loss versus a Win, as a
Function of the Spread

−.1

predicted win

−12.5

predicted close

−3

predicted loss

3
Spread

Note: Dashed lines are pointwise 95% confidence intervals.

14

