                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            REVEALING FAILURES IN THE HISTORY OF SCHOOL FINANCE

                                          Peter H. Lindert

                                       Working Paper 15491
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15491


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2009




For their helpful comments on earlier drafts, the author thanks Sun Go, Maarten Prak, Noam Yuchtman,
and conference participants at Queens University in Kingston, at the Instituto de Ciências Sociais in
Lisbon, at the Fundación Ramón Areces and Instituto Figuerola in Madrid, and at UC Davis. The
usual absolving disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Peter H. Lindert. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Revealing Failures in the History of School Finance
Peter H. Lindert
NBER Working Paper No. 15491
November 2009
JEL No. H23,H52,N3,N30,O15

                                              ABSTRACT

This essay proposes a set of non-econometric tests using data on wage structure, school resource costs,
public expenditures, taxes, and rates of return to explain anomalies in which richer political units deliver
less education than poorer ones.

Both the anomalies of education history, and its less surprising contrasts, fit broad patterns that can
be revealed and partially explained using low-tech methods. Over most of human history, contrasts
in the output of education were driven mainly by contrasts in the supply of tax support for mass education.
Exogenous influences on the demand for, and the private supply of, education played only lesser roles.
Pro-growth public education could have emerged a century or two earlier than it did, had the leading
countries of Western Europe mustered the political will to fund it. Government underinvestment in
mass education is demonstrated for England and Wales between 1717 and 1891. Differences in political
support still account for most of today’s education anomalies where the contrasts involve less developed
regions.

In today’s highest-income settings, however, differences in tax funding lose their previous explanatory
power. The postwar shift away from strong effects of school resources calls for a renewed introduction
of historical context into the “does money matter” debate.


Peter H. Lindert
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
phlindert@ucdavis.edu
        I. WHY WASN’T, AND ISN’T, THE WHOLE WORLD DEVELOPED?

       In an oft-cited presidential address, Richard Easterlin challenged economic
historians and development economists to come up with the simplest big reason why
most humans have been sentenced to live in poor and underdeveloped economies.
Honoring his own question, he suggested a single big issue to pursue. To know why the
whole world isn’t developed, we should turn more attention to the lack of formal
schooling, especially primary school for the masses. Before 1940, less than four percent
of the total population was in school in most countries. Some have accelerated since then,
and some have not. He did not try to explain this puzzle himself, but only conjectured
that “a major shift in political power” caused a positive shift in “the incentive structure”
for mass education.1
       Education cannot be a monocausal explanation for underdevelopment, of course.
In the quarter century since Easterlin’s address, the search for a top global force behind
economic development has turned away from schooling toward other causal forces,
especially institutions that secure private property rights. Considerable progress has been
made toward identifying historical-statistical instruments that can explain part of the
global differences in economic growth over recent centuries.2 The new empirical
institutionalism does agree that the advance of knowledge is crucial to growth, and most
empirical tests are sufficiently reduced-form to allow education policy to be part of the
causal machinery. Yet the featured mechanisms are the security of private property rights
against piracy, theft, and government. Even Gregory Clark’s challenge to the role of
institutions ignores policies toward formal mass education, although it does introduce a
human-capital argument about middle-class values and family size.3
       Still, there are several reasons for going back to school, so to speak, in the search
for better explanations. One is the power of history’s raw correlation: every country
where the average income has advanced beyond, say, a thousand PPP dollars of 1990 has
elevated its schooling, and has done so with public tax money, not waiting for private
markets to do the educating. It would strain credibility to argue that this is purely a
reverse causation from economic growth to the level and funding of education. Surely,
any shock either to the supply of schooling or to output has a cumulative effect on both.


                                                                                       Page 2
Even the recent studies that have downplayed the role of education in comparative
development have confirmed the significance of that role. For example, a landmark
article by Mark Bils and Peter Klenow emphasizing that schooling cannot explain even
half the postwar differences in growth rates does firmly establish its minority
contribution, perhaps as much as a third of all postwar variance in GDP growth.4
        A second reason to return to the role of formal schooling is that the traditional
externalities arguments are now being confirmed by empirical tests. The externalities
have proven significantly positive in recent econometric studies, despite the difficulties of
measuring external effects.5
        How could we learn more from the human record about the causes and growth
effects of formal education? Given the feedbacks between education and other variables,
there are four main kinds of evidence:


        (1) randomized natural experiments, the econometric “gold standard” of causal
identification;
        (2) econometric estimates on panel or cross-sectional econometric samples where
the models fail to pass tests of instrument exogeneity and power;
        (3) non-econometric quantitative comparisons; and
        (4) non-quantitative historical data.


Each of the four kinds of evidence has a contribution to make, because of each trades
weaknesses for strengths. Their scientific reliability in identifying causality runs in the
order shown here, from (1) to (4). Yet the empirical breadth and suggestive power of
their respective databases run in the opposite order. At one extreme, naturalized natural
experiments have yielded the most solid evidence on the economic and health effects of
formal schooling, exploiting such randomizers as the calendar month of a person’s birth
or accidents in the sequence in which different U.S. states implemented mandatory
schooling laws.6 The price of this high credibility is the narrowness of the counterfactual
question answered (what if no mandatory schooling at that time, or what if the person
were born late in the year) and the narrowness of the historical context covered. While
the share of history allowing randomized experiments will grow, it will always be a small

                                                                                      Page 3
share of history. To avoid discarding most of the human record, we must supplement the
best narrow tests with use of shakier testing of larger ranges of experience. This paper
emphasizes the third technique, namely non-econometric quantitative comparisons, for
illuminating the sources and effects of extra formal schooling.
       It turns out that low-tech handling of a set of qualitative indicators, buttressed by
some accounting measurements, allows us a great deal of causal insight. History has been
kind to us: While the different historical indicators might conceivably contradict each
other’s testimony, they often do not. The power of those raw correlations has already
produced strong non-econometric comparative studies of the Americas by the Engerman-
Mariscal-Sokoloff team.7
       The reward for using improved non-econometric evidence is the identification of
some clear patterns in the history of education policy failures:
       (1) Most of history makes it easy to find and demonstrate cases of
underinvestment in primary education, with no clear cases of overinvestment.
       (2) For at least three centuries, underinvestment in primary education has been
mainly the result of political decision-making, not of private irrationality or of any lack of
technology that would reward those with extra schooling. The one clear case of private
irrationality is many societies’ failure to educate daughters when the law allowed gender
equity in schooling and teaching.
       (3) Indeed, some governments have even lost net revenue by under-investing in
mass education and failing to solve the familiar problem of capital market imperfections.
I illustrate with two cases in which the fiscal rate of return on extra schooling exceeded
the cost of government borrowing. The risk-aversion argument, which may absolve
private individuals from the charge of irrationally passing up large expected returns, does
not apply to secure governments.
       (4) The clearest failures have been inegalitarian, blocking education for the
masses while investing enough public funds in elite education to bid down its returns. In
many cases, the inegalitarian bias shows signs of being linked to gender inequity as well.
History has still not offered a clear case of egalitarian failure to groom top talent while
delivering heaps of tax money to the masses.8



                                                                                       Page 4
       (5) Government underinvestment is likely to have occurred in several contexts
since the late seventeenth century. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the secure
states of Western Europe, particularly England, could have accelerated mass schooling
and growth two centuries before they actually did so. This paper also casts suspicion on
postwar governments in Latin America.
       (6) Since the 1960s, however, the shortcomings in rich countries’ education
policies are less clearly related to under-funding. With nearly full enrollments in primary
and secondary education, the frontier has shifted from education quantity to quality, and
inefficiency is replacing insufficiency as the locus of likely policy error.


      II. EXPLAINING ANOMALIES IN PAST EDUCATION PERFORMANCE


       Comparative historiography needs additional tools to explain the contrasts that
have occurred over a vast, but thinly quantified, historical record. Making the most of the
available clues calls for a procedure that delivers clear qualitative conclusions when the
data fail to offer a randomized natural experiment. One can find which suspects were
responsible for historical contrasts in education outcomes, aided only by some of the
suspects’ movements, a few clearly valid behavioral assumptions, and some additional
contrasts, which we will call “fingerprints”.
       To launch such a non-econometric inquiry into contrasting education outcomes,
we must begin with what we know to be a tight inter-relationship between education
achievement and the level of income. Education achievement, or the contribution of
education to productive human capital, manifests itself partly in average years of
educational attainment and partly in some observable indicators of educational quality,
such as test scores. Education achievement can also take forms that do not require formal
schooling, though they would be helped by it -- such forms as literacy and numeracy.9
Any dimension of this achievement (Ed) depends on incomes through these two
simultaneous equations, for any polity i in time t:
                  (+)
(1)     Edit = ao + a1Yit + a2 X it + eait and
                (+)

                                                                                     Page 5
(2)     Yit = bo + b1 Edi,t−1 + b2 Z it + ebit .


Here Ed is any education performance outcome, Y is average income (or its logarithm),
and X is a vector of exogenous influences on Ed -- our leading suspects, it will turn out.
The a’s and b’s are vectors of coefficients, Z is a vector of exogenous influences on Y,
and the e’s are error terms. Examples of X would be the strength of economic demand
for skills, social willingness to educate females, or government policies toward
education; and examples of Z would be geographic or historical luck, such as natural

resources, proximity to foreign markets, or the absence of war. The plus signs over a1

and b1 indicate two of our frugal assumptions: outputs of the education sector depend
positively on current average income, and income depends positively on the previous

generation’s education outputs, Edt-1. Using the assumed linear structure of coefficients,

the contrast between any two polities i = A and i = B, is represented by


(3) ΔEdt = a1b1ΔEdt−1 + a1b2ΔZ t + a2ΔX t + Δeat + aΔ1ebt for education, and


(4) ΔYt = b1ΔEdt−1 + Δb2 Z t + Δebt for income.


To cut the differences in structure between polities, let us make the comparison
contemporaneous, so that either polity had the chance to draw from the same global menu
of technologies for providing education and for keeping adults alive and productive.10
       So far, we have little way of constraining the set of possible explanations of the
difference between settings A and B. To add more information, let us focus only on those
contrasts that are education-income anomalies, defined as cases where education
outcomes are higher in A than in B, or ΔEd > 0, even though B is richer in terms of
income, or ΔY < 0. Such anomalies, with A more educated though B is richer, have
happened in a sizeable minority of historical settings over the last three centuries. In
these anomalous cases, one can rule out either a poverty defense, or a Wagner’s Law
defense, that the country with less schooling simply could not afford it.11


                                                                                      Page 6
         For each of history’s anomalies, we now have a slightly narrower set of suspects.
Looking back at Equation (4), let us take a case in which A was as least as educated at B
in the previous generation too, and set the A-minus-B difference in Equation (4)’s error
eb at zero. Then the only way that A could have been poorer than B, as the anomaly
requires, is for the term Δb2 Z to be negative. That is, the anomaly requires that A must
have some exogenous disadvantage (natural resources, etc.) unrelated to education.
Turning back to Equation (3), our suspicions about how A got more education can now
focus on the term involving education-specific suspects ( a2ΔX ). It seems safe to
conclude that this term a2ΔX plus any lagged advantage in previous education ( ΔEdt−1)
should share in explaining at least 100 percent of the contrast in education, once we add
two reasonable assumptions: (1) the current contrast in education exceeds the income-
transmitted effect of any previous education advantage that A had enjoyed
( ΔEdt > a1b1ΔEdt −1), and (2) the double difference in error terms ( Δea t + aΔ1ebt ) is not
positive.
         The tests still have only very limited power, however, since there can be a number
of education-specific suspects within that a2ΔX bundle. Worse, many of these X
suspects cannot be measured. A prime example would be exogenous differences in social
attitudes affecting the private demand for schooling.
         Fortunately, the historical record often leaves additional fingerprints in the form
of other features left by the same education-specific suspects (the X’s). There will be

several observable features, Fi’s, that may be linearly related to the X’s, Z’s, and other

forces V’s:


(5) Fi = c io + c i1 X + c i2 Z + c i3V + eic , or, in the A-B contrast,


(6) ΔFi = c i1ΔX + c i2ΔZ + c i3ΔV + Δeic


The more such additional fingerprints we have, and the more we know about the signs of
the coefficients, the more we can infer the ΔX’s and their likely roles in making the
poorer country the more educated country.

                                                                                          Page 7
        This simple framework leads us part of the way toward causal explanation of
anomalous contrasts. The framework has been a parsimonious one, involving only the
following kinds of assumptions and information:


        (a) the assumption that a greater education of the previous generation of students
raises current national product ( b1 > 0);
        (b) the assumption that greater income raises investment in education ( a1 > 0);
        (c) the observed anomaly that A is more educated than richer country B, which
allows us to rule out a net explanatory effect of the exogenous non-education influences
on income (the ΔZ’s);
        (d) data on additional fingerprints (the ΔFi ’s); and
        (e) the assumption that we know the signs of various coefficients, though we lack
reliable estimates of their absolute magnitudes.


The sharpness of our explanation will depend on the specifics of each historical
comparison. In some cases, we will find too many X’s that could contribute uncertain
amounts to the observed contrast, and our explanation will remain incomplete. In other
lucky “natural experiments”, we will be fortunate enough to find only 1-3 suspects guilty,
yielding a fairly clear explanation of each contrast. Better still, the clear cases will turn
out to have some clear patterns, inviting global conjectures.


                         III. WHERE WERE THE ANOMALIES?


        History has left us enough numbers to sketch a global history of the education
anomalies featured in this paper. There are many cases in which a poorer country has
higher education outputs than a richer country, even though most comparisons find that
richer countries have more schooling.
        The anomalies algorithm looks very symmetrical, though my paper title is not.
In principal, each anomaly invites these choices between mirror-image interpretations:




                                                                                        Page 8
• “Richer Country B ‘succeeded’ in becoming richer, despite less education, due to some
       wiser use of resources” versus “Country B failed on the education front.”
• “Country A spent too much tax money on schooling” versus “Richer Country B spent
       too little tax money on schooling”.


In each case the second interpretation seems to hold more promise. One reason is that
education outcomes are more policy-malleable than oil deposits and other exogenous “Z”
influences on income, making for a more inviting research agenda. Another is that the
rate of return evidence suggests under-investment failures, not over-investment failures in
the education sector. Finally, anomalous successes in test scores (e.g. Finland and Korea
in PISA today) seem to depend more on pedagogical efficiencies and ethnic homogeneity
than to economic policy, offering less reward for applying economic historiography.
       The nature of quantifiable education outputs has drifted over time. Before the
mid-nineteenth century the most widely available indicator was literacy. The early
literacy history, say between the early seventeenth century and the early nineteenth,
contained few anomalies. Broadly, in the centuries before public schooling, those
countries with more prosperous middle and upper classes tended to purchase more
literacy for their children. The best-known alleged exception is the relatively high rate of
literacy in not-so-rich Sweden, the “impoverished sophisticate” of the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries. Yet even here the anomaly was not dramatic, since Swedish
children were highly literate but not so highly schooled. That is, they learned to read the
Bible, but did not stay in school for many years, as revealed by nineteenth-century data.12
       From the middle of the nineteenth century to the late twentieth, the most useful
indicator of education outputs was the overall enrollment rate for primary and secondary
school. Figures 1 through 4 follow this indicator from 1870 to 2000, with the slight twist
that the data for 2000 have cumulated earlier enrollments into an overall educational
attainment of the entire adult population. Figures 5 through 7 then introduce the kind of
education output measure that will dominate discussions of the twenty-first century: Not
years of schooling, which are converging over time, but achievement test scores that are
designed to measure education quality over the primary and secondary school years.13



                                                                                     Page 9
       Within and across the regions of the world, some anomalies have persisted since
the mid-nineteenth century, while others have vanished or have appeared only more
recently. In the community defined by Northwest Europe and its overseas offshoots, the
main past anomaly related to the performance of England and Wales. In the nineteenth
century, when England and Wales led in national income, it lagged behind some
countries in enrollments. By the late twentieth century, its position -- more precisely, that
of the United Kingdom -- had been transformed. As Figures 1 and 2 show for 1870-
1900, the United Kingdom as a whole sent a noticeably lower share of children through
school than did Canada, the United States, New Zealand and Australia, even though the
UK was the richer country in most comparisons. In 1870, Figure 1 allows us a glimpse
of how the international contrasts differed for the different nations within the UK. The
real anomaly indeed relates to the wealthier English-Welsh part of the Kingdom. Why
did it have lower enrollments relative to Scotland, as well as relative to North America
and Australasia? This case study will be pursued in Section VI below. For now, the
important point to note is that the English lag was indeed temporary. By the late
twentieth century the United Kingdom had slightly higher enrollments and adult
educational attainments that the United States and the rest (Figure 4), and in the PISA
achievement tests of the early twenty-first century Britain’s 15-year-olds were in the
middle of the OECD cluster (in Figure 5), scoring higher than their U.S. counterparts.
       A more persistent anomaly is the education underperformance of much of Latin
America relative to East Asia and Eastern Europe. So say the available contrasts in all
five figures, e.g. in the lower enrollments in the South American countries than in Japan
in 1870-1930, when Japan’s income was much lower (Figures 1-3). Latin American
schooling also lagged behind that of the Caribbean region. That is, the anomalies tended
to contrast poorer and better-schooled countries around the Caribbean with richer and less
schooled South Americans. Specifically, Costa Rica, Cuba, Jamaica, and Trinidad-
Tobago have generally been ahead in education despite their not being as rich as
Argentina, Chile, Uruguay, and Venezuela. The most persistent historical anomaly
contrasts better-schooled Costa Rica with underperforming Venezuela evident all the way
from 1930 (Figure 3) through the test scores of 2006 (Figure 6).



                                                                                    Page 10
       The Middle East also has puzzling contrasts, at least in the data available since the
late twentieth century (Figures 4 and 5 again). The better-educated yet poorer countries
cluster in Anatolia and the Levant, as shown by the national observations for Jordan,
Lebanon, Syria, and Turkey. By contrast, enrollments and test scores tend to be much
lower in Tunisia and in the oil-rich countries of North Africa and the Arabian Peninsula,
according to data from Algeria, Libya, Saudi Arabia, and Oman.14 These anomalies are
only partly due to differences in the education of females, and call for further
explanation.
       Africa and Asia have their own output anomalies. These get less attention here,
since Africa and Asia are just beginning to participate in international testing programs
like PISA. Within sub-Saharan Africa, the South and East tend to be more schooled than
the North and West, partly because the North and West still discriminate more against
females in education. This produces some education-income anomalies like Figure 4’s
contrast between Malawi (poorer, more schooled in 1970) and Niger (less poor, less
schooled).15 Within Asia, the main anomalies are success cases, rising above the global
draft of education with income. In the early going, Japan achieved far more schooling
than its income would have predicted (Figures 2 and 3). In the postwar era, it is joined by
Korea, which has combined long average years of schooling with test scores that match
or exceed those of any richer Asian country (Figures 4 and 5). And at the poorer end of
the spectrum, China has achieved more years of average schooling than any country in
South Asia.
       The final illustration of revealed output anomalies draws on a present-day
American puzzle, which a larger literature, much of it econometric, has already tackled.
In Figure 7, as in Figures 5 and 6, the education output measure is a test-score average,
but this time the polities are states within the United States rather than nations. The main
interregional pattern should be familiar to any student of U.S. education history: despite
postwar convergence, the Southeast still has lower incomes and lower test scores than the
Northeast and North Central regions. The main anomaly appears in the West: California,
Nevada, and Hawaii have peculiarly low test scores for their income levels, and New
Mexico also tests poorly relative to lower-income Louisiana. There is something
distinctly worse about California’s primary-secondary schooling, even after the ethnic

                                                                                    Page 11
mix and immigrant share have been held constant. So one would gather from a simple
comparison of California with middling Texas in Figure 7, and so say several
econometric studies.16 Thus our simple way of mapping anomalies seems to fit the
econometric results and institutional realities of this well-documented case. Less
resolved, however, is the debate over the underlying causes of America’s current
anomalies in education output, and we return to this debate later.


    IV. WHAT HELD BACK MASS EDUCATION? LINING UP THE SUSPECTS


       To explain history’s education-and-income contrasts, let us begin by lining up the
forces most often suspected of holding back education (the ΔX’s) as row headings on the
left side of Table 1. The suspects are grouped into demand-side and supply-side forces in
the market for primary schooling.
       The most obvious demand-side force that might have retarded education for
millennia would be a lack of demand for the kind of labor that requires literacy,
numeracy, and other skills that schools might help to deliver. We naturally, though
wrongly, suspect that most of our ancestors were unschooled largely because the
economy had no jobs that called for schooling. One might accuse this first suspect if one
sought to summarize all history before, say, the Industrial Revolution as a setting in
which the backward state of technology forced people to make their living with raw
labor. The first row of Table 1 says that such low demand for skills should have raised
the relative child (unskilled) wage, lowered the adult gains from education, and lowered
all rates of return on education.
       In the second row stands its close relative, high demand for child labor (in the
less-educated setting B). We often believe that children have stayed away from school
because their parents felt they could earn good wages at an early age without going to
class or studying. In the manufacturing zone of northern England, the Industrial
Revolution famously kept children out of school, a problem that provoked a series of
child labor laws and compulsory schooling laws.17 The second row in Table 1 poses ways
to test this possibility. If it were the dominant constraint, and other things were equal, we
would see higher wage rates for children, less educational attainment, and thus higher

                                                                                     Page 12
adult-wage gains from skills (ΔW) and higher rates of return for those who invested in
education.
       Next come some demographic forces that must have played at least a partial role,
leaving us the task of deciding how big a role and when. Higher fertility would make it
harder for parents in place B to afford schooling, even though it would not necessarily
affect the market price of schools. Human capital per child would be lowered.18 Larger
families would also supply more children to the low-skill labor market, bidding down the
child wage and bidding up the skilled-wage premium among adults once the adult labor
supply tilted toward less schooling. The shift toward supplying less skilled workers
would also raise the rates of return for those who received extra education.
       Another demographic force probably played a major role in delaying the shift
toward more schooling. Short adult life expectancy should have shortened the average
work career and held down the rates of return on schooling, even though it may also have
bid up the wage premium by supplying less skilled labor per year. This prolonged
restraint was removed only with the arrival of modern health improvements. As will be
argued below, one background reason why educational attainment is higher in Mexico or
India today than in England or America back in the early nineteenth century, with
roughly comparable incomes, is that Mexicans and Indians can now expect to use their
skills over longer careers.19
       It is particularly natural to attribute the long delay of formal schooling to
fundamental social attitudes, represented in Table 1 by the row “family distaste for
schooling.” This rubric is meant to include a host of inertial instincts that parents might
have, such as “Your grandparents didn’t need schooling to live a decent life, nor did I,
and neither do you” or “Don’t try to move into a strange life where you’re not wanted”.
If it were the dominant retarding force in context B, then we should expect to see a
persistence of high skill premiums and high rates of return to extra schooling for those
few who obtained it.
       Discrimination is also a leading suspect, on both the demand side and the supply
side of the market for primary schooling. It has checked demand for schooling when
employers or powerful competing groups deny a large share of the population its free
access to jobs that would use the schooling. Classic examples are refusal to hire women,

                                                                                       Page 13
or to hire members of a disadvantaged race or caste or tribe. Job market discrimination
should raise the skilled wage and raise all rates of return on education for those in the
favored group.
       On the supply side, discrimination can also be practiced in the education
admissions process, by restricting entry from any of the same groups of outsiders. Either
kind of discrimination lowers the use of persons with high ability, and drags down
outsiders’ incentive to get that schooling. It would show up in the data, however, in a
deceiving way. The measured skilled wage premiums and the rates of return to education
would all look higher, even though the true wage rates and rates of return are lower for
those denied access. The literature on rates of return to education has repeatedly
reminded us of this point when discussing “screening” and the use of best-schools
connections to allocate and restrict top jobs in government or guilds. Where screening is
based on ability (innate talent plus parental background), the marginal product of
schooling looks deceivingly high because those outside the margin would be less
productive. Even in the less ability-biased kinds of discrimination, the returns can still
deceive, because competition would have bid down the rates of pay being protected by
discriminatory education. When discrimination is a prime suspect, the historian and
economist must decide with the help of clues not shown in Table 1. In some cases, that is
easy. For example, discrimination against female education retards education and output
in ways that are easy to quantify once one has data on education and wages by gender.
       Alternatively, schooling may have been blocked through much of history simply
because it had a high unit costs (or out-of-pocket costs, or “direct” costs) relative to
average income levels. Those high costs could have taken the form of ineffective
teaching technology or high prices for such school inputs as teachers, books, paper, and
safe buildings. Such a possibility should be weighed by direct observation of high costs,
and if possible by weighing their negative effect on the private and social returns to
schooling. Indirectly they should also have tended to hold up the pay premiums (ΔW) for
those few who acquired the skills anyway.
       Schooling will also have been lower in settings where there was less philanthropy
to support it. The signs of such a lack of charity are simply its low level and the same



                                                                                      Page 14
effects that Table 1 showed for family distaste for schooling, except that denial of charity
also lowers the private rate of return for those who do get educated.
        The final rows in Table 1 examine the imprints of the suspect that will end up
being featured in this essay: The relative denial of tax support for basic education.
Whatever its causes, it leaves a distinctive set of fingerprints. Without tax support, the
private returns to schooling will be lower and the restricted group receiving the schooling
will enjoy higher pay premiums. Society as a whole will also get lower returns. Unlike
other suspected causes of low schooling, the denial of tax support in one setting relative
to another will leave its traces in relatively available fiscal data. Table 1 points this out,
by selecting two indicators of tax support for primary schooling, both of which tend to be
relatively measurable even for less developed countries and for centuries past. We will
look at these tax-support measures more closely when reviewing the evidence.
        Looking down the rows of Table 1, one notices that two of the best-known
suspects are missing. First, as mentioned when we defined anomalies above, lower
income would obviously restrain the demand for education. Yet income should not be
listed in Table 1 because it is too central, too endogenous to any model of how education
interacts with the economy. Income and education have tight simultaneous links, and
progress together, as noted earlier. One needs a lucky natural experiment to quantify the
education effects of an income shock, or the income effects of an education shock. While
some econometric studies have succeeded in exploiting such natural experiments, these
studies are few in number and their conclusions quantify what was already known
qualitatively: positive income shocks raise investments in education, and positive
education shocks (e.g. mandatory schooling laws) raise income, yet the slopes of these
relationships are not known so securely that we can simply subtract a known income
effect to distill exogenous influences on education. This, again, is why this study focuses
on anomalous cases in which education was held back despite a (B) polity’s having the
same or higher income than a polity (A) that invested more in education.
        Second, what about the familiar problem of credit constraints? Education is an
expensive investment, and perhaps the central constraint in all lower-education settings
had simply been the fact that poor parents find it harder get financing for their children’s
education. Credit constraints, like income, are central to any explanation of why the

                                                                                       Page 15
whole world has had so little education, yet like income they do not belong on the list of
exogenous suspects in Table 1. The reason, again, is that they are too central to the
history of backwardness, and too correlated with income. The poorer a household or a
whole society, the harder it is to gain the trust of lenders, for education or any other long-
term investment. Other forces must intervene to remove these constraints. One might
wish that improvements in the private financial sector would have provided the keys to
financing schooling, yet history offers relatively little hope of a low risk premium on
private student loans for the masses. Rather the crucial capital for mass private education
has been provided by tax-based subsidies. History suggests a corner solution: No country
has achieved universal primary education without relying mainly on taxes. Thus for
primary education the problem of credit supply lurks in the last rows of Table 1: The
issue is why some countries have been slower than others in supplying the tax funding
that would solve the credit constraint for primary education.


                         V. THREE KINDS OF FINGERPRINTS


       The clues, or quantitative indicators, listed in Table 1 help us sort among the
lined-up suspects. In fact, they also advance our standards for judging the classic fear of
“omitted-variable bias”. Tests of influences, econometric or otherwise, usually draw the
automatic agnostic response that perhaps some other omitted variables have acted as the
true hidden causes of movements in the dependent variable. The fingerprint testing
introduced here serves to raise the price of agnosticism. Anyone choosing to reserve
doubts should explain not only what omitted variables they have in mind but also how
these can match the extra fingerprint patterns. The more fingerprint tests we can add, the
fewer the number of possible suspects.
       Three main types of fingerprints that would be left at the scene by any influence
on comparative education outputs are presented as column headings in Table 1.


A. Market Rates
       Child wages. The opportunity cost of school children’s foregone earnings has
dropped with economic development, a rough tendency that partly explains the long

                                                                                      Page 16
delay in educational attainment. We know that it dropped as nations became rich,
because the value of hired child labor became nearly zero by law. Once a nation passed
laws making schooling mandatory, there was no employment opportunity during school
hours and therefore no opportunity cost.
        The importance of that change depends on how much children could earn in the
more rural and impoverished settings where they were free to drop out of primary school.
The correct answer seems to be that their opportunity costs loomed large as a share of the
total cost of going to school. In most of David Mitch’s calculations for Victorian
England, the opportunity cost was four-fifths of the total cost of attending school. In
Lewis Solmon’s calculations for the United States in 1880 and 1890, the lost wages were
about half the total cost of schooling in the countryside, and well above half in the
cities.20 Awaiting more quantitative data from other settings, we can only conclude that
the decline of child labor opportunities was an important part of the rise of schooling.
Still, as we shall see in rate-of-return calculations below, even with the higher estimates
of the opportunity cost of child labor, extra schooling brought high returns to all parties,
leaving us to explore why those returns were often passed up.
        Direct School Costs, and the Relative Price of Teachers. Did most of world
history deliver so little education because schooling of given quality was more costly and
less affordable for a typical family than it has become in today’s rich countries?
Unencumbered by data, our intuition could run in either direction. Perhaps teachers were
an expensive elite in less developed times and regions, and have become cheaper. Or
perhaps the opposite, if the quality of schooling declined and/or teachers became scarce
with development. We are still far from a global or even multi-national economic history
of school costs, and equally far from a global history of teacher pay, the key input price
in this sector. Nor is it easy to relate relative teacher wage rates to relative unit costs
unless or until one can hold quality constant.
        A straightforward answer requires measurement of the average cost of a pupil’s
week or month in school, relative to a standard income. Such data, in a form that is
comparable across countries or decades, are hard to find for any time before the 1980s. It
is hard to correct any time series on school costs or fees for the upward drift in quality
caused by lengthening of the school year, improvements in teacher quality and pedagogy,

                                                                                        Page 17
and class size reduction. The problem seems soluble, especially with U.S. historical data,
but only after much careful handling.21 Since the 1980s, the international agencies
(OECD, UNESCO, World Bank) have made international comparisons. There are
noteworthy differences between countries in unit costs, relative teacher pay, class size,
and test scores. Daily school costs per child seem to rise over the course of economic
development. The most likely reason, however, is a rise in school quality and not a rise in
the price of a given quality of schooling. Curriculum achievement test scores are clearly
higher in the richest countries than among test-taking students in developing countries,
suggesting an upward drift in the quality of delivery.22 Yet despite this rise in quality, the
direct cost of schooling of given quality, relative to general wage rates, has no clear trend
over the course of development.
        A Broad Hint from the History of Wage Premiums. Measuring the percentage
gain in adult pay that comes with extra education can help us reach an early decision on
the top-row suspect, namely a low market demand for skilled labor in the less-schooled
settings. As noted, many might suspect that there has been less schooling for centuries
because less developed settings had less demand for skilled labor. Perhaps these settings
lacked skilled-intensive technology or had low tastes for skill-intensive goods before,
say, the Industrial Revolution or the arrival of direct foreign investment from more
advanced countries. The lower past demand should have manifested itself in the form of
a lower skilled-wage premium, as predicted in Table 1. One might have gathered from
the widening of wage gaps in North America and Britain since the 1970s that wages were
more equal earlier, supporting the belief that demand for skills were relatively lower in
the past.
        Yet the growing eclectic sets of data on wage structure cast serious doubt on the
notion that skills were less rewarded in less developed settings. Recent international
comparisons give a clear result: Less developed settings generally have higher wage
premiums for higher-skill occupations, and there is no trend toward higher wage
premiums, except in countries in transition from communism. For example, Latin
American skilled-wage ratios remain above those of the US, especially in low-education
Brazil, Guatemala, and Nicaragua. The low-skill-demand argument seems to be wrong in
predicting lower wage premiums in less developed settings.23

                                                                                      Page 18
       The available fragmentary evidence on movements over history seems to agree
with the recent global cross-sections. A first hint comes simply from following American
wage history starting from the early nineteenth century. That history suggests wide
swings but no clear long run widening.24 Similarly for Britain, skill premiums showed no
clear net movement toward widening wage gaps anytime in the last seven centuries. In
the building sector, for example, the skill premiums dropped across the fourteenth
century, remained stable until the mid-nineteenth, and then dropped again.25 Jan Luiten
van Zanden has now extended our view of wage premiums in the building sector back to
medieval times in Western Europe, with parallel indications from some East Asian data.
He finds that wages compressed considerably from the middle ages to early modern
times, with no real reversal in recent centuries. 26 Similarly, the skilled wage premium
has declined in the building trades of India from the middle of the nineteenth century to
the end of the twentieth.27 While the skill premium in the building trades is not itself a
schooling wage premium, nor a technology premium in a newly emerging sector, career
choices would have linked the scarcities of skills across sectors.
       Though the wage premium evidence is indirect, apparently earlier and less
developed settings gave relatively high rewards to the kinds of skills that schooling
helped to develop. The same was probably true in the commercial sphere, where literacy
and counting have always been valued. We should look to other suspects, instead of
positing that there was less demand for literacy or numeracy in earlier settings.


B. Rates of Return, with Caveats and Global Patterns
       Let us turn next to a direct examination of rates of return on education, both as
concepts and as empirical measures produced by a scholarly cottage industry in the late
twentieth century. The rates of return have typically been used as clues about
underinvestment or overinvestment in formal education. Somebody (private and/or
public entities) has under-invested in the sense of lowering GDP if the rate of return is
too high, and over-invested if they have driven the rate of return to levels that are too
low. The vast literature measuring postwar rates has revealed important patterns that
probably held throughout modern history. Before viewing these patterns, however, we
must note some shortcomings of the conventional measures.

                                                                                     Page 19
       Caveats about Conventional Private and Social Rates. We start with the
conventional private and social rates of return, before introducing this paper’s new
emphasis on the fiscal rate of return. The present value of private benefits is the
discounted sum of the extra after-tax income gains from the extra education.
Correspondingly, on the cost side, the household incurs out-of-pocket private costs plus
the opportunity cost of what the child would have earned in not in school. The internal

rate of private return is the rate of discount, rP, that equates the present values of benefits
and costs.
       The familiar “social” benefits and costs of giving an individual more schooling
are discounted in a similar manner, except that the affected party consists of the
household and philanthropic and government sectors together. Again, the internal rate of
return is that value of the rate of discount that makes net present value equal to zero.
Externalities are ignored here, as they are in all past measurements of the “social” rate of
return. I shall also set aside non-economic consumption benefits of education, to instill a
bias toward understating some conclusions to be drawn later.28
       The rate of return estimates must be used with a great deal of caution. The first
problem is that the rates are based on a different counterfactual, a different “margin”,
than what most users of the measures would want. We typically want the rate of return
measure to compare the gains and losses from somehow encouraging a marginal child to
complete the next step of education. Yet the measure itself does not do that. Rather it
gives us what might be called the “average marginal” rate of return on the difference in
education at two levels, such as high school graduates versus primary school finishers.
The implicit counterfactual is unintended and unattractive: What if we had somehow
blocked everybody from getting the high school diploma? Furthermore, as a particular
level of education becomes more universally attained, e.g. with almost everybody
finishing primary school, the difference in the earnings of the two groups reflects the
increasingly atypically nature of those who don’t even finish primary school. There is no
way to avoid the fact that the marginal returns and costs may not equal the average ones
already attained, and we must imagine just how fast the diminishing returns to education
might set in as it expands. Such judgments must be reached on a case-by-case basis.



                                                                                       Page 20
       A second problem is that rates of return are typically over-estimated by making
the nearly universal assumption that people go to work and capture the extra earnings that
their education makes possible. Yet adults, especially females, typically work less than
that level at which they would fully reap the rewards of their educational attainment. At
the level of the individual, this point matters little, since one can simply assume that
every individual was free to choose between paid work and home time, so that education
has raised the marginal value of their time whether or not they work for pay. However, if
we are interested in effects on the growth of GDP per capita, or in the effects of education
on government revenue, the incompleteness of labor force participation means that the
economic returns are overstated. In what follows this likely effect of incomplete work
will be taken into account.
       Two Useful Global Patterns, Despite Another Flaw. Despite these caveats, there
is a great deal of useful information in comparing rates of return across contexts. Recent
studies have produced the useful rates of private and social return shown in Table 2.29
Note that Table 2 has three patterns. First, the rates of return are usually higher in poorer
countries, as one might expect from the greater severity of credit constraints in poor
settings. This suggests what the emerging economic history of wage structure has also
suggested: The economic gains from education were probably even higher in that past
than they are today. Second, the rate of return is usually higher at the earlier levels of
education. The return on primary education exceeds the return on higher education, even
without measuring externalities, which should have been larger in primary schooling.30
Finally, the private rates of return look higher than the social rates because of a
questionable decision that the authors have consistently made in defining the private rate.
       The first two tendencies offer valuable historical clues that probably extend back
for centuries, but the third is misleading. How could the private rate always exceed the
social rate, as shown in Table 2? The key assumption relates to the role of government in
the private rate calculations. Like most authors calculating private rates of return, George
Psacharopoulos and co-authors have deducted government subsidies to education from
the private cost side, but ignored the taxes paid on the private benefits side. Their
decision to take a short cut was made explicit at least as early as 1981: “Of course
earnings [in the social-rate calculation] should be before tax, whereas in the private rate

                                                                                        Page 21
of return calculation earnings should be after tax. But contrary to popular belief, the
post- versus pre-tax treatment of earnings does not make a big difference in the rate of
return calculation.”31 The same short cut has been taken by most of the rate of return
literature, though the difference was quantified in an early study by W. Lee Hansen and
also discussed by Gary Becker.32 Some authors have omitted all taxes from the
calculation of private returns, while others only missed indirect taxes, some kinds of
wealth tax, and the losses of social program benefits that accompany extra earnings.
Early authors (e.g. Hansen, Becker) were in this less-biased category, rightly introducing
income tax rates but missing other taxes altogether.
        The whole international comparative literature, however, took a step backwards
after 1964 by failing to deduct any taxes at all from private returns. Only in 2005 did the
OECD re-introduce income taxation and explicitly consider the fiscal rate of return,
though they still failed to deduct indirect taxes from the extra earnings.33
        Overstating the private returns by the amount of direct and indirect taxes paid on
extra income misdirects our suspicions. Viewing the persistent gap in private versus
social rates of return, one might ask “Why do private individuals constantly under-invest
more in education than does society as a whole?” That puzzle would be lessened,
however, if the calculations took account of direct and indirect taxes, thus lowering the
private rates of return. The numbers need to be worked out, since governments take their
bite from every year of a long work career. (The social rates, however, are free from this
tax bias.)
        The Fiscal Rate of Return. Correctly handling taxes invites a calculation of the
fiscal rate of return on extra education attainment and quality. Such a calculation can
reveal whether governments have actually passed up large bills on the sidewalk, i.e. large
later tax revenues, by refusing to pay smaller amounts to subsidize mass schooling. The
fiscal rate of return is the internal rate that equates the revenue gains and the costs that
extra education brings to government itself.34
        In what follows, we will find two historical cases in which the fiscal rate of
return on education was quite high, like many of those private and social rates of return.
Yet the fiscal measure has some extra strength as a clue revealing past underinvestment
in education. It is harder to ignore a high fiscal rate of return, because is a traditional risk

                                                                                       Page 22
argument is much less applicable on the government side. Traditionally, we look at the
high rates of return foregone on private investments and excuse them on the grounds that
such investments are very risky, warranting a rate well above the interest rates at which
risk-averse private businesses and households might borrow. The traditional argument is
certainly valid for private education loans, which repay private lenders only over a whole
generation. Yet for a provincial or national government, it seems unlikely that the
aggregate future tax returns from investing with subsidies in mass education are so
uncertain. Indeed, the uncertainty of the aggregate tax base could even be reduced by
subsidizing broad-based education. Calculations for Victorian England and postwar
Venezuela will confirm that the governments could have earned higher rates of return
than the interest rates they paid on their own debt.


C. The Relative-Public-Inputs Evidence
        Next let us turn to Table 1’s pair of tax-support clues that allow us a direct view
of political and fiscal efforts in support of education. The first clue is a support ratio
defined as35
                                                  (subsidies /attending _ student)
        Tax support ratio for primary pupils =
                                                          (income /adult)
This ratio scales the generosity of the subsidy in terms of the population’s ability to pay.
Such a measure is already displayed in publications by the OECD and UNESCO, as well
as in the scholarly literature.36 What is the norm for this ratio? If it is lower in setting B
than in higher-education A, is that a bad thing for B? The answer will depend on whether
or not A has over-invested in subsidizing and delivering primary education. The
empirical literature tends to approve of the levels of primary-education support in today’s
most-educated societies. Granted, there is a hot debate over whether adding more money
would do any good in the public schools of the United States and other OECD countries,
with Eric Hanushek supplying an abundance of evidence for the null hypothesis, and
there is good reason to wonder whether the subsidies need to be restricted to publicly-
supplied schooling.37 Yet nobody in these debates has mustered evidence in favor of
actually cutting primary school subsidies or in favor of cutting attendance toward the
lower levels of the past. It seems safe, when comparing this ratio between two settings,


                                                                                        Page 23
to presume that the more educated setting A has not yet reached the point of over-
investing in primary education, especially since those rates of return continue to run so
high (again see Table 2).
       A quick examination of Table 3’s postwar rates of public support for primary
schooling helps to bring this simple public-expenditure fingerprint into focus. Globally,
those countries whose children went to school less and got lower test scores (as in
Figures 4-6) tended to be countries that were less willing to spend taxes even in relation
to their average incomes (here in Table 3). Some of them were poorer, of course,
allowing them the excuse that they simply could not afford to spend as high a share of
their income on public education. Yet this Wagner’s Law variant on the poverty defense
falls short in the cases in which richer countries chose to spend less on public schooling.
We will find that most of history’s anomalies were such cases, with richer countries
achieving less education largely because they spent less of their incomes on taxes for
schools.
       The second selected support measure also reveals much about education finance
in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. It is a double ratio, by level of education:
                                         (subsidy /student) _ in _ primary _ education
       Primary/tertiary double ratio =                                                  ,
                                         (subsidy /student) _ in _ tertiary _ education
where tertiary refers to university education and other training beyond secondary school.
The lower this ratio in setting B relative to setting A, the more favor given by B’s
governments to higher education.
       Again, the ratio cannot be used to judge education policies until we have a norm,
a “best” balance between subsidizing primary education and subsidizing tertiary. One
guide is that the case for externalities from education spending has been stronger for
primary than for higher education. It was primary education that Adam Smith, Thomas
Jefferson, and Milton Friedman considered most worthy of subsidy on the ground that
mass schooling created citizens and social order, and the econometric evidence cited
above also emphasized spillovers from primary and secondary education. Granted,
institutions of higher learning in the United States and a few other advanced countries
generated great spillover benefits from their Research and Development. Yet the returns
from the instructional part of higher education are arguably more private.38


                                                                                       Page 24
       By itself, the fact that externalities might be greater for lower levels of education
does not tell us the “best” balance of public subsidies. Yet if we accept the notion that
the per-student externalities could reasonably be larger at the primary level, then the
“best” value of the primary/tertiary ratio should not be below one in any country.
Alternatively, in the OECD countries this ratio tends to be one-half (50%), as shown at
the top of Table 4. To err on the side of acquitting too many governments of developing
countries, let us say that the efficiency norm is 50 percent.
       Table 4 reveals that many developing countries spend less than half as much tax
money on each primary student as on each student in higher education, causing us to
wonder how the case for subsidizing those at the top could be stronger in countries with
more illiterates and less research-agglomeration efficiencies of the sort experienced in the
world’s top research centers. Recent literature has supported these suspicions by finding
that inequality in educational attainment, a result fostered by favoring higher education
subsidies, has had a negative effect on economic growth since 1960.39 Note that this
primary-versus-tertiary fingerprint offers telling evidence even without an education
output anomaly. Countries with relative primary support ratios well below 50 percent in
Table 4 cannot use their poverty as an excuse, since the same education budget could
have been more productively reallocated from tertiary to primary education. Such cases
suggest a policy failure regardless of the nation’s income per capita.40 Table 4 hints that
a counterproductive bias in favor of over-subsidizing higher education, and under-
subsidizing primary education, is endemic in Latin American, the Caribbean, Africa,
South Asia, and Southeast Asia. We return to this point in discussing postwar Latin
America.


                    VI. THREE FINGERPRINTING APPLICATIONS


A. England and Wales 1717 - 1891

       A strong illustration of the applicability of this paper’s clues in earlier history is
provided by English experience between the Glorious Revolution of 1688 and the Fees
Act that finally funded universal primary education in 1891. Here is a case that
particularly points toward insufficient government support, the suspect at the bottom of

                                                                                       Page 25
Table 1. By 1688, England was a great power with a secure government and a famously
secure revenue base.41 Yet England and the United Kingdom delivered relatively little
tax support for primary schools. Both England-Wales and the Kingdom as a whole
lagged behind France and the United States (along with Prussia) until the Fees Act of
1891, despite having a higher income per capita. So testify both the primary-school
support ratios (public or total expenditures per pupil, divided by GDP per capita), and
also the teacher/pupil ratios.42 Elsewhere I have conjectured that centralization and
restriction of the franchise played important roles in holding Britain behind until the
franchise was extended down the social ranks and the demand for schooling became
overpowering.43
       Confirming evidence comes through the availability of micro-studies of education
in Victorian England, studies that now make it possible to quantify the returns on
primary-school investments in England. David Mitch’s work allows us to convert his
extensive data on occupational rewards and school costs into rates of return on three
years’ schooling in the 1820s leading to literacy in adulthood, and Jason Long’s matching
of children in the 1851 census with adults in 1881 provides a similar view of the returns
to completing primary school around mid-century. Table 5 presents estimates of the
returns that are conservative in that they are likely to understate some of the gains or
overestimate some of the costs.44 Even with this tilt toward underestimation, the returns
are high enough to make some suggestions. The private and social returns are up close to
those reported for the 1970s-1990s in Table 2 above, even though the Victorian English
population had noticeably shorter careers. One implication of this is that the direct costs
and opportunity costs of schooling did not loom large enough to choke off the case for
investing in formal primary education. Yes, there was sufficient demand for literacy,
despite the likelihood that the demand for child labor held back the progress of schooling
in the industrial North for a few decades.
       The main innovation in Table 5, however, is the fiscal rate of return. Even with
estimates that are probably too pessimistic, it was well above the rate of interest at which
Parliament could borrow. The issue returns: Why did Parliament decline to subsidize
mass schooling if it would repay Her Majesty’s government itself? Indeed, the fiscal
indictment stands even when we re-introduce the fact that a grown-up child’s labor force

                                                                                     Page 26
participation would have been only partial, especially for females. Table 5’s Row (h.)
reports the same rates of return as for 1840, but with the adult earnings increments cut in
half. This lowers the rates of economic return on schooling, though not by half the rate
itself. The result is still a double-digit rate of return -- either private or social or fiscal --
well above the 4.4 percent rate at which Her Majesty’s government could have borrowed.
The government appears to have left money on the sidewalk by not investing more in
primary education before the Elementary Education Act of 1870 and the more decisive
Fees Act of 1891.
        The failure may have extended back to the start of the Hanoverian dynasty. As
far as we know, the returns and costs of primary education in the eighteenth century
should have yielded rates of return at least as high as those in Table 5, given what we
know about tax rates, interest rates, and the wage structure. The tax rates paid by
laborers were thought by Joseph Massie to be 8 percent, similar to the Victorian rates.45
Government could also borrow cheaply: The consol rate was below five percent as early
as 1717, the fourth Hanoverian year. So as early as 1717, the government could have
reaped a significant fiscal return by investing in universal primary education. Finally, the
wage structure did not reward education any less in the eighteenth century than later,
given the indirect evidence cited when introducing the skilled/unskilled wage ratio in
Table 1 above. Thus given the history of tax rates, interest rates, and wage rates, the rates
of return back to about 1717 should have been as high as those Victorian rates shown in
Table 5. It is fair to ask why Parliament in 1717 could not have enacted something like
the Education Act of 1870, followed 21 years later, in 1738, by an analogue to the Fees
Act of 1891. The usual explanation just re-poses the same question: Yes, education
subsidies were blocked partly by conflicts over the link between education and religion,
but these were later resolved in favor of free public schooling. Regardless of what
explains the opposition to tax-based schooling, the point remains that the operative
constraint that held up the advance of schooling lay in the collective unwillingness to
supply taxes.
        We cannot extend the same simple indictment back before the late seventeenth
century, however. The consol rate was well above five percent under the Stuarts and the
House of Orange, largely because the throne could (and did) default on its debts before

                                                                                           Page 27
1688.46 Britain and other emerging states were still not secure enough to take a more
modern long-run view of the economics of education subsidies. And before the late
fifteenth century, regimes were not only insecure but also more rural than the Tory
opponents of education in the nineteenth century, and thus had a self-interest that
opposed paying taxes to educate peasants to flee or revolt. Yet from the early eighteenth
century on, the necessary elements were all in place -- other than political will.
       Thus for the Victorian period at least, and probably for the whole period from
1717 to 1891, England-Wales and the United Kingdom underperformed in the sphere of
education relative to the United States and France. The culprits can be summarized using
the line-up of suspects in Table 1. Drawing on data for the Anglo-American anomaly of
1850-1890, the guiltiest suspect appears to have been deficient British (or superior
American) political will to pay taxes for primary schools, to judge from those support
ratios and from Britain’s lower teacher/pupil ratios. Accomplices may have included a
high relative wage for child labor in Britain and the higher cost of Britain’s (more male)
teachers relative to the (more female) primary-school teachers of North America and
Australasia.47 Other suspects are acquitted: Relative to the United States, rich Victorian
Britain did not suffer from lower market demand for skills, or higher fertility, or shorter
adult life expectancy, or weaker philanthropy.


B. Latin America in the Twentieth Century
       The lag in Latin American schooling behind that of North America has been
summarized and tentatively explained in a series of writings by the research team of
Stanley Engerman, Elisa Mariscal, and Kenneth Sokoloff (EMS). Reaching back to the
colonial era for root causes, they argue that low and unequal education, like other
symptoms of Latin American inequality in the nineteenth century and early twentieth,
stemmed from inequality in political power and landownership. They conclude that


       “although investment in schooling is strongly and positively correlated with per
       capita income over time and across countries, much variation remains to be
       explained. Moreover, the extent of inequality in political power, as reflected in the



                                                                                      Page 28
       proportion of the population who can vote, does seem to be associated with lower
       literacy and schooling rates.”48


To this Ewout Frankema has now added an important extension of the data on Latin
American education since 1870, emphasizing the inequality of education more than its
average level.49
       This section follows their lead, both in focusing on anomalous departures from
the income-education correlation and in emphasizing the distribution of political voice.
I offer new twists in the geography and historical timing of the Latin lags, especially for
the twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, and fresh evidence on the political
economy of government failure to subsidize. My tentative conclusions, to be presented
elsewhere, are:


       (1) If one compares Latin America with the rich industrialized countries, as the
EMS team has done, the data neatly fit both their concern and their explanation. Relative
to the richer countries, Latin American education has always been low and unequal.
       (2) While I think their explanation is the correct one, we must acknowledge that
their North-South contrast fits too many hypotheses. In the language of this paper, the
fact that Latin America has always been poorer allows critics to resist our hunch that
unequal voice is the key. Their lower education attainments do not pose an anomaly.
       (3) The search for anomalies yields more fruit, by revealing cases in which a
Latin American country has less education, and more unequal education, than poorer
countries. There are several such Latin American anomalies. The most dramatic one is a
case that has been relatively ignored: Venezuela.50 This section focuses on that case and
finds strong support for indicting a political environment that refused to subsidize mass
schooling.


       The global positioning of Latin American education achievements can be judged
by a renewed look at Figures 2-6 above. The region as a whole indeed had far lower
education than Canada, the United States, or Northwest Europe between 1900 and 2006.
Relative to countries with similar income per capita, its lag was less dramatic, as the

                                                                                      Page 29
figures suggest.51 Latin America’s disadvantage might be reinforced a bit if one could
adjust the enrollments data for a bias now identified by Frankema. Not only are Latin
American enrollments a bit lower, for a given income per capita, but these enrollment
rates also consist of a higher share of grade-repeaters dropouts, and a lower share of true
primary-school completers, than on other continents. He thus finds that the postwar
catching-up in Latin American enrollments may hide a loss in educational quality,
relative to other continents.52
        If Figures 2-6 show that Latin America as a whole has not distinctly lagged all
other continents in education attainment, they nonetheless also show some incriminating
anomalies. The new clues cast a different light on the Southern cone countries. The
Engerman-Mariscal-Sokoloff team described Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay as education
leaders in the Latin American context. While that is broadly correct, these three countries
provided less schooling than several poorer countries outside South America. As of
1900-1930, enrollment rates in Argentina and Uruguay trailed behind those of both the
mother countries (Spain and Italy), and trailed behind those of much poorer Japan,
Greece, and (in 1930) Romania. In terms of test scores, Argentina’s first entry into the
PISA exams, in 2006, yielded lower sample-average scores than those achieved by 15-
year-old students in Turkey and Mexico. Thus the position of the Southern Cone
countries in education history depends on what other countries we compare them to. On
the global level, they have tended to be slight under-achievers relative to countries in
other regions with the same incomes.
        The most noteworthy anomaly, however, relates to Venezuela, a country whose
education history has been seriously under-studied (at least, in the English-language
literature). Throughout the twentieth century Venezuela has been a clear Country-B
“failure” case, a rich country with strangely low education. Despite its oil prosperity
after World War I, Venezuela’s school enrollment rates in 1930 were no higher than
those of much poorer Turkey, and also below those of Mediterranean Europe, as well as
such distant poor countries as Japan, Romania, and even Siam (Figure 3). Closer to
home, Venezuelan children have been consistently less schooled than those in at least
five poorer neighbors: Colombia, Costa Rica, Guyana, Trinidad-Tobago, and Mexico.53
Even as late as 2006, after decades of oil wealth and after a few years of enrollment

                                                                                    Page 30
increases under Hugo Chavez, Venezuela’s sixth-graders got the second-lowest national
average sample score in math and reading out of 16 countries (Figure 6).
          Why these anomalies? Why did some many Latin American countries each enroll
and teach a lower share of their children than poorer countries? Some initial suggestions
can be offered here, ones that will be expanded in later writings.
          For all of Latin America, as for Industrial-Revolution Britain, we can reject some
natural suspicions. It seems untrue that the relative demand for higher-skilled and higher-
educated labor was weaker in Latin America. On the contrary, skill premia seemed as
high there as on any other continent.54 Nor was the use of child labor any greater in Latin
America than in South Asia or Africa or the Middle East. There has also little
discrimination against female enrollments for at least a century of Latin American history
-- certainly not as much as in Mediterranean Europe, the Middle East, Africa, or South
Asia.55
          For Latin America as a whole, as for Industrial Revolution Britain, the main
culprit has been a political bias against subsidizing mass schooling. To the evidence
already presented by EMS and by Frankema, this section can add two new international
clues, one for the start of the twentieth century and another for the later twentieth and the
early twenty-first. The start-of-century clue appears in the form of a pair of diagrams,
Figures 8 and 9, comparing expenditures across countries around the year 1900. Back
then, says Figure 8, Latin America spent about as much per child of school age as other
regions at the same income levels. The behavior of the data-supplying countries clusters
along the same familiar line relating expenditures to income. In this respect, there was
nothing different about Latin American school finance, given the levels of income.
Figure 9, however, reveals a consistent difference using some of the same data. It
decomposes Figure 8’s expenditures per child of school age into (expenditures per pupil)
times (pupils per child of school age, alias the enrollment rate). The two components are
graphed against each other, separately for Latin American and the rest of the world. One
would expect the two to rise together as we move from poorer to richer countries, and
they do so in Figure 9. Yet the relationship between these two components is different
for Latin America: Moving toward the richer and higher-spending countries like
Argentina yields much less gain in enrollments per dollar of expenditure per enrolled

                                                                                     Page 31
pupil, than the same movement (toward the US and New Zealand behavior) in the rest of
the world. Given the same resources, Latin American governments somehow delivered
more inputs per pupil to a smaller fraction of the school-age population. This appears to
be the same sort of elitism in deciding what schooling to supply, and in what
neighborhoods, as was emphasized by EMS and by Frankema.
       A century later the same elitism seems evident in much of Latin America, even
though the locus of power has shifted. A key choice variable in today’s education
structures is the allocation of public funds between using the same tax money for higher
education or using it for primary (and secondary) education. We saw in Table 4 above
that countries differ greatly in their choices here. Among the data-supplying countries of
Latin America, Table 4 suggests that primary education seems to have been short-
changed relative to higher education in Argentina before the return of democracy, in
Brazil, in Chile before the concertación began in 1990, and in Colombia, Costa Rica,
Jamaica, Mexico, and Venezuela (but not in Cuba). Given that the social rates of return
run higher for the earlier stages of education in these same countries, their tilt toward
higher education appears to have lowered GDP. This testimony from Table 4 agrees with
several past studies about Latin America as well as about the Asian and African countries
with low relative investments in primary education.56
       Since Venezuela’s low education performance offered the most glaring anomalies
in Figures 2-6, its sources need to be identified. Here, even more than in other countries,
the culprit seems to have been a political bias against mass education. That bias was
spotlighted back in 1959, when Carl Shoup and his collaborators published their task-
force study of the whole fiscal structure of Venezuela:


       “Education has such a low priority in the national investment program that the
       level of education relative to income is one of the lowest in the world. Further
       progress in the non-petroleum sectors, particularly industry, agriculture, and
       government, will depend heavily on better education.”57




                                                                                     Page 32
So they judged at twentieth-century Venezuela’s first sustained switch from caudillo rule
to democracy. Yet, as we saw in Tables 3 and 4 and in Figures 5 and 6, Venezuela still
has not caught up, despite three rounds of sudden enrichment from oil price hikes.
        So large were the windfalls passed up by Venezuela’s politicians that they may
even, like Victorian Britain, have missed a high rate of return to government itself. That
is, the fiscal rate of return may have exceeded the opportunity cost of funds. The
Venezuelan data in Table 6 suggest that the under-investment may have reached even this
extreme, to judge from data circa 1958. The cost of public funds for investments like
education was thought to be about 10 percent. On the assumption that people worked full
time after their education, not only the rest of society but also the government itself could
have reaped a net gain from extra investment in any level of education (far right column).
On the pessimistic assumption that people worked only half time, the same would not be
true, so that the lost social gains did not translate into losses for government itself.
        Such evidence of bias does not emerge in all cases. As Table 6 shows, the same
was not true of Mexico around 1963, suggesting that Mexico’s bias against subsidizing
primary education was less strong. Still, the fiscal rates of return in Table 6 were not
negative, which underlines a more basic point: Investing in education did raise revenues
for government, contrary to the assumption commonly implied. An open question is why
they did not discuss such returns. If they had somehow not thought of the point, why
not?


C. Different Fingerprints in Today’s Rich Countries
        The third illustrative application reveals a developmental shift in the seeming ability
of different forces to explain differences in education outputs. For historical settings before
the late twentieth century, and continuing into the twenty-first for developing regions, it has
been easy to identify insufficient tax support as a prime culprit in poor performances. A key
premise of this explanation is, of course, that spending more tax money would keep children
in school longer and raise their test scores. This premise is well supported for most history
and for most of the world’s children today. As we have seen in Figures 8 and 9, enrollments
historically responded to raising tax support per pupil or per child of school age. We also
saw in Table 2 that raising the levels of education brought higher rates of return in lower

                                                                                       Page 33
income countries, again pointing to insufficient supply of public funds as the main check on
education. For most of modern history, there should have been little doubt that “money
matters”, both in raising the years of schooling and in raising cognition.
       In today’s rich countries, however, the money-matters premise is less strong, possibly
because we have changed frontiers for primary and secondary education. Once a country has
reached full enrollments and high attendance up through age 15, and the average child
reaches 8,000 hours of instruction between the 5th and 15th birthdays, adding further tax
support can only raise test scores, productivity, and income by improving the quality of
learning per hour of contact time. How money translates into quality learning is less
obvious.
       Figures 10 and 11 offer crude hints about this developmental shift, by graphing recent
test scores against expenditures per primary school pupil. Figure 10 notes two different
slopes in the international OECD data for 2004-2006. If we include the new test-taking
countries Turkey, Chile, and Mexico in the sample, there is still an upward slope: more
public expenditures seem to be accompanied by higher test scores. If the PISA tests were
given to 15-year-olds world-wide, then most of the test-taking students would yield national
averages like those of Turkey, Chile, and Mexico, or further to the southwest in Figure 10,
and there would be a even more significant positive slope relating public expenditures to test
scores. Yet among the rich OECD core countries (white circles) and formerly communist
countries of Eastern Europe (black triangles), the slope between expenditures and
achievement scores is nearly flat. Countries spending much more failed to raise their student
test scores significantly. Figure 11 finds the same twist among states of the United States.
Over all 50 states, there appears to be a significant upslope relating public school
expenditures and the NAEP test performance of eighth-graders. Yet the 50-state picture
includes several poorer states of the South and West that have not completed the
developmental shift. True, their children stay in school past age 15, and their schools run the
same 175-180 days per year as in the rest of the country. Yet their lower spending seems to
have lowered quality by raising class sizes in the Western states, and in unmeasured ways in
the South. Yet when we restrict our view to the more prosperous and established Northeast
and North Central regions, the effect of expenditures drops to insignificance, as indicated by
the thicker line. Once one looks only at regions where the lowest state average for

                                                                                       Page 34
expenditures per student is already high, one gets the kind of result that Eric Hanushek
repeats so often: no clearly significant effect of spending more.
       Once a region’s income and educational effort is up in the range where extra
expenditures have less certain effect, it should not surprise us to find more abundant clues
that something other than expenditures is responsible for those anomalous cases in which
rich areas have poorer education performance. And so it seems for two anomalous under-
performers in the United States. One is the District of Columbia, where test scores were too
low to fit conveniently on Figure 11. Even though the District has a technically high average
income, its income inequality is extreme and its school system is stricken with controversy
and fighting. Expenditure levels are not the prime suspect.
       The other poor performer to be noted here is California, which shares with New
Mexico and Hawaii the unenviable position of having low student test scores despite having
an average income level. Why are California’s test scores worse than those of Texas and
North Carolina, with their similar expenditures and similar percentages of ethnic minorities,
by about 1.5 standard deviations among state averages? The relatively lower test scores can
be only partly due to low expenditures. Despite frequent rumors to the effect that California
ranks 49th in education spending per pupil, or in education spending as a share of state
income, its expenditures are only moderately low by inter-state standards. In the 2004-2005
school year, California’s current expenditures per enrolled student were 91 percent of the
national average. The performance looks a bit anomalous for a state with a slightly higher-
than-average income, yet California’s rank among states was still no worse than 30th.
       The input measure that does put California near the bottom of states is not
expenditures, but teachers per pupil, the inverse of class size. California ranks 48th, above
only Arizona and Utah.
       If California pays for fewer teachers for each (say) 100 students than any other state
but Arizona and Utah, why were its expenditures not so far below average? California has
apparently always ranked near the top in average annual pay for a state’s teachers. That may
have been true as far back as 1880. With greater certainty, we know that California ranked
2nd-7th among states in average teacher pay since 1939 or earlier, and ranks 3rd by this
measure today.58



                                                                                     Page 35
       To pin down causes, it also helps to know when California’s relative performance
sagged, and which suspects would have contributed to this sagging. The anomaly is
relatively recent. For relative expenditures per pupil, we know that California’s
expenditures per pupil ranked as high as 7th back in 1960. Its spending per pupil has been
below average only since sometime in the 1980s, reaching a trough at 87 percent of the
national average in the mid-1990s, reviving to 96 percent after the dot-com boom
centered in Silicon Valley, and sliding down to 91 percent since then.
       The simple non-econometric evidence suggests that the California political
outcome in school finance is peculiarly inefficient, and not simply by denying funds.
While the famous Serrano decisions and Proposition 13 clearly cut expenditures since the
1970s, the story is not simply one of a polity trapped by anti-tax radicals. Rather,
California has caught between this force and at least two others since about the 1970s:
high immigration and a powerful teachers’ lobby. The result combines moderate
expenditures with high teacher pay, crowded classrooms, and low test scores.


                          VII. CONCLUSIONS AND AGENDA

       It should now be evident why this paper focuses on revealing failures rather than
on revealing successes in education output, and why its title highlights finance rather than
learning. The failures appear to spring more from the public finance side, making it
easier for economists and economic historians to suggest solutions. By contrast, the
success cases probably relate less to economists’ comparative research advantage, being
due in greater part to differences in pedagogical technique and social environment.
       There are sufficient non-econometric tools to exploit and interpret the abundant
historical information about the progress of schooling in the data-constrained past. Even
without the randomized natural experiments that we prefer, we can identify prime
suspects for several cases of failure in education supply.
       We can even see some patterns in the preliminary signs. Looking at earlier
centuries, it should easier to find cases where education was under-supported rather than
over-supported, given the high rates of return not captured. Most visible failures seem to
be cases of inegalitarian policy, under-investing in mass primary schooling. So past


                                                                                       Page 36
scholars have feared, and so say the new indicators especially for Victorian Britain, and
possibly for Belgium in the late nineteenth century. We have also raised the possibility
that secure Western European states could have accelerated mass education, and
economic growth, as much as two centuries earlier than they did. The balance of guilt
may be shifting. Our clues from the start of the twenty-first century point less at tax-
blocking elites, and more at the messiness of political compromises between them and
their opponents.
       These modest early clues point toward at least four areas for further detective
work in the history of education finance:
       (1) One set of projects relates to the reasons for the delay in Western Europe’s
public primary schooling. In which cases did those in power pass up productive
opportunities because their narrow self-interest opposed educating the masses? In which
cases were they not sufficiently secure in their power to believe that the later tax revenues
from a more educated population would be theirs to control? For example, could the
Dutch Republic have launched free schools in the first half of the 17th century, leading
their actual history by two and a half centuries? Might the government budget have been
able to spend more on wars with England with the help of the extra taxes raised?
Certainly they could have borrowed the extra money, if they chose, at interest rates that
were even lower than Britain’s consol rate before 1792 and only about one percent above
the consol rate for most of the nineteenth century. For France, too, it is possible to argue
that political opposition delayed schooling by more than a century.59
       (2) Another project would pursue whether or not the early failure in public
primary education was matched by public health failure. Why were the public
improvements in urban sanitation, for example, delayed until the nineteenth century?
One possibility is that sanitation, unlike basic education, waited on breakthroughs in
knowledge, such as the discovery of the link between water supplies and cholera. If so,
policy may have been blameless in this area of public health. An opposing possibility is
suggested by Jeffrey Williamson, who notes that some partial advances in English and
French urban sanitation dated back to the late seventeenth century and the early
eighteenth, suggesting a policy failure of the sort described for primary education in this



                                                                                     Page 37
paper.60 Here is a related policy issue for which a broad early history can use non-
econometric techniques.
       (3) Another research priority is to pursue an issue that is a close relative of this
paper’s inquiry into mass primary and secondary education: How would one judge the
insufficiency or excess of public support for higher education, beyond the few clues
suggested by some literature cited here? And does a closer look really substantiate this
paper’s suspicions against excess spending on tertiary education at the expense of
primary and secondary?
       (4) Finally, why was the balance of apparent guilt different in the past from
today’s patterns in the OECD and within the United States? In earlier history, and in
developing countries today, the most frequent culprit appears to have been elites’
blocking of tax support for schools. So we saw in the case of British education in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and also in the global tendency for social rates of
return on still-unachieved schooling to be highest at in poorer countries. In today’s
OECD countries, however, the cases of clear under-funding of mass education are being
crowded out by cases of apparent inefficiency in some polities’ delivery of education
from historically high budgets. Explaining this long drift from inegalitarian tax-blocking
to inefficient political compromise remains high on the research agenda in the history of
education.




                                                                                      Page 38
  Table 1. Fingerprints: How Various Forces (Suspects) Would Affect
           Indicators Indirectly Linked to Primary Schooling

             Each cell summarizes a predicted effect of a force that has lowered primary schooling
             in our featured setting B relative to a higher-education setting A.

                                               Three kinds of fingerprints (ΔF's) --
                                               (1) Market rates             (2) Measured* rates of return
                                                 Wc      C         ΔW       on extra primary education:
                                                                Measured*
                                                      Direct adult wage Private         Social    Fiscal
    -- left by these forces reducing           Child cost of gains from rate            rate      rate
   demand for primary schooling in B:          wage school education rP                 rS        rF
   less market demand for skilled labor        UP               down        down        down      down
   more demand for child labor                 UP               UP          UP          UP
   higher fertility                            down             UP          UP          UP        UP
   lower adult life expectancy                                  UP          down (a) down (a) down
   family distaste for schooling                                UP          UP          UP        UP
   discrimination in skilled-labor markets                      UP          UP          UP        UP

    -- and of these forces restricting its supply in B:
   discrimination in school admissions                         UP          UP         UP           UP
   higher unit costs of schooling                       UP     UP          down (b)   down         UP
   less philanthropy for primary schooling                     UP          down (b)   UP           UP
   less political support
              for tax-based schooling                          UP          down (b)   UP           UP

                                               (3) Support ratios for primary schooling
                                               Two additional fingerprints are:
                                               (3a) Tax support ratio      (3b) Primary/tertiary
                                               for primary pupils          double ratio
   less political support for tax-based
              mass primary schooling           down                        down
   (No other force has a clear predicted
              effect on the support ratios.)



Notes to Table 1:
The parameters Wc, C, ΔW, U, and ø are measured relative to the annual income of
an individual earnings the lower-education wage rate. In the 19th and earlier centuries,
this is an unskilled wage rate in the building trades.

The effects are predicted static general-equilibrium results, including next-generation
effects on the educational attainment of the adult labor force.

Blank = no clear direction of effect is implied.
*The distinction between measured average gains in earnings and true marginal gains is
especially important in the case of discrimination. Whether the discrimination is in the

                                                                                               Page 39
labor market or in admissions to educational institutions, it will lower the true marginal
rate of return for those discriminated against, though it will raise the average measured
return for insiders.
(a) = Reducing life expectancy would initially lower the private and social return to
primary education, though the reduction in educational attainment would later offset part
of this effect by raising ΔW.
(b) = These initially lower the private return to primary education by raising its cost,
though the reduction in educational attainment would later offset part of this effect by
raising ΔW.

Fuller definitions of the support ratio indicators (fingerprints):
(3a) Absolute tax support for primary pupils = (tax-based expenditures per primary
school pupil) / (GDP per adult).
(3b) Relative tax support for primary pupils = the same double ratio, but divided by the
corresponding double ratio for university education.

Imagined exogenous sources of each force, and further explanation of the effects:
More demand for child labor: May be due to shifts toward child-using sectors, such as
agriculture. Would lower school attendance, of course, later raising the supply of
unskilled adult labor at the expense of skilled labor. So the wage gain ΔW would be
raised later.

High unit costs of schooling: May be due to restrictions training fewer teachers, or
denying teacher careers to women, or less efficiency in education techniques. By
lowering the supply of more educated entrants into the labor force, such cost-push factors
will raise the wage gains for those who have the extra schooling.

Less market demand for skilled labor: Could be due to de-skilling shifts in technology.
Symmetrically, it can be due to any force that shifts demand toward more skills in Setting
A, leaving B behind.

Family distaste for schooling can arise from any cultural source: The most prominent
historical variant is aversion to educating females.

Discrimination in skilled-labor markets: Discrimination by gender, class, caste, tribe, or
guild connections in occupations other than teaching. The measured private rates of
return will reflect the larger wage gains of the favored insiders.

Discrimination in school admissions: Again, discrimination by class, caste, tribe, gender,
or guild connections: The effects depend on how negative are the effects on overall
attendance. The table shows the effects of simply denying admissions to the outsider
groups, without raising the admissions and attendance of favored insiders.

Less political support for tax-based schooling, on the part of those with political
influence: This can result from restricted suffrage, or an elite-based autocracy.


                                                                                      Page 40
              Table 2. Average Rates of Return to Investment in Education by Level,
                       1970s-1990s, by per Capita Income Group

                       (internal rates of return, in percent per annum)
                             Private (overestimated)                     Social
                          Primary Secondary Higher              Primary Secondary Higher
Per capita income group of countries
High Income                  25.6           12.2      12.4         13.4         10.3  9.5
Middle Income                27.4           18.0      19.3         18.8         12.9 11.3
Low Income                   25.8           19.9      26.0         21.3         15.7 11.2
World                        26.6           17.0      19.0         18.9         13.1 10.8
Individual countries
    Canada 1994                              7.8      13.0
    Japan 1976               13.4           10.4       8.8           9.6         8.6  6.9
    USA 1987                                                                    10.0 12.0
Latin America and the Caribbean
    Argentina 1989           10.1           14.2      14.9           8.4         7.1  7.6
    Brazil 1989              36.6            5.1      28.2         35.6          5.1 21.4
    Chile 1989                9.7           12.9      20.7           8.1        11.1 14.0
    Costa Rica 1989          12.2           17.6      12.9          11.2        14.4  9.0
    Dom. Rep. 1989                                                 85.1         15.1 19.4
    El Salvador 1990         16.4           13.3       8.0         18.9         14.5  9.5
    Guatemala 1989                                                 33.8         17.9 22.2
    Jamaica 1989             20.4           15.7                   17.7          7.9
    Mexico 1992              11.8           14.6      11.1         18.9         20.1 15.7
Asia
    China 1993               18.0           13.4      15.1         14.4         12.9 11.3
    Hong Kong 1976                          18.5      25.2                      15.0 12.4
    India 1995                2.6           17.6      18.2
    Korea, South 1986                       10.1      17.9                       8.8 15.5
    Malaysia 1978                           32.6      34.5
    Pakistan 1991             8.4           13.7      31.2
    Philippines 1988         18.3           10.5      11.6         13.3          8.9 10.5
    Singapore 1999           22.2           12.9      18.7         16.7         10.1 13.9
    Sri Lanka 1981                          12.6      16.1
    Thailand 1989            16.0           12.9      11.8

   Sources and notes to Table 2:
   Source: For rates of return, Psacharopoulos and Patrinos (2004a, Table A1).
   High income group = GDP per capita at or above $9,266 in 1990 PPP dollars, with group
     mean = $22,530. Low Income group = GDP per capita at or below $755, with mean $363.
   The middle income group had a mean income of $2,966, and the world mean was $7,669.
   The private rates are overestimated because they assume zero taxation of the extra
     earnings gained from education. See the text.




                                                                                        Page 41
        Table 3. Primary-School Support Ratios in Core OECD
                 Countries, Latin America, and Asia 1960-2002

The support ratio = (public "current" primary-school public expenditures
   per pupil) divided by (GDP per person 15 or older)
Region or
   country         1960-65 1970-75        1985     1995      2002
Core OECD                                  22.0     23.7      22.8
   Canada              21.6       30.4     25.6     28.7
   Japan                                            20.6      20.8
   USA                 20.5       25.0     25.2     27.5      28.5

Developing countries                                     21.3
Latin America and the Caribbean
   Argentina                                    7.5      11.4      13.3
   Brazil            15.1       14.4                     15.7      13.2
   Chile             13.0       10.9                     16.6      15.2
   Costa Rica                   25.9           13.2      15.6
   Cuba                                        22.1      33.4
   Dom. Rep.                                    6.4       5.1
   El Salvador                                  5.7       4.8
   Guatemala                                    7.8       7.6
   Jamaica            11.1       9.8           13.8      16.0      12.3
   Mexico             11.4      10.3                     18.8      16.9
   Venezuela                    15.1                      8.8
Asia
   China                         6.6            8.9      11.9
   Hong Kong                     8.9           10.5      13.3
   India               9.8      10.6           16.6      16.6      15.7
   Korea, South       11.0      10.0           19.6      19.8      19.1
   Malaysia                                    21.4      12.8
   Pakistan                     16.2           18.1      15.3
   Philippines                  15.9            8.7      15.6      18.6
   Singapore                    10.7           13.2      10.2
   Sri Lanka         24.7       25.4           12.4      11.0
   Thailand                                    16.3      11.8
Sources and notes to Table 3:
Sources: OECD Education at a Glance, 1992, p. 63 (primary school only); idem, 2005, pp. 172-
3; IMF, International Financial Statistics, various years; and UN (2001) for age distributions.
The “1985” figure for the OECD core uses data from 1988.
The “1995” figures for the OECD and for developing countries use data from 1999.
The figures for Canada and the United States aggregate secondary education with primary.
Argentina's figures use data from 1984-1985 and 1994-1996 as "1985" and "1986".
See also the notes to Table 4.

                                                                                        Page 42
       Table 4. Which Postwar Governments Have Short-changed
                Primary Education Relative to Higher Education?

   Each cell number is a ratio of (public support of primary education per pupil),
                as a % of (public support of higher schooling per pupil)
                This percentage should be at least 50 (see text)
Region or
   country            1960-65        1970-75          1985         1995          2002
Core OECD                                              51.0         43.2          56.1
   Canada                  25.2          29.8          67.2         63.4
   Japan                   90.9         200.0          90.9       108.4         126.6
   USA                     51.2          81.3          71.3         73.4          77.5

Developing countries                                                14.7
Latin America & Caribbean,
18 countries                6.7         10.6          13.7          17.9
   Argentina              22.2          12.1          31.5          40.1         52.4
   Brazil                   2.1          8.2                         7.2          8.1
   Chile                    3.9          8.6           9.6          45.5
   Colombia                 2.9                       17.5          21.7
   Costa Rica             10.9          17.2          12.9          23.1
   Cuba          (1950/55) 71.4                       43.5          50.0
   Jamaica                  6.5          9.1           4.0           5.5
   Mexico                   9.2          9.8           8.5          23.3         29.4
   Venezuela                6.5         11.8          11.6           6.8
Asian developing countries
   China                            ('75) 0.9          3.2           9.4          7.1
   Hong Kong                            70.4                        84.9
   India                    4.2           4.8         11.9          11.0         13.2
   Indonesia                              9.8         15.0                       12.8
   Korea, South           45.5          58.8         113.5        263.9         339.8
   Malaysia                 3.8           5.8          9.5         10.6          17.6
   Pakistan                               5.8          7.5
   Philippines                         130.2          45.7          62.2         29.3
   Singapore              13.7          14.7          13.7          23.7
   Sri Lanka              10.4            7.4         14.1          12.1
   Thailand                 6.8           8.3         49.9          33.7         32.3
African countries
   Kenya                    0.6           0.8          2.3           1.8
   Malawi                   0.4           0.4          0.7           0.6
   Tanzania                 0.6           0.9          0.7




                                                                                 Page 43
Sources and notes to Table 4:
         Sources: UNESCO, World Education Report, 1991-2000; OECD Education at a
Glance, (1992, p. 63); Ioschpe (2004, p. 184); and Claudia Goldin’s compilations in
Carter et al., Historical Statistics of the United States, Millennial Edition, vol. 2.
         I am indebted to Ewout Frankema for some calculations for 1960/5 through
1990/5, from his paper-in-progress on “Mass Education in Twentieth-Century Latin
America: A Quantity-Quality Trade off?”, which used UNESCO data. The 1960s and
1970s data for about half the countries are my own calculations from the UNESCO
Statistical Yearbook and IMF, International Financial Statistics. For China and Thailand
2002, Asaoka (2006, p. 42), citing UNESCO Institute of Statistics. For Chile, the
1970/75 figure refers to the post-coup year 1975 only.
         Most of the expenditure figures refer to current expenditures, the main exceptions
being figures for 2002 and figures for the United States. They omit tax breaks and some
household subsidies for education, and they omit capital costs. For 1965-1995 figures,
current expenditures unallocated by level of expenditure were spread proportionately
across the levels.
         Notes on years covered: The years covered in “1960-65” and “1970-75” vary
from country to country. The year “1995” is really 1999 in the case of core OECD,
Brazil, and developing countries. Korea's figure is so low because of a high private share
of tertiary expenditure.
         For the United States, the expenditure-per-student numerator ratio combines
primary and secondary public schools.
         The 1985 figure refers to a 1980-1985 average in the cases of Argentina, Chile,
Colombia, Cuba, El Salvador, Guatemala, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay,
Uruguay, Venezuela, and the Africa countries. For Cuba, the 1995 figure is also an
average for 1990-1995.
         For 2002 the OECD’s numbers are based on full-time school year equivalents.
Lacking data on private expenditures, the 2002 data for Brazil, Malaysia, and Philippines
are for total expenditures, which were predominantly but not completely public. For all
other countries in 2002, expenditures for primary schooling had to be allocated between
private and public according to the ratios given for the larger aggregate of primary,
secondary, and non-tertiary post-secondary education.
         The figures for expenditures on tertiary institutions generally include expenditures
on research and development, along with expenditures on instruction. For 2002, the
instructional shares of the total tertiary budgets were 79% for core OECD countries, and
89% for the USA.




                                                                                    Page 44
       Table 5. Estimated Rates of Return on Literacy and Primary Schooling in Victorian England

                                                         Internal rates of return

                                                        (1) Three year's schooling, achieving signature literacy Yield on British
       Approximate                                                                                      Public     government
       year of                                              Private          Social         Fiscal (gov't +        consol securities
       marriage Population group                             family    (all parties) (government) donors)          at start of schooling
(a.)       1840 Grooms who were sons of laborers               15.3            14.8           16.5        12.9            4.4 in 1821
(b.)       1840 Grooms who were sons of laborers               19.5            19.0           21.2        13.6            4.4 "
(c.)       1840 Grooms from all classes                        20.1            19.6           21.5        17.4            4.4 "
(d.)       1868 Grooms who were sons of laborers               11.0              9.9           6.5          6.3           3.4 in 1842.
(e.)       1868 Grooms from all classes                        16.5            15.2           11.2        11.0            3.4 "
                                                        (2) State elementary, 3 tax-funded years to learn signature literacy
(f.)       1840 Grooms who were sons of laborers               16.4            14.8            5.4          5.4           4.4 in 1821
                                                        (3) Six years of elementary school
(g.)     age 18 School attenders of 1851 (Long 2006)           14.0            12.1            7.4          5.8           3.1 in 1851.
        in 1860
(h.)       1840 Labourers' children, 50% in labor force        10.7            10.3           11.8          8.6           4.4 in 1821


Sources and Notes to Table 5:
         The two main sources are the studies by David Mitch (1982, 1983, 1984, 1992) and Jason
Long (2006). Supporting data on taxes paid by working-class families in the 1830s were taken
from Hilditch citing the Poor Law Commission, and for circa 1868 from Baxter (1869, pp. 110-
112). The consol interest rates are from Homer and Sylla (1991, pp. 195-196).
         Assumptions behind the hypothetical calculations, based on parameters in these sources:
         Life cycles: All were males who married at the age of 26. Those who married in 1840
were born in 1814, and started their schooling in 1821. They enjoyed enhanced wage rates from
1832 to 1862, except that those in (b.) continued working to 1871. The hypothetical grooms of
1868 were born in 1835, started school in 1842, and enjoyed enhanced earnings from 1853 to
1883. Those attending school in the 1851 census were born in 1842, started their six years of
primary schooling in 1848, and enjoyed enhanced earnings from 1860 to 1890.
         Weekly child wages during 25 weeks of school each year = 2 shillings for (a.), (c.), (f.),
(g.), and (h.); for (b.), 31.25s a week for two years, then twice that for the third year; and three
shillings a week for (d.) and (e.).
         Total direct cost of schooling = 6d a week for (a.), (c.), (f.), and (h.); 14 s a year for (b.);
£1.27 a year for (d.) and (e.); and £1.35 a year for (g.). The part of this cost that was subsidized by
government was zero for the 1840 estimates, £0.525 for (f.), and £0.48 for (d.) and (e.).
         The adult wage increments for 50 weeks a year, from literacy or primary schooling: (a.),
(f.), and the males in (h.) = 2.47 s a week; (b.) = 2.7 s a week for ages 18-26, then 4.54 s a week for
ages 27-57; (c.) = 4.66 s; (d.) = 1.86 s; (e.) = 4.18 s; and (g.) = £7.74 a year.
         (h.) is the "half-ben" case in which the child is a male-female mix with a 50% earnings rate.
         Tax rate paid by working class parents and sons = 5 percent of expenditures for 1840 and
8.96 percent for estimates (d.), (e.), and (g.).




                                                                                                                             Page 45
       Table 6. Estimated Rates of Return to Investment in Education,
                Venezuela 1958 and Mexico 1963

                                  Percentage of direct Internal rates of return (%)
                                     costs paid for                Private            Social Fiscal
                                    by government       (family & donors)       (all parties) (gov't)
A. Assuming males rates of adult earnings
Venezuela 1958 primary school             53.5                     24.0%             21.4% 12.9%
       "       secondary                  100                      17.5%             15.3% 8.8%
       "       university                 100                      25.4%             20.1% 10.2%

Mexico 1963       primary school          58.1                      15.1%          14.0%      7.8%
                  secondary               81.2                      14.9%          13.2%      5.9%
                  university              88.5                      17.0%          13.9%      3.9%

B. Assuming half these rates of adult earnings (e.g. if women had no career earnings)
Venezuela 1958 primary school             53.5                     14.8%          13.2%       7.6%
       "        secondary                  100                     10.5%            9.1%      4.8%
       "        university                 100                     15.3%          12.0%       5.7%

Mexico 1963       primary school          58.1                      10.8%            9.9% 4.9%
                  secondary               81.2                      10.1%            8.8% 2.9%
                  university              88.5                      10.3%            7.9% -0.0%

Sources and notes to Table 6:
The main source for Venezuela is Carl Shoup et al. (1959), and for Mexico the works of
Martin Carnoy (1964, 1967a, 1967b).
        These are supplemented with life-table survival rates based on data from 1959-
1961 for Mexico and 1963 for Venezuela. Carnoy conducted his own survey of a few
thousand urban Mexican workers and their family members in 1963, and based his
published rates of return on these micro-data. By contrast, Shoup and collaborators based
their estimates of present values and rates of return for Venezuela on aggregate average
relationships of earnings to occupation, age, and schooling.
        Both sets of data have been reworked here, however, to refine the fiscal side of
education. My retention of most of Carnoy's assumptions yields rates of returns in the
same range as his. For Venezuela, however, my rates of return are below the very high
estimates announced by Shoup and his collaborators. The main reasons for the
discrepancy are that (a) Shoup and collaborators omitted any opportunity costs of the
student's time, and (b) they omitted indirect taxation (usually 10-11 percent of income)
from their calculations of private and social returns, and omitted any fiscal rates of return.
For further details on my re-working of the estimates, download Excel files for Mexico
and Venezuela from http://econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty/fzlinder, clicking on "Data and
estimates underlying “Revealing Failures in the History of Education Finance.”




                                                                                            Page 46
Page 47
Page 48
Page 49
Page 50
Page 51
Page 52
Page 53
Page 54
                     SOURCES AND NOTES TO FIGURES 1-10

All of the numbers used in the figures will be posted at http://econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty/fzlinder.

Figures 1-3:
        The estimates of GDP per capita in 1870, 1900, and 1930 in 1990 international
PPP dollars are those of Angus Maddison (1995 and 2001). The enrollments data are
derived from other sources in Lindert (2004, Volume 2, Appendix A), from the Banks
post-1815 data base, and from Benavot and Riddle (1988), in that order of priority. In
some cases where it was impossible to obtain the 5-14 population denominator from the
Lindert sources or from Banks, I used the school age population denominator from
Benavot and Riddle, introducing some differences in the ratio definition.
        The reason that the UK dot fails to look like a weighted average within the
triangle formed by England-Wales, Ireland, and Scotland seems to be that the GDP per
capita and the enrollment rates are based on different weighting schemes (total population
versus population 5-14).

Figure 4:
        The estimates of GDP per capita in 1970 in 1990 international PPP dollars are
taken from the Penn World Tables, version 6.2, measure rgdpch. The same source is
used for GDP per capita in Figures 5-7.
        As a proxy for enrollments sometime around that 1970 date, I used the
educational attainment of the 15-64 age group, as measured thirty years later, in 2000.
These year-2000 data are drawn from http://soto.iae-csic.org/Data.htm , accessed 18 June
2009. This source is cited, and the estimates explained, in Cohen and Soto (2007).

Figure 5:
        The average reading, mathematics, and science achievement scores of 15-year-
olds are from the PISA 2006 exams (OECD, PISA 2007).

Figure 6:
       The Reading and Math scores are combinations of different LLECE 1997 scores
and SERCE 2006 scores, from Hanushek and Woessmann (2009b, Appendix Table A1).

Figure 7:
        From National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) for 2005, I averaged
scores for reading and math for 8th graders, after converting each into separate standard
deviation units in the distribution of averages across states. The source is
http://nces.ed.gov/quicktables, Table 129, accessed June 2009.

Figures 8 and 9:
        The enrollment rates are from the same sources listed above for Figures 1-3. The
current expenditures per pupil, expressed in US dollars, are taken from US Commissioner
of Education, Annual Report 1899-1900, pp. 2618-2621: "Elementary Education in
Foreign Countries”: and US Commissioner of Education, Annual Report 1900-1901, pp.
2483-5: "Statistics of Elementary Education in Foreign Countries." These can include

                                                                                    Page 55
private expenditures in some cases, though differences in public expenditures probably
dominate the expenditure differences shown here.

Figure 10:
        The PISA scores for 2006 are from the same source as listed for Figure 7. The
public expenditures per primary pupil in the school year 2004-2005 are from OECD
Education at a Glance 2007.

Figure 11:
        The test scores are the same as those used in Table 7. Current expenditures per
pupil in public primary and secondary schools for the academic year 2004-2005 are from
http://nces.ed.gov, accessed 16 March 2009.




                                                                                 Page 56
                                 REFERENCES

A’Hearn, Brian, Jörg Baten, and Dorothee Crayen. 2009. “Quantifying Quantitative
        Literacy: Age Heaping and the History of Human Capital.” CEPR Discussion
        Paper 7277.
Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Angrist. 2000. “How Large are Human Capital
        Externalities? Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws.” NBER
        Macroeconomics Annual 2000: 9-59.
Acemoglu, Daron and Simon Johnson. 2005. “Unbundling Institutions.” Journal of Political
        Economy 113, 5 (October): 949-995.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial Origins of
        Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review 91,
        5 (December): 1369-1401.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2002. “Reversal of Fortune:
        Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution.”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 4 (November): 1231-1294.
Angrist, Joshua and Alan B. Krueger. 1991. “Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect
        Schooling and Earnings?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106: 974-1014.
Baten, Jörg and Dorothee Crayen. 2008. “Global Trends in Numeracy 1820-1949 and Its
        Implications for Long-Run Growth.” CESifo Working Paper no. 2218.
Baxter, R. Dudley. 1869. The Taxation of the United Kingdom.
Becker, Gary S. 1964. Human Capital. New York: Columbia University Press.
Behrman, Jere. 1996. “Measuring the Effectiveness of Schooling Policies in Developing
        Countries: Revisiting Issues of Methodology.” Economics of Education Review
        15, 4 (October): 345-364.
Benavot, Aaron and Phyllis Riddle. 1988. “The Expansion of Primary Education, 1870-
        1940: Trends and Issues.” Sociology of Education 61 (July): 191-210.
Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow. 2000. “Does Schooling Cause Growth?” American
        Economic Review 90, 5 (December): 1160-1183.
Brewer, John. 1989. The Sinews of Power: Money, War, and the English State, 1688-1783.
        Boston, Unwin.
Carter, Susan et al. 2006. Historical Statistics of the United States, Millennial Edition.
        Five volumes. New York; Cambridge University Press.
Castelló, Amparo and Rafael Doménech. 2002. “Human Capital Inequality and Economic
        Growth: some New Evidence.” Economic Journal 112 (March): C187-C200.
Clark, Gregory. 1996. “The Political Foundations of Modern Economic Growth: England,
        1540-1800,” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 26, 2 (Spring): 563-588.
Clark, Gregory. 2007. Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the World. Princeton:
        Princeton University Press.
Clemens, Michael A. 2004. “The Long Walk to School: International Education Goals in
        Historical Perspective.” Center for Global Development Working Paper Number 37.
        March.
Cohen, Daniel and Marcelo Soto. 2007. “Growth and Human Capital: Good Data, Good
        Results.” Journal of Economic Growth 12: 51-76.
Dee, Thomas S. 2004. “Are There Civic Returns to Education?” Journal of Public
        Economics 88, 9-10 (August): 1697-1720.

                                                                           Page 57
DeFerranti, David, Guillermo E. Perry, Francisco H. G. Ferreira, and Michael Walton. 2004.
       Inequality in Latin America: Breaking With History? Washington: World Bank.
DeLong, J. Bradford and Andrei Shleifer. 1993. “Princes and Merchants: City Growth Before
       the Industrial Revolution.” Journal of Law and Economics 36 (October): 671-702.
Dincecco, Mark. 2009a. “Political Regimes and Sovereign Credit Risk in Europe, 1750-
       1913”. European Review of Economic History.
Dincecco, Mark. 2009b. “Fiscal Centralization, Limited Government, and Public Revenues
       in Europe, 1650-1913.” Journal of Economic History 69, 1 (March): 48-103.
Stanley L. Engerman, Elisa V. Mariscal, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. Forthcoming. “The
       Evolution of Schooling Institutions in the Americas, 1800-1925.” In David Eltis,
       Frank Lewis, and Kenneth Sokoloff (eds.), Human Capital and Institutions: A
       Long Run View, Chapter 4. Cambridge University Press.
Flynn, James R. 1984. “The Mean IQ of Americans: Massive Gains 1932 to 1978.”
       Psychological Bulletin 95, 1 (January): 29-51.
Flynn, James R. 1987. “Massive IQ Gains in 14 Nations: What IQ tests Really Measure.”
       Psychological Bulletin 101, 2 (March): 171-191.
Flynn, James R. 2000. “IQ Trends over Time: Intelligence, Race, and Meritocracy.” In K. A.
       Arrow, S. Bowles, and S. Derlauf (eds.), Meritocracy and Economic Inequality.
       Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp. 35-60.
Frankema, Ewout H.P. 2009. Has Latin America Always Been Unequal? A Comparative
       Study of Asset and Income Inequality in the Long Twentieth Century. Leiden and
       Boston: Brill. Global Economic History Series.
Freeman, Richard B. and Remco H. Oostendorp. 2000. “Wages around the World: Pay
       Across Occupations and Countries.” NBER Working Paper 8058 (December).
Go, Sun and Peter H. Lindert. 2010. “The Uneven Rise of American Public Schools to
       1850.” Journal of Economic History 70, 1 (March): 1-26.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race between Technology and
       Education. Cambridge MA: Belknap Press.
Grissmer, David, Ann Flanagan, Jennifer Kawata, and Stephanie Williamson. 2000.
       “Improving Student Achievement: What State NAEP Test Scores Tell Us”. Santa
       Monica CA: RAND Corporation.
Hanushek, Eric A. and Ludger Woessmann. 2008. “The Role of Cognitive Skills in
       Economic Development.” Journal of Economic Literature 46, 3 (September):
       607-668.
Hanushek, Eric A. and Ludger Woessmann. 2009a. “Do Better Schools Lead to More
       Growth? Cognitive Skills, Economic Outcomes, and Causation” NBER Working
       Paper 14633 (January).
Hanushek, Eric A. and Ludger Woessmann. 2009b. “Schooling, Cognitive Skills, and the
       Latin American growth Puzzle.” NBER Working Paper 15066 (June).
Hanushek, Eric A. and Ludger Woessmann. Forthcoming. The Human Capital of
       Nations. CESifo MIT Press Book Project.
Haveman, Robert H. and Barbara Wolfe. 1984. “Schooling and Economic Well-Being:
       The Role of Non-Market Effects.” Journal of Human Resources 19, 3 (summer):
       128-140.
Heckman, James J., Lance Lochner, and Petra Todd. 2008. “Earnings Functions and
       Rates of Return.” NBER Working Paper No. W13780 (February).

                                                                              Page 58
Homer, Sidney and Richard Sylla. 1991. A History of Interest Rates. Third edition. New
       Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Hoxby, Caroline M. 1998. “All School Finance Equalizations are Not Created Equal”.
       NBER Working Paper 6792. November.
Ioschpe, Gustavo Berg. 2004. A ignorância custa um mundo: o valor da educação no
       desenvolvimento do Brasil. São Paulo: Francis.
Keyfitz, Nathan and Wilhelm Flieger. 1968. World Population: An Analysis of Vital Data.
       Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lange, Fabian and Robert Topel. 2006. “The Social Value of Education and Human
       Capital.” In Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch (eds.), The Handbook of the
       Economics of Education, volume 1. Amsterdam: North-Holland. pp. 460-509.
Lindert, Kathy A., Emmanuel Skoufias, and Joseph Shapiro. 2006. “Redistributing
       Income to the Poor and the Rich: Public Transfers in Latin America and the
       Caribbean.” World Bank, SP Discussion Paper 0605, August.
Lindert, Peter H. 1978. Fertility and Scarcity in America. Princeton: Princeton University
       Press.
Lindert, Peter H. 2003. “Voice and Growth: Was Churchill Right?” Journal of Economic
       History 63, 2 (June): 315-350.
Lindert, Peter H. 2004. Growing Public: Social Spending and Economic Growth since the
       Eighteenth Century. Two volumes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2005. “The Relationship Between Education and Adult Mortality in
       the United States,” Review of Economic Studies 72: 189-221.
Lochner, Lance and Enrico Moretti. 2004. “The Effects of Education on Crime: Evidence
       from Prison Inmates, Arrests, and Self-Reports.” American Economic Review 94,
       1 (March): 155-189.
Long, Jason. 2006. “The Socioeconomic Return to Primary Schooling in Victorian
       England.” Journal of Economic History 66, 4 (December): 1026-1053.
Maddison, Angus. 1995. Monitoring the World Economy 1820-1992. Paris, OECD.
Maddison, Angus. 2001. The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective. Paris: OECD.
Mariscal, Elisa, and Kenneth Sokoloff. 2000. “Schooling, Suffrage, and the Persistence
       of Inequality in the Americas, 1800-1945.” In Stephen Haber (ed.), Political
       Institutions and Economic Growth in Latin America. Stanford: Hoover Institution
       Press, pp. 159-217.
Massie, Joseph. 1761. Calculations of Taxes for a Family of Each Rank, Degree, or
       Class, for One Year. Second edition. London: T. Payne. Baker Library, Reel 772,
       no. 9689.
McMahon, Walter W. 2004. “The Social and External Benefits of Education.” In Geraint
       Johnes and Jill Johnes (eds.), International Handbook on the Economics of
       Education. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp. 211-259.
Milligan, Kevin, Enrico Moretti, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2004. “Does Education Improve
       Citizenship? Evidence from the United States and the United Kingdom.” Journal of
       Public Economics 88, 9-10 (August): 1667-1695.
Mitch, David F. 1982. “The Spread of Literacy in Nineteenth-Century England.”
       Doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago.
Mitch, David F. 1983, 1984. “Underinvestment in Literacy? The Potential Contribution
       of Government Involvement in Elementary Education to Economic Growth in

                                                                              Page 59
        Nineteenth Century England.” Journal of Economic History 44, 2 (June 1984):
        557-566; and the expanded 1983 draft of this article kindly supplied by the author.
Mitch, David F. 1986. “The Impact of Subsidies to Elementary Schooling on Enrollment
        Rates in Nineteenth Century England.” Economic History Review 39, 3 (August):
        371-391.
Mitch, David F. 1992. The Rise of Popular Literacy in Victorian England: The Influence
        of Private Choice and Public Policy. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
        Press.
Mitch, David F. 2004. “School Finance.” In Geraint Johnes and Jill Johnes (eds.),
        International Handbook on the Economics of Education. Cheltenham: Edward
        Elgar, pp. 260-297.
Moretti, Enrico. 2004. “Estimating the Social Return to Higher Education: Evidence from
        Longitudinal and Cross-sectional Data.” Journal of Econometrics 121, 1-2 (July-
        August): 157-212.
North, Douglass C. and Barry Weingast. 1989. “Constitutions and Commitment: The
        Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England,”
        Journal of Economic History 49, 4 (December): 803-832.
Nugent, Jeffrey B. and James A Robinson. Forthcoming. “Are Endowments Fate?” Revista
        de Historia Economica.
O’Brien, Patrick K. 1988. “The Political Economy of British Taxation, 1660-1815.”
        Economic History Review, second series, 41, 1 (February): 1-32.
Oreopoulos, Philip and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2009. “How Large Are Returns to Schooling?
        Hint: Money Isn’t Everything.” NBER Working Paper 15339 (September).
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 2002. Education at a Glance.
        Paris: OECD.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. Programme for International
        Student Assessment. 2007. PISA 2006: Science Competencies for Tomorrow’s
        World - Executive Summary. Paris: OECD.
Phelps Brown, E. H. 1977. The Inequality of Pay. Berkeley: University of California
        Press.
Pritchett, Lant. 2001. “Where Has All the Education Gone?” World Bank Economic
        Review 15, 3: 367-393.
Psacharopoulos, George. 1981. “Returns to Education: An Updated International
        Comparison.” Comparative Education 17, 3 (October): 321-341.
Psacharopoulos, George. 1987. Economics of Education: Research and Studies. New
        York: Pergamon Press.
Psacharopoulos, George. 1994. “Returns to Investment in Education: A Global Update.”
        World Development 22, 9 (September): 1325-1343.
Psacharopoulos, George. 1996. “Public Spending on Higher Education in Developing
        Countries: Too Much Rather than Too Little.” Economics of Education Review
        15, 4 (October): 421-422.
Psacharopoulos, George and Emmanuel Jiménez. 1986. Financing Education in
        Developing Countries. Washington: The World Bank.
Psacharopoulos, George and Y.C. Ng. 1994. “Earnings and Education in Latin America:
        Assessing Priorities for Schooling Investments.” Education Economics 2, 2.



                                                                                Page 60
Psacharapoulos George, and Harry Anthony Patrinos. 2004a. “Returns to Investment in
        Education: A Further Update.” Education Economics 12: 2 (August): 111 - 134.
Psacharapoulos George, and Harry Anthony Patrinos. 2004b. “Human Capital and Rates
        of Return.” In Geraint Johnes and Jill Johnes (eds.), International Handbook on the
        Economics of Education. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp. 1-57. LC65.I59.2004.
Psacharapoulos George, Eduardo Velez, A. Panagides, and H. Yang. 1996. “Returns to
        Education during Economic Boom and Recession: Mexico 1984, 1989, and 1992.”
        Economic Economics 4, 3 (December): 219-230.
Psacharapoulos, George and Maureen Woodhall. 1990. Education for Development: An
        Analysis of ‘Investment’ Choices. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sandberg, Lars G. 1979. “The Case of the Impoverished Sophisticate: Human Capital and
        Swedish Economic growth before World War I.” Journal of Economic History
        39, 1 (March): 225-241.
Schultz, Kenneth A. and Barry R. Weingast. 1998. “Limited Governments, Powerful States.”
        In Randolph M. Siverson (ed.), Strategic Politicians, Institutions, and Foreign Policy.
        Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 15-49.
Shoup, Carl S. 1959. The Fiscal System of Venezuela. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.
Solmon, Lewis C. 1970. “Estimating the Costs of Schooling in 1880 and 1890.” Explorations in
        Economic History 7:4 (Summer): 531-581.
Solmon, Lewis. 1975. Capital Formation by Expenditures on Formal Education 1880 and 1890.
        New York: Arno Press.
Tan, Jee-Peng and Alain Mingat. 1992. Education in Asia: A Comparative Study of Cost and
        Financing. Washington: The World Bank.
Tuttle, Carolyn. 1998. "A Revival of the Pessimist View: Child Labor and the Industrial
        Revolution." Research in Economic History 18: 53-82.
Tuttle, Carolyn. 1999. Hard at Work in Factories and Mines: The Economics of Child
        Labor During the British Industrial Revolution. Oxford: Westview Press.
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 2001. World Population
        Prospects: The 2000 revision. Volume 1. New York: UN.
United Nations. 2005. The Arab Human Development Report 2005. New York: United
        Nations.
UNESCO. Various Years. Statistical Yearbook.
U.S. Commissioner of Education. 1899/1900. “Elementary Education in Foreign
        Countries." In its Annual Report 1899-1900. Washington, GPO: 2618-2621.
U.S. Commissioner of Education. 1900/1901. “Statistics of Elementary Education in
        Foreign Countries.” In its Annual Report 1900-1901. Washington, GPO: 2483-
        2485.
Van Zanden, Jan Luiten. 2009a. The Long Road to the Industrial Revolution. The European
        Economy in a Global Perspective 1000-1800. Amsterdam: Brill.
Van Zanden, Jan Luiten. 2009b. “The Skill Premium and the Great Divergence”, European
        Review of Economic History 13, 1 (April): 121-153.
Venniker, R. 2001. “Social Returns to Education: A Survey of Recent Literature on
        Human Capital Externalities.” CPB (Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy
        Analysis) Report 00/1. http://www.cpb.nl/eng/cpbreport/2000_1/s3_4.pdf.
Weisbrod, Burton A. 1964. External Benefits of Education. Princeton University,
        Industrial Relations Section.

                                                                               Page 61
Williamson, Jeffrey G. 1982. “The Structure of Pay in Britain, 1710-1911.” Research in
       Economic History 7: 1-54.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. 1990. Coping with City Growth during the British Industrial
       Revolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. 2006. “Inequality and Schooling Responses to Globalization
       Forces: Lessons from History.” NBER Working Paper 12553. September.
Wrigley, E.A. and Roger Schofield. 1981. The Population History of England, 1541-
       1871: A Reconstruction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.




                                                                               Page 62
                                                ENDNOTES

1
    Easterlin (1981). For updates on the global advance of school enrollments, see Benavot and Riddle (1988)
and Clemens (2004).
2
    A classic non-econometric single-country study is North and Weingast (1989), with revisions by Clark
(1996). The econometric testing of institutional influences from earlier centuries has been led by De Long
and Shleifer (1993); Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001, 2002); and Acemoglu and Johnson (2005).
3
    Clark (2007).
4
    Bils and Klenow 2000. Similarly, the refreshingly iconoclastic work by Lant Pritchett on international
macro-estimates of the effects of education does not deny its positive role (Pritchett 2001, 2008).
5
    On the civic participation effects of schooling, see Dee (2004) and Milligan, Moretti, and Oreopoulos
2004. On its crime prevention effect, see Lochner and Moretti (2004). Currie and Moretti (2003) and other
studies find positive effects of schooling on health. Other studies use production-function econometrics to
capture the productivity effects of spillovers that leave no specific imprint (Moretti 2004a, 2004b, and a
survey in 2006). See also the surveys by Krueger and Lindahl (2001) and McMahon (2004).
           The natural-experiment study by Acemoglu and Angrist (2000) emphasized the low statistical
significance of externalities from the extra schooling triggered by compulsory schooling laws. Yet they
authors acknowledge that their point estimates still include enough externalities to justify noticeable
subsidies, and that their experiment was limited to externalities from secondary education alone.
6
    See, for example Angrist and Krueger (1991), Acemoglu and Angrist (2000), and Lleras-Muney (2005).
7
    Mariscal and Sokoloff (2000), Engerman, Mariscal, and Sokoloff (forthcoming). The present author’s
transatlantic empirics are also comparative and reach conclusions like those of the Engerman-Mariscal-
Sokoloff team, but tend to rely more on panel-data econometrics, with the usual caveats about exogeneity
and instrument power (Lindert 2004, Chs. 5 and 15).
8
    If there are exceptions in which society over-invested public funds in primary education rather than higher
education, they would probably be highly egalitarian communist regimes, such as Cuba under Castro. Yet I
am not aware of any study that has quantified such overinvestment in basic education.
9
    Lack of numeracy is demonstrated in the aggregate by age heaping, the tendency to round numbers off to
integers ending in 0 or 5. See Baten and Crayen (2008) and A’Hearn, Baten, and Crayen (2009).
10
     The underlying structure shaping education outcomes might conceivably involve different a’s and b’s in
the two polities. If so, any judgment of the education performance of B should use a counterfactual
drawing on the coefficients from B, posing questions of the form “If B had had A’s values of the
independent variables Edt-1, Z and X, how would its education outcome have differed, in our view, given
B’s own structure?”
11
     The poverty defense argues that exogenous income determinants (in the Z vector) have lowered
education simply because the income elasticity of education is positive. The Wagner’s Law defense
excuses the poorer and lower-education country even from spending as great a share of its income on


                                                                                                      Page 63
public services (in this case, public education). Applying either of these defenses requires that the less
educated country be the poorer one, which is ruled out in the cases defined as education anomalies here.
12
     Sandberg (1979), Lindert (2004, v. 2, Appendix A).
13
     The larger tables behind Figure 1-5, complete with the countries whose dots are unlabeled, will be posted
at http://econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty/fzlinder. The sources for enrollments 1870-1930 are those reported in
Lindert (2004, v. 2, Appendix A). The educational attainments of adults in 2000 are from http://soto.iae-
csic.org/Data.htm (accessed 18 June 2009), as described in Cohen and Soto (2007). The PISA test scores
for 2006 (with some splicing from PISA 2003 scores, as in the case of the US reading scores) are from the
online version of OECD Education at a Glance 2007. The GDP per capita estimates for 1870-1930 are
from Maddison (2001), and those for 1970 and 2004 are from Penn World Table 6.2.
14
     In addition to the sources cited in the preceding footnote, see the UN’s Arab Human Development Report
(2005).
15
     According to Penn World Table 6.2, Niger’s income per capita has now sunk sufficiently since about
1990 for Mawali to catch up.
16
     Hoxby (1998), Grissmer et al. (2000), and other sources cited in Lindert (2004, Ch. 6).
17
     Tuttle (1998, 1999).
18
     Lindert (1978, Chs. 6, 7).
19
     Even a relatively unhealthy country today, like Burkina Faso, is arguably on the same enrollment
trajectory, and the same life expectancy, as were England and America at nineteenth-century dates with
comparable PPP incomes per capita. For the enrollment comparison, see Clemens (2004, especially Tables
10, 11). Life expectancy from birth in Burkino Faso was about 44 years at the end of the twentieth century,
versus 40 in England in 1851 or 38 in the United States in 1850 (Wrigley and Schofield 1981, Table A.3;
Carter et al. (2006, volume 1, pp. 447-448). The adult life expectancies were probably also similar.
20
     Mitch (1982, 1984, and 1992) and Solmon (1970, 1975).
21
     For United States, one could start with the data series in Claudia Goldin’s education chapter in volume 2
of Carter et al. (2006), and consult Solmon (1970, 1975) for detailed cost estimates by state in 1880 and
1890.
22
     In addition to the correlations shown in Figures 5 and 6, see Tan and Mingat (1992), OECD (various
years), and UNESCO (various years). IQ scores have also been correlated with economic development,
both internationally in recent years and across the 20th century in each of several OECD countries (Flynn
1984, 1987, 2000). It remains to be seen how much the improvement in IQ scores relates to schooling and
how much to such other factors as health or learning the test.
23
     For a global cross-section from 1988-1992 data, see Freeman and Oostendorp (2000, especially Table 3).
On Latin America, see Frankema (2009, ch. 4), De Ferranti et al. (2004, p. 316).
24
     Williamson and Lindert (1980), Margo’s wage chapter in Carter et al. (2006), Williamson (2006), Goldin
and Katz (2008, esp. Chapter 8).



                                                                                                     Page 64
25
     Clark (2007, Chapter 8). Looking at several sectors rather than just the building trades, Phelps Brown
(1977) and Williamson (1982) find no clear movements in skill premia since the eighteenth century.
26
     Van Zanden (2009a, 2009b).
27
     Van Leeuwen (2007).
28
     For explicit treatment of non-economic returns from education, see Becker (1963), Mitch (1982, 1992),
Haveman and Wolfe (1984), and Oreopoulos and Salvanes (2009).
29
     This paper uses only the “full method” cross-sectional estimates based on monetary benefits and costs,
avoiding any rates of return in the tradition of Jacob Mincer. The Mincerian estimates never explore the
costs of education, or who paid for them, and instead use extra years of schooling as a cost proxy. Such an
approach is a non-starter here, given this paper’s desire to focus more attention on who paid whom for the
schooling. In addition, the Mincerian estimates have come in for serious econometric criticisms regarding
their functional form (e.g. Heckman, Lochner, and Todd 2008), and often yield unstable estimates.
30
     As Lant Pritchett has pointed out (2001, 373, note 6), the higher rate of return on primary education
derives not so much from a higher percent pay increase in later life as from the simple fact that the
opportunity cost of the child’s time is so much lower in the earlier years of the education cycle.
31
     Psacharopoulos (1981, p. 323). Emphasis in the original.
32
     Hansen (1963, esp. p. 136), Becker (1964, esp. p. 167).
33
     OECD (2005, pp. 125-126).
34
     In an open economy, one would have to lower the tax rate to reflect partial losses due to an average rate
of brain drain. This paper deals mainly with large-country cases, where this effect would be negligible.
One might also worry that the calculations need to include any crowding out or crowding in of private
education from the extension of government subsidies. Yet the calculations applied in this paper assume
that the government subsidizes all schools, as in a voucher plan, so that substitution between public and
private schools has less relevance. One must also not overlook something obvious to the historian: In most
settings where public subsidies were not provided, private schooling was also lacking for most children.
This would have limited the amount of crowding out.
35
     One can choose variants on this basic measure, depending on practicalities and purpose. They fall into
three main categories: (1) tax effort, (2) absolute public inputs per child, and (3) relative public inputs per
child (the “support ratio” featured here). Each has its strengths and weaknesses.
           (1) Tax effort is conveniently measured by the share of national income devoted to subsidizing
primary education. This straightforward ratio unfortunately can be raised or lowered just by diffrences in
the share of population that is school-aged, making a country look less generous when in fact it simply has
fewer children (e.g. nineteenth-century France).
           (2) The absolute public inputs of subsidies per child are closer to the input concept preferred by
the production-function literature in the economics of education. These inputs can be measured per
enrolled pupil, per attending pupil, or per child of school age. The last denominator has the advantage and
disadvantage of including the enrollment or attendance rate in the measure. That is good or bad depending

                                                                                                       Page 65
on whether enrollment and attendance were driven by the supply of student slots (our present purpose) or
the parental demand for slots.
           (3) The relative public inputs per child is captured by the “support ratio” of (subsidies/child) to
(GDP per capita or per adult of working age). It best dramatizes the departures from the usual positive
Wagner’s Law relationship of tax effort to income per capita. Here again its “child” measure can refer to
enrolled students, attending students, or children of school age. The choice again depends on which of
these comes closest to tracking the supply of subsidies as opposed to parental demand. My choices in the
text reflect my hunches about how best to proxy the public supply-of-subsidies side.
36
     In cases of discriminatory access to subsidized schools, one must avoid the pitfall of mis-applying the
subsidies per favored-group student to the larger population or its incomes. For example, one must take
care not to use the wrong data from the American post-bellum South or from South Africa under apartheid.
Separate support ratios must be applied to different groups, and compared with the incomes of the relevant
taxpayers.
37
     Hanushek and Woessmann (2008, 2009, and forthcoming).
38
     For the debate over whether externalities are truly greater in higher education, and how this might hinge
on the degree of separability of research from instruction, see Birsdall (1987, 1996) versus Psacharopoulos
(1996). See also Behrman (1996) on the methodological difficulties involved.
39
     Castelló and Doménech (2002).
40
     The comparison with current leading-country practice can be doubted and replaced with an opposing
infant-industry or Gerschenkronian argument in favor of tilting toward investments in higher education in
developing countries. Given that higher education calls for very high fixed costs before its research and
instruction can compete with the leading foreign universities, it might be more necessary for higher
education than for primary education to have the government force its growth with heavy subsidies. The
present paper can only pose this possibility, and not yet resolved it.
           A key clue to the validity of the infant-industry or Gerschenkronian argument would be whether or
not countries that caught up in the past and became educational leaders did it by tipping government
subsidies away from primary education and toward higher education, like some of today’s developing
countries covered in Table 4. A good case study would be North America and Australasia, which had to
catch up with Britain, France, and Germany in the nineteenth century. While I am still gathering data on
American university finance between the Civil War and World War II, it seems that the Northeastern states
achieved their global prominence in higher education with primary/tertiary ratios above the text 50%
threshold, to judge from the data for 1850 and from 1950 on. The Southern and Western states usually had
lower primary/tertiary ratios, but also failed to catch up to the Northeast.
41
     O’Brien (1988), Brewer (1989), North and Weingast (1989), Schultz and Weingast (1998).
42
     Specifically, the United Kingdom’s public support ratio for primary schools was the lowest of five data-
supplying countries in 1870 and the lowest of seven data-supplying countries in 1900. In terms of primary-



                                                                                                        Page 66
school teachers per 100 pupils, the UK ranked fifth out of seven data-supplying countries in 1870, and 8th
out of 16 data-supplying countries in 1900. See Lindert (2004, Volume 2, Appendices A and C).
43
     Lindert (2003; 2004, Chapters 5 and 15). See in particular Figure 5.3 (p. 97), which reveals a tax-support
anomaly about England that corresponds to the education output anomaly of Figures 1-3 in this paper.
44
     The estimates based on David Mitch’s data fall within the range of possible private and social rates of
return he staked out (Mitch 1982, 1984, 1992). Professor Mitch suggests that my estimate based on Jason
Long’s work may have been too pessimistic in assuming that it would take six years of primary school to
achieve the kind of wage gains estimated by Long. I am grateful to him for his advice on these estimates.
45
     Massie (1761).
46
     Homer and Sylla (1991, Chs. 8-9); Clark (1996), Dincecco (2009a, 2009b).
47
     Go and Lindert (2010, Table 2). For further prewar data on females’ shares of primary teach, and their
relative salaries, see the two “female teachers” files in http://econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty/fzlinder .
48
     Mariscal and Sokoloff 2000; Engerman, Mariscal, and Sokoloff, forthcoming. The quotation comes from
the latter.
49
     Frankema 2009, Chapter 4.
50
     Nugent and Robinson (forthcoming) are also urging the shift of more attention to the development policy
failures of Venezuela since it fell under dictatorships in the early twentieth century.
51
     The relative position of Latin America for given income per capita is less dramatic in Figures 2 and 3
than in Frankema’s 4.1 because of a difference in samples. Figures 2 and 3 include more countries from
outside of the OECD core, some of which had enrollment deficiencies similar to those of Latin America.
52
     Ibid. [Frankema 2009, Chapter 4].
53
     To add the lag behind Guyana to the contrasts in Figures 2-6, see the Unesco Institute of Statistics
homepage: http://stats.uis.unesco.org/unesco/ReportFolders /ReportFolders.aspx. See in particular the
secondary school enrollment rates documented between 1970 and 2000.
54
     For differences in national wage structures 1988-1992, see Freeman and Oostendorp (2000, especially
Tables 3, 4).
55
     Frankema (2009, Table 4.2).
56
     On Brazil, Mexico, and Chile, see Ioschpe (2004), and Lindert, Skoufias, and Shapiro (2006). On Asia,
see Tan and Mingat (1992).
57
     Shoup et al. (1959), p. 409.
58
     Lewis Solmon (1975) gives data on direct resources costs per public elementary school pupil in 1880.
California ranked second to Colorado in such costs per pupil. This was likely a wage effect at least as much
as a small-class-size effect. For teacher pay by state in the most recent years, see
www.nces.ed.gov/quicktables.
59
     Dincecco (2009a, especially Figures 1-2).
60
     Williamson (1990, Ch. 10, especially pp. 281-297).



                                                                                                       Page 67
