                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    REGULATION, ALLOCATION, AND LEAKAGE IN CAP-AND-TRADE MARKETS
                               FOR CO2

                                          James B. Bushnell
                                             Yihsu Chen

                                        Working Paper 15495
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15495


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2009




The authors are grateful for helpful discussion and comments from Dallas Burtraw, Meredith Fowlie,
Don Fullerton, Adrien Kandel, Andreas Lange, Scott Murtishaw, Charles Kolstad, Ellen Wolfe, and
seminar participants at UC Berkeley, Rice University, Iowa State University, Johns Hopkins, and the
NBER winter institute. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by James B. Bushnell and Yihsu Chen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Regulation, Allocation, and Leakage in Cap-and-Trade Markets for CO2
James B. Bushnell and Yihsu Chen
NBER Working Paper No. 15495
November 2009
JEL No. L9,Q50

                                              ABSTRACT

The allocation of emissions allowances is among the most contentious elements of the design of cap-and-trade
systems. In this paper we develop a detailed representation of the US western electricity market to
assess the potential impacts of various allocation proposals. Several proposals involve the "updating''
of permit allocation, where the allocation is tied to the ongoing output, or input use, of plants. These
allocation proposals are designed with the goals of limiting the pass-through of carbon costs to product
prices, mitigating leakage, and of mitigating costs to high-emissions firms. However, some forms
of updating can also inflate permit prices, thereby limiting the benefits of such schemes to high emissions
firms. Rather than mitigating the impact on high carbon producers, the net operating profit of such
firms can actually be lower under input-based updating than under auctioning. This is due to the fact
that product prices (and therefore revenues) are lower under input-based updating, but overall compliance
costs are relatively comparable between auctioning and input-based updating. In this way, the anticipated
benefits from allocation updating are reduced and further distortions are introduced into the trading
system.


James B. Bushnell
Department of Economics
468H Heady Hall
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50011
and NBER
jimb@iastate.edu

Yihsu Chen
UC, Merced
ychen26@ucmerced.edu
1         Introduction
As climate change policy in the United States begins to move from concept to imple-
mentation, there is increasing focus on the details of that implementation. There is
widespread support for focusing much of the regulatory emphasis for greenhouse gas
(GHG) reductions on cap-and-trade as the mechanism to achieve these reductions. Al-
though the concept of capping GHG emissions and allowing trading for compliance has
broad acceptance, many details about the design of a cap-and-trade system are still
hotly debated. Policy-makers must often balance equity considerations with the desire
to achieve cost-effective and meaningful reductions in emissions. The differential impacts
of GHG regulation on various industries, regions, and consumers make the design of those
regulations very contentious.
    Pending Federal action on climate policy, most of the current initiative has come
from the state or regional level in the United States. The Regional Greenhouse Gas
Initiative, a cap-and-trade program which covers the electricity sector of the northeastern
U.S., began operating in 2009. California’s Assembly Bill 32 (AB 32) requires that all
sectors of its economy reduce their aggregate GHG emissions to 1990 levels by 2020. The
California initiative is proceeding in parallel with the broader-based Western Climate
Initiative (WCI). The WCI will establish a regional cap-and-trade program that will
initially encompass large stationary sources (primarily electricity) and then expand to
include other sources, including transportation fuels in a second phase.1
    The fact that GHG policy has until recently been driven at the local, rather than
national level, has created concern over the geographic limitations of the regulations.
Environmental targets can be undermined if production is able to shift away from the
jurisdictional reach of the regulator through either leakage or reshuffling of production
sources.2 These concerns over regional US policies reflect similar, more general concerns
with leakage as a challenge even for international climate agreements. In the crafting of
European CO2 market, as well as the American Clean Energy and Security Act (ACESA)
that would establish a national cap in the United States, much attention has been paid
to the “competitiveness” question, which is fundamentally related to how vulnerable
domestic producers are to leakage from imports.
   Because of this, a significant fraction of the implementation efforts have been devoted
to policies and design choices that can mitigate this leakage problem. The choice of
the level of the supply chain at which emissions are measured and regulations applied,
known as the “point of regulation,” can play a role in limiting the circumvention of the
regulations, although previous analysis has argued that these benefits can be overstated
    1
        WCI, 2008.
    2
        See Bushnell, et. al (2008), Fowlie (2008), and Chen (2009).
and that other efficiency problems can be created.3 Here, we focus on the impact of
alternative allocation proposals on market performance. This question is also relevant
at the international level as current proposals for a US cap-and-trade rely heavily upon
allocation mechanisms to blunt the impact of the regulation on competitive trade-exposed
industries.
    In this paper, we develop a detailed model of the power sector in the western United
States, and examine the impacts of alternative cap-and-trade designs on the operations,
emissions, and prices in this region. Our research is motivated by several important eco-
nomic and policy questions relating to cap-and-trade design. First, there is the practical
question of just how severe leakage would be under varying levels of WCI participation.
Obviously the more states that participate, the less severe the potential for leakage may
be, but we hope to quantify those risks by examining the benefits of expansion from
California to the rest of the WCI. Second, we take advantage of current policy debates
over cap-and-trade design to examine the general relationships between specific design
elements and market outcomes such as leakage and overall market efficiency. Specifically,
we focus on the question of the allocation of permits through “updating,” a policy that
links allocation to ongoing production. This approach appears in various forms in every
major CO2 market under consideration. Last, we provide some quantitative, but neces-
sarily qualified, estimates of the impacts of cap-and-trade on permit and power prices in
the western U.S.
    We find that leakage of electricity production to unregulated regions is a significant
concern, even under the expanded WCI program. One of the key design elements under
consideration is the allocation of emissions credits through “updating.” The environmen-
tal economics literature often focuses on “output-based” updating, which ties allocation
of permits to quantities of product produced. Our results show that output-based up-
dating substantially reduces leakage, and produces relatively low electricity prices com-
pared to an exogenous form of allocation, such as auctioning. Much of the allocation
seen in practice, however, either explicitly or implicitly ties allocations to inputs or even
emissions, rather than outputs. Further when an output-based allocation is applied to
multiple industries, it is common to normalize “output” according to the carbon content
of the products that are being produced. Such an approach, often called benchmarking,
is included in the ACESA legislation. By normalizing output according to emissions,
output-based updating takes on characteristics similar to emissions-based updating. This
form of updating has drawn supporters because of the view that it can help ease the tran-
sition to carbon regulation by allocating disproportionately more permits to relatively
high carbon producers, as well as limit the permit windfall that may be reaped by a
low carbon producer under a purely output-based scheme. However as we demonstrate
  3
    See the recommendations of the Market Advisory Committee to the California Air Resources Board
(2007), Burtraw (2008), Chen, et al., (2008).
in the context of the WCI market, this “quasi emissions-based”, or equivalently, “fuel-
based” updating in fact reverses many of the effects seen under output-based updating.
One implication of these results is that, while updating is in part motivated by a desire
to provide financial relief to carbon intensive firms, it can in fact leave high polluting
firms only modestly better off than if all the permits were auctioned. At the same time,
updating can introduce significant distortions into the abatement decisions of firms and
industries.


2       Design and Modeling of Cap-and-Trade Markets
As is necessarily the case with markets that are created by regulatory fiat, the choices
made by regulators in designing those markets play a central role in influencing their
outcomes. This is certainly true in the case of cap-and-trade (C&T) markets for the
trading of emissions compliance obligations. Such markets exist because regulators create
a demand for emissions credits through the setting of the emissions cap. By establishing
tradable emissions credits, regulators also create a valuable new property right. Not
surprisingly, the distribution or allocation of those valuable rights is often a source of
great contention.4
    Traditionally, the allocation of permits has been held to be an issue limited to eco-
nomic transfers that need not affect the efficiency of the resulting emissions trading
market. Certainly it is the equity concerns that dominate the discussions and debates
amongst policymakers and the affected industries. The impacts on efficiency can be neg-
ligible if the allocation is truly exogenous to the ongoing operations of the industries
subject to the emissions cap, as is the case with the US SO2 trading program (Ellerman,
et al., 2000). However, in many cases the allocation of emissions permits has either been
endogenous, or contingent upon market outcomes.
    One proposal that has been of increasing interest is to allocate emissions credits using
output-based updating. Under output-based updating each firm receives an allocation of
emissions credits that is proportional to its total product production. In the electricity
context, for example, this means each firm receives an allocation that is proportional
to the MWh generated within the regulatory jurisdiction.5 The effects of output-based
    4
     See, for example Kanter and Mouawad, 2008.
    5
     We use the term generated somewhat loosely here, as in the California and WCI context, the point
of regulation is mixed. Emissions from sources within the cap-and-trade region will be regulated along
the lines of traditional source-based cap-and-trade systems. In additions imports into the cap-and-trade
region will also be regulated under a system known as the “first-deliverer.” In effect the importer of the
product will be required to surrender emissions credits equivalent to the emissions required to produce
updating have been a subject of much research.6 In general, it is believed that output-
based updating would help to mitigate leakage, as firms would be rewarded (in the form
of permits) for domestic production. Output-based updating is also widely believed to
result in lower product prices than alternative forms of allocation.
    While one strain of the academic literature has focused on the detrimental efficiency
effects of such a price impact, it has an appeal to regulators. For example, the design
recommendations of both the California Public Utilities Commission and the WCI include
the minimization of the impacts of carbon regulations on consumers as a prominent
objective of the allocation process. Despite the appeal of the product price effect, these
“lower” prices can lead to inefficient over-consumption as the externality cost of the
pollution is not reflected in product prices.7 It is interesting to note, however, that in a
general equilibrium setting, the welfare effects of minimizing the product price impacts
are more ambiguous.8
    Further, there is a concern that output-based updating, if applied symmetrically to
all producers (or at least to all fossil-fueled producers), would exacerbate equity concerns.
For example, there is a fear that low-carbon producers will experience a “windfall” under
output-based allocation, while high-carbon producers will suffer most of the cost impacts
of GHG regulations. This is because output-based allocation favors cleaner producers.
They are rewarded for production, and penalized for emissions. Traditionally, allocation
has been used as a tool to “soften the blow” of increased environmental compliance
through allocations based upon historic emissions patterns, also known as grandfathered
allocations. Under grandfathered allocation, larger polluters receive a larger share of the
allocations, while also paying more for compliance due to their higher emissions levels.
In this way the total costs to high-emissions producers are mitigated, while the marginal
cost of compliance remains the same. The California Public Utilities Commission has
recommended (CPUC, 2008) an alternative we will refer to as “fuel-based” updating
in order to address this equity concern. Under fuel-based updating, the allocation of
emissions credits per MWh of generation would be higher for high-carbon (e.g., coal-
based) producers than it would be for low-carbon (e.g., gas-based) producers.
    Fuel-based updating is part of a general class of allocation approaches also known as
that product, even though the production itself occurs physically outside of the cap-and-trade region.
Under first-deliverer, the importers would also be eligible for allocations under an updating scheme.
These allocations would be proportional to the MWh imported into the cap-and-trade region.
   6
     see Jensen and Rasmussen (2000), Fischer (2003), and Fischer and Fox (2007)
   7
     See Burtraw, Palmer, and Kahn (2005) for a discussion of the various impacts of updating.
   8
     This is because the price impacts of the environmental regulation may exacerbate the negative
impacts of other existing taxes and regulations. Although there has been considerable focus on using
the revenues from environmental regulations to offset these distortions (see Goulder, Parry and Burtraw
(1997), and Fulerton and Metcalf (2001)) it is possible that minimizing the price impact on the regulated
products could also work in the same direction.
input-based, or emissions-based updating. It is in fact more common than output-based
allocation in practice. This is in part due to the equity concerns described above, and
also due to the fact that it is not always easy to either measure or compare the “output”
of some plants, particularly in C&T programs that span multiple industries. Some states
participating in the US NOx budget program utilize a form of input-based updating that
is based upon the heat-input of power plants. Allocations the ETS market for CO2 in the
European Union have contained, at least implicitly, several aspects of updating. (Grubb
and Neuhoff, 2006, Ahman, et al., 2006). It is also expected that updating will play a
significant role in the emerging US national cap-and-trade legislation.
    The analysis of updating proposals, both input and output based, has focused on the
efficiency implications of these approaches. In addition to inefficient over-consumption,
updating can result in a productive inefficiency by distorting relative production deci-
sions, as well as distort long-term investment signals.9 Several papers have examined the
interaction of allocation policy with leakage and efficiency for specific industries, includ-
ing electricity (Neuhoff, Martinez, and Sato (2006)) and cement (Demailly and Quirion
(2006)).
    However, these papers tend not to emphasize the aspects of updating that motivate
their application in practice. These are the impacts of updating on permit and product
prices, as well as the equity effects for firms. Using a theoretical model, Bohringer and
Lange (2005) consider a “closed” trading system where the cap is fixed and there is
no opportunity for trading with other emissions markets. When allocations are exactly
proportional (but not equivalent) to emissions, input-based updating recreates the “first-
best” product prices and emissions of auctioning. The permit prices, however, rise in a
closed system. This is because emissions-based allocation reduces the perceived marginal
rate of emissions for firms. In order to achieve the reductions required by the cap,
permit prices must rise to offset this perceived discounting of emissions rates. Although
higher-emissions firms receive larger allocations, they pay disproportionately more for
the emissions that are not covered by allocation, due to the higher equilibrium permit
prices. In an “open” trading system, the effect of updating tends to push the abatement
to regions or industries that are not receiving the implicit production subsidies in the
form of updated permit allocations.
    The western market we examine here has characteristics of both closed and open
systems. The allocation rules are aimed at market shares, and therefore the industry
level cap would not change with allocation results. In the initial years of the WCI,
when the allocated shares will be the largest, emissions will be dominated by the electric
sector. As mentioned before, however, leakage is also a concern. There will therefore
be opportunities for trading product, if not emissions permits with neighboring regions.
  9
      See Jensen and Rasmussen (2000), Ahman and Holmstrom (2006), and Sterner and Muller (2008)
The goal of this paper is to try to sort through these factors and establish the relative
impacts of them on market outcomes.


2.1    Analysis of Cap-and-Trade Design

For the most part, empirical projections of cap-and-trade markets for GHG have tended
to take the “long-view” approach of simulating outcomes 10 to 20 years in the future. The
studies commissioned by the regulatory agencies responsible for implementing California’s
AB 32, for example, emphasize the year 2020 (see discussion of the E3 model in CPUC
(2008)). As such this work tends to be focused on the important assumptions one must
make about the trajectory of future electricity demand and trends in the investment of
new generation technologies. Chen et al. (2008) examine the economic and emissions
implications of the three C&T proposals considered under AB32: source-, load- based
and first-seller. When cross-boarder electricity sales are subject to an emissions cap, they
show that these three proposals produce the same market outcomes, and all of them are
prone to emissions leakage. None of these studies consider how outcomes might change
under different permits allocation schemes.
    Because of our focus on the specific design of the cap-and-trade mechanism, and
its impact on the operation of electricity markets, we instead take the “near-view” ap-
proach. We base our analysis upon actual market data drawn from the year 2007, and
look at the counter-factual question of how those markets would have functioned under
a cap-and-trade regime. In this sense the work follows in the spirit of Fowlie (2008),
who also studies the potential for leakage from a California-only market, and also that
of Bushnell, Mansur, and Saravia (2008) who deploy similar techniques to examine com-
petition and vertical contracting issues. In a fashion similar to Schuliken, et al., (2008),
we formulate the joint equilibrium outcomes of the emissions and electricity market as a
linear-complementarity problem.
    Our study differs from previous work in several important ways. While Fowlie and
the E3 study employ an empirical model of portions of the western electricity market,
we model the emissions credit prices as endogenous to the cap-and-trade market. This
is central to our work given our focus on the endogenous impact of allocation policies on
permit prices. Second, in addition to California’s CO2 policies, we examine the broader
western market proposed under the WCI. Last, we explicitly consider how allocation
policies can affect firm behavior in the western US. Previous work examining the impacts
of allocation have either taken a general equilibrium approach (Bohringer and Lange
(2005), Sterner and Muller (2008), Fischer and Fox (2008)), or more complex formulations
applied to stylized market data (Shuliken, et al., 2008, Neuhoff, et al., 2006).
   We also take a different approach than most similar analyses to developing our market
elements used for the simulation. One difficulty with simulating electricity markets in a
high level of detail is that, while data on most fossil-fuel based generation units is quite
extensive and reliable, there are far less data on the activities of hydro-electric plants,
renewable generation, and the substantial amount of power generated from combined
heat & power or “cogeneration” plants. When building a counter-factual recreation of
an electricity market, these data gaps make assumptions about the missing production
necessary.
    We take the approach of restricting our construction of a counter-factual market
outcome to the portion of resources for which we do have detailed data. In effect we
are assuming that, under our counter-factual, the operations of non-modeled genera-
tion plants would not have changed. This is equivalent to assuming that compliance
with the carbon reduction goals of a cap-and-trade program will be achieved through
the reallocation of production within the set of modeled plants. We feel that this is a
reasonable assumption for two reasons. First the vast majority of the carbon emissions
from this sector come from these modeled resources. Indeed, data availability is tied to
emissions levels since the data are reported through environmental compliance to exist-
ing regulations. Second, the total production from “clean” sources is unlikely to change
in the short-run. The production of low carbon electricity is driven by natural resource
availability (rain, wind, sun) or, in the case of combined heat and power (CHP), to non-
electrcity production decisions. The economics of production are such that these sources
are already producing all the power they can, even without additional carbon regulation.
To a first-order, short-run emissions reductions will have to come either from shifting
production from among conventional sources, a reduction in end-use electricity demand,
or through substitution with unregulated imports, i.e., leakage or reshuffling.10


3      Model
In this section, we describe first our equilibrium model and then discuss how we apply
data from various sources to arrive at our calculations.
   Although this simulation approach is capable of representing imperfect competition
in the product market (i.e., electricity) we assume here that firms act in a manner
  10
    It is important to recognize that our modeling approach not only assumes that existing zero-carbon
sources will not change how much they produce but also when they produce it. An interesting question
is whether a redistribution of hydro-electric power across time could lower carbon emissions by enabling
a better management of fossil generation sources. Such an analysis would require a co-optimization of
hydro and thermal electric production and is beyond the scope of this paper.
consistent with perfect competition with regards to both the electricity and emissions
permit markets. We still model these markets as a series of equilibrium conditions for
each of the individual firms represented, as the incentive effects on individual firms from
policies such as updating are still relevant here.
    The key variables and parameters of the model are grouped according to four impor-
tant indices; the firm, location, technology, and time period of production. The total
production of firm i from generation technology j, and location l at time t is represented
     i
by qj,l,t                                                                   i
          . Firm and technology level emissions rates are denoted eij,l (qj,l,t ). We assume
that emissions rates can be increasing in quantity, but are unchanging over time. Pro-
                  i   i
duction costs Cj,l  (qj,l,t ) vary by firm, technology, and location, and as described below
                                              i
are assumed to be quadratic in output qj,l,t     .
   For each firm i ∈ {1, ..., N } and time period t ∈ {1, ..., T }, a perfectly competitive, or
cost-minimizing firm i maximizes profits for all its technologies j and locations l:


           πi,l,t (qti ) =                    i        i     i                         i
                                                                                             · eij,l (qj,l,t
                                                                                                       i
                             XX                                              X X
                                     [pl,t · qj,l,t − Cl,j (qj,l,t )] − λ             qj,l,t                 ),   (1)
                             l   j                                          l∈REG j


    where pl,t and λ are the wholesale prices of electricity and CO2 permits, respectively.
Permit prices are assumed to be uniform across the regulated (capped) region. Wholesale
electricity is assumed to be a homogenous commodity for purposes of setting wholesale
prices, although prices are assumed to vary by location subject to transmission constraints
as described below. However, electricity production falls into two categories, that within
the region covered by the emissions cap and that outside the reach of the regulation. The
set REG represents those plants located inside the cap and trade region.


3.1    Cap-and-Trade Design

The profit function described in the previous section assumes a standard source-based
cap-and-trade market, where the compliance obligation rests explictly on the producer
(in this case the electricity generator). As the focus of C&T design turned to allocation,
however, much of the regulatory emphasis was devoted to mitigating consumer prices,
smoothing the cost impacts to firms (at least somewhat), and mitigating the “windfall”
profits that might be earned by low-carbon producers (CPUC (2008)). These goals
were to be addressed primarily through allocation policies. In particular, two specific
alternative implementations of output-based updating are considered here.
3.1.1    Output-based Updating

As discussed above, one mechanism that can depress product market prices and at least
partially combat leakage is output-based updating. In this context, the allocation of
emissions credits would be tied to the electricity production of firms. Each MWh of
production would earn a fraction of an emissions credit.
    In practice, the above model would be part of a larger multi-period cycle of emissions
compliance and allocation. Because of the data-intensive nature of our approach, it is
difficult to explicitly model multiple years. We instead represent the allocation decision
as part of a “closed-loop,” to a single cap-and-trade compliance cycle. This is sufficient
to capture the key qualitative impacts of updating on the incentives of firms. In effect,
the allocations are given out at the end of the cycle, just before credits are required
to be surrendered. These allocations are then linked to the actual output of producers
during the compliance cycle that is about to conclude. We therefore suppress the effect
of interest rates or other dynamic considerations.
     Following this assumption, we can rewrite the profit maximization problem for each
                                                                                          i
firm to include the prospect of output-based allocation of emissions credits. Let δt (ql,t  )=
     i
δ · ql,t be the allocation of emissions credits earned for use in the compliance cycle 1..T
                    i
from producing ql,t   units of electricity in regulated region l during period t ∈ 1..T . Note
that we assume that the overall cap does not change, only that the distribution of (zero-
cost) emissions credits across firms varies with the relative output of firms and their
facilities. In other words δ = δ̃ PCAPQt . where Qt is the aggregate production (market
                                               1..T

demand) in period t, δ̃ is the overall fraction of carbon credits that are allocated through
updating, and t ∈ 1..T is the cycle of the compliance period. Thus, the program of
output-based updating would not take the form of a “tradable performance standard.”11
Under a performance standard, the subsidy for output is not limited by an overall cap.
Even if the performance standard were a regulatory mandate, rather than an allocation of
emissions credits, there is an implicit subsidy of production. Compliance with a mandate,
when specified as an intensity per unit of output, can be advanced both through limiting
the undesirable input and expanding total output.12
   The profit for firm i will now include consideration of the additional permits earned
from additional production.

         πi,l,t (qti ) =                    i        i     i                         i
                                                                                           · [eij,l (qj,l,t
                                                                                                      i
                           XX                                              X X
                                   [pl,t · qj,l,t − Cl,j (qj,l,t )] − λ             qj,l,t                  ) − δ].   (2)
                           l   j                                          l∈REG j

  11
    See Fischer, 2003.
  12
    See Fullerton and Heutel (2007). One current proposal that exhibits this characteristic is the “low
carbon fuel standard” for transportation fuels (see Holland, Hughes, and Knittel (2008)).
    This profit equation highlights how the updating weakens the marginal cost impact
of the cap-and-trade requirement for a given permit price, lambda. For facilities with
an emissions rate higher than the allocation rate, the cap-and-trade still effectively taxes
output, although at a lower rate. For facilities with an emissions rate that is lower than
the allocation rate, eij,l < δ, there is now a production subsidy.


3.1.2   Fuel-based Updating

The other approach to updating under consideration would distinguish between the in-
puts of various production sources. Motivated by a desire to limit the cost impacts of
cap-and-trade on utilities heavily reliant on coal-based sources of power, this proposal
would allocate emissions credits to generation from differing fuel sources in a ratio roughly
aligned with the average GHG emission rate from each fuel source. In the notation of
our model, this approach would provide δj emissions credits to each MWh of generation
from a source of technology type j. In other words, each technology could in theory be
subject to a separate allocation ratio. The resulting equilibrium condition for production
for firm i would be


        πi,l,t (qti ) =                      i        i     i                           i
                                                                                              · [eij,l (qj,l,t
                                                                                                         i
                          XX                                                 X X
                                    [pl,t · qj,l,t − Cl,j (qj,l,t )] − λ               qj,l,t                  ) − δj ].   (3)
                          l     j                                          l∈REG j


    As with the output-based allocation, the allocation component δj weakens the impact
of permit prices on the perceived marginal cost of production. The strength of this effect
is now asymmetric, and its net impact will depend upon the specific value of δj . The
general intent of the fuel-based updating is to weaken the impact on higher emission
technologies and therefore soften the blow of implementing the cap. A somewhat extreme
version of this allocation would arise if emissions rates within each technology class were
constant and equivalent across all firms and locations (i.e., eij,l = ej ) and the allocation
factors were applied proportionately to emission rates δj = δ̃ · ej . Then equation (3) can
be rewritten as


              πi,l,t (qti ) =                    i              i     i                               i
                                X                          X                                  X
                                        [pl,t · qj,l,t −       Cl,j (qj,l,t )] − λ(1 − δ̃)           qj,l,t · ej .         (4)
                                    l                      j                                 l∈REG


   Note that (4) is essentially equivalent to equation (1), again assuming that emissions
rates are constant over technologies and firms, except for the fact that the permit price
has now been scaled by 1 − δ̃ for all firms. The Bohringer and Lange (2005) result implies
that in a closed cap-and-trading system this results in the same outcomes that would
be produced by a grandfathered allocation of permits, except for the fact that permit
prices are increased by 1/(1 − δ̃). In this paper we examine the impact of this kind of
updating in a much more complex production environment, with leakage, transmission,
and capacity constraints. In addition, the actual updating policies proposed for the WCI
do not reach the level of perfectly matching emissions rates, although some would come
close. As the updating policy moves toward better correlation with emissions rates, we
would expect these effects to become more pronounced. An empirical analysis such as
this one is necessary to determine exactly how pronounced these impacts would be.


3.2    Transmission Network Management
We assume that the transmission network is managed efficiently in a manner that pro-
duces results equivalent to those reached through centralized locational marginal pricing
(LMP). For our purposes this means that the transmission network is utilized to efficiently
arbitrage price differences across locations, subjet to the limitations of the transmission
network. Such arbitrage could be achieved through either bilateral transactions or a
more centralized operation of the network. For now we simply assume that this arbitrage
condition is achieved.
    Mathematically, we adopt an approach utilized by Metzler,et al. (2003), to represent
the arbitrage conditions as another set of constraints of the market equilibrium. Under
the assumptions of a DC load-flow model, the transmission ‘flow’ induced by a marginal
injection of power at location l can be represented by a power transfer distribution factor
P T DFlk , which maps injections at locations, l, to flows over individual transmission paths
k. Within this framework, the arbitrage condition will implicitly inject and consume
power, yl,t to maximize available and feasible arbitrage profits as defined by
                                     X
                                            (ph,t − pl,t ) yl,t .
                                     l6=h


     In the above arbitrage equation, the location h is the arbitrarily assigned “hub”
location from which all relative transmission flows are defined. Thus an injection of
power, yl,t ≥ 0, at location l is assumed to be withdrawn at h. This arbitrage condition
is subject to the flow limits on the transmission network, particularly the line capacities,
Tk .

                                −T k ≤ P T DFl,k · yl,t ≤ T k

    This combination of arbitrage pressure and physical transmission constraints are re-
solved in the solution to the following langrangian.
                             Xh                                                      i
                     max            (ph,t − pl,t ) yl,t − P T DFl,k · yl,t − T k τk,t .
                      yl,t
                             l6=h

Where τk,t is the shadow value of capacity on transmission path k at time t.


3.3     Equilibrium Conditions

Each firm has a limited capacity of each technology type in each location, which we
denote by q ij,l . Given the above framework, we can represent the resulting equilibrium as
the set of quantities that simultaneously satisfy the following first order conditions. We
represent as a complementarity condition, where the symbol ⊥ signifies complementarity.
For each firm i and period t:


    i                 i0    i
   qj,l,t ≥ 0 ⊥ pt − Cl,j (qj,l,t ) − λ(eij,l + qj,l,t
                                                 i
                                                       ∗ ei0j,l,t ) − γj,l,t
                                                                       i
                                                                             ≤ 0 ∀i, j, t, l ∈ REG.     (5)

and

                   i                 i0    i          i
                  qj,l,t ≥ 0 ⊥ pt − Cl,j (qj,l,t ) − γj,l,t ≤ 0 ∀ i, j, t, l ∈
                                                                             / REG.                     (6)

         i                                                                   i
   Here γj,l,t is the shadow value of the capacity constraint on technology qj,l,t .

                                     i
                                    γj,l,t ≥ 0 ⊥ q ij,l − qj,t
                                                           i
                                                               ≥ 0 ∀ i, j, t, l.                        (7)

    Each firm, taking prices as exogenous, sets its production so that marginal costs equal
the price at the location of the production. This marginal cost component includes the
costs of emissions credits in locations subject to the emissions cap as well as the shadow
price of the limited capacity of that technology.
Output-based Updating
   As described above, output-based updating would allocate δ permits per MWh to
each firm. Differentiating the profit function (2) yields the following.


  i                 i0    i
 qj,l,t ≥ 0 ⊥ pt − Cl,j (qj,l,t ) − λ((eij,l + qj,l,t
                                                i
                                                      ∗ ei0j,l,t ) − δ) − γj,l,t
                                                                           i
                                                                                 ≤ 0 ∀ i, j, t, l ∈ REG. (8)
  If the updating is instead fuel or technology specific, then the above condition is
modified so that the allocation quantity, now δj , can be unique to a technology type j.


  i                 i0    i
 qj,l,t ≥ 0 ⊥ pt − Cl,j (qj,t ) − λ((eij,l + qj,l,t
                                              i
                                                    ∗ ei0j,l,t ) − δj ) − γj,l,t
                                                                           i
                                                                                 ≤ 0 ∀ i, j, t, l ∈ REG. (9)

Environmental Constraint
   Along with equilibrium conditions (5) - (??), the equilibrium for a combined electricity
and emissions market will include the following condition defining the permit price for
the overall compliance period.

                                                  i
                                                        · eij,l,t (qj,l,t
                                                                    i
                                                                          ) − eM AX ≤ 0.
                                       X
                         λ≥0⊥                    qj,l,t                                               (10)
                                   i,j,l∈REG,t


Where, again, the symbol ⊥ signifies complementarity between the constraint on available
emissions permits and the permit price, which is the shadow price of that constraint. If
there are excess emissions permits, the price is zero; otherwise λ is positive.
Network Constraints
   Prices at individual locations will be determined by the production decisions of firms
and the flows over the transmission network. The arbitrage minimization assumption
described above produces the following condition.
                                                 X
                                 ph,t − pl,t −         P T DFl,k · τl,t = 0.
                                                   k


    This reflects the general condition from an efficiently utilized network, that the prices
between locations differ only by the additional costs of congestion of a shipment between
those locations, as measured by the flows over lines times their shadow prices. There is
a separate condition for potential congestion in each direction.

                             1
                            τk,t ≥ 0 ⊥P T DFl,k · yl,t − T k ≤ 0 ∀k, t.


                             2
                            τk,t ≥ 0 ⊥T k − P T DFl,k · yl,t ≤ 0 ∀k, t.

   When the inverse demand, marginal cost, and emissions functions are linear, as they
are described below, the equilibrium conditions for each of the possible cap-and-trade
regimes, along with the respective conditions for network operations and emissions market
balance, combine to form a linear complementarity problem (Cottle, Pang, and Stone
                         i                                          i
(1992)) with variables qj,l,t , yl,t and dual values τk,t , λ, and γj,l,t ≥ 0. The solution to
this complementarity problem constitutes a perfectly competitive equilibrium to this
market, subject to the respective definitions of the cap region and allocation policy. Using
the data sources and functional forms described in the following section, we calculate
these equilibrium outcomes using the PATH solver algorithm (Dirske and Ferris, 1995)
implemented through the AMPL math programming language.


4     Data Sources and Assumptions
Our primary data source is the BASECASE dataset from Platts, which is in turn derived
primarily from the continuous emissisions monitoring system (CEMS) utilized by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to monitor the emissions of large stationary
sources. Almost all large fossil-fired electricity generation sources are included in this
dataset. However, hydro-electric, renewable, and some small fossil generation sources are
missing. The CEMS reports hourly data on several aspects of production and emissions.
Hourly data on nuclear generation plants are included with fossil generation data in the
BASECASE dataset. Here we utilize the hourly generation output and carbon emissions
for available facilities.
    These hourly output data are aggregated by firm and region to develop the “demand”
in the simulation model. As described above, this is in fact a residual demand; the de-
mand that is left after applying the output from non-CEMS plants. Plant cost, capacity,
and availability characteristics and regional fuel prices are then taken from the Platts
POWERDAT dataset. These data are in turn derived from mandatory industry reporting
to the Energy Information Administration (EIA) and the National Electric Reliability
Council (NERC).
    These data are then combined to create a demand profile and supply functions for
periods in the simulation. Although hourly data are available, for computational reasons
we aggregate these data into representative time periods. There are 20 such periods
for each of the four seasons, yielding 80 explicitly modeled time periods. As California
policy was the original focus of this work, the aggregation of hourly data was based
upon a sorting of the California residual demand. California aggregate production was
sorted into 20 bins based upon equal MW spreads between the minimum and maximum
production levels observed in the 2007 sample year. A time period in the simulation
therefore is based upon the mean of the relevant market data for all actual 2007 data
that fall within the bounds of each bin. For example, every actual hour (there were 54)
during Spring 2007 in which California residual demand fell between 6949 and 7446 MW
were combined into a single representative hour for simulation purposes. The resulting
emissions from this hour were then multiplied by 54 to generate an annualized equivalent
total level of emissions.
    The number of season-hour observations in each bin is therefore unbalanced, there are
relatively few observations in the highest and lowest production levels, and more closer
to the median levels. The demand levels used in the simulation are then based upon the
mean production levels observed in each bin. In order to calculate aggregate emissions,
the resulting outputs for each simulated demand level was multiplied by the number of
actual market hours used to produce the input for that simulated demand level.
   In the following sub-sections, we describe further the assumptions and functional
forms utilized in the simulation.


4.1     Market Demand

End-use consumption in each location is represented by the demand function Ql,t =
αl,t − βl pl,t , yielding an inverse demand curve defined as

                                              αl,t −         qi,j,t − yi,t
                                                       P
                                                       i,j
                                      plt =
                                                           βl
where yi,t is the aggregate net transmission flow into location l. The intercept of the
demand function is based upon the actual production levels in each location calculated
as described above. The mean hourly demand is summarized by GHG regulatory region
in Table 1.13 In each representative hour, demand is assumed to be at the levels reflected
in Table 1 when market prices are equal to the levels observed in the actual market hours
from which the demand numbers are taken. In other words, we model a linear demand
curve that passes through the observed price-quantity pairs for each period. As electricity
is an extremely inelastic product, we utilize an extremely low value for the slopes of this
demand curve. For each region, the regional slope of the demand curve is set so that the
median elasticity in each region is -.05.14
   13
      As described below, supply and demand regions can be characterized as belonging in one of 5
electrical zones or one of the four zones distinguished by climate regulation listed in Table 1.
   14
      When the market is modeled as perfectly competitive, as it is here, the results are relatively insensi-
tive to the elasticity assumption, as price is set at the marginal cost of system production and the range
of prices is relatively modest.
                           Table 1: Demand by Region and Season

                       Season AZNM     CA NWPP non-WCI
                       Winter  10925 11641 10781  16407
                       Spring  12130 11369  8394  15604
                       Summer  14705 16314 12823  18766
                       Fall    10943 13504 12878  16622



4.2     Fossil-Fired Generation Costs and Emissions

We explicitly model the major fossil-fired thermal units in each electric system. Because
of the legacy of cost-of-service regulation, relatively reliable data on the production costs
of thermal generation units are available. The cost of fuel comprises the major component
of the marginal cost of thermal generation. The marginal cost of a modeled generation
unit is estimated to be the sum of its direct fuel, CO2, and variable operation and
maintenance (VO&M) costs. Fuel costs can be calculated by multiplying the price of
fuel, which varies by region, by a unit’s ‘heat rate,’ a measure of its fuel-efficiency.
    The capacity of a generating unit is reduced to reflect the probability of a forced outage
of each unit. The available capacity of generation unit i, is taken to be (1 − f ofi ) ∗ capi ,
where capi is the summer rated capacity of the unit and f ofi is the forced outage factor
reflecting the probability of the unit being completely down at any given time.15 Unit
forced outage factors are taken from the generator availability data system (GADS) data
that is collected by the North American Reliability Councils. These data aggregate
generator outage performance by technology, age, and region.
    Generation marginal costs are derived from the costs of fuel and variable operating
and maintenance costs for each unit in our sample. Platts provides a unit average heat-
rate for each of these units. These heat-rates are multiplied by a regional average fuel
cost for each fuel and region, also taken from Platts. Costs for each technology type are
then aggregated by firm and region, and then represented with a single quadratic function
for each of five technology types, further separated by firm and region. Marginal cost of
technology j at location l for firm i is therefore an affine function.

                                     i0    i          i
                                    Cl,j (qj,l,t ) = kl,j + cil,j ql,j,t
                                                                   i


  15
    This approach to modeling unit availability is similar to Wolfram (1999) and Bushnell, Mansur and
Saravia (2008).
                   Table 2: Generation by Ownership and Fuel Type

                  Firm          Coal CCGT Gas St Gas CT                   Oil
                  BRKA          6104   629   235     319                    0
                  CPN              0  4802     0     915                    0
                  DYN              0  2120  2875       0                    0
                  EIX            720  1373     0     237                    0
                  LADWP         2117  1303  1929     282                    0
                  PW            1741  1569   430     486                    0
                  SALTRP        1802  1537   407       0                    0
                  SEMPRA           0  2366     0      46                    0
                  XCEL          2593   690   107       0                    0
                  Others       14153 16338 12049   4840                   629



   These cost functions are derived by aggregating the generation of each firm by re-
gion and technology type. The five technology categories are coal, gas combined cycle
(CCGT), conventional (steam) gas, gas combustion turbine (CT), and oil.
    There are ten firms consisting of the nine largest fossil generation producers and a
“fringe” firm derived from the aggregation of the generation from all remaining firms.
The generation capacity of each of these firms is summarized by technology type in Table
2.
Emissions Rates
    Emissions rates are based upon the fuel-efficiency (heat-rate) of a plant and the carbon
intensity of the fuel burned by that plant. They are modeled as affine functions, with
rates differentiated by firm, location, and technology. This yields a functional form of


                                eil,j (ql,j,t
                                        i          i
                                              ) = El,j          i
                                                       + il,j ql,j,t .


4.3    Transmission Network

Our regional markets are highly aggregated geographically. The region we model is the
electricity market contained within the U.S. portion of the Western Electricity Coordinat-
ing Council (WECC). The WECC is the organization responsible for coordinating the
planning investment, and general operating procedures of electricity networks in most
states west of the Mississipi. The multiple sub-networks, or control areas, contained
within this region are aggregated into the four “sub-regions.” Between (and within)
these regions are over 50 major transmission interfaces, or paths. Due to both compu-
tational and data considerations, we have aggregated this network into a simplified, 5
region network consisting primarily of the 4 major subregions.16 Figure 1 illustrates the
areas covered by these regions. The states in white, plus California, constitute the US
participants in the WCI.
    Given aggregated level of the network, we model the relative impedance of each set
of major pathways as roughly inverse to their voltage levels. The network connecting
AZNM and the NWPP to CA is higher voltage (500 KV) than the predominantly 345
KV network connecting the other regions. For our purposes, we assume that these lower
voltage paths yield 5/3 the impedance of the direct paths to CA.
   There are sub-regions with both the NWPP and AZNM areas that would also not be
subject to the currently organized WCI agreement. These include the states of Nevada
and Idaho, as well as power plants located on tribal lands in the desert southwest. In
each case these regions were considered to electrically be part of the region in which they
were located, but for purposes of GHG regulation were treated as separate regions.
    The flow capacity over the regional interfaces are ideally based upon the amount of
“slack” capacity remaining over these interfaces under actual market conditions. We have
obtained data from the WECC for hourly flows and total available capacity for each hour
of the first 10 months of 2007. Unfortunately data for November and December 2007
were not yet available.
   We characterize the available additional capacity over the key paths according to the
average difference between available capacity (or ATC) and actual flows over each key
transmission path. These differences are averaged over peak and off-peak periods for
each of the four seasons represented in our model, where the winter season is based on
the average of October only.17 The resulting available remaining import capacity over
each transmission interface is summarized in Table 3.
  16
     The final “node” in the network consists of the Intermountain power plant in Utah. This plant is
connected to southern California by a high-capacity DC line, and is often considered to electrically be
part of California. Because under some regulatory scenarios, it would not in fact be part of California
for GHG purposes, it is represented as a separate location that connects directly to California.
  17
     In implementing our model, “off-peak” hours are defined as falling in the lowest 6 out of 20 of
demand ‘bins’ that are described above. All other hours are treated as “on-peak”.
Figure 1: Western Regional Network and Cap-and-Trade Regions
     Table 3: Available Slack Transmission Capacity by Region and Period (MW)

        Season     Period   NW-CA SW-CA             RM-NW RM-SW SW-NW
                   Off-peak   5649  3023               731   523   709
        Spring
                   Peak           3692       2855         837        505        772

                   Off-peak       2886       3320         935        490        762
        Summer
                   Peak           1634       3337         957        451        922

                   Off-peak       5012       2604         540        369        402
        Fall
                   Peak           3101       2757         652        318        666

                   Off-peak       5473       2362         458        278        319
        Winter
                   Peak           3683       1921         545        231        396



5     Results
Following the assumptions described above, we simulate the electricity production for the
western electricity market under a variety of assumptions about the scope and design of
cap-and-trade for CO2. For the geographic scope of the regulation, we first simulate op-
erations under no-cap at all to establish a reference level for the other simulation results.
Then we examine CO2 caps applied to California-only, to all (US) states participating in
the WCI, and finally to all states (and tribal areas) in the western market. For each of
these cap-and-trade scenarios, we assume that the cap is set at 85% of the CO2 emissions
from the “no-cap” scenario. For all of the results in this section, we assume that permits
are allocated exogenously and therefore do not effect the output decisions of firms. As
described above, the simulation encompasses 8760 hours of actual market data that were
aggregated into 80 representative hours, 20 for each season. These representative hourly
results were then multiplied by the number of actual hours in each of the “bins” from
which these hours were based upon. The results reported below are therefore annual
totals, based upon 8760 hours of production.
    Table 4 summarizes the aggregate annual CO2 emissions for each of the key regulatory
regions. Results are reported for each of the simulated scenarios, as well as the actual
(2007) aggregate emissions, as measured by CEMS, for each of these regions. First
note that simulated emissions under the “no cap” scenario are about 6% lower than
measured actual emissions. This difference is most pronounced in the California region.
As illustrated in Figure 2, these differences are driven by the relative production of
combined cycle (CCGT) to less efficient (CT and ST) gas plants. Production from
less efficient plants is lower, and from CCGT plants higher, in our simulation than in
actuality. This is most likely due to several factors. First, by aggregating actual hourly
observations into representative market hours, we in effect truncate the peak demand
levels of the system into a single level representing the average of a set of high demand
hours. The operation of these less efficient plants is usually concentrated in these very
high demand hours. Second, our simulation ignores inter-temporal operating constraints
on plants, and CCGT plants are in fact less nimble than our simulation implicitly assumes
them to be. Third, while we model major inter-regional transmission constraints, other
more local constraints could force the operation of less efficient generation.


                            '52 @missions by Begion and Begulation
                                       Actual                                    *o 'ap


                  'al                                        'al



              *&PA                                        *&PA



                  S&                                         S&



            non!&'(                                      non!&'(


                        0         50        100    150             0        50       100   150

                                                  'oal                 ''
                                                  S4                   '4
                                                  5il
           Graphs by regulation




                              Figure 2: Actual vs. Baseline Emissions

    Setting aside these differences for the moment, we turn our focus to the impacts of cap-
and-trade regulations relative to our simulated no-cap case. As would be expected, a cap
applied only to California, as originally envisioned under AB 32, would result in significant
leakage. Although California emissions decline by 5.5 mmTons as required by the cap,
aggregate west-wide emissions decline by less than one mmTon. Emissions prices are
correspondingly low, at only 10.80 $/ton, due to the fact that compliance through leakage
             Table 4: Scope of Regulation: Emissions by Region (mmTons)

                                                              Carbon
         Regulation          CA    NWPP    SW non-WCI Total     Price
         Actual (CEMS)     40.71    87.30 63.37 149.52 340.9      NA
         No cap            35.99    83.75 58.00 139.46 317.2      NA
         Cal only          30.55    84.78 60.04 141.25 316.62   10.80
         WCI cap           32.33    71.76 46.88 147.95 298.92   40.30
         WECC cap          36.87    74.32 48.99 131.08 291.26  43.80



is a relatively inexpensive option. When the cap is applied to the currently configured
WCI, leakage is greatly reduced, but still roughly 1/3 of the 26 mmTon reduction in
WCI state emissions is picked up in the nearly 7 mmTon increase in non-WCI emissions.
When the cap is applied to the entire market, permit prices rise to just below $ 44
/ton. This can be interpreted as the value required to reach a true reduction of 26
mmTons over the entire region without any leakage, as opposed to a reduction of 26
mmTons under the cap that is offset by an increase outside the cap. One implication
of this comprehensive carbon cap is that California emissions increase. This is because
the generation capacity inside California’s borders is relatively clean, and a west-wide
reduction in overall emissions is most easily accomplished by reducing output from coal
generation in other states, and replacing it with gas output from California.
    Table 5 summarizes the net injections into the west-wide network originating from
each region. Recall that the “demand” modeled here is based upon actual production,
rather than end-use demand, so it is the change in these figures, summarized below,
that is relevant, rather than their absolute levels. In the table above, a negative figure
implies a net import from the region relative to the actual period, while a positive number
implies a net export. For example, California imported 347 MW per hour less under our
base-case simulation than was implied by the actual data for the same periods, resulting
in a net increase of 347 MW of CA production. Consistent with the emissions results,
one can see the sizable swing in imports into California (around 1200 MW/h) under
a California-only cap, as well as the large increase in net injections from the non-WCI
region (about 2200 MW/h) under the WCI cap. Note again that flows into California
experience a substantial decrease under the comprehensive west-wide cap.
    The impact of these regulations on wholesale electricity prices in the various regions
is summarized in table 6. Note that the regional breakdown in these columns is slightly
different than in the previous tables. These are electricity market areas, rather than
CO2 regulatory areas. The NWPP includes both capped and uncapped states, while
           Table 5: Change from Actual Exports by Region (Average MWh)

                     Regulation     CA NWPP SW non-WCI
                     No cap         347   509 -97  -759
                     Cal only      -969   802 468  -301
                     WCI cap       -156  -469 -846 1472
                     WECC cap      1012    79 -204 -888



      Table 6: Scope of Regulation: Electricity Prices by Region (Average $/MWh)

                   Regulation   Cal     NWPP AZNMNV RMPA
                   No cap     57.14      59.12  60.44 64.89
                   Cal only   59.45      62.19  64.00 66.56
                   WCI cap    75.75      77.04  77.90 75.66
                   WECC cap 78.8         81.68  83.61 89.03



the RMPA has no WCI states in its region. Prices rise substantially under the more
comprehensive CO2 caps, even in regions not covered by the cap. This is due to the
increased exports from these regions.


5.1     Impacts of Allocation Policies

We now turn to the question of how the various policies for allocation of permits impacts
prices and operations. Table 7 summarizes the emissions by regulatory region for the
various permutations of a policy applied to the WCI, including the baseline “no-cap”
case. In all cases, except the no-cap case, an identical emissions cap of roughly 150
mmTons, or 85% of the uncapped level, is applied to the WCI region. The row labeled
‘WCI cap” applies to any allocation policy, such as auctioning or grandfathering, where
allocations are exogenous to ongoing market outcomes. There were also two versions of
allocations through updating that we considered. The row “WCI updating” refers to
output-based updating. Under this policy, we assumed that 80%, or 120 mmTons, of the
permits are allocated under the updating policies, with the remainder either allocated
in some exogenous fashion or auctioned off. Similarly, in the “Fuel-based” updating
scenario, we also assume that 80% of the permits were allocated, and the remainder
auctioned. Under the Fuel-based updating scenario, we follow the CPUC’s (CPUC,
2008) proposed allocation ratios. This proposal would allocate twice as much to coal
generation as it would to gas generation. These ratios apply only to the fraction of
total permits allocated, so that the net allocation received by a coal plant was equivalent
to 0.75 tons/MWh, while the allocation to gas plants would be 0.375 tons/MWh.18 We
established these allocation levels so that the total number of permits assigned under both
the fuel-based and output-based allocation proposals was the same. This is truly “fuel-
based” updating, with the distinction between updating being based upon fuel, rather
than technology or explicit emissions rates. We therefore would not expect as extreme an
impact from this allocation as that implied by equation (4). However, differentiation by
fuel does capture a significant portion of the emissions rate differences between plants,
so some significant differences from output-based updating would be expected.
    As seen from Tables 7 and 8 the impacts of the allocation policies are indeed signifi-
cant. Carbon emissions in uncapped “non-WCI” regions increase by roughly 7 mmTons
(or 1/3 of the required reduction), under a WCI cap with no updating. When output-
based updating is applied to firms within the WCI, this leakage of emissions is reduced
to roughly 2 mmTons (or less than 1/10 of the required reductions). Also note that
emissions within California rise substantially with the application of output-based up-
dating. As can be seen from Figure 3, this is due to a large decrease in coal production.
This is because output-based allocation favors gas generation relative to coal-generation,
and California has no coal-based utility scale generation. The output-based updating
therefore had a non-trivial impact on mitigation of leakage from the WCI region. When
the updating approach is changed instead to be fuel-based, however, this mitigation of
leakage is largely offset. Total emissions are only 2 mmTons lower than when no updating
at all is applied.
    The most striking impact of the updating policies is on the prices of the emissions
permits. Permit prices rise from about $ 40/ton without updating to $45.60/ton with
output-based updating. As predicted, the fuel-based updating approach has a substantial
impact on permit prices, raising them to just under $67.50/ton. Recall that this model
reflects only the electricity sector, and therefore the distortions from these price impacts
are contained within this industry and are largely offset by the updating policies that
caused them. When one considers that this market will eventually include most major
sources of CO2 emissions within the west, and be linked with other regions through trades
with other CO2 markets, as well as offset programs, the potential distortions caused by
such an inflationary impact on permit prices become a significant concern.
   The results summarized in Table 8 tell a similar story, this time in terms of energy
exports rather than emissions. The application of a CO2 cap on the WCI states results in
  18
    There are very few oil plants in the sample, and they received allocations in equal ratios as those of
gas plants.
               '>2 Dmissions by Fegion and Fegulation
                            *o 'ap                                     &'( cap

     'al                                           'al
   *&PA                                          *&PA
     S&                                            S&
 non!&'(                                       non!&'(


                       &'( 23updating                         &'(3fuel!based update

     'al                                           'al
   *&PA                                          *&PA
     S&                                            S&
 non!&'(                                       non!&'(

           0           50       100      150             0        50        100       150

                                        'oal                 ''
                                        S=                   '=
                                        >il
Graphs by regulation




                       Figure 3: Impact of Updating Policies
             Table 7: Effect of Updating: Emissions by Region (mmTons)

                                                                 Carbon
           Regulation    CA        NWPP SW        non-WCI Total    Price
           No cap       34.4         84.4 59.0       140.2 318.0     NA
           WCI cap      30.9         72.0 48.2       148.8 299.9   40.30
           WCI updating 38.4         65.5 47.2       141.9 293.0  45.60
           Fuel-based   33.8         67.1 50.2       145.7 296.8  67.50



           Table 8: Change from Actual Exports by Region (Average MWh)

                   Regulation            CA NWPP SW non-WCI
                   No cap                347   509 -97  -759
                   WCI cap              -156  -469 -846 1472
                   WCI updating         1169  -799 -581  210
                   Fuel-based            357  -684 -585  913



a net increase of 2200 MW per hour in net exports from the non-WCI regions, which swing
from net importers to net-exporters of power. When output based updating is applied,
the WCI region again becomes a net importer. As with emissions, the application of
fuel-based updating reverses the effects of output-based updating, raising net-exports
from the non-WCI regions by an average of about 700 MWh.
    Table 9 summarizes the price impacts of the cap, and of the updating policies. The
imposition of the cap (again requiring a 15% reduction from the status quo) raises Cal-
ifornia wholesale average prices from around $ 58/MWh to around $ 75 /MWh. The
almost $ 20 /MWh increase is consistent with the facts that CO2 costs are about $ 40
/ton in this scenario, and that gas plants, which emit roughly 1/2 ton per-MWh are
almost always the marginal, price-setting technology. When output-based updating is
applied, most of this impact on the market-clearing price is eliminated, as prices “fall”
from 75 to about $ 62 /MWh. Yet again the fuel-based updating policy reverses the
impacts of the output-based updating. Prices under fuel-based updating average around
$ 70 /MWh.
Profit Impacts of Allocation Policies
   We now examine how the allocation policies impact the emissions costs and operating
profits of firms. Recall that the the updating schemes are largely motivated by a desire
       Table 9: Effect of Updating: Electricity Prices by Region (Average $/MWh)

                    Regulation     Cal            NWPP AZNMNV RMPA
                    No cap       57.14             59.12  60.44 64.89
                    WCI cap      75.75             77.04   77.9 75.66
                    WCI updating 62.75             65.01  66.53 68.52
                    Fuel-based   69.32              71.5  72.95 72.13



to offset the cost impacts to high emitting firms and limit any perceived windfalls to low
emissions firms. Table 10 summarizes the net costs of emissions regulations on firms. The
net emissions costs is defined here as the costs of emissions permits required by the firm
under the cap-and-trade regulation less the value of the emissions permits allocated under
the various allocation approaches. As before the fuel-based and output-based contingent
allocation schemes assume that 80% of total permits (about 120 mmTons) are allocated to
producers. The last column in this table considers an exogenous grandfathered allocation
of the same quantity, based upon the emissions under the “no-cap” scenario, which here
serves as the proxy for historic emissions.
    Note that when a firm receives more in allocation than it must surrender due to its
actual emissions, the net costs can be negative. This is in fact the case for largely gas-
based producers, such as Calpine (CPN) and Dynegy (DYN) under the output-based
allocation approach. In contrast, coal-heavy producers such as PacifCorp (owned by
BRKA) and Arizona Public Service (owned by PW) have significant emissions costs
under any scenario. Despite the skewing of permit allocation in favor of coal producers
under the fuel-based allocation approach, net emissions costs are only slightly lower for
these firms under this approach. The reason is that the higher equilibrium permit prices
largely offset the increased allocation quantities these firms receive under the fuel-based
approach. These firms are clearly better off under grandfathering, which also skews
allocations their way without impacting permit prices.
    The picture becomes more complex when one considers the net effects of the allocation
scheme on product (electricity) prices as well as emissions costs. Table 11 summarizes
the operating profits of the firms under the assumption that each firm were selling all
its output at market-clearing prices, rather than at a a regulated cost-based rate. It is
important to recognize that several of the firms in this table are in fact either regulated or
government-owned.19 Therefore these results are more a qualitative representation of the
general net revenue and cost effects than a literal assessment of each firms bottom line
  19
    The results also reflect only revenue of sales from thermal generation sources. Firms with substantial
nuclear and hydro generation would benefit disproportionately more from a higher permit price.
                   Table 10: Net Emissions Costs by Firm (Millions $)

                                No   Fuel- Output-   Grand-
                  Firm   Allocation based    based fathering
                  BRKA        894.2 439.5    489.6     292.2
                  CPN         394.9   41.9    -96.7    126.4
                  DYN         261.6    6.3    -77.2    101.1
                  EIX         157.6    6.3    -44.1     44.3
                  LADWP       660.8 262.1    280.3     227.1
                  PW          286.4 120.5    100.4      97.8
                  SALTRP      341.8 135.8    123.3     110.7
                  SEMPRA      203.4   -0.5    -67.7     58.4
                  XCEL          0.0    0.0      0.0      0.0
                  Others     2883.3 1107.3   743.9    1261.0



impact. The profits are therefore defined as the total revenues (assuming market-based
sales) less the net emissions costs from table 10 as well as the total production costs (fuel
and operating expenses).
    The results in table 11 highlight the complex interaction between the allocation policy,
permit prices, and electricity prices. Recall that, based on allocation and emissions costs
alone, gas-intensive firms appeared to benefit from output-based allocation. However,
output-based allocation also greatly limited the pass-through of carbon costs to electricity
prices. This results in reduced revenues for all firms. While gas intensive firms such as
CPN still prefer contingent allocation to auctioning, they actually do better under fuel-
based allocation than output-based. This is despite the fact that fuel-based allocation
was intended to limit their perceived windfall benefits from allocation. However, since
electricity prices are higher under fuel-based, the increased revenue from this scenario
more than offsets the reduced allocation in permits relative to output-based updating for
these firms.
    For high carbon firms, such as the coal-heavy BRKA and PW, the contingent alloca-
tion approaches look even worse. The combination of higher emissions costs due to the
inflated permit prices and lower electricity revenues reduce profits under these allocation
schemes to below those seen with no allocation at all. While fuel-based is in fact preferred
to output-based allocation by such firms, neither is particularly appealing. As before,
grandfathering is the clear winner from the perspective of such firms.
    Table 11: Wholesale Market Net Revenues from Fossil Generation (Millions $)

                                   No   Fuel- Output-          Grand-
             Firm          Allocation   based   based No Cap fathering
             BRKA               1746     1988    1636   1587     2397
             CPN                  389     605     578    190       670
             DYN                  225     376     355     80       401
             EIX                  401     453     413    245       508
             LADWP                442     711     535    438       899
             PW                   517     578     470    377       720
             SALTRP               513     608     496    409       747
             SEMPRA               244     338     302     91       385
             XCEL               1140     1041     953    863     1140
             XFRINGE            4262     4962    4168   3489     6858



6     Conclusions
While the establishment of cap-and-trade regulation, as opposed to command-and-control
regulations, is largely motivated by a desire to provide incentives for the efficient mit-
igation of pollution, many other policy goals are often at play. These goals include
mitigating the cost impacts of climate regulation on both consumers and on the firms to
which the regulation will be applied. As climate policy advances in the United States,
these ancillary goals are playing a prominent role in the design of emissions markets. The
allocation of emissions permits is seen as a critical tool for achieving these policy goals.
    We have studied these issues in the context of the proposed California and Western
Climate Initiative cap and trade programs, by focusing on the electricity market that
spans these regions. In this context, the mitigation of regulatory circumvention through
leakage is an additional concern. Indeed, we find that even with the expansion of the
western cap to 7 states, leakage could still be significant. Here the proposals for the
contingent allocation of permits, either linked to the output or the fuel input of a plant,
can have a significant impact. Output-based allocation largely achieves the stated goals
of policy-makers by effectively mitigating leakage and also electricity prices. However,
when the allocation is linked to the fuel of the resource, rather than strictly to its output,
most market outcomes closely resemble those seen under an exogenous allocation scheme
such as auctioning or grandfathering. Permit prices, however, rise considerably to levels
more than double that seen under an exogenous allocation. Although the primary goals
of input-based allocation are to insulate high-carbon firms from cost shocks and prevent
“windfalls” to low-carbon producers, these goals are largely unachieved even when 80%
of the permits are allocated.
    While we believe these results have important practical implications for the design of
the western electricity market, we need to note many caveats that limit the interpretation
of these results as a forecast of WCI cap-and-trade market results. First, we limit our
analysis to the electricity industry, which will dominate the WCI market for its first
phase, but will then be combined with several other sectors, including transportation
fuels. Second, we model only traditional “source-based” market implementations, where
the WCI is pursuing a hybrid design that will combine the source-based regulation of
plants located within the WCI with attempts to account for the carbon content of imports
into that region.
    It is important to examine the specific implications of this “first-deliverer” approach,
which will almost certainly limit leakage below the levels we find here. However, we
believe that the source based model studied here provides an accurate picture of the
implications of allocation policies under either a first-deliverer or source-based design.
There are also some factors that may limit the leakage-mitigating impact of the first-
deliverer approach. Although regulators can attempt to apply carbon levels to imports,
these attempts can be bypassed by a reshuffling of transactions. It is suspected that,
under such a system, relatively clean production will be identified as the ‘source’ of
imports into the WCI. Second, and more importantly, the WCI is often a net exporter of
power. The first-deliverer design cannot deal with leakage when it is driven by end-use
demand located outside the regulators jurisdiction.
    When one considers the implications of an integration of the electricity sector with
other sectors, the aspect of fuel-based updating that is most problematic is the greatly
increased permit price. The concern is that the upward price pressure from the sector
receiving updates will lead the mitigation to be concentrated in other sectors that do
not. In those sectors, marginal emissions costs will in fact be much higher than in the
sectors receiving updated allocations. For example, one would expect the utilization
of unconventional “offsets,” such credits for retrofitting inefficient facilities, to greatly
increase as the result of the inflationary pressure on permit prices caused by updating.
    More generally, as discussions concerning national cap-and-trade regime for CO2 ad-
vance, these results, consistent with previous work, highlight the potential distortions
that updating can introduce into a cap-and-trade market. Just as important from the
point of view of policy-makers, careful attention must be paid to the equilibrium effects
of any allocation proposal. The “benefits” from more complex allocation schemes may be
far less than policy-makers expect, while the distortions they introduce remain a serious
concern.
References
 [1] M. Ahman, D. Burtraw, J. Kruger, and L. Zetterberg. A ten-year rule to guide the
     allocation of eu emission allowances. Energy Policy, 35(3):17181730, 2006.

 [2] M. Ahman and K. Holmgren. New entrant allocation in the nordic energy sectors:
     Incentives and options in the eu ets. Climate Policy, 6:423–440, 2006.

 [3] C. Bohringer and A. Lange. Economic implications of alternative allocation schemes
     for emission allowances. The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 107(3):563–581,
     2005.

 [4] C. Bohringer and A. Lange. On the design of optimal grandfathering schemes for
     emissions allowances. European Economic Review, 49:2041–2055, 2005.

 [5] D. Burtraw. Regulating co2 in electricity markets: Sources or consumers? Climate
     Policy, 8:588–606, 2008.

 [6] D. Burtraw, K. Palmer, and D. Kahn. Allocation of co2 emissions allowances in
     the regional greenhouse gas cap-and-trade program. Discussion Papers dp-05-25,
     Resources For the Future, June 2005.

 [7] J. Bushnell, E.T. Mansur, and C. Saravia. Vertical Arrangements, Market Structure,
     and Competition: An Analysis of Restructured US Electricity Markets. American
     Economic Review, 98:237–66, 2008.

 [8] J. Bushnell, C. Peterman, and C. Wolfram. Local Solutions to Global Problems:
     Climate Change Policies and Regulatory Jurisdiction. Review of Environmental
     Economics and Policy, 2008.

 [9] California Public Utility Commission. Rulemaking 06-04-09: Final opinion on green-
     house gas regulatory strategies, October 2008. http://docs.cpuc.ca.gov/.

[10] Y. Chen. Regional solution to a global problem: A short-run case analysis of co2
     leakage and nox and so2 emissions spillovers. Energy Economics, 31:667–675, 2009.

[11] Y. Chen, P. Liu, and B.F. Hobbs. Economic and emissions implications of load-
     based, source-based, and first-seller emissions programs under california ab32. Tech-
     nical Report EPE-022, University of California Energy Institute, 2008.

[12] R. W. Cottle, J.-S. Pang, and R. E. Stone. The Linear Complementarity Problem.
     Academic Press, Boston, 1992.
[13] Damien Demailly and Philippe Quirion. Co2 abatement, competitiveness and leak-
     age in the european cement industry under the eu ets: grandfathering versus output-
     based allocation. Climate Policy, 6(1):93–113, 2006.

[14] S.P. Dirkse and M.C. Ferris. The path solver: a nommonotone stabilization scheme
     for mixed complementarity problems. Optimization Methods and Software, 5(2):123–
     156, 1995.

[15] A.D. Ellerman, P.L. Joskow, R. Schmalensee, J.P. Montero, and E. Bailey. Markets
     for clean air. Cambridge University Press New York, NY, 2000.

[16] Carolyn Fischer. Output-based allocation of environmental policy revenues and
     imperfect competition. Discussion Paper 02-60, Resources For The Future, January
     2003.

[17] Carolyn Fischer and Alan K. Fox. Output-based allocation of emissions permits for
     mitigating tax and trade interactions. Land Economics, 83(4):575–599, 2007.

[18] M. Fowlie. Incomplete environmental regulation, imperfect competition, and emis-
     sions leakage. Working Paper 14421, National Bureau of Economic Research, Octo-
     ber 2008.

[19] D. Fullerton and G. Heutel. The general equilibrium incidence of environmental
     mandates. Working Paper 13645, National Bureau of Economic Research, November
     2007.

[20] D. Fullerton and G. Metcalf. Environmental controls, scarcity rents, and pre-existing
     distortions. Journal of Public Economics, 80:249–267, 2001.

[21] M. Grubb and K. Neuhoff. Allocation and competitiveness in the eu emissions
     trading scheme: Policy overview. Climate Policy, 6(1):7–30, 2006.

[22] Western Climate Initiative. Design recommendations for the wci regional cap-and-
     trade program. Technical report, September 2008.

[23] J. Jensen and T.N. Rasmussen. Allocation of co2 emissions permits: A general
     equilibrium analysis of policy instruments. Journal of Environmental Economics
     and Management, 40:111–136, 2000.

[24] James Kanter and Jad Mouawad. Money and lobbyists hurt european efforts to curb
     gases. New York Times, December 10 2008.
[25] I. L. Goulder, I. Parry and D. Burtraw. Revenue-raising versus other approaches
     to environmental protection: The critical significance of preexisting tax distortions.
     RAND Journal of Economics, 28(4):708–731, 1997.

[26] Market Advisory Committee. Market Advisory Committee to the California Air
     Resources Board: Recommendation for designing a greenhouse gas cap-and-trade
     system for California, June 2007.

[27] C. Metzler, B. Hobbs, and J.-S. Pang. Nash-Cournot equilibria in power markets on
     a linearized DC network with arbitrage: Formulations and properties. Networks &
     Spatial Economics, 3(2):123 – 150, 2003.

[28] Karsten Neuhoff, Kim Keats Martinez, and Misato Sato. Allocation, incentives and
     distortions: the impact of eu ets emissions allowance allocations to the electricity
     sector. Climate Policy, 6(1):73–91, 2006.

[29] J. Hughes S. Holland and C. Knittel. Greenhouse gas reductions under low carbon
     fuel standards? The American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1(1):106–146,
     2008.

[30] J. Shuliken, B. F. Hobbs, and J. S. Pang. Long-run equilibrium modeling of emissions
     allocation systems in electric power markets. Operations Research, forthcoming.,
     2009.

[31] Thomas Sterner and Adrian Muller. Output and abatement effects of allocation
     readjustment in permit trade. Climatic Change, 86(1-2):33–49, January 2008.
