NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCING CONSTRAINTS AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
William Kerr
Ramana Nanda
Working Paper 15498
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15498

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2009

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by William Kerr and Ramana Nanda. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Financing Constraints and Entrepreneurship
William Kerr and Ramana Nanda
NBER Working Paper No. 15498
November 2009
JEL No. E44,G21,L26,M13
ABSTRACT
Financing constraints are one of the biggest concerns impacting potential entrepreneurs around the
world. Given the important role that entrepreneurship is believed to play in the process of economic
growth, alleviating financing constraints for would-be entrepreneurs is also an important goal for policymakers
worldwide. We review two major streams of research examining the relevance of financing constraints
for entrepreneurship. We then introduce a framework that provides a unified perspective on these research
streams, thereby highlighting some important areas for future research and policy analysis in entrepreneurial
finance.

William Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu
Ramana Nanda
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 221
Boston
MA 02163
rnanda@hbs.edu

Financing Constraints and Entrepreneurship
William R. Kerr and Ramana Nanda

1. Introduction
Surveys of current and potential entrepreneurs suggest that obtaining adequate access to capital is one
of the biggest hurdles to starting and growing a new business. Given the important role that
entrepreneurship is believed to play in the process of creative destruction – and hence economic growth
– it is not surprising that attempts to alleviate financing constraints for would-be entrepreneurs is an
important goal for policy makers across the world. For example, the U.S. Small Business Administration
funded or assisted in the funding of about 200,000 loans in Fiscal Year 2007, at an administrative cost of
about $1,000 per loan (SBA 2008). Financial assistance for entrepreneurs is also high on the agenda in
the European Union and OECD, where member states are urged to promote the availability of risk
capital financing for entrepreneurs (OECD 2004).
The underlying premise behind these policies is that there are important frictions in the credit markets
precluding high-quality entrepreneurs with good ideas (i.e., positive net present value projects) from
entering product markets because they are unable to access adequate capital to start a new business.
Much of the academic literature has therefore focused on analyzing the nature of these frictions, the
effect they have on access to finance, and the impact of reduced financing constraints on rates of
entrepreneurship.
This article reviews two major streams of work examining the relevance of financing constraints for
entrepreneurship. The first research stream considers the impact of financial market development on
entrepreneurship. These papers usually employ variations across regions to examine how differences in
observable characteristics of financial sectors (e.g., the level of competition among banks, the depth of
credit markets) relate to entrepreneurs’ access to finance and realized rates of firm formation. The
second stream employs variations across individuals to examine how propensities to start new
businesses relate to personal wealth or recent changes therein. The notion behind this second line of
research is that an association of individual wealth and propensity for self-employment or firm creation
should be observed only if financial constraints for entrepreneurship exist.
These two streams of research have remained mostly separate literatures within economics, driven in
large part by the different levels of analysis. Historically their general results have been mostly
complementary. More recently, however, empirical research using individual-level variation has
questioned the extent to which financing constraints are important for entrepreneurship in advanced
economies. This new work argues that the strong associations between the financial resources of
individuals and entrepreneurship observed in previous studies are driven to large extents by unobserved
heterogeneity rather than substantive financing constraints. These contrarian studies have led to
renewed interest and debate in how financing environments impact entrepreneurship in product
markets.

1

This article begins with an overview of the main findings of these two research streams. We highlight
the areas where they seem to pose an apparent puzzle based on potentially contradictory implications.
We then develop a framework that can reconcile these contradictory findings and outline a set of
implications for ongoing research and policy analysis in the area of financing constraints and
entrepreneurship.1

2. Financial Market Development and Entrepreneurship
Metrics of financial market development quantify the ease with which individuals in need of external
finance can access the required capital and the premium they pay for these funds. The role
entrepreneurship plays in linking a country’s financial market development to its subsequent economic
growth is highlighted by King and Levine (1993a,b) and Levine (1997). Their work brought prominence
to the role of finance in Schumpeter’s creative destruction, whereby entrepreneurs with new ideas and
technologies displace incumbents with old technologies, leading to a continued increase in productivity
and economic growth. This contrasts with the view, put forth by Joan Robinson and others, that
development of financial sectors and institutions simply follows economic growth.
Central to this idea is the notion that a large fraction of the productivity growth in the economy may
take place at the extensive margin (e.g., the birth of new firms, the closure of unproductive firms) rather
than on the intensive margin (e.g., firms becoming more productive internally). Since most startups
need to raise capital in order to implement their new ideas, cross-sectional differences in the ability of
capital markets to select and finance the most promising entrepreneurs may lead to important
differences in entrepreneurship and productivity growth across economies (Greenwood and Jovanovic
1990; Jayaratne and Strahan 1996; Levine 1997; Beck et al. 2000; Guiso et al. 2004).
Thus a growing line of research has examined the sources of friction in the capital markets that may lead
to financing constraints (or the misallocation of capital more broadly) and hence negatively impact
productivity growth. In the following sub-sections, we outline three important mechanisms through
which frictions in the capital markets lead to financing constraints for entrepreneurs.
2.1 Financial Market Depth
Perhaps the most important factor governing the ability of startups to raise sufficient capital for their
projects is the depth of the local capital markets. This depth is therefore a natural starting point for
measuring financial market development for funding new capital-intensive projects, through metrics like
1

There are two important literature strands that we do not review. The first strand studies financing constraints
for entrepreneurship in developing economies, with recent innovations using randomized experiments for causal
analysis. Representative papers include Morduch (1999), Paulson and Townsend (2004), Paulson et al. (2006),
McKenzie and Woodruff (2006, 2008), Banerjee and Duflo (2008), and De Mel et al. (2008). A second literature
uses quantitative techniques to evaluate financing constraints, entrepreneurship, and economic outcomes.
Representative papers include Quadrini (2000), Li (2002), Castaneda et al. (2003), Cagetti and De Nardi (2006),
Buera (2008), Meh (2005), and Mondragón-Vélez (2007).

2

the ratio of bank deposits to GDP or stock market capitalization to GDP. For example, Rajan and
Zingales (1998) show that industrial sectors with a greater need for external finance develop faster in
countries with deeper capital markets. Fisman and Love (2003) find that, in particular, startup firms
struggle with overcoming weaknesses in financial market development, even where established firms
are able to use trade credit as a substitute for formal financing. Comin and Nanda (2009) show how the
difficulties faced by startups in raising capital might adversely impact the commercialization of new
technologies. Using historical data on banking-sector development and technology diffusion, they find
that capital-intensive technologies are adopted much faster relative to less capital-intensive
technologies in countries that are over a certain threshold in banking-sector development.
Why do some regions have greater financial depth than others? The lack of financial market liquidity
has been traced to several related factors. At the most basic level, the willingness of financial
intermediaries to lend to entrepreneurs (and the willingness of depositors to save with intermediaries)
depends on financial and securities laws in a country. For example, La Porta et al. (1997, 1998) and Beck
et al. (2001) trace the relationships between the legal origins of financial market laws across countries
and relate them to the degree of investor protection and hence the ability of financial intermediaries to
raise and lend capital. Paravisini (2008) shows in the context of Argentina that banks not only face
frictions in their access to external financing, but that these frictions prevent them from undertaking
profitable investment opportunities in the real economy. Banerjee and Duflo (2008) have similar
findings in the context of a directed lending program in India.
While the issues of financial market depth may be particularly acute in emerging markets, startups in
advanced economies are not immune to these issues. For example, Berkowitz and White (2004) find
that entrepreneurs are less likely to get credit for their startups in U.S. states with stronger bankruptcy
protection for individuals. When banks are less certain of recovering their loans in the event that a
startup fails, they are less likely to extend credit in the first place. Guiso et al. (2004) examine local
variation in the supply of credit across regions in Italy. They find that even in a well-developed and
integrated financial market like Italy, regions with deeper capital markets promote the entry and growth
of new firms and increase the propensity of individuals to start new businesses.
These findings are important in that they underscore the importance of local capital markets for
entrepreneurship. The degree of asymmetric information associated with small, entrepreneurial
ventures is very high. As a result, the intermediaries who are best able to overcome the costs of
screening and monitoring these ventures are often local. Deep, national capital markets alone may not
be sufficient to alleviate financing constraints for startups.
The importance of access to local finance seems equally relevant for venture capital (VC) financing as it
is for bank financing. Sorenson and Stuart (2001) find that VC firms are much more likely to fund
entrepreneurs located within a short geographic distance from where they are based (or to provide
funding on the condition that entrepreneurs move closer to the VC firms). Similarly, Black and Gilson
(1998) relate the lack of a large biotechnology industry in Germany to the local institutional
environment for VCs. They argue that the institutional environment in Germany, which is more bank
oriented compared to the U.S.’s market orientation, reduces the ability of German startups to achieve

3

liquidity events via stock listings. As a consequence, the VC community in Germany is less developed,
and the flow of risk capital to good biotechnology projects in Germany is weaker. Other studies find
that VC investors appear particularly effective in funding innovative startups (Kortum and Lerner 2000)
and that the ebbs and flows in the capital markets may have important follow on consequences for rates
of innovation in the economy (Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf 2009).
While capital market depth is a key factor impacting the ability of entrepreneurs to finance their
startups, the organization of the financial sector can also have profound effects on financing constraints
for potential entrepreneurs. In the next two sub-sections, we explore two related dimensions in which
the organization of the financial sector can impact startup activity – the level of competition between
financial intermediaries and the internal structure of the financial intermediaries.
2.2 Competition between Financial Intermediaries
The level of competition between financial intermediaries can impact the terms of credit to startups as
well as the degree to which capital is allocated to the highest-quality projects (Levine 1997). This issue
is particularly acute in developing countries where the banking system may be subject to political
capture (Banerjee et al. 2003; Cole 2009). However, bank deregulation is shown to have first-order
effects on the ex ante allocation of capital to large firms in France (Bertrand et al. 2007) and on
entrepreneurship in the U.S. (Black and Strahan 2002; Kerr and Nanda 2009a,b). For example, Bertrand
et al. (2007) find that banks were less willing to bail out poorly performing firms in the product markets
after the French banking reforms of 1985. As a result, French firms in sectors with a greater reliance on
bank finance were more likely to restructure.
The U.S. branch banking deregulations provide a particularly useful laboratory to study the effect of
bank competition on entrepreneurship. Prior to liberalization, U.S. banks faced multiple restrictions on
geographic expansion both within and across states. The most restrictive of these, known as unit
banking, limited each bank to a single branch. From the 1970s through the mid 1990s, banks
experienced significant liberalization in the ability to establish branches and to expand across state lines,
either through new branches or acquisitions.
Greater bank competition and markets for corporate control due to U.S. deregulations are thought to
have improved allocative efficiency by allowing capital to flow more freely towards projects yielding
highest returns. Moreover, although the number of banks fell over this period, the number of bank
branches increased considerably, reflecting greater competition and increased consumer choice in local
markets. From a theoretical perspective, these reforms would have had a strong positive effect on
entrepreneurship if startups faced substantial credit constraints. Moreover, since entrepreneurs
typically would have faced fewer non-bank options for financing their projects relative to existing firms
(e.g., internal cash flow, bond markets), more efficient allocation of capital within the banking industry

4

should have led to larger increases in startup entry relative to facility expansions by existing firms if
startups faced barriers in their ability to raise sufficient external capital to grow.2
Black and Strahan (2002), Cetorelli and Strahan (2006) and Kerr and Nanda (2009a) find dramatic
increases in startup activity subsequent to inter-state branch banking deregulation. Moreover, Kerr and
Nanda (2009a) show that these increases continue to be significant when compared to the baseline of
facility expansions by existing firms – particularly so for firms entering at a smaller size where financing
constraints are most likely to be most acute. In addition to these changes at the extensive margin, Kerr
and Nanda (2009b) also find that startups were likely to be larger at entry relative to their maximum size
in the first three years of operation, suggesting intensive margin effects of the reforms as well.
These results are particularly strong in light of theories suggesting that an increase in bank competition
has the potential to impede startup activity. For example, Petersen and Rajan (1995) argue that startups
may benefit from concentrated banking markets because monopolist banks can engage in intertemporal cross-subsidization of loans. As a monopolist bank can charge above-market interest rates to
mature firms, it can, in turn, charge below-market rates to potential entrepreneurs. By doing so, the
bank can maximize the long-term pool of older firms to which it lends. Increased competition weakens
the market power of local banks, reducing their ability to charge above-market rates, and thereby
weakening the incentives for subsidizing new entrants as well. Despite this possibility, the strong
elasticity of entry with respect to the reforms suggests that the overriding impact of the increased
competition between banks was to facilitate the provision of cheaper credit and better allocation of
capital to new projects.
2.3 Structure of Financial Intermediaries and their Relationship with Firms
Financial intermediaries provide an important role in deciding which projects to fund and in monitoring
these projects after funding them. As the costs of acquiring information about borrowers increase, it
becomes harder to fund them profitably. Established firms have several advantages in this respect such
as history of audited financial statements, greater collateral to pledge against loans, and potentially the
ability to partially fund expansion through retained earnings. On the other hand, information
asymmetry and limited assets are particularly acute for potential entrepreneurs, resulting in good
projects going unfunded because intermediaries are unable to evaluate them effectively.
Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) outline why these large costs of screening and monitoring startups cannot be
completely overcome by raising interest rates. They observe that raising interest rates may lead to
2

Only twelve states had some form of intra-state deregulation prior to 1970, and no state allowed inter-state branch banking.
Starting in the 1970s, and especially in the 1980s, most states passed both forms of deregulations. Accounts of the political
economy of these reforms suggest their passage was mostly exogenous to product markets, driven in part by federal actions
and state-level structures of the banking industry. Moreover, Kerr and Nanda (2009a) show that the timing of the reforms is
not systematically related to the level of entrepreneurial activity in states prior to the reforms. Exploiting cross-state timing in
the passage of the reforms provides a useful way to study the effect of an increase in bank competition on entrepreneurship.

5

adverse selection, where only entrepreneurs starting the most risky projects would agree to the bank’s
loan terms. In such an instance, the banks would face greater default probabilities, making the loans
unprofitable in expectation. They show theoretically that in such an instance, banks may be forced to
ration credit rather than raise interest rates to market clearing levels. Credit rationing causes
entrepreneurs to face financing constraints. Thus, innovations within the financial sector that lower
information costs can have important effects on reducing financing constraints for entrepreneurs.
A large body of work finds that close ties between financial intermediaries and firms reduce information
asymmetries and lower financing constraints. For example, Petersen and Rajan (1994) and Berger and
Udell (1995) show that borrowers with longer banking relationships are less likely to pledge collateral,
less likely to rely on expensive trade credit, and hence are less constrained in their investment decisions
than firms with shorter banking relationships. Related work suggests that small or decentralized banks –
where branch managers have greater authority to make adjudication decisions – are much more likely
to lend to startups and small businesses. These banks have a comparative advantage for evaluating
informationally opaque or “soft information” businesses (Berger et al. 2001). They also are more likely
to have appropriate incentives to act on the information than branch managers in large, hierarchical
banks where adjudication decisions are centrally made (Stein 2002).
Berger et al. (2005) find that differences in bank organizational structures impact the credit constraints
of small firms across the U.S. Canales and Nanda (2008) demonstrate a similar effect for terms of
lending to small businesses in Mexico. In many respects, the recent innovations for microfinance in
developing countries, such as the Grameen Bank founded by Muhammad Yunus, can be seen as
reducing monitoring cost for informationally opaque micro-businesses. These innovations enable
financial intermediaries to lend smaller amounts to entrepreneurs at a profit due to the lower fixed
costs of evaluating and monitoring projects.
Although we have outlined these sources of financing constraints as distinct channels impacting
entrepreneurship, they are of course interlinked. For example, Canales and Nanda (2008) show the
important effects of the interaction between bank structure and the competitive environment when
studying the terms of lending to small businesses in Mexico. Bozkaya and Kerr (2007) show that
countries with strong employment protection laws – where firing workers is more difficult – are
associated with weaker VC and private equity markets. Their findings suggest that institutional
environments can have first-order effects on the presence and structure of certain types of financial
intermediaries and hence on the availability of startup capital in certain types of industries.

3. Personal Wealth and Entrepreneurship
We now turn to the second broad stream of research on financing constraints and entrepreneurship.
While the first stream of research relies on cross-sectional differences in the institutional environment
to study the impact of financial development and financial frictions on entrepreneurial activity, the

6

second stream analyzes the propensity of individuals to become entrepreneurs depending upon their
financial resources.
Entrepreneurs tend to be significantly wealthier than those who work in paid employment. For
example, Gentry and Hubbard (2004) find that entrepreneurs comprise just under 9% of households in
the U.S., but they hold 38% of household assets and 39% of the total net worth. Not only are
entrepreneurs wealthier, but also the wealthy are more likely to become entrepreneurs.
The canonical model to understand this relationship between individual wealth and entrepreneurship
was developed by Evans and Jovanovic (1989). In their model, the amount an individual can borrow to
fund a new venture is a function of the collateral that he or she can post, which in turn is a function of
personal wealth. If the amount the entrepreneur needs to borrow is sufficient to cover the capital
required to start the business, then the entrepreneur is said to be unconstrained. On the other hand, if
the entrepreneur needs to invest more than he or she can borrow, then a financing constraint leads to
sub-optimal investment for the project at hand. Since returns to projects are a positive function of the
capital invested, some projects that would have been profitable for an unconstrained entrepreneur
become unprofitable for a constrained entrepreneur.
Thus, a central prediction of this model is that the propensity to become an entrepreneur is a function
of personal wealth if potential entrepreneurs are credit constrained. Wealthy individuals are less likely
to be constrained for a given project. On the other hand, a null relationship between wealth and
entrepreneurship would suggest that borrowing constraints are not binding for potential entrepreneurs.
Looking at whether there is a strong association between personal wealth and the propensity to become
an entrepreneur may thus shed light on the nature of financing constraints in the economy.
Evans and Jovanovic (1989) estimate their model using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of
Youth (NLSY) and find significant support for the presence of financing constraints in their data. They
argue that the positive relationship between personal wealth and entry into entrepreneurship can be
seen as evidence of market failure, where talented but less wealthy individuals are precluded from
entrepreneurship because they lack sufficient wealth to finance their new ventures. This finding has
been extremely influential in both academic and policy circles.
While a null relationship between personal wealth and entrepreneurship points to a lack of financing
constraints, Evans and Jovanovic (1989) note that unobserved heterogeneity may lead to a spurious
correlation between personal wealth and entrepreneurship in empirical studies even if individuals do
not face financing constraints. Subsequent work in this second strand of research has built on this
canonical model, while attempting to better control for sources of endogeneity in order to understand
the causal relationship between personal wealth and the propensity to enter into entrepreneurship.
Below, we organize the subsequent work by two major categories of potentially spurious correlation.
3.1 Endogenous Wealth Creation
In the Evans and Jovanovic (1989) model, returns to entrepreneurship are greater for high-ability
individuals. An important concern with empirical findings that show wealthier individuals become

7

entrepreneurs is that personal wealth accumulation is endogenous. That is, if individuals with high
ability are more likely to generate savings (because they earn more in wage employment relative to the
mean person) and are also more likely to become entrepreneurs, the observed correlation between
personal wealth and entrepreneurship may reflect this unobserved attribute rather than the causal
effect of financing constraints (Holtz-Eakin et al. 1994; Blanchflower and Oswald 1998). A similar
concern may apply to results showing that those who are less wealthy start smaller firms (Cabral and
Mata 2003).
In order to address such concerns, researchers have sought to find exogenous shocks to personal wealth
and study their effects on selection into entrepreneurship. In addition, dynamic models of occupational
choice have aimed to characterize better the inter-temporal savings and consumption paths of
individuals who eventually become entrepreneurs (Buera 2008).
An early innovation to overcome the endogeneity of wealth accumulation came from Holtz-Eakin et al.
(1994) and Blanchflower and Oswald (1998) who looked at bequests as a way to untangle the
endogeneity of wealth creation. Blanchflower and Oswald (1998) find that bequests increase the
likelihood of entry into self-employment, especially for younger workers who are less likely to have
saved as much. Relatedly, Holtz-Eakin et al., (1994) look at the continuation probabilities of selfemployed individuals as a function of bequests. They find that those who received bequests were less
likely to shut down their businesses and had better firm performance conditional on continuing
operations.
As Blanchflower and Oswald (1998) note, a potential concern with the use of bequests as an instrument
for personal wealth is that the bequests may not be truly exogenous. For example, bequests may be
factored into the financial calculations of children. Children of wealthy parents may choose to consume
more in the present and invest in the business once they receive the bequest. Consistent with this idea,
Hurst and Lusardi (2004) find that future bequests predict entry into self-employment as much as past
bequests do. Other novel attempts to overcome this endogeneity concern – for example, Lindh and
Ohlsson (1998) examine self-employment entry among lottery winners finding a strong positive
relationship between shocks to personal wealth and subsequent self-employment entry. It is debated,
however, whether these techniques can ultimately account for wealth effects associated with large
changes in personal assets that may impact preferences or relative ability as later discussed.
3.2 Wealth Effects, Preferences, and Sorting
A second source of spurious correlation arises from the fact that observed and unobserved individual
abilities and preferences for entrepreneurship may be systematically correlated with personal wealth.
For example, wealthy people may have lower absolute risk aversion, making them more likely to
become entrepreneurs (Evans and Jovanovic 1989; Khilstrom and Laffont 1979). People may also have a
preference for being their own boss that increases with greater personal wealth (Hurst and Lusardi
2004). Further, if wealthy individuals are more effectively able to exploit certain networks that help
them gain access to scare resources, the relative ability of an individual as an entrepreneur compared to
a wage worker may systematically change as they get wealthier – irrespective of their absolute ability in

8

each sector. This may make wealthier individuals more likely to sort into entrepreneurship even if less
wealthy individuals do not face financing constraints.
Hurst and Lusardi (2004) argue in favor of this perspective. They document that the propensity to enter
self-employment is relatively flat up to the 80th percentile of the U.S. wealth distribution. Moreover, the
strongest association between wealth and entry into self-employment is in the top five percent of the
wealth distribution. As these very wealthy individuals do not generally start very capital-intensive firms,
Hurst and Lusardi (2004) conclude that entrepreneurship may be a luxury good. People may derive nonpecuniary benefits of being their own boss (Hamilton 2000), in which case the wealthy may be more
likely to sort into entrepreneurship due to these unobserved preferences rather than due to substantive
financing constraints.
In a similar vein, Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) find that the returns to private equity
investments among wealthy business owners are not large enough relative to public markets to account
for the undiversified and illiquid stakes that they have in their businesses. These authors also point to
the presence of unobserved preferences for self-employment that may drive this “private equity
premium puzzle.” These studies would suggest caution about implementing policies to reduce financing
constraints for entrepreneurs.
Using micro data from Denmark, Nanda (2009) finds the same non-linear relationship between personal
wealth and entrepreneurship identified for the U.S. by Hurst and Lusardi (2004). Moreover, he also
finds that the wealthiest entrepreneurs are more likely to fail, particularly those founding businesses in
less capital-intensive industries. Nanda argues that an important factor explaining this may be the
disciplining role of the external capital markets. Wealthy individuals are less likely to have their ideas
screened and vetted by potential investors, lowering the threshold level of ability required for wealthy
individuals to start businesses. In such an instance, a far greater proportion of wealthy individuals may
become entrepreneurs because they do not face the discipline of external finance, even if less wealthy
individuals with high ability do not face financing constraints. This view is similar to that of de Meza
(2002), who provides a theoretical framework where an individual who is indifferent between becoming
an entrepreneur and staying a wage earner is higher ability than the wage earners, but lower ability than
the entrepreneurs. When the cost of finance falls, these marginal individuals are most likely to select
into entrepreneurship.
This sub-section has highlighted a growing set of studies that have noted either a potentially spurious
association between personal wealth and entrepreneurship or provided explanations for the
correlations that do not invoke financing constraints. The conclusions of these studies suggest that in
advanced economies, financing constraints may not play as important a role in impacting
entrepreneurship as was previously believed. Yet regional-level studies discussed in Section 2 suggest a
very consistent pattern of financing constraints faced by firms. How should we reconcile these different
views?

9

4. An Approach to Reconciling the Different Explanations
In this section, we propose a simple framework that may help to reconcile these different views. We
also highlight some fruitful areas of research that may help to better explain the nature of financing
constraints faced by entrepreneurs.
{Insert Figure 1 here}
This graph places entering businesses into a two-dimensional space. The vertical axis documents the
firm size or capital intensity of the new business. At lower levels, the entrepreneur may be part time
and self-employed, without any significant investment or employment of others. At higher levels, the
firm is entering with a substantial number of employees in the first year. Most hobby entrepreneurs or
sole proprietors will never seek to hire someone else, remaining permanently in the lower bubble. In
some cases, the start-up will grow much larger, following the path of famous Silicon Valley firms like
Hewlett-Packard that began in a garage.
The horizontal axis considers the technological novelty of the project. This includes both the actual
technical challenges required and the difficulty that investors have in assessing the technologies in
advance. Most entrepreneurs use off-the-shelf business models with proven technologies, such as
restaurants, consulting firms, franchised dealerships, and construction firms, among others. Other
projects have unproven technologies, where the technology generalizes to include many aspects of the
business model like design combinations, delivery methods, and so on. This definition would cover, for
example, the launch of Federal Express as well as pure technology-oriented startups. The right-hand
bubble in the chart represents these latter cases, which we label as “Schumpeterian Entrepreneurship”
in short hand.
The first point of this taxonomy is to highlight that the two literature strands in Sections 2 and 3 tend to
sample different forms of entrepreneurship. Regional studies, at either the country or sub-country
level, typically consider financial development and entrepreneurship among firms that are above a
certain explicit or implicit size. The top left bubble in Figure 1 represents this group. This selection may
be due to the legal status of businesses in the sample (e.g., incorporated firms only) or how the data are
collected (e.g., payroll tax registers). The data often build from administrative and tax records, and only
the firms that have reached a corresponding size or status are included. Moreover, the collection
agency may explicitly sub-sample small firms that are below a certain number of employees, using
imputation techniques for other firms. This selection factor from government records can be
particularly acute in developing countries where many entrepreneurs operate in informal sectors.
On the other hand, studies looking at personal wealth and entrepreneurship often use self-employment
as a proxy for entry into entrepreneurship. Questions regarding self-employment are the most
prevalent on household surveys from which these studies draw, and this definition of entrepreneurship
is easily linked to the notion of the number of people leading independent enterprises. This metric,
however, weighs small-scale, independent operators very heavily vis-à-vis high-growth
entrepreneurship. This can be seen in self-employment rankings that list West Palm Beach, Florida, as

10

America's most entrepreneurial city while San Jose, California, home to a large portion of Silicon Valley,
is near the bottom of the rankings. This contrasts with measures of firm startups or VC funding that rank
San Jose near the top. This self-employment group is the bottom left bubble in Figure 1.3
Thus studying different populations may be an important factor for explaining some of the differences in
the results. The bottom, left bubble represents the vast majority of entrants. The U.S. provides a vivid
illustration. Of the 26 million firms in the U.S., 20 million are self-employed individuals, full or part time,
without paid employees. Of the remaining six million businesses, 80% have 20 employees or fewer.
When looking at new entrants subject to payroll tax, Kerr and Nanda (2009) find that only 5% of startups
are formed with more than 20 employees in the first year. This share would be substantially lower if
calculated relative to the large majority of entrants that are not paying payroll tax.
A threshold of 20 employees, however, is not an uncommon bar for observing entrepreneurship in many
cross-country or cross-regional studies employing official statistics on business starts. These
government entry figures capture a very small share of the total entrepreneurial activity that may be
reported on individual-level surveys. This observation does not mean that studies based on firm-level
administrative data are weaker or less reliable than inquiries employing individual-level data. Indeed,
the small share of businesses in the former sample captures most of the job creation and innovation
that policy makers typically seek with entrepreneurship initiatives. This trade-off is even more acute in
studies employing samples of VC-backed firms. VC-backed samples are not representative for the
overall landscape of entrepreneurship even among employer firms, but they do capture even more the
very high-growth entrepreneurship that some researchers hope to analyze.
Both types of studies are important, but it is essential to position findings regarding financial constraints
within the landscape of entry activity and its various metrics. As an example from our own work, Kerr
and Nanda (2009a) show that U.S. banking deregulations led to significant increases in churning entry –
that is, very small entrants that survive three years or fewer. This extensive margin effect suggests large
increases in weaker entrants following relaxed constraints. This churning growth helps reconcile why
prior work found that the U.S. inter-state reforms resulted in entry increasing by over 10% a year (Black
and Strahan 2002) but no measured effects on the firm size distribution and limited productivity gains
(Cetorelli and Strahan 2006; Jayaratne and Strahan 1996). In a similar vein, Nanda (2009) finds a
substantial growth in weak entrants with high failure rates after financing constraints were lessened in
Denmark using individual-level data.
On the other hand, Kerr and Nanda (2009a,b) find important intensive margin effects after the U.S.
reforms. Deregulation promoted larger entry sizes for those startups that survive three years, along the
lines of the theoretical predictions by Evans and Jovanovic (1989). Moreover, the overall effects for
reducing incumbent market shares were consistent with other regional-level findings. These patterns
3

Glaeser and Kerr (2009) discuss further measurements of entrepreneurship. The self-employment pattern is also
evident in country rankings. For example, Southern European countries (e.g., Portugal, Greece) rank very high on
European self-employment scales but tend to have very small VC markets. On the other hand, Scandinavian
countries rank low on self-employment indices but have been among the most successful European countries in
attracting VC investments (Bozkaya and Kerr 2007).

11

suggest that the reduced financing constraints brought about by U.S. banking deregulations also
facilitated a group of stronger entrants that before the reforms would have not entered or would have
entered at sub-optimal firm sizes.
The U.S. Census Bureau data that undergird these results are built from payroll tax information. They
thus include very small firms with less than five employees that are often incompletely measured. This
was important for seeing the first effect, which is where the two bubbles overlap. The data also include
the larger entrants that lie behind the second result, which is more typical of firm-level data. A
consideration of different effects and samples is important in this context.4
Additional studies employing micro data can shed further light on how the motivations and needs of
these sub-populations differ, along with the ultimate response to changes in local financing
environments. Data advances worldwide are helping in this effort. While the Kerr and Nanda (2009a,b)
sample lacks many entrants in the bottom, left bubble – the non-employer firms that are missing from
payroll records – recent efforts by the U.S. Census Bureau incorporate income tax data about selfemployed entrepreneurs . Moreover, the self-employed records are matched to subsequent employer
firms where appropriate. These types of data are also emerging in many European countries. Richer
data should provide deeper insight into how changes in financial conditions impact different forms of
entrepreneurship and transitions across the types.
In addition to more detailed government registers, there is a complementary element of expanding data
from additional sources. For example, Braguinsky et al. (2009) study whether scientists who work on
startups related to their field of study seem to have similar levels of non-pecuniary benefits from selfemployment as those who work in startups unrelated to their field of study (Hamilton 2000). They find
substantial differences between these groups, suggesting that the motivations for starting new
businesses can also vary in important ways across sub-populations.
This study also relates to the second dimension of Figure 1, which measures the technological novelty of
a new project. The vast majority of new firms started in the economy are not undertaking major
technological advances or changes to existing methods of production. This is true even among Bhide’s
(2000) sample of growth-oriented founders in the Inc. 100 list. Moreover, many of the newly founded
small businesses require little capital or have a set of hard assets that banks can take as collateral (Fluck
et al. 2000). On the other hand, the more novel and unverifiable the technology proposed by the
entrepreneur, the more difficult it is for traditional financial institutions to evaluate the creditworthiness
of the project at hand. Many such startups are likely to have fewer tangible assets with verifiable
valuations that can be pledged for a bank loan. This axis thus highlights why it is the case that projects
towards the left of the horizontal axis tend to be bank financed, but why equity and more complex
4

This sensitivity to entrepreneurship definition and scope is not exclusive to financing constraints. A consistent
finding in the labor economics literature is that stricter employment protection increases entrepreneurship
defined through self-employment indices (Blanchflower et al. 2001, Addison and Teixeira 2003). Studies of
entrepreneurial finance, however, show that stricter regulations reduce VC investment and high-growth
entrepreneurship (Jeng and Wells 2000, Da Rin et al. 2006, Bozkaya and Kerr 2007). Autor et al. (2007) also find
employment protections reduce entry rates for firms with payroll. A similar mapping of entry distributions and
the entrant types considered can reconcile these two findings.

12

financial contracts (e.g., the convertible preferred stock forms used by VCs) may be necessary to finance
projects based on novel technologies.
VC firms attempt to fill at least part of this gap in the U.S. and other countries. VCs screen
entrepreneurial projects, structure financing deals, and monitor the performance of the companies in
which they take equity stakes. VCs also provide non-financial resources like customer and supplier
contacts, technical expertise, employee recruitment, and so on, which may improve the chances of
success for unproven technologies and business models. While institutions such as VC have evolved in
some countries to cover these extreme market failures, they have not taken root in all countries as
discussed in Section 2. The absence of such intermediaries may thus help to explain differences in the
kinds of entrepreneurship prevalent across regions – for example, the weaker relative entry of Silicon
Valley type startups in Europe – as well as the types of industries that emerge or do not emerge in
different regions.
Even in the U.S., extremely capital-intensive and novel technologies like wind turbines, refineries for
biofuels, and other clean energy projects, which would lie in the top right-hand corner of Figure 1, are
said to fall into the “valley of death” (Nanda and Stuart 2009). They are too capital intensive for
traditional venture capital and too risky for project finance. While these latter financiers are very
comfortable funding highways, dams, coal powered-plants, and other well-proven technologies, they
are reluctant to fund risky projects with long financing cycles and the potential to become obsolete
before the investment pays off. On the other hand, clean technologies may be too capital intensive for
traditional VC investors. VC investors typically fund $5-10 million investments, and syndicate out larger
investments, but the risk capital and coordination costs involved in funding a $250 million
demonstration bio-refinery may be too great for VC investors, even if the projects have positive net
present value.
While in theory such types of innovation can be done within the context of large firms (or through
financing from strategic investors in such sectors), the interests of strategic investors are not always
aligned with the success of these new technologies. Often the new technology has the potential to
cannibalize the core business of the incumbents, as is the case of biofuels and oil companies, making
incumbents much less likely to focus on commercializing new technologies. In other instances, the
bureaucracies associated with larger firms may stifle new innovations. It is for these reasons that the
process of creative destruction is said to be so important in leading to continued economic growth, and
hence, it is perhaps in such areas that government subsidies to alleviate credit constraints may have the
greatest leverage.

5. Conclusions
Financing constraints are one of the biggest concerns impacting potential entrepreneurs around the
world. Academic literature has focused on understanding several dimensions of financing constraints.
In this review article, we outlined two major streams of research examining this question. While many

13

of the findings are complementary, some of the results pose a puzzle regarding the extent to which
financing constraints may be a problem for entrepreneurs in advanced economies.
Our framework is a starting point for reconciling these seemingly contradictory findings. The slice of
entrepreneurship examined is very important for the appropriate positioning of research on financing
constraints, but studies too often fail to consider this dimension in the conclusions drawn from empirical
results. The choice of where in the space of capital intensity and technological novelty to found a firm
may reflect a whole set of unobserved factors that researchers need to be careful about when they look
at the question of financing constraints in entrepreneurship. This framework is also useful for thinking
about the appropriate role of public policy in stimulating entrepreneurship. Promoting
entrepreneurship is an important goal of many governments, and researchers need to define for policy
makers a more unified perspective for how studies and samples fit together.

14

6. References
Addison, J. and P. Teixeira (2003), ‘The economics of employment protection’, Journal of Labor
Research, 24 (1), 85-129.
Autor, D., W. Kerr, and A. Kugler (2007), ‘Does employment protection reduce productivity? Evidence
from U.S. states’, Economic Journal, 117 (521), 189-217.
Banerjee, A. and E. Duflo (2008), ‘Do firms want to borrow more? Testing credit constraints using a
directed lending program’, Working Paper.
Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, and K. Munshi (2003) ‘The (mis)allocation of capital’, Journal of the European
Economic Association, 1 (2-3), 484-94.
Beck, T., R. Levine, and N. Loayza (2000), ‘Finance and the sources of growth’, Journal of Financial
Economics, 58 (1-2), 261-300.
Beck, T., A. Demirguc-Kunt, and R. Levine (2001), ‘Legal theories of financial development’, Oxford
Review of Economic Policy, 17 (4), 483-501.
Berger, A. N. and G. F. Udell (1995), ‘Relationship lending and lines of credit in small firm finance’,
Journal of Business, 68 (3), 351-81.
Berger, A. N., N. H. Miller, M. A. Petersen, R. G. Rajan, and J. C. Stein (2005), ‘Does function follow
organizational form? Evidence from the lending practices of large and small banks’, Journal of Financial
Economics, 76 (2), 237-69.
Berger, A. N., L. F. Klapper, and G. F. Udell (2001), ‘The ability of banks to lend to informationally opaque
small businesses’, Journal of Banking & Finance, 25 (12), 2127-67.
Berkowitz, J. and M. White (2004), ‘Bankruptcy and small firms’ access to credit’, Rand Journal of
Economics, 35, 69-84.
Bertrand, M., A. Schoar, and D. Thesmar (2007), ‘Banking deregulation and industry structure: Evidence
from the French banking reforms of 1985’, Journal of Finance, 62 (2), 597-628.
Bhide, A. (2000), The Origin and Evolution of New Business, New York: Oxford University Press.
Black, B. and R. Gilson (1998), ‘Venture capital and the structure of capital markets: Banks versus stock
markets’, Journal of Financial Economics, 47, 243-77.
Black, S. and P. Strahan (2002), ‘Entrepreneurship and bank credit availability’, Journal of Finance, 57 (6),
2807-33.
Blanchflower, D. and A. Oswald (1998), ‘What makes an entrepreneur?’, Journal of Labor Economics, 16
(1), 26-60.

15

Blanchflower, D., A. Oswald, and A. Stutzer (2001), ‘Latent entrepreneurship across nations’, European
Economic Review, 45, 680-91.
Bozkaya, A. and W. Kerr (2007), ‘Labor regulations and European industrial specialization: Evidence from
private equity investments’, HBS Working Paper 08-043.
Braguinsky, S., S. Klepper, and A. Ohyama (2009), ‘The Schumpeterian entrepreneur is alive and well’,
Working Paper.
Buera, F. (2008), ‘A dynamic model of entrepreneurship with borrowing constraints: Theory and
evidence’, Working Paper.
Cabral, L. M. B. and J. Mata (2003), ‘On the evolution of the firm size distribution: Facts and theory’,
American Economic Review, 93 (4), 1075-90.
Cagetti, M. and M. De Nardi (2006), ‘Entrepreneurship, frictions, and wealth’, Journal of Political
Economy, 114, 835-70.
Canales, R. and R. Nanda (2008), ‘Bank structure and the terms of lending to small businesses’, HBS
Working Paper 08-101.
Castaneda, A., J. Diaz-Gimenez, and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2003), ‘Accounting for the U.S. earnings and wealth
inequality’, Journal of Political Economy, 111, 818-57.
Cetorelli, N. and P. Strahan (2006), ‘Finance as a barrier to entry: Bank competition and industry
structure in local U.S. markets’, Journal of Finance, 61 (1), 437-61.
Cole, S. (2009), ‘Fixing market failures or fixing elections? Elections, banks and agricultural lending in
India’, American Economic Journals: Applied Economics, 1 (1), 219-50.
Comin, D. and R. Nanda (2009), ‘Finance and the diffusion of technologies’, Working Paper.
Da Rin, M., G. Nicodano, and A. Sembenelli (2006), ‘Public policy and the creation of active venture
capital markets’, Journal of Public Economics, 90, 1699-723.
de Meza, D. (2002), ‘Overlending?’, Economic Journal, 112 (477), F17-31.
de Mel, S., D. McKenzie, and C. Woodruff (2008), ‘Returns to capital in microenterprises: Evidence from
a field experiment’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123 (4), 1329-72.
Evans, D. S. and B. Jovanovic (1989), ‘An estimated model of entrepreneurial choice under liquidity
constraints’, Journal of Political Economy, 97 (4), 808-27.
Fisman, R. and I. Love (2003), ‘Trade credit, financial intermediary development and industry growth’,
Journal of Finance, 58, 353-74.

16

Fluck, Z., D. Holtz-Eakin and H. Rosen. (2000). ‘Where does the money come from? The financing of
small entrepreneurial enterprises.’ Princeton Working Paper.
Gentry, W. and G. Hubbard (2004), ‘Entrepreneurship and household saving’, Advances in Economic
Analysis & Policy, Berkeley Electronic Press, 4 (1).
Glaeser, E. and W. Kerr (2009), ‘Local industrial conditions and entrepreneurship: How much of the
spatial distribution can we explain?’, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 18 (3), 632-63.
Greenwood, J. and B. Jovanovic (1990), ‘Financial development, growth, and the distribution of income’,
Journal of Political Economy, 98 (5), 1076-107.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2004), ‘Does local financial development matter?’, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 119 (3), 929-69.
Hamilton, B. (2000), ‘Does entrepreneurship pay? An empirical analysis of the returns to selfemployment’, Journal of Political Economy, 108 (3), 604-31.
Holtz-Eakin, D., D. Joulfaian, and H. S. Rosen (1994), ‘Sticking it out: Entrepreneurial survival and liquidity
constraints’, Journal of Political Economy, 102, 53-75.
Hurst, E. and A. Lusardi (2004), ‘Liquidity constraints, household wealth, and entrepreneurship’, Journal
of Political Economy, 112 (2), 319-47.
Jayaratne, J. and P. E. Strahan (1996), ‘The finance-growth nexus: Evidence from bank branch
deregulation’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 (3), 639-70.
Jeng, L. and P. Wells (2000), ‘The determinants of venture capital funding: Evidence across countries’,
Journal of Corporate Finance, 6, 241-89.
Kerr, W. and R. Nanda (2009a), ‘Democratizing entry: Banking deregulation, financing constraints, and
entrepreneurship’, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Kerr, W. and R. Nanda (2009b), ‘Banking deregulation, financing constraints, and firm entry size’,
Working Paper.
Khilstrom, R. and J.-J. Laffont (1979), ‘A general equilibrium entrepreneurial theory of firm formation
based on risk aversion’, Journal of Political Economy, 87, 719-48.
King, R. G. and R. Levine (1993a), ‘Finance and growth - Schumpeter might be right’, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 108 (3), 717-37.
King, R. G. and R. Levine (1993b), ‘Finance, entrepreneurship, and growth - Theory and evidence’,
Journal of Monetary Economics, 32 (3), 513-42.
Kortum, S. and J. Lerner (2000), ‘Assessing the impact of venture capital on innovation’, Rand Journal of
Economics, 31, 674-92.

17

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1997), ‘Legal determinants of external
finance’, Journal of Finance, 52 (3), 1131-50.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1998), ‘Law and finance’, Journal of Political
Economy, 106 (6), 1113-55.
Levine, R. (1997) ‘Financial development and economic growth: Views and agenda’, Journal of Economic
Literature, 35 (2), 688-726.
Li, W. (2002), ‘Entrepreneurship and government subsidies: A general equilibrium analysis’, Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control, 26, 1815-44.
Lindh, T. and H. Ohlsson (1998), ‘Self-employment and wealth inequality’, Review of Income and Wealth,
44 (1), 25-42.
McKenzie, D. and C. Woodruff (2006), ‘Do entry costs provide an empirical basis for poverty traps?
Evidence from Mexican microenterprises’, Economic Development and Cultural Change, 55 (1), 3-42.
McKenzie, D. and C. Woodruff (2008), ‘Experimental evidence on returns to capital and access to finance
in Mexico’, World Bank Economic Review, 22, 457-82.
Meh, C. (2005), ‘Entrepreneurship, wealth inequality and taxation’, Review of Economic Dynamics, 8 (3),
688-719.
Mondragón-Vélez, C. (2007), ‘The transition to entrepreneurship: Human capital, wealth and the role of
liquidity constraints’, International Finance Corporation Working Paper.
Moskowitz, T. J. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2002), ‘The returns to entrepreneurial investment: A private
equity premium puzzle?’, American Economic Review, 92, 745-78.
Morduch, J. (1999), ‘The microfinance promise’, Journal of Economic Literature, 37 (4), 1569-614.
Nanda, R. (2009), ‘Entrepreneurship and the discipline of external finance’, HBS Working Paper 08-047.
Nanda, R. and M. Rhodes-Kropf (2009), ‘Financing risk and Innovation waves’, Working Paper.
Nanda, R. and T. Stuart (2009), ‘KiOR: Catalyzing clean energy’, Harvard Business School Case 809-092.
OECD (2004), ‘Financing innovative SMEs in a global economy’, Second OECD Conference of Ministers
Responsible for SMEs, Istanbul, Turkey.
Paulson, A. and R. Townsend (2004), ‘Entrepreneurship and financial constraints in Thailand’, Journal of
Corporate Finance, 10 (2), 229-62.
Paulson, A., R. Townsend, and A. K. Karaivanov (2006), ‘Distinguishing limited liability from moral hazard
in a model of entrepreneurship’, Journal of Political Economy, 114 (1), 100-44.

18

Paravisini, D. (2008), ‘Local bank financial constraints and firm access to external finance’, Journal of
Finance, 63 (5), 2161-93.
Petersen, M. A. and R. G. Rajan (1994), ‘The benefits of lending relationships - Evidence from small
business data’, Journal of Finance, 49 (1), 3-37.
Petersen, M. A. and R. G. Rajan (1995), ‘The effect of credit market competition on lending
relationships’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110 (2), 407-43.
Rajan, R. G. and L. Zingales (1998), ‘Financial dependence and growth’, American Economic Review, 88
(3), 559-86.
Quadrini, V. (2000), ‘Entrepreneurship, saving, and social mobility’, Review of Economic Dynamics, 3, 1–
40.
SBA (2008), SBA Fiscal Year 2008 Annual Report, www.sba.gov.
Sorenson, O. and T. Stuart (2001), ‘Syndication networks and the spatial distribution of venture capital
investments’, American Journal of Sociology, 106, 1546-88.
Stein, J. C. (2002), ‘Information production and capital allocation: Decentralized versus hierarchical
firms’, Journal of Finance, 57 (5), 1891-921.
Stiglitz, J. E. and A. Weiss (1981), ‘Credit rationing in markets with imperfect information’, American
Economic Review, 71 (3), 393-410.

19

high
“Valley of Death”

Firm size or capital intensity of project

Project Finance

low

Cross-country and regional
studies of financial
development and
entrepreneurship

Studies of VC-backed
Schumpeterian
entrepreneurship

Studies of personal wealth
and entrepreneurship
(often via self-employment)

Technology or business-model novelty of project

Figure 1

high

