NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF IMMIGRATION ON PRODUCTIVITY:
EVIDENCE FROM US STATES
Giovanni Peri
Working Paper 15507
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15507

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2009

I thank Greg Wright for outstanding Research Assistance. I thank two anonymous referees for very
helpful comments on a previous draft of this paper and participants in several seminars for suggestions.
I gratefully acknowledge generous funding from the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Effect of Immigration on Productivity: ¸˛ Evidence from US States
Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 15507
November 2009
JEL No. F22,J61,R11
ABSTRACT
Using the large variation in the inflow of immigrants across US states we analyze the impact of immigration
on state employment, average hours worked, physical capital accumulation and, most importantly,
total factor productivity and its skill bias. We use the location of a state relative to the Mexican border
and to the main ports of entry, as well as the existence of communities of immigrants before 1960,
as instruments. We find no evidence that immigrants crowded-out employment and hours worked
by natives. At the same time we find robust evidence that they increased total factor productivity, on
the one hand, while they decreased capital intensity and the skill-bias of production technologies, on
the other. These results are robust to controlling for several other determinants of productivity that
may vary with geography such as R&D spending, computer adoption, international competition in
the form of exports and sector composition. Our results suggest that immigrants promoted efficient
task specialization, thus increasing TFP and, at the same time, promoted the adoption of unskilled-biased
technology as the theory of directed technologial change would predict. Combining these effects, an
increase in employment in a US state of 1% due to immigrants produced an increase in income per
worker of 0.5% in that state.

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu

1

Introduction

Immigration during the 1990’s and the 2000’s has significantly increased the presence of foreign-born workers
in the U.S. This increase has been very large on average and very unequal across states. In some states, such
as California, one worker in three was foreign-born as of 2006, while in West Virginia only one in one hundred
was. Several studies have analyzed how such diﬀerential inflows of immigrants have aﬀected diﬀerent aspects of
state economies such as labor markets (recently Borjas 2006, Card 2001, 2007, 2009, Peri and Sparber 2009),
industrial specialization (Card and Lewis 2007) and innovative capacity (Gauthier-Loiselle and Hunt 2008).
In this paper we take a more systematic approach and use a production-function representation of the
economies of U.S. states to analyze the impact of immigration on the inputs to production (employment,
average hours worked, average skill intensity, and physical capital), on productivity (total factor productivity
and the skill-bias of productivity) and, through these, on income per worker. While a large literature has
analyzed the eﬀects of immigration on employment and hours worked1 (and on wages, using labor market data)
our contribution is to identify the impact of immigration on capital intensity, total factor productivity and
the skill-bias of aggregate productivity using national accounting data combined with census data. As for the
diﬃculty of establishing a causal link between immigration and economic outcomes due to simultaneity and
omitted variable biases, we take a two-pronged approach. First, we identify some state-characteristics likely
to be related to immigration and much less to other determinants of productivity. These are the distance
from the Mexican border and from the two main East-West ports of entry of immigrants (New York and Los
Angeles), as well as the presence of immigrant communities prior to 1960. Interacted with decade dummies, these
geographic variables provide variation that is a strong predictor of the immigrants’ inflow, but a priory (as they
are essentially geography-based) not with other productivity shocks. Second, in the instrumented regression of
productivity on immigration rates we introduce proxies for many of the relevant causes of productivity growth in
the last few decades. Treating these as potentially endogenous, and using the same geographical instruments, we
isolate the features of geography that are uncorrelated with those factors while still correlated with immigration
and use them as predictors of immigrant inflows. The factors that we explicitly control for are the intensity of
R&D and innovation, the adoption of computers, the openness to international trade as measured by the export
intensity and the sector-composition of the state. Both the positive, significant and strong eﬀect of immigration
on total factor productivity and the large, negative and significant eﬀect of immigration on the skill bias of
productivity survive the inclusion of these controls and the instrumental variable strategy.
We then show that a measure of task-specialization of native workers induced by immigrants explains half
to two thirds of the positive productivity eﬀect, while the eﬀect due to unskilled-biased technological adoption
survives all controls and is compatible with a choice of directed technology at the state level as first pointed
1 Card

(2007) and (2009) discuss the status of this literature.

2

out by Lewis (2005) and then by Beaudry, et al. (2008). These results, combined with a constant capital-labor
ratio in production suggest that these productivity gains may arise due to the eﬃcient allocation of skills to
tasks, as immigrants are allocated to manual-intensive jobs, promoting competition and pushing natives to
perform communication-intensive tasks more eﬃciently. Hence eﬃciency gains are likely to come from specialization, competition and choice of appropriate techniques in traditional sectors rather than from technological
improvements in high tech sectors.
The rest of the paper is as follows: Section 2 introduces the production-function approach to accounting
and decomposes the eﬀects of immigration on inputs and productivity. Section 3 describes how each state-level
variable is constructed and presents their behavior over the period 1960-2006. Section 4 shows the OLS and
2SLS estimates of the eﬀect of immigration on inputs, total factor productivity and productivity skill-bias and
performs several robustness checks with respect to the eﬀect of immigration on productivity. Section 5 provides
some concluding remarks.

2

Production Function and Accounting Framework

In order to analyze the impact of immigration on the total and average income of an economy and to decompose
the channel through which immigrants may aﬀect labor productivity, we adopt a production-function approach.
Later we will use the predictions of a simple growth model for the long run balanced growth path of such an
economy. We consider each U.S. state  in year  as producing a homogenous, perfectly tradeable output, using
the following Cobb-Douglas production function:

(1−)


 = 
[  ( )]

(1)

In expression (1),  indicates total production of the numeraire good;  measures aggregate physical
(1−)

capital;  measures aggregate hours worked; 

captures total factor productivity; and ( ) is an index

of skill intensity defined by the following formula:
i 
h
−1
−1 −1
( ) = (   )  + ((1 −   )(1 −  )) 

(2)

where  =   is the share of total hours worked ( ) supplied by highly educated workers ( )
and (1 −  ) =   is the share of total hours worked supplied by less educated workers ( ) 2 . The
parameter   captures the degree of skill-bias of the productivity used in state  and year . A value close to
1 implies that highly educated workers are much more productive than less educated ones, and an increase in
  implies that the highly educated workers are becoming more productive relative to less educated workers.
2 The

definitions imply that  +  =  

3

Notice that in expression 1, if we carry the terms  and  inside the index  ( ) and we call 
 =   
3
and 
 = (1 −   ) we obtain a very common production function used in several studies of aggregate

labor markets (Katz and Murphy 1992, Peri and Sparber 2009), of income distribution (Krusell et al. 2000)
and of technological growth (Acemoglu 1998, Caselli and Coleman 2007). In such a production function, more
and less educated workers combine their labor inputs in a Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES) function,

where the elasticity of substitution is   0 and 
 and  measure the productivity specific to more and

less educated workers, respectively. In order to decompose the growth rate of output per worker using the
production function and simple long-run assumptions, it is convenient to re-write (1) in terms of output per
worker  =   (where  is total employment in state  and year ) as follows:

 =

µ





¶ 1−

[  ( )]

In equation (3)  =  
/  captures average hours worked per person and

(3)



is the capital-output ratio,

which is constant in the balanced growth path of any neoclassical model due to the linearity of the physical
capital accumulation equation in  and  (see for instance page 99 of Barro and Sala i Martin, 2004). We
now take the logarithmic derivative (percentage change) of both sides of equation (3) over time and denote them
with ab(so that for any variable   ln  = b) The percentage change of total output and output per worker

can therefore be expressed as follows:

d c
d
c
 =  + 
 =  +

µ


1−

¶d

b
b + 
+
b + 



(4)

Expression (4) is the basis of our empirical decomposition of the eﬀects of immigration. It says that total
output in a state increases as a consequence of increased employment (c
 ) and of increased output per person
(c
 ). Output per person, in turn, increases due to the contribution of four factors: (i) the capital intensity of


b
the economy, captured by the capital-output ratio d
  (ii) the total factor productivity  , (iii) the average

b  Such a decomposition
hours worked 
b and (iv) the productivity-weighted skill-intensity index measured by 


is convenient for several reasons. First, the neoclassical growth model predicts that in the long run (balanced
b  0) while the
growth path) output per worker  only grows because of total factor productivity growth (


other terms ( 
   and  ) are constant. Hence a simple, exogenous increase in employment, as immigration

d
is sometimes treated as, would only increase 
 with no eﬀect in the long run on any other variable nor on  .

However, immigration can be much more than a simple inflow of people. On the positive side, diﬀerences in
skills, increased competition, changes in the specialization of natives and directed technical change can promote
increases in productivity and capital intensity. On the negative side, crowding of fixed factors and incomplete
3 It


can be written as:  = 


 
 −1 
 −1 −1 (1−)
 

   + 
 

4

capital adjustment can produce decreases in productivity and capital intensity. Moreover, if the transition
dynamics to the new balanced growth path are slow, capital may take a long time to adjust and the term



may be below its steady state for a while. With our approach we can analyze the impact of immigration

on each of the five terms on the right hand side of (4). A second interesting feature of this approach is
d
that by analyzing the impact on employment (
 ) we can confirm or revise
 ) and average hours worked (b

the existing evidence (from labor market analysis) that immigration did not crowd out natives but instead

b we can
increased total employment leaving average hours worked unchanged4 . In analyzing the impact on 


also verify whether immigration has increased the share of unskilled workers and what average eﬀect this had

on productivity. Finally, we can focus on more novel channels: did immigration aﬀect capital intensity d
 or

b ? Combining these channels we will be able to understand if immigration leads to
total factor productivity 
a simple employment increase, possibly biased towards the less educated, or if it has long-run eﬀects on the

structure of the receiving economies. Moreover, since we are also able to identify the separate eﬀects on 
and   we can identify what type of productivity gains (whether skilled or unskilled-biased) or losses have been
produced by immigration.
Our empirical approach entails estimating the impact of immigration on each term on the right hand side of
equation (4). First, using measures of Gross State Product (GSP), capital stocks, hours worked, employment
and relative wages of more and less educated workers, we can calculate each term on the right hand side of
equation (4). Then, if we can identify an inflow of immigrants exogenous to the receiving states (driven, that
is, by factors that are not correlated with productivity, employment or physical capital) we can estimate the
elasticities   from the following type of regression:


b =  +  ∆ + 



where  is alternatively the total employment ( ) the capital-output ratio

(5)

 total

factor productivity

 , average hours worked  or the index of highly educated workers   The explanatory variable


∆


is the


percentage change in employment due to immigrants (
) and  and  are, respectively, year fixed eﬀects

and zero-mean random shocks.
These regressions produce estimates within a common framework that can then be aggregated to obtain the
eﬀect on total income and on income per worker, thus measuring the aggregate and per capita gains (or losses)
from immigration and the importance of each channel. Clearly, identifying an exogenous inflow of immigrants
and ensuring that immigration, and not other unobservable, correlated shocks, is driving the estimated elasticity
is crucial to our goal. For these reasons we will discuss the instrumental variable strategy and the validity of
4 We take as reference the labor market estimates of Card (2001), Card (2007) and Card (2009) that do not find any significant
negative crowding out eﬀect of immigrats on native employment across US cities.

5

the instruments at length and will introduce controls for other long-run technological and specialization trends
in section 4.
Before implementing our empirical analysis, let us specify an important theoretical underpinning of it. If
each state has a production structure as described above and if immigration has some eﬀect on productivity
and/or capital intensity (say positive, as we will find below) then diﬀerential immigration can drive diﬀerences
in productivity and wages across states. Because of worker mobility, these diﬀerences will push all workers into
states with higher productivity. To avoid this, we assume that, while in terms of production-prices (in units
of the numeraire) permanent diﬀerences in income per person could arise due to productivity diﬀerences, these
are, however, absorbed by corresponding diﬀerences in the average price index across states, which is driven by
diﬀerences in the prices of housing or fixed amenities. Hence, a diﬀerential increase in income per worker in
state  relative to state  due to immigration (c
c
 − 
 ) is accompanied by equivalent growth in the price index

of state  and  as the result of changes in housing, land and fixed-amenities prices. Formally this implies that

c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
 − 
 = 
 − 
 and thus real income diﬀerences are unchanged (
 − 
 = 
 − 
 ) for any couple of
states. This is compatible with an equilibrium where workers are mobile. Since we measure output and capital

at common US prices (not adjusted for local cost of living) our analysis allows us to study productivity and
wage diﬀerences across states driven by immigrants. The large literature that documents a strong positive eﬀect
of immigration on housing prices5 confirms that this adjustment mechanism, through land prices and local price
indices, is plausible.

3

Data and Construction of Variables

3.1

Variables Measured Directly

We consider as the units of analysis fifty U.S. states plus Washington D.C. in each census year between 1960
and 2000 and in 2006. We use three main data sources. For data on aggregate employment and hours worked,
including the distinction between more and less educated workers and natives and immigrant workers, we use
the public use micro-data samples (IPUMS) of the U.S. Decennial Census and of the American Community
Survey (Ruggles et al., 2008). For data on GSP we use the series available from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (2008b). Finally, to calculate state physical capital we use data from the National Economic Accounts,
obtained from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (2008a). We now describe the construction of each variable in
detail.
To construct employment and hours worked6 we use the general 1% sample for Census 1960, the 1% State
Sample, Form 1, for Census 1970, the 1% State Sample for the Censuses 1980 and 1990, the 1% Census Sample
5 For
6 The

instance Saiz (2003, 2007), Ottaviano and Peri (2006), Gonzales and Ortega (2009).
details on variable definiiton, construction and data are in the Appendix A.

6

for year 2000 and the 1% sample of the American Community Survey (ACS) for the year 2006. Since they
are all weighted samples we use the variable “personal weight” to produce the average and aggregate statistics.
To produce measures of hours worked (or employment) by state and level of education we select the following
sample. First, we include people age 17 and older in the census year (corresponding to 16 and older the previous
year7 ) not living in group quarters who worked at least one week in the previous year, received positive wage
income and were not self-employed. We then select only workers with work experience of at least one year
and less than or equal to forty years8 . We divide workers into the two education groups  (those with some
college education or more) and  (those with high school education or less) using the variable EDUCREC
which classifies levels of education consistently across censuses and ACS data. The “foreign-born” status used
to identify native and immigrant workers is given to those workers who are non-citizens or are naturalized
citizens (using the variable “CITIZEN” beginning in 1970 and "BPLD" in 1960).
The hours of labor supplied by each worker are calculated by multiplying hours worked in a week by weeks
worked in a year and individual hours are multiplied by the individual weight (PERWT) and aggregated within
each education-state group. This measure of hours worked by education group and state is the basic measure


of labor supply. We call 
and 
the hours worked, respectively, of domestic (native) and foreign highly


educated workers in state  and year  so that  = 
+ 
is the total of hours worked by highly educated

workers in state  and year . Similarly, we call 
 and  the hours worked, respectively, by domestic (native)

and foreign less educated workers in state  and year  so that  = 
 + is the total of hours worked by less


educated workers in state  and year  Finally, consistent with the model below, we call  = 
+ 
the


total hours supplied by workers of both education levels (sum of  and ) in state  and year ;  = 
+

denotes the total employment (sum of natives and foreign born) in state  and year ;  =  
/  measures
the average hours worked in the economy in state  in year ; and the variable  =   measures the
share of hours worked by the highly educated in state  and year 
We measure gross product at the state level  using data on GSP available from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (2008a). The Bureau of Economic Analysis produces figures on GSP in current dollars by combining
data on local labor income, local business taxes and local capital income by industry and state and complementing these with value added data from the Economic Census. The currently available series covers the period
1963-2006. We use that series and convert it to constant 2000 dollars using the Implicit Price Deflators for
Gross Domestic Product available from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (2008b). Finally, we extend the series
backwards to 1960 using the state-specific real growth rates of GSP averaged over the 1963-1970 period in order
to impute growth between 1960 and 1963. We only use data relative to 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000 and 2006
7 Sixteen

years of age is the cut-oﬀ chosen by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for those people who are defined as "working age".
is calculated using the variable “AGE” and with the assumption that people without a high school degree enter the
labor force at age 17, people with a high school degree enter at 19, people with some college enter at 21 and people with a college
degree enter at 23.
8 Experience

7

for the 50 states plus D.C. The variable  , output per worker, is then constructed by dividing the real GSP
 by total employment in the state,  .
The construction of physical capital  is a bit more cumbersome. The National Economic Accounts only
estimates the stock of physical capital by industry at the national level9 . Following Garofalo and Yamarik (2002)
we use the national estimates of the capital stock over the period 1963-2006 for 19 industries (listed in Appendix
C). We then distribute the national capital stock in a year for each industry across states in proportion to the
value added in that industry that is generated in each state. This assumes that industries operate at the same
capital-output (and capital-labor) ratios across states, hence deviation of the capital stock from its long-run
level for an industry is similar across states because capital mobility across states ensures equalization of capital
returns by industry. Essentially, the state composition across industries and the adjustment of the capital-labor
ratio at the industry level determine in our data the adjustment of state capital-labor ratios. We then deflate the
value of the capital stocks using the implicit capital stock price deflator available from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (2008b) and we extend the stock backward for each state to 1960, applying the average growth rate
between 1963-1970 to the period 1960-1962. This procedure gives us the panel of real capital stock values by
state  . Capital per worker ( =   ) is calculated by dividing the capital stock by total employment
in the state and year. Hence, in total, we can obtain direct measures of the variables        and
of the ratios    and  

3.2

Variables calculated indirectly

The variables  and   are not observed directly. However, we can use the production function expression


in (1) and the condition that the average hourly wage of more and less educated (
and 
) equals the

marginal productivity of  and  , respectively, to obtain two equations in two unknowns and solve them. In
particular, setting the ratio of the hourly wages of  to  equal to the ratio of their marginal productivity
gives the following equation:


=



µ

 
1 −  

¶ −1
µ



1 − 

¶− 1

(6)

Solving (6) for the parameter  we obtain the following expression:

  = ¡ ¢ 
 −1


1

¡  ¢ −1
−1


1

¡  ¢ −1
1
−1

+ 
(1 −  ) −1

Substituting (7) into (1) and solving explicitly for  we obtain:
9 See

Appendix B for details.

8

(7)

⎛

⎞¡ ¢ 
1
1


¡  ¢ −1
1
− 1−
1−
 −1 −1
 + 
(1 −  ) −1





⎝
⎠
 =
¤ 
£ 

  +  (1 −  ) −1


(8)



The only new variables required to calculate   and  , besides those described in section 3.1 above, are


the hourly wages for more and less educated workers, 
and 
 We obtain these from the IPUMS data by

averaging hourly wages (calculated from the same sample as the one used for hours worked) by state and year,

first separately for individuals with some college education or more, 
 and then for those with high school
 10
education or less, 
 Finally, in order to implement (7) and (8) we need a value for the parameter , the

elasticity of substitution in production between more and less educated workers. As there are several estimates
of this value in the literature, most of which cluster between 1.5 and 2.0 (see Ciccone and Peri 2006 for a recent
estimate and a summary of previous ones), we choose the median value of 175 for  and check the robustness
of our most relevant results to a value of 15 and of 20

3.3

Summary statistics and trends

The average growth rates, by decade, of all the variables considered in the analysis—those measured directly
(


∆

d b  d
b
    
  

b )—are reported in Table A1 of the
b  
and b
 ) as well as those calculated indirectly (


Table Appendix. Some well known tendencies are evident in the data. The progressive increase in the inflow
of immigrants as a share of employment during the 70’s and again during the 90’s is noticeable. We also see
the slow-down in growth of income per worker and, correspondingly, of total factor productivity during the 70’s
(and 80’s) and the re-acceleration during the 2000-2006 period. Employment and working hours per person
experienced sustained growth over the entire 1970-2000 period with a reduction only in the 2000-2006 period.
Figures 2, 3 and 4 also illustrate the average and state-specific behavior of income per worker, capital
per worker and TFP, respectively, all in logarithmic terms. Besides confirming the average tendencies of those
variables, the figures also show a moderate tendency of income per worker and TFP to converge across states (the
vertical spread between top and bottom states tends to contract over time) indicating continued technological
convergence over the period. Figure 4, capital per worker, shows less convergence than the other two and some
states with particularly large mining and oil sectors stand out as outliers. Finally, Figures 5 and 6 show that
both the skill-bias of technology,    and the share of highly educated workers,   increased constantly and
significantly over the whole period and in particular during the 70’s and 80’s. The literature on wage dispersion
across education groups (e.g., Katz and Murphy 1992) has emphasized this finding, attributing it to directed
skill-biased technological change. Also, these two variables seem to exhibit a clear tendency towards cross-state
convergence over the period. Reassured by the behavior of our measured and constructed variables, which match
1 0 The

exact procedure used to calculate individual hourly wages is described in A.

9

some important trends emphasized in the literature, we proceed to the empirical analysis.

4

Estimates of the Eﬀects of Immigrants

4.1

OLS Estimates

Our main empirical strategy is to estimate equations like (5) using, alternatively, the growth rate of diﬀerent
variables in lieu of the placeholder b  The dependent variables used in the regressions are shown in the first
column of Tables 1 through 6, and the estimated elasticity ( ) is reported in the cells of those tables. As

introductory results, Table 1 reports the OLS estimates of equation (5) on a panel of 50 U.S. states (plus
D.C.) using inter-census changes between 1960 and 2000 and the 2000-2006 change. Each cell reports the
result of a diﬀerent regression that includes time fixed eﬀects, weights each cell by the total employment in
it, and reports the heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered by state. The first two rows of Table 1
d
decompose the eﬀect of immigration on total income into its eﬀect on total employment (
 ) and on output

(gross state product) per worker (c
 ) The following four rows decompose the eﬀect on output per worker into
³
´
d


b
the contributions due to the capital intensity 1−
 , total factor productivity,  , average hours worked

b . Those four eﬀects add up to the total eﬀect on c

b  and the skill-intensity index 
  Finally, the last two


rows show the eﬀect of immigration on the share of educated workers b
 and on the skill-bias of productivity

b . Estimating the eﬀect via OLS and without any further controls11 , but with common time eﬀects, leaves the



estimates subject to endogeneity and omitted variable issues. We propose an estimation strategy that addresses
those issues in the next sections.
In Table 1 we provide some evidence of stable and strong correlations between immigration and some of
the relevant growth rates, while including some simple controls and robustness checks. In particular, we check
whether the correlations depend on the period considered (in column 2 we drop the 60’s and in column 3 we
drop the 2000’s), and whether including the lagged dependent variable in order to capture autocorrelation over
time (column 4) or instrumenting employment changes due to immigrants with the population changes caused
by them (arguably a measure that is less aﬀected by labor market conditions) aﬀects the estimates.
The estimates are quite stable and robust across specifications so we can simply comment on the general
features of these correlations. First, the elasticity of total employment to immigrants is always larger than one
and never significantly diﬀerent from one. This confirms the existing evidence (Card 2001, Card 2005, Cortes
2008, Ottaviano and Peri 2006) that there is no crowding-out of native employment by immigrants in local
labor markets12 . The estimates are often larger than one, suggesting the existence of a demand-driven bias.
1 1 Estimating the regressions for the components of  simultaneously in a seemigly unrelated least square regresion (SUR)

that accounts for correlation between the errors, produces almost identical elasicity estimates.
1 2 Given the way we constructed our variables, a coeﬃcient of one on 

 implies that one immigrant worker produced an increase
in total employment of one, hence it produces no change in native employment.

10

Second, there is a consistent positive and significant correlation between income per worker and immigration.
This positive correlation results from the combination of a positive correlation of immigration with total factor
productivity, with an elasticity in the proximity of 1.25, and a negative correlation between immigration and
capital intensity, with an elasticity around -0.5. The positive eﬀect of immigrants on hours worked (+0.12/0.13)
b (-0.15/-0.19) compensate for each other in terms of income per
and the negative eﬀect on the skill index 


worker.

Finally, we also find a very significant and robust negative correlation between the immigration rate in
employment and both the share of more educated workers as well as the skill-bias of technology, both with an
elasticity not far from -0.7. States with larger than average inflows of immigrants over the period 1960-2006 were
therefore associated with a one-for-one increase in employment, a larger growth of income per worker (entirely
due to larger TFP growth), while at the same time the capital and the skill intensity of production grew at a
slower rate. To look more closely at these eﬀects we begin addressing the endogeneity and omitted variable bias
of the OLS estimates using an instrumental variable technique.

4.2

Instruments and 2SLS

Our instrumental variable approach combines the instruments based on the past settlement of immigrants
(augmented by their national rate of growth) drawn from Card 2001, and then in several other studies (including
Card 2009 and Peri and Sparber 2009), with a purely geographical instrument based on the distance from the
main points of entry of immigrants into the US. Specifically, the imputed growth of immigrants as a share of the
working age population was calculated as follows. We first identify from the Census foreign-born workers13 from
10 diﬀerent areas: Mexico, Rest of Latin America, Canada-Australia-New Zealand, Western Europe, Eastern
Europe and Russia, China, India, Rest of Asia, Africa and Others. Let us call these ten the "nationality of
origin" of the immigrants. For each nationality of origin  and each state  the total number of people in
working age (16-65) in Census 1960 is  1960 For each nationality of origin we also calculate the rate of
growth of the total working age population in the U.S., namely: 1960− = (  −  1960 ) 1960 .
This allows us to impute the immigrant population from each nationality of origin in each state, by applying
the national growth rate to the 1960 population from that nationality in each state. Hence the "imputed"
immigrant population from nationality  in state  would be d
 =  1960 ∗ (1 + 1960− ). Adding

up across nationalities we have the total imputed population of immigrants in each state and year: d
  =
P d
    Finally, we construct the imputed decennial growth of working age population due to immigration
³
´
as d
 +10 − d
  (d
  +   ) where   is the actual native population of working
age in state  and year . We use this measure as an instrument for the growth in employment due to immigrants
1 3 Using

the variable BPLD for 1960 and BPLD and CITIZEN for 1970 and later.

11

in each state and decade,


∆
 .

The US-Mexico border (for Mexican immigrants) and Los Angeles and New York (for other travelers) are the
main points of entry to the U.S. The distance of each state’s center of gravity from the Border, New York and
Los Angeles is calculated as follows. First, we obtain data on the geodesic coordinates of each state’s population
center of gravity from the 2000 Census as well as for 12 sections of the U.S.- Mexican border, covering its entire
length, and for New York, Los Angeles and Miami. We then use the formula for geodesic distance to calculate
the distance (in thousands of kilometers) between each state’s center of gravity and the relevant points of entry.
We then interact the logarithmic distance variables with five decade dummies (60’s, 70’s, 80’s, 90’s and 00-06).
This captures the fact that distance from the border had a larger eﬀect in predicting the inflow of immigrants in
decades with larger Mexican immigration and the distance from Los Angeles had a larger impact on immigrant
inflows in periods of large immigration from China and Asia.
The imputed immigrants and geographic instruments have strong power. Their F-test in the samples used
vary between 36 and 44 when used jointly (see the second to last row in Table 2). Even the geographic
instruments by themselves have significant power (F-test of 25, as reported in the last column of Table 2).
Moreover, the instruments, when used jointly, pass the test of overidentifying restrictions and one cannot reject
the assumption of exogeneity of instruments at 5% confidence level14 . Surveying the results across specifications,
again using diﬀerent samples (omitting 1960 in specification 2 and 2006 in specification 3), controlling for past
lagged values (specification 4), and using only the geographic instruments (specification 5) we obtain a very
consistent picture. First, the impact on total employment is now estimated to be close to one and never
statistically diﬀerent from one. The diﬀerence between the OLS and the 2SLS estimates confirms the idea
that some reverse causality may bias the OLS estimates up. Similarly, the eﬀect on the growth of income per
worker is lower than in the OLS case and between 0.4 and 0.5, still statistically significant in all specifications.
Decomposing this eﬀect one sees that the positive elasticity results from the combination of a positive eﬀect on
TFP with a negative eﬀect of around -0.5 on capital intensity.
b is not fully balanced
In the estimates in Table 2 the negative eﬀect of immigration on the skill index 


by the positive eﬀect on hours worked and so those two terms contribute negatively to output per worker.

The negative eﬀects of immigration on the share of highly educated workers and on the skill-bias of technology
are strongly confirmed by the 2SLS estimates and in both cases the elasticity is around -1. Interpreting the
coeﬃcient as causal, which would be the case if the instruments are uncorrelated with any economic factor
aﬀecting productivity and growth in a state-decade, the analysis reveals three eﬀects of immigration not clearly
measured before and confirms two well-known eﬀects. First, immigration mechanically increases employment
1 4 The test statistic, under the null hypothesis that none of the instruments appear in the second stage regression, is distributed
as a Chi-square with degrees of freedom given by the diﬀerence between the number of instruments and the endogenous variables
(15 in our case). The test statistics equals 7.65. The corresponding value for the relevant Chi-square distribution, with 15 degrees
of freedom, is 0.07, and hence the null hypothesis level stands at 5% confidence. See Wolrdige (2002) for the details of the test.

12

and reduces its share of highly educated workers, and it does not crowd out native employment. These are wellknown eﬀects already emphasized by Card (2007) and Card and Lewis (2007). Second, immigration promotes
production techniques that are less capital intensive and more unskilled-intensive (both eﬀects were suggested
by Lewis 2005 and are consistent with the idea of directed technological choice) but it also increases overall
factor-neutral productivity.
The most remarkable and new estimated eﬀects are those regarding total factor productivity and its skill
bias. The first is responsible for the significant net positive eﬀect of immigrants on output per worker and the
second is a direct test of directed technical adoption. Hence, we will devote section 4.4 to testing their robustness
to the inclusion of several controls. Before doing that, however, let us also analyze the impact of immigrants
on capital intensity. Capital intensity, measured as the capital-output ratio, may decrease either because the
capital stock does not respond to immigration, because it responds less than employment, or because, in spite
of a full response to employment, the capital-labor ratio does not increase as TFP increases. We decompose the
decrease in the next section in order to isolate these three eﬀects and we find that the decrease in capital-output
is due to an increase in TFP vis-a-vis a constant capital-labor ratio.

4.3

A closer look at physical capital

b   of the capital-labor ratio, 
b  − 
b
Table 3 analyzes the response of the growth rate of the capital stock, 
³
´
d


and of the standardized capital-output ratio 1−
 to immigration as a share of employment. We report
the OLS estimates (specifications 1 to 3) and 2SLS estimates (specifications 4 to 6) using all instruments. We

allow for samples that omit the initial decade (specifications 2 and 4) or the last one (specifications 3 and 6).
In all the regressions we include the capital-labor ratio of the state at the beginning of the decade to control for
the potential tendency of capital intensity to convergence across states, and we report heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors, clustered by state. The estimates, especially those using 2SLS, show that within the decade
immigration produced a one-for-one response of capital so that the capital-labor ratio in states receiving more
immigrants did not decline at all as a result. The inflow of immigrants stimulated a corresponding increase in
investment that left the capital-labor ratio basically unchanged. However, because of the productivity increase,
output is growing faster than employment and, when measured in terms of the capital-output ratio, the economy
is adopting technologies that appear less capital intensive. The reduction in capital intensity is not due to
incomplete adjustment of capital to labor but to the disproportionate increase in output. Rather than being
the result of a slow adjustment of the capital stock this phenomenon seems more likely due to a change in
the capital intensity of the production techniques adopted, possibly associated with the chosen technology or
productive organization. The corresponding reduction in the skill-intensity of the productivity (the eﬀect on )
may be associated with this phenomenon. The model in Krusell et al. (2001) in which skill-biased technologies

13

are explicitly linked to the intensity of equipment/capital in production may provide a joint explanation for
the two phenomena: immigrants stimulate the choice of techniques toward those that more eﬃciently use less
educated workers and are less capital intensive.

4.4

The Eﬀects on Productivity and Skill-Bias

The most remarkable and novel eﬀects estimated in Table 2 are the positive, large and significant eﬀect of
b and the negative, large and significant eﬀect on the skill-bias of
immigration on total factor productivity ()
b Both eﬀects are quite large and while they are not estimated extremely precisely they are
technology ().
always very significant. The concern is that the geographic instruments used in the 2SLS estimation, while

certainly aﬀecting the immigration rates and certainly exogenous with respect to technological changes, may
be correlated with other features that have aﬀected productivity growth and its skill-intensity. The geographic
location of a state, for instance, may be correlated for climatic reasons with its amenities, or also with its sector
composition (think of agriculture and mining) which may aﬀect its access to international and national markets
and therefore the location of highly educated workers along with the adoption and diﬀusion of technologies.
For these reasons we include in the regression several variables that are aimed at capturing the independent
influence of these factors on the productivity and technology of U.S. states. We include each of them, one by
one, considering them as potentially endogenous and therefore using the geographic and imputed-immigrant
instruments to predict them. While the instruments are not very powerful in predicting the controls, what
we care about is that they maintain power in predicting immigration rates and that the estimated eﬀect of
immigration remains significant.
The coeﬃcient on the control variables is often estimated imprecisely (and we do not report them in Tables 4
and 5); however, what we care about is the coeﬃcient on the immigration rate, estimated using the instruments.
The inclusion of the controls implies that we are using the variation in the geography-based instruments that is
orthogonal to the controlled factor (and hence independent from it) to predict the immigration rate and its eﬀect
on productivity. We include the controls one at the time, since including them all together reduces the power of
the instrument so drastically that we obtain very large standard errors. Table 4 shows the estimated coeﬃcients
b as the dependent variable. Table 5 shows the
on the immigration rates in regressions based on (5), using 

b as the dependent variable. Proceeding from top to bottom, Tables
coeﬃcients of a similar regression with 


4 and 5 show estimates obtained using OLS estimation methods (first row) or 2SLS estimation methods (rows
2 to 4). Moreover, to check how robust the results are to the choice of the parameter  (the substitutability
b we report the estimates using two
b and 
between more and less educated workers) in the construction of 


alternative values of that parameter (equal to 1.5 and 2, respectively). The last two rows of Tables 4 and 5
report results from a specification that we will discuss in section 4.5.

14

Considering the diﬀerent specifications (columns) in Table 4 (which correspond to those in Table 5), we first
report the basic estimates obtained from a regression that only controls for time fixed eﬀects, then column (2)
controls for the average real yearly R&D spending per worker in each state in the 70’s, 80’s and 90’s. The data
are from the National Science Foundation (1998) and include total (private and federal) funds for industrial
R&D in constant 1990 US dollars15 . We obtain the variable by dividing the aggregate state data by state
employment. The estimated eﬀect of the R&D variable on TFP changes (not reported and corresponding to
the specification in the basic 2SLS in the second row) is 0.10 (with a standard error equal to 0.09) while its
b is 0.04 (with standard error 0.10). So the R&D variable positively aﬀects both productivity and
eﬀect on 


skill-bias, which is expected. Due to the low power of the instruments in predicting it, however, the estimated
standard errors are large and the estimates are not significant. More importantly for our purposes, the inclusion
of R&D as a control (and the shortening of the sample to 1970-2000) does not aﬀect much the estimated eﬀect
of immigration on TFP (with an elasticity of 1.15 in the basic specification) and on the skill-bias (an elasticity
of -0.94).
The second column of Tables 4 and 5 introduces computer use as a control. The adoption of computer
technology is a major technological innovation leading to increased productivity, especially of the highly educated, and since its diﬀusion varied by sector and location we can control for it. To do this, we introduce the
share of workers in each state that use a computer at work to the regression. The original (individual) data are
from the March supplement of the Current Population Survey, and are available for the years 1984, 1997, 2001.
Assuming that in 1970 no worker used a computer, since the PC was first introduced in 1980, we interpolate
linearly the 3 data points and we impute the shares in 1980, 1990 and 2000 for each state. We include this
b (not reported)
control in specification (3). The estimated coeﬃcient of the computer adoption variable on 

b it is 0.21 (standard error 0.16)16 . As expected, computer adoption
is 2.10 (standard error 0.90) while on 


has a positive and skill-biased eﬀect on productivity across states. More interesting for us, however, is that the

b is still large and significant (but reduced by 30% to an elasticity of 0.72) and the
eﬀect of immigration on 

eﬀect on the skill-bias is essentially unchanged in its magnitude (0.90) and significance (standard error equal to

0.13). While the adoption of computers may involve the reorganization of production in a way that is similar
to the task specialization that occurs between natives and immigrants (see the next section), the productivity
gains from geography-driven migration flows are robust to the inclusion of the computer adoption variable.
The third control, introduced in specification (4), is also a very important one. The geographic location of
an economy is a very important determinant of its trade with the rest of the world. Being close to a major port,
to the coast, to navigable rivers and the distance from other countries all aﬀect trade costs and hence trade
1 5 The data are available every year for the period 1975-1998. We calculate the average yearly expenditure in a state between
1975 and 1979 and we impute it over the whole 70’s decade and the average over 1991-1998 is used for the 90’s decade.
1 6 In both cases we report the coeﬃcients from the basic 2SLS specification in the second row.

15

volumes. Moreover, during the decades between 1960 and 2009 the U.S. significantly increased its trade with
the rest of the world. Since trade may increase productivity (promoting competition, inducing specialization,
reducing costs of inputs) we control for trade as a share of GSP in order to account for this eﬀect. The data on
exports of manufactured goods by state of origin are from the Origin of Movement data available from the US
Census and for purchase on CD-ROM (at www.gtis.com). These data are the total value, in current dollars, of
exports from each state from 1987 to 2006. We calculate exports as a share of GSP in 1987-1989 and attribute
this value to the entire decade of the 1980’s and then calculate the average export/GSP value by state in the
1990’s and in the 2000-2006 period. We include these values in the regression as a proxy for the access of a
state to international trade in each decade. The downside is that we have to limit our analysis to the 80’s,
90’s and 2000-2006. The coeﬃcient obtained for the eﬀect of trade on productivity is negative (-0.36) and
significant (standard error 0.13) while the eﬀect on the skill-bias is not significant. While such a negative eﬀect
is somewhat surprising, it is worth noting that if we only include trade as an explanatory variable in the TFP
regression (instrumented with the geographic variables) its eﬀect is estimated to be positive (+0.30), although
not significant (standard error 0.70). When included as a control (as in column 4) its eﬀect become negative,
while immigration maintains a positive and very significant, in fact enhanced (+1.51), eﬀect on productivity
(Table 4), with an unchanged eﬀect on the productivity bias (-1.04). These results imply that the geographic
openness of a state seems to have aﬀected productivity positively, but the eﬀect worked through immigration
and not trade. This is an interesting finding, as the many papers studying the eﬀect of trade on growth across
countries (e.g., Frankel and Romer 2003) do not control for migration flows.
Finally, the last column of Tables 4 and 5 introduces a control that accounts for the wage growth in each state,
according to its sector-composition. In particular, we construct a proxy for sector-driven productivity growth
by averaging the growth rate of the average wage in each of 13 sectors (defined as the 2-digit definition of the
variable IND1990 in the IPUMS), each weighted by the initial (1960) share of that sector in state employment.
This control accounts for the fact that diﬀerent states had diﬀerent sector structures in 1960 and this might be
correlated with geography and it aﬀect on productivity growth. The inclusion of this variable (whose coeﬃcient
b 
b and on 
on TFP is positive and very significant) does not modify much the eﬀect of immigration on 


In summary, the (unskilled-biased) productivity eﬀect of immigrants is quite robust to the inclusion of several
controls. This, together with the null eﬀect on native employment, implies that across the analyzed time-horizon

(ten year changes) immigration had a positive eﬀect on the total wages of natives.

4.5

The Eﬃcient Task-Specialization Hypothesis

There are two mechanisms proposed and studied in the previous literature that can jointly explain the positive
productivity eﬀect of immigrants and its skill-bias. Lewis and Card (2007) find that in markets with an

16

increase in less educated immigrants a large proportion of all sectors show a higher intensity of unskilled
workers.

Furthermore, Lewis (2005) documents that in those labor markets there is a slower adoption of

skill-intensive techniques. Combining these findings with the theory of "directed technological change" or
"appropriate technological adoption" (Acemoglu 2002) one can infer that the availability of unskilled workers
pushes firms to adopt technologies that are more eﬃcient and intensive in the use of unskilled workers. More
recently, in a paper with Chad Sparber (Peri and Sparber 2009) we show that in states with large inflows
of immigrants, natives with lower education tend to specialize in more communication-intensive production
tasks, leaving to immigrants more manual-intensive tasks. This produces increased task-specialization following
comparative advantages and results in eﬃciency gains, especially among less educated workers. In the last two
rows of Table 4 we analyze whether the reorganization of production around the eﬃcient specialization of natives
(and immigrants) can explain part of the measured productivity gains.
We include in the regression a measure of the change in relative specialization of less educated natives
between communication and manual tasks at the state level. The variable is constructed (as described in Peri
and Sparber 2009) by attributing the intensity of physical-manual tasks ( ) and of communication-interactive
( ) tasks to each worker,  based on their occupation, using the average of 52 ability variables collected in the
O*NET dataset. Then we calculate the average of the ratio of these two task intensities for native workers in each
state  and year     The percentage change in this variable is then included in the regression. The idea
is that if immigrants aﬀect the eﬃciency of production in a state, by reallocating natives toward communication
tasks and by undertaking manual tasks, leading to an overall productivity improvement, we should observe the
productivity eﬀect of immigrants mostly through the task-reallocation of natives. Hence, controlling for this
task reallocation the productivity impact of immigrants should decrease. Moreover, the instruments used to
predict immigrant flows should also be good instruments for the endogenous task reallocation. This is exactly
what we observe in the last two rows of Figure 4, where we report the coeﬃcients on the immigration variable
and on the specialization change, estimated by 2SLS and also including (in specifications 2 to 5) the other
controls.
Two important patterns emerge. First, the estimated coeﬃcient on the change in specialization is positive
and mostly significant—in other words, the specialization change instrumented by geography has a positive eﬀect
on productivity. Second, the coeﬃcient on the immigration variable, while still positive, is reduced significantly,
often to half of its original estimate (without a control for specialization). It also loses its significance in
three cases. Hence, the eﬀect of controlling for the "change in specialization" on the estimated coeﬃcient of
immigration on TFP is much more drastic than the eﬀect of introducing any other control. This is a sign that
a large part of the positive productivity eﬀect may actually go through the eﬃcient re-allocation of natives and
immigrants across production tasks. The eﬀect of controlling for task re-allocation in the skill-bias regression is

17

much smaller. This is expected, as reallocation is likely to enhance overall eﬃciency. However, even controlling
for task re-allocation, states with a large inflow of immigrants are likely to choose relatively unskilled-intensive
techniques.

4.6

Robustness of the main estimated eﬀects

The overall picture emerging from the empirical analysis is clear. Confirming the results of several articles on
the labor market eﬀect of immigrants we find that they have a one-for-one impact on total employment, with no
evidence of crowding out of natives. More interestingly, we find that immigrants had a significant, positive eﬀect
on the total factor productivity of states, with a significant pro-unskilled bias. The productivity eﬀect (combined
with other smaller eﬀects on capital intensity, skills and hours worked) drives a positive and significant eﬀect
b )
d
b and 
of immigration on GSP per worker. In this section we check whether these eﬀects (on 
b  
  

are all robust to further controls and sample restrictions. Table 6 presents the estimates of the elasticity of the

variables to immigrants when estimated in 2SLS, allowing for diﬀerent robustness checks. First, especially for
GSP and productivity, one may suspect that convergence across states may bias the estimates if immigrants
tend to flow into states that are catching-up. Including the initial value of the dependent variable to account
for convergence (column 2 of Table 6) does not change any qualitative result; in fact, it increases the estimated
positive impact of immigration on employment, GSP per worker and productivity.
If we eliminate the border states (with Mexico) in specification (3) the explanatory power of the instruments
is reduced, which is evident in the larger standard errors. However, while the employment eﬀect is estimated to
be much smaller, though very imprecise, all the other eﬀects (notably on TFP and GSP per worker) are positive,
larger than in the basic sample, and still very significant. The standard errors and estimates also increase when
we eliminate the largest state economies (California, Texas and New York), which are also the largest receivers
of immigrants. Overall, while a large part of the variation in the instrument is between border or coastal states
and the rest, so that dropping them reduces the precision, the positive elasticity of productivity and GSP per
worker to immigrants may be even larger in non-coastal, non-border states. This suggests that possibly the
larger eﬃciency gains per immigrant from specialization are realized when immigrants are a small group and
access highly manual-intensive occupations in services, construction, agriculture and manufacturing. As they
become a larger fraction of the labor force they access occupations where they do not have such a large relative
advantage and the overall eﬃciency gain per immigrant decreases. Finally, restricting the sample to only the
three most recent decades, which experienced by far the largest aggregate inflow of immigrants, and including 4
regional dummies (West, South, Midwest and East) does not change the estimates much. Even when estimated
within regions the inflow of immigrants is found to have had a significant, positive eﬀect on productivity and
GSP per worker.

18

4.7

Eﬀects on wages

To make a final check of the consistency of our results with those found in the labor literature (which mostly
analyzes the wage impact of immigrants), from our estimates we can obtain the impact of immigration on the
wages of more and less educated workers. If we define the hourly wages of more and less skilled workers as the
marginal productivity of  and   and then manipulate the expression, collect common terms and calculate
the rates of change, we obtain the following two decompositions that help us attribute the percentage change
in wages to the factors that we have just studied:

d


 =
d
 =


µ


1−

µ


1−

¶d
´ −1
³

c
b + 1 c
+
c
 −  +





¶
¶d
µ
 c
 − 1 c  

b + 1 c
+
+
−

 




1 − 

1 −  

(9)

(10)

The first two terms on the right hand side of (9) and (10) are common to both formulas and imply that
increases in the capital-labor ratio and in the total factor productivity of the economy increase the marginal
productivity of all workers and increase the hourly salaries of both types of workers. In contrast, the remaining
c
terms show that an increase in the share of highly educated workers c
 or in their relative productivity   has

diﬀerential eﬀects on more and less skilled workers. The hourly wages of highly educated workers benefit from
a decrease in the share  and from an increase in   , while the hourly wages of less educated workers benefit
from an increase in  and from a decrease in    Using the estimates from Table 2, Column 1, the eﬀect of
an inflow of immigrants equal to 0.50% of initial employment (which was roughly the yearly inflow during the
period 1990-2006) on the wages of more educated workers is equal to +0.36%17 . On the other hand, still using
the estimates from Table 2, Column 1 and the formula in (10), and using as initial values of  and   their
values in 1990, we obtain the result that the same increase in immigrants (equal to 0.50% of current employment)
produces a 0.04% increase in the wages of less educated workers18 . These values are in line with most of the
literature on the labor market eﬀects of immigrants that finds a somewhat positive eﬀect of immigration on the
highly skilled (e.g., Card 2009, Ottaviano and Peri 2008) and an eﬀect close to zero on the wages of the less
skilled (Card 2001, 2009). Our decomposition emphasizes that the supply eﬀect of immigrants on less educated
workers is balanced by the unskilled-biased productivity eﬀect, so that the result is a very small wage eﬀect on
less educated workers. On the other hand, the TFP and supply eﬀects are large enough for highly educated
workers so that, in spite of the unskilled-biased impact of immigrants, the overall eﬀect of immigration on their
wages is positive.
1 7 The

calculations involve simply substituting the terms from Table 2 into (9) as follows:
106 − 047 + (1175) ∗ (−021 + 108) − (075175) ∗ 085 and then multiplying by 0.5.
1 8 These calculations simply involve substituting the terms from Table 2 into 10:
106 − 047 + (1175) ∗ (−021 − (122) ∗ (108)) + 043 ∗ 085 ∗ 1 and then multiplying by 0.5.

19

5

Conclusions

This paper uses an aggregate accounting approach to estimate the eﬀect of immigration on productivity, capital
intensity and the skill-bias of US state economies. We consider the variation in immigrant location due to
geography (as an instrument) in order to isolate the causal eﬀect of immigration on these variables. We also
control for several other determinants of productivity that vary across states and are possibly related to their
location. We present three main findings, two of which are quite new in this literature. First, we confirm that
immigrants do not crowd-out employment of (or hours worked by) natives but simply add to total employment.
Second, we find that they increase total factor productivity significantly and, third, that such eﬃciency gains are
unskilled-biased—larger, that is, for less educated workers. We check that these eﬀects are robust to including
several control variables (such as R&D spending, technological adoption, sector composition or openness to
international trade) and that they are not explained by productivity convergence across states or driven only
by a few states or particular decades. We conjecture that at least part of the positive productivity eﬀects are
due to an eﬃcient specialization of immigrants and natives in manual-intensive and communication-intensive
tasks, respectively (in which each group has a comparative advantage), resulting in an overall eﬃciency gain.
Preliminary empirical evidence supports this claim. In conclusion, we also check that these findings are in line
with the analysis of the wage eﬀect of immigrants on less educated natives, which is close to 0, and on highly
educated natives, which is positive.

20

References
Acemoglu„ Daron (1998). "Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Technical Change and
Wage Inequality", Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 1055-1090.
Acemoglu, Daron (2002). "Directed Technical Change", Review of Economic Studies 69:4, 781-810.
Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (2004). "Economic Growth" Second Edition, MIT Press, Cambridge
Massachusetts,
Borjas, George (2006). “Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of Immigration.” Journal of
Human Resources 41, no.2: 221-258.
Card, David (2001). “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local labor Market Impacts of Higher
Immigration” Journal of Labor Economics, XIX (2001), 22-64.
Card, David (2005) "Is The New Immigration Really So Bad?," Economic Journal, 2005, Volume 115,
pp.300.323.
Card, David (2007) "How Immigrants Aﬀects U.S. Cities" CReAM Discussion paper No. 11/07.
Card, David (2009). "Immigration and Inequality" American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 99:2,
1-21.
Card, David and Ethan Lewis (2007) “The Diﬀusion of Mexican Immigrants During the 1990s: Explanations
and Impacts” in Mexican Immigration to the United States, George J. Borjas editor, The University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, London, 2007.
Caselli, Francesco and John W. Coleman (2006) "The World Technology Frontier", American Economic Review,
96:3, 499-522.
Ciccone, Antonio and Giovanni Peri (2005) "Long-Run Substitutability between More and Less Educated Workers: Evidence from U.S. States 1950-1990", Review of Economics and Statistics 87:4, 652-663.
Frankel, Jeﬀrey and David Romer (1999) "Does Trade Cause growth?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol
83, 3. pp. 379-399.
Garofalo, Gasper A. and Steven Yamarik, (2002). "Regional Convergence: Evidence From A New State-By-State
Capital Stock Series," The Review of Economics and Statistics, MIT Press, vol. 84(2), pp. 316-323.
Gauthier-Loiselle, Marjolaine and Jennifer Hunt (2008) "How Much Does Immigration Boost Innovation?"
NBER Working Paper # 14312 Cambridge, Ma.
21

Gonzales, Libertad and Ortega Francesc (2009) "Immigration and Housing Booms: Evidence from Spain," IZA
Discussion Papers 4333, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA), Germany.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy (1992) "Changes in Relative Wages 1963-1987- Supply and Demand
Factors", Quarterly Journal of Economics 107:1, 35-78.
Krusell, P. L. Ohanian, V. Rios-Rull and G. Violante (2000), “Capital-Skill Complementarity and inequality:
A Macroeconomic Analysis,” Econometrica 68, 1029-53.
Lewis, Ethan (2005) “Immigration, Skill Mix, and the Choice of Technique,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper #05-08, May 2005
National Science Foundation (1998) "Survey of Industrial research and development" Division of Science Resource Studies, Washington D.C.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco and Giovanni Peri (2006) “The Economic Value of Cultural Diversity: Evidence from
U.S. cities”, Journal of Economic Geography, Vol. 6, Issue 1, Pages 9-44.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco I.P. and Peri Giovanni (2008) “Immigration and National Wages: Clarifying the Theory
and the Empirics” NBER Working Paper 14188, July 2008.
Peri, Giovanni and Chad Sparber (2009) “Task Specialization, Immigration and Wages”, American Economic
Journal : Applied Economics, Vol 1:3.
Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia Kelly
Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. 2008. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series:

Version 3.0

[Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center [producer and distributor].
http://www.ipums.org.
Saiz, Albert (2003) “Room in the Kitchen for the Melting Pot: Immigration and Rental Prices.” The Review
of Economics and Statistics, 85 (3), 502-521.
Saiz, Albert (2005) ““Immigration and Housing Rents in American Cities.” Journal of Urban Economics 61,
pp.345-371.
Wooldridge J.L. (2002) Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. MIT Press, Boston, MA.

22

A

Appendix: Census Data

A.1
1)

Definition of the Samples
Eliminate people living in group quarters (military or convicts): those with the gq variable equal to 0, 3

or 4.
2)

Eliminate people younger than 17. Since people of working age are defined by BLS as those 16 an

older, and since the questions related to work variables pertain to the previous year, we consider 17 years of age
as the cut-oﬀ.
3)

Eliminate those who worked 0 weeks last year, which corresponds to wkswork2=0 in 1960 and 1970

and wkswork1=0 in 1980-1990-2000 and ACS.
4)

Once we calculate experience as age-(time first worked), where (time first worked) is 16 for workers

with no HS degree, 19 for HS graduates, 21 for workers with some college education and 23 for college graduates,
we eliminate all those with experience 1 and 40.
5) Eliminate those workers who do not report valid salary income (999999) or report 0.
6) Eliminate the self-employed (keeping those for whom the variable CLASSWKD is between 20 and 28).
Construction of hours worked and employment by cell
To calculate the total amount of hours worked by natives and immigrants, male and female, in each educationexperience cell, we add the hours worked by each person multiplied by her personal weight (PERWT) in the
cell.
Construction of the average hourly wage by cell
In each cell we average the hourly wage of individuals, each weighted by the hours worked by the individual. Hence individuals with few hours worked (low job attachment) are correspondingly weighted little in the
calculation of the average wage of the group.

A.2

Individual Variables: Definition and Description

Education: Education groups in each year are defined using the variable EDUCREC which was built in order
to consistently reflect the variables HIGRADE and EDUC99. In particular, we define as less educated ()
those with EDUCREC=7, corresponding to a high school degree or less. Highly educated are those with
EDUCREC=8, corresponding to some college or more.
Experience: Defined as potential experience, assigns to each schooling group a certain age reflecting the
beginning of their working life; in particular, the initial working ages are: 17 years for workers with no degree,
19 years for high school graduates, 21 years for those with some college education and 23 years for college
graduates.

23

Immigration Status: In each year, only people who are not citizens or who were naturalized citizens are
counted as immigrants. This is done using the variable CITIZEN and by attributing the status of foreign-born
to people when the variable is equal to 2 or 3. In 1960, the variable is not available and the selection is done
using the variable BPLD (birthplace, detailed) and by attributing the status of foreign-born to all of those for
which BPLD15000, except for the codes 90011 and 90021 which indicate U.S. citizens born abroad.
Weeks Worked in a Year: For the censuses 1960 and 1970 the variable used to define weeks worked in
the last year is WKSWORK2, which defines weeks worked in intervals. We choose the median value for each
interval so that we impute to individuals weeks worked in the previous year according to the following criteria:
6.5 weeks if wkswork2=1; 20 weeks if wkswork2=2; 33 weeks if wkswork2=3; 43.5 weeks if wkswork2=4; 48.5
weeks if wkswork2=5; 51 weeks if wkswork2==6. For the censuses 1980, 1990, 2000 and ACS we use the variable
wkswork1 which records the exact number of weeks worked last year.
Hours Worked in a Week: For census years 1960 and 1970 the variable used is HRSWORK2 which
measures the hours worked during the last week, using intervals. We attribute to each interval its median value
and measure the number of hours per week worked by an individual according to the following criteria: 7.5
hours if hrswork2=1; 22 hours if hrswork2=2; 32 hours if hrswork2=3; 37 hours if hrswork2=4; 40 hours if
hrswork2=5; 44.5 hours if hrswork2=6; 54 hours if hrswork2=7; 70 hours if hrswork2==8. For the censuses
1980, 1990, 2000 and ACS we use the variable UHRSWORK which records the exact number of hours worked
in a usual week by a person.
Hours Worked in a Year: This is the measure of labor supply by an individual and it is obtained by
multiplying Hours Worked in a Week by Weeks Worked in a Year, as defined above.
Yearly Wages: The yearly wage in constant 1999 US dollars is calculated as the variable INCWAGE
multiplied by the price deflator suggested in the IPUMS, which is the one below. Recall that each census and
ACS is relative to the previous year so the deflators below are those to be applied to years 1960, 1970, 1980,
and so on:
 

1959

1969

1979

1989

1999

2005

  5725 4540 2314 1344 1000 0853
Topcodes for Yearly Wages: Following an established procedure we multiply the topcodes for yearly
wages in 1960, 1970 and 1980 by 1.5.
Hourly Wages: The hourly wage for an individual is constructed by dividing the yearly wage as defined
above by the number of weeks worked in a year times the number of hours worked in a week.

24

B

Appendix: Construction of Physical Capital by State

In our construction of the state capital stocks we follow Garofalo and Yamarik (2002). This involved distributing
the national capital stock by industry and year, obtained from the BEA (2008b), to each state and industry
and year according to the percentage of value added for the state and industry and year in the national value
added for that industry and year, obtained from the BEA (2008a). In other words, following the notation of
the paper and denoting as  one industry, we constructed capital stocks for state  and industry  as :
∙

¸
 ()
 () =
 ()
 ()
We then summed over all industries , for each state , in year , to obtain a capital stock series by state and
year. Finally, we used as a price deflator the implicit capital deflator, obtained from the aggregate BEA data to
transform the capital stock series into real values. Furthermore, the value added data at the state level needed to
be generated for all years using a concordance, as described below. That concordance left us with 19 industries
that we use to attribute the capital stock. The industries are: Agriculture; Forestry; Fishing and Hunting; Mining; Utilities; Construction; Manufacturing; Wholesale Trade; Retail Trade; Transportation and Warehousing;
Information, Finance and Insurance; Real Estate and Rental and Leasing; Professional, Scientific, and Technical
Services; Management of Companies and Enterprises; Administrative and Waste Management Services; Educational Services; Health Care and Social Assistance; Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation; Accommodation and
Food Services; Other Services, except Government.
Constructing the NAICS97 to SIC87 Concordance
The first step in generating the capital stock by state was to generate a crosswalk, or concordance, from
NAICS97 to SIC87 using the Census Bureau’s crosswalks at http://www.census.gov/epcd/ec97brdg/index.html.
This step was necessary in order to extend the BEA’s value added by state data to pre-1997 dates. The bridge
from NAICS97 to SIC87 (NtoS) lists a NAICS code and then the corresponding SIC codes that go into it, and
then the establishments, sales, payroll and employees per that combination. The file does not, however, list the
percentage of the SIC category which should be attributed to the NAICS code, and since there may be more
than one NAICS code per SIC code, this information is needed. The HTML version on the website does list
this percentage, but it is unfortunately not in the electronic file. This percentage can be calculated using the
opposite bridge from SIC87 to NAICS97 (StoN). The StoN file contains the same variables as the NtoS file, but
maps all the NAICS that go into a given SIC. Also available are the totals of the 4 categories (sales, etc.) for
each SIC code, at diﬀerent digit levels (2-digit, 3-digit, etc.).
We delete everything in the StoN file except the SIC totals (we delete the SIC to NAICS mappings). We
then merge these to the NtoS file by SIC code, so that now the NtoS file has the mapping as before, but also

25

includes the totals for each SIC value next to each NAICS-sic pair. Then the percentage can be calculated for
each NAICS-sic combination by dividing the NAICS-SIC totals into the merged SIC totals.

Since what we

actually want is SIC2 to NAICS2, and the original mapping (NtoS) is actually SIC4 to NAICS6, before merging
the SIC4 totals into the NtoS file we trimmed the NAICS codes down to 2 digits, and then summed up over the
unique SIC4-NAICS2 combinations. We then trimmed the SIC4 values to SIC2, and summed over the unique
SIC2-NAICS2 values. Finally, we merged in the SIC2 totals from the StoN file and calculated the percentage
of each SIC2 that goes into each NAICS2.

26

Tables and Figures
Table 1:
OLS estimates of the impact of immigration on the components of Gross State Product growth
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Explanatory variable is
2SLS
estimates
basic
OLS
1970-2006
1960-2000
Including
immigration as percentage
using
Immigrant
Lagged
of initial employment;
Dependent Variable:

N̂

ŷ

1.64**
(0.50)
0.66**
(0.19)

 α  ˆ ˆ

( K − Y )
1− α 

-0.53**
(0.14)

Â

1.25**
(0.29)
0.12**
(0.02)
-0.16**
(0.03)

x̂
φˆ

hˆ
β̂
Observations

-0.76**
(0.13)
-0.69**
(0.08)
255

1.56**
1.61**
(0.51)
(0.53)
0.73**
0.69**
(0.18)
(0.22)
Components of ŷ
-0.54**
0.47**
(0.15)
(0.14)
1.32**
1.26**
(0.38)
(0.31)
0.13**
0.12**
(0.02)
(0.02)
-0.16**
-0.19**
(0.03)
(0.03)
Components of φˆ
-0.80**
-0.75**
(0.14)
(0.13)
-0.73**
-0.70**
(0.09)
(0.08)
204
204

Dependent
variable

Population Change as
instrument

1.36**
(0.57)
0.74**
(0.20)

1.75**
(0.58)
0.63**
(0.19)

-0.51**
(0.13)

-0.59**
(0.14)

1.26**
(0.27)
0.12**
(0.03)
-0.15**
(0.04)

1.26**
(0.28)
0.12**
(0.01)
-0.16**
(0.03)

-0.72**
(0.12)
-0.70**
(0.09)
204

-0.76**
(0.14)
-0.67**
(0.08)
255

Note: Each cell is the result of a separate regression. The explanatory variable is the net inflow of immigrant workers over an inter-census period as a percentage of
the initial employment. The units of observations are US states (plus DC) in each census year 1960-2000 plus 2006. Each regression includes time fixed effects. The
method of estimation is least squares with observations weighted by the employment of the state. Errors in parenthesis are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by
state. **=significant at the 5% confidence level. The calculated variables use the assumption that σ=1.75.

27

Table 2:
2SLS estimates of the impact of immigration on the components of Gross State Product growth
Instruments: imputed immigrants and distance from border/port of entry interacted with decade dummies
Explanatory variable is
immigration as percentage
of initial employment;

(1)
basic 2SLS

(2)
1970-2006

(3)
1960-2000

(4)
2SLS, including
lagged dependent
variable

(5)
Geography instrument
only

0.70*
(0.40)
0.51**
(0.23)

1.10**
(0.50)
0.37**
(0.14)

-0.45**
(0.09)

-0.40**
(0.10)

1.07**
(0.23)
0.11*
(0.03)
-0.24**
(0.03)

0.90**
(0.21)
0.07*
(0.02)
-0.21**
(0.03)

Dependent Variable:

N̂

ŷ

0.90**
(0.34)
0.47**
(0.17)

 α  ˆ ˆ

( K − Y )
1− α 

-0.47**
(0.09)

Â

1.06**
(0.24)
0.08**
(0.02)
-0.21**
(0.03)

x̂
φˆ

hˆ
β̂
First stage F-test
Observations

-1.08**
(0.08)
-0.85**
(0.12)
36.71
255

0.81**
0.87**
(0.34)
(0.34)
0.48**
0.47**
(0.21)
(0.21)
Components of ŷ
-0.47**
-0.44**
(0.10)
(0.10)
1.13**
1.05**
(0.24)
(0.26)
0.10**
0.07
(0.03)
(0.03)
-0.21**
-0.22**
(0.03)
(0.03)
ˆ
Components of φ
-1.13**
-1.06**
(0.08)
(0.08)
-0.93**
-0.85**
(0.13)
(0.12)
36.52
38.73
204
204

-1.09**
(0.09)
-0.57**
(0.13)
44.22
204

-1.11**
(0.13)
-0.84**
(0.13)
25.03
255

Note: Each cell is the result of a separate regression. The explanatory variable is the net inflow of immigrant workers over an inter-census period as a percentage of
the initial employment. The units of observations are US states (plus DC) in each census year 1960-2000 plus 2006. The method of estimation is 2SLS with imputed
immigrants and distance from border and from port of entry interacted with decade dummies as instruments. The errors in parenthesis are heteroskedasticity-robust
and clustered by state. The calculated variables use the assumption that σ=1.75.

28

Table 3:
Decomposing the impact of immigration on the capital-output ratio
Explanatory variable is
immigration as
percentage of initial
employment;

(1)
basic OLS
controlling for
initial ln(K/N)

(2)
OLS
1970-2006
controlling for
initial ln(Κ/Ν)

(3)
OLS
1960-2000
controlling
for initial
ln(Κ/Ν)

(4)
basic 2SLS
controlling for
initial ln(Κ/Ν)

(5)
2SLS
1970-2006
controlling for
initial ln(Κ/Ν)

(6)
2SLS
1960-2000
controlling for initial
ln(Κ/Ν)

1.38**
(028)
-0.09
(0.30)
-0.50**
(0.17)

1.31**
(0.28)
-0.11
(0.33)
-0.53**
(0.19)

1.92**
(0.31)
0.35
(0.34)
-0.39
(0.20)

1.01*
(0.37)
0.04
(0.36)
-0.41**
(0.13)

0.96**
(0.38)
0.01
(0.27)
-0.42**
(0.14)

1.46**
(0.37)
0.32
(0.28)
-0.32*
(0.17)

255

204

204

255

204

204

Dependent Variable:

K̂

Kˆ − Nˆ
 α  ˆ ˆ

( K − Y )
1− α 
Observations

Note: Each cell is the result of a separate regression. The explanatory variable is the net inflow of immigrant workers over an inter-census period as a percentage of
the initial employment. The units of observations are US states (plus DC) in each census year 1960-2000 plus 2006. The method of estimation is OLS in column 1 to
3 and 2SLS with imputed immigrants and distance from border interacted with decade dummies as instruments. Each regression includes time dummies as well as
the lagged value of (logarithmic) capital per worker in order to control for convergence. The Errors in parenthesis are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by state.

29

Table 4:
Analyzing the impact of immigration on Total Factor Productivity ( Â )

Dependent Variable: Â
Explanatory variables:
Immigrants as share of
employment
OLS
2SLS
2SLS
A constructed with σ=1.5
2SLS
A constructed with sigma=2
Explanatory variables:
Change in Employment due
to Immigration
Change in CommunicationManual specialization of
natives
Observations

(1)
Basic
(1960-2006)

1.35**
(0.30)
1.15**
(0.25)
1.46**
(0.38)
1.04**
(0.44)

(2)
Controlling for
R&D per worker
(1970-2000)

(3)
Controlling for
Computer
Adoption
(1970-2000)

(4)
Controlling for
Trade
(period 19802006)

1.42**
1.17**
1.89**
(0.37)
(0.39)
(0.32)
1.11**
0.72**
1.51**
(0.31)
(0.26)
(0.28)
1.43**
1.21**
1.67**
(0.35)
(0.29)
(0.33)
1.00**
0.56**
1.44**
(0.29)
(0.25)
(0.27)
Task specialization channel: dependent variable A

0.68*
(0.40)
1.20
(1.20)

0.55
(0.44)
1.40**
(0.70)

255

153

0.35
(0.38)
2.39**
(0.66)
153

1.07**
(0.48)
1.62
(1.21)
153

(5)
Controlling for wagegrowth depending on
initial sector
composition
(1960-2006)

1.18**
(0.27)
0.94**
(0.24)
1.26**
(0.29)
0.84**
(0.23)

0.43
(0.41)
1.38*
(0.72)
255

Note: Each cell in row 1 to 4 is the coefficient of the regression of Â on the change in employment due to immigrants, estimated including time fixed
effects. The baseline estimate (row 1) is OLS with TFP constructed using the assumption that σ=1.75.In the second row we use 2SLS with imputed
immigrants and border distance plus distance from New York and Los Angeles, interacted with decade dummies. In the third and fourth row the method
of estimation is 2SLS and total factor productivity is constructed under the assumption that σ, the elasticity of substitution between more and less
educated is 1.5 or 2. In the last two rows we report the coefficient of a regression of A simultaneously on the immigration rate and on the change in taskspecialization of natives. The units of observations are 50 US states plus DC in each census year between 1960 and 2000 plus 2006. The errors in
parenthesis are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by state.

30

Table 5:
Analyzing the impact of immigration on Skill-Bias ( βˆ )
Dependent Variable:

βˆ

Explanatory variables:
Immigrants as share of
employment
OLS
2SLS

βˆ constructed with
sigma=1.5

β̂ constructed with sigma=2

(1)
Basic

(2)
Controlling for
R&D per worker

(3)
Controlling for
Computer
Adoption

(4)
Controlling for
Trade

(5)
Controlling for initial
sector composition

-0.72**
(0.08)
-0.93**
(0.12)
-1.77*
(0.15)

-0.77**
(0.09)
-0.94**
(0.13)
-1.79**
(0.20)

-0.74**
(0.09)
-0.90**
(0.13)
-1.91**
(0.22)

-0.86**
(0.08)
-1.04**
(0.10)
-1.76**
(0.17)

-0.66**
(0.08)
-0.87**
(0.09)
-1.71**
(0.17)

-0.56**
(0.10)

-0.56**
(0.09)

-0.48**
(0.09)

-0.68**
(0.07)

-0.51*
(0.07)

Task specialization channel: dependent variable

Explanatory variables:
Change in Employment due
to Immigration
Change in CommunicationManual specialization of
natives
Observations

-0.87**
(0.15)
-0.21
(0.47)
255

-0.71**
(0.19)
-0.36
(0.48)

-0.78**
(0.13)
-0.27*
(0.37)

153

153

-1.11**
(0.19)
-0.25
(0.39)
153

β̂
-0.88*
(0.12)
-0.20
(0.46)
255

Note: Each cell in row 1 to 4 is the coefficient of the regression of βˆ on the change in employment due to immigrants, estimated including time fixed
effects. The baseline estimate (row 1) is OLS with TFP constructed using the assumption that σ=1.75.In the second row we use 2SLS with imputed
immigrants and border distance plus distance from New York and Los Angeles, interacted with decade dummies. In the third and fourth row the method
of estimation is 2SLS and total factor productivity is constructed under the assumption that σ, the elasticity of substitution between more and less
educated is 1.5 or 2. In the last two rows we report the coefficient of a regression of A simultaneously on the immigration rate and on the change in taskspecialization of natives. The units of observations are 50 US states plus DC in each census year between 1960 and 2000 plus 2006. The errors in
parenthesis are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by state.

31

Table 6:
Robustness check of the main effects

Explanatory variable is
immigration as
percentage of initial
employment;

(1)
Basic

(2)
Controlling for
convergence by
including
initial value

(3)
No border states
(CA,AZ, NM,
TX)

(4)
No largest
states (CA, NY,
TX)

(5)
1980-2006

(6)
Including region
dummies

0.90**
(0.34)
0.47**
(0.17)
1.03**
(0.24)
-0.85**
(0.11)
255

1.33
(0.88)
0.76**
(0.21)
1.20**
(0.24)
-0.43**
(0.09)
255

0.24
(1.35)
2.18**
(0.47)
2.58**
(0.71)
-1.36**
(0.30)
235

2.36**
(0.73)
2.09**
(0.51)
2.73**
(0.78)
-1.07**
(0.26)
240

0.79**
(0.34)
0.70**
(0.26)
2.51**
(1.15)
-1.07
(0.10)
153

0.60*
(0.32)
0.69**
(0.30)
0.96**
(0.42)
-1.07**
(0.10)
255

Dependent Variable:

N̂

ŷ

Â
β̂
Observations

Note: Each cell is the result of a separate regression. The explanatory variable is the net inflow of immigrant workers over an inter-census period as a percentage of
the initial employment. The units of observations are US states (plus DC) in each census year 1960-2000 plus 2006. The method of estimation is2SLS with imputed
immigrants and distance from border interacted with decade dummies as instruments. Each regression includes decade dummies. The Errors in parenthesis are
heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by state. The calculated variables use the assumption that σ=1.75.

32

Figure 1
Immigrant workers as % of Employment, U.S. States 2006

Note: Data are from the American Community Survey 2006.

]

33

11.5

Figure 2
Real GSP per worker in logarithmic scale
U.S. states, 1960-2006

AK

AK

CT
NY

11
10.5
10
9.5

CT
NY

WY

NV
MI
NY
WY
CT
NJ
IL
OH
CA
IN
WI
UT
KY
WV
MA
LA
NM
PA
WA
MN
MO
RI
IA
CO
TX
NC
MD
NE
OR
KS
AZ
VT
OK
NH
TN
VA
MT
FL
ID
ME
AL
HI
GA
AK
SD
ND
AR
SC
MS

1960

NY
MI
IL
OH
NV
CT
LA
NJ
WY
PA
MA
AK
IN
CA
WI
KY
MN
MO
WV
VA
IA
RI
WA
OR
TX
NC
NH
TN
NM
NE
HI
MD
FL
KS
AZ
ME
AL
CO
VT
GA
OK
AR
UT
MT
SC
ID
MS
SD
ND

1970

NY
CT
MA
NJ
WY
LA
NH
CA
IL
WV
MN
OH
RI
IA
NV
PA
MI
TX
HI
IN
WI
KY
MO
TN
VA
NC
ME
WA
VT
MD
AR
GA
CO
FL
OK
OR
KS
NE
AZ
ND
AL
UT
SC
SD
MS
NM
ID
MT

LA
ND
NY
RI
WV
CT
IL
IA
MA
MN
OH
KY
TX
MI
IN
NH
NJ
PA
WI
CA
NV
OK
MO
NM
NE
OR
MT
KS
WA
AR
CO
TN
HI
NC
UT
VA
GA
ID
VT
AL
AZ
FL
MD
MS
ME
SC
SD

1980

year

1990

ln(GSP/Worker)
US Average

34

MA
NJ
CA
IL
W
MIA
CO
AZ
MN
OH
VT
HI
MD
RI
GA
PA
FL
NV
NH
NC
TX
AK
UT
KS
MO
NE
OR
IN
SD
KY
W
TN
IA I
NM
LA
SC
ME
VA
AL
ID
W
Y
OK
AR
ND
MS
W
MTV

2000

MA
NJ
CA
IL
RI
VT
WA
HI
MD
CO
MI
MN
NV
SD
FL
NC
OH
IA
AK
NH
PA
AZ
NE
OR
TX
KS
WI
GA
TN
MO
IN
UT
LA
VA
ME
AL
ND
NM
SC
KY
WY
OK
ID
MT
AR
MS
WV

2010

14

Figure 3
Real capital per worker in logarithmic scale
U.S. states, 1960-2006

CT

13

CT

11

12

AK
ND
WY
NV
WY
NY
NM
CA
ND
IL
NJ
UT
NE
MN
WA
AZ
LA
WI
SD
MT
CO
HI
MO
IA
MA
AK
RI
OH
OK
CT
ID
KS
MI
FL
WV
PA
TX
OR
MD
IN
VT
KY
ME
AL
MS
AR
VA
TN
NH
NC
GA

WY
NY
NV
AK
HI
CA
LA
NM
IL
WA
NJ
FL
IA
VA
MN
MA
MI
AZ
MO
OH
PA
SD
MT
NE
OR
WI
MD
ND
TX
WV
CO
CT
RI
KS
IN
ID
NH
UT
VT
OK
KY
ME
AR
GA
NC
TN
AL
MS
SC

AK
WY
CT
NY
HI
NJ
CA
MA
NV
NH
LA
WV
IL
FL
MD
RI
TX
ND
MN
PA
VA
VT
IA
WA
AZ
CO
ME
OH
MI
NM
GA
OR
KS
MO
NE
MT
OK
WI
SD
AR
KY
UT
IN
ID
NC
TN
AL
MS
SC

HI
IA
LA
NY
MN
NV
WV
NM
CA
MT
NE
RI
SD
TX
MA
IL
NJ
CT
FL
CO
OK
OR
NH
WA
AZ
KS
WI
KY
PA
ID
MO
OH
UT
MI
AR
IN
MD
VT
VA
GA
TN
AL
MS
NC
ME
SC

NY
MA
IL
NE
IA
NJ
KS
MN
W
A
AZ
OH
I
PA
NH
RI
IN
MI
ME
MO
CO
CA
TX
MD
GA
TN
VA
FL
AK
UT
SD
VT
KY
LA
NC
OR
ND
AL
AR
HI
SC
MS
OK
NV
ID
W
V
NM
MT
WY

IA
NE
NY
MA
IL
MN
RI
WI
NJ
OH
MI
IN
PA
WA
NH
KS
MO
ME
CA
CO
MD
TX
VA
AZ
TN
AK
KY
ND
SD
LA
FL
AL
GA
OR
HI
NC
VT
UT
SC
NV
OK
MS
AR
ID
WV
MT
NM
WY

10

SC

1960

1970

1980

year

1990

ln(Capital/Worker)
Average US

35

2000

2010

MI
NV
CT
IN
OH
KY
NJ
NY
IL
WV
WI
WY
PA
CA
MA
LA
NC
UT
WA
RI
MO
MN
NM
MD
OR
TX
TN
AK
NH
VT
CO
IA
VA
KS
SC
ME
GA
AL
AZ
OK
NE
FL
MT
ID
AR
MS
HI

MI
NY
CT
AK
OH
IL
KY
NJ
PA
IN
LA
MA
NV
WI
CA
WV
RI
MO
NC
MN
WY
TN
OR
WA
VA
TX
AL
IA
SC
NH
ME
GA
MD
NM
KS
VT
AZ
AR
NE
CO
OK
FL
HI
MS
UT
MT
ID

AK

AK

WY

NY
CT
MA
LA
NJ
IL
CA
NH
OH
MN
MI
WV
WY
PA
RI
IN
KY
TN
TX
WI
IA
MO
NC
NV
VA
AR
WA
ME
GA
OK
OR
VT
AL
CO
UT
SC
KS
HI
MD
AZ
FL
NE
MS
ND
ID
NM
SD
MT

LA
RI
NY
CT
MA
WV
IL
KY
OH
MI
IN
PA
MN
NJ
IA
WI
ND
TX
NH
CA
MO
NV
OK
OR
TN
NC
NM
AR
KS
MT
WA
AL
NE
GA
VA
CO
MS
UT
VT
ID
SC
ME
AZ
MD
FL
HI

NY
CA
NJ
MA
MI
W
A
HI
CO
VT
CT
NV
NM
OR
AK
UT
IL
MD
NC
FL
GA
TX
AZ
SD
RI
KY
MN
OH
ID
PA
TN
SC
W
Y
NH
MO
LA
AL
IN
MT
OK
KS
AR
W
I
VA
MEV
MS
W
ND
NE
IA

NY
CA
NJ
VT
MA
HI
NV
CT
MD
NC
CO
WA
FL
OR
RI
NM
SD
IL
AK
MI
UT
GA
AZ
TX
MN
TN
WY
NH
PA
OH
LA
AL
ID
SC
KS
MO
MT
VA
AR
OK
KY
ND
WI
IN
ME
WV
MS
NE
IA

SD
SD
ND

1

1 .5

2

2 .5

3

Figure 4
Total Factor Productivity (A) in logarithmic scale
U.S. states, 1960-2006

SD
ND

1960

1970

1980

year

1990

ln(Total Factor Productivity)
Average US

36

2000

2010

1

Figure 5
Productivity skill-bias, β
U.S. states, 1960-2006

.2

.4

.6

.8

CO
CA
CT
UT
AZ
MA
MD
TX
NY
VT
HI
WA
MN
NJ
ND
IL
NM
AK
OR
FL
NH
NE
ID
OK
KS
MI
GA
RI
MO
MT
WY
VA
NC
LA
PA
TN
WI
AL
IA
NV
SD
OH
SC
ME
MS
KY
IN
AR

UT
CT
CO
OK
SD
MD
CA
KS
VT
NM
TX
NJ
ND
NY
MA
AZ
LA
WA
MN
MS
AK
FL
ID
WY
GA
NE
HI
IL
MT
NV
NC
OR
MO
SC
IA
MI
AL
AR
OH
PA
RI
TN
WI
WV
IN
KY
ME
VA
NH

1960

CA
NM
MD
ND
UT
CT
CO
NY
SD
TX
AZ
MA
NJ
VT
AK
KS
OK
HI
VA
MN
MT
OR
FL
WA
LA
GA
ID
IL
NE
NH
IA
MO
NV
MS
AL
TN
MI
NC
WI
WY
AR
KY
ME
SC
PA
OH
RI
IN
WV

1970

CA
CT
CO
MA
VT
MD
NJ
NY
UT
AK
AZ
TX
HI
WA
FL
MN
OK
NM
KS
ID
OR
RI
IL
GA
NH
VA
ND
MI
MS
MO
NE
AL
SD
NV
NC
MT
LA
TN
PA
SC
WI
ME
OH
IA
AR
WY
KY
IN
WV

1980

MA
CA
CO
CT
NJ
VT
MD
NY
W
A
IL
MN
UT
AZ
OR
TX
NM
FL
KS
NH
ND
AK
NE
HI
GA
MI
RI
ID
MT
NC
ME
SD
MO
OK
PA
VA
W
I
AL
IA
OH
W
SCY
TN
NV
LA
MS
IN
KY
AR
WV

CT
MA
CA
MD
NJ
NY
VT
MN
CO
WA
IL
KS
NH
UT
OR
TX
HI
MI
AZ
GA
NE
NC
NM
RI
FL
ND
MO
VA
PA
AK
WI
AL
MT
TN
ID
OH
SC
IA
OK
SD
ME
KY
IN
AR
MS
NV
LA
WY
WV

WV

year

1990

Productivity skill-bias, beta
US average

37

2000

2010

.8

Figure 5
Share of workers with some college education or more, h
U.S. states, 1960-2006

.2

.4

.6

CO
AK
UT
WA
CA
HI
ND
AZ
MA
MN
OR
CT
MD
NE
MT
IL
KS
NY
WY
VT
MI
NH
NJ
TX
ID
NM
OK
FL
SD
NV
IA
RI
VA
MO
WI
OH
GA
ME
AL
NC
LA
PA
MS
IN
SC
TN
KY
AR
WV

UT
CA
AK
CO
WA
NM
KS
OK
ID
OR
SD
WY
MN
NV
AZ
ND
MT
MA
NE
TX
NY
CT
MD
NJ
FL
IL
IA
MI
VT
OH
WI
MO
WV
IN
HI
LA
NH
VA
KY
PA
ME
MS
AL
AR
TN
GA
RI
NC
SC

1960

AK
UT
CA
CO
MT
WA
NM
OR
AZ
ND
SD
ID
VA
KS
WY
HI
MN
NV
OK
MD
MA
NY
TX
CT
IL
NH
NJ
FL
NE
IA
MO
VT
LA
MI
WI
ME
MS
GA
OH
AR
TN
AL
IN
KY
PA
RI
WV
NC
SC

1970

CA
CO
UT
AK
WA
HI
MA
OR
AZ
CT
MT
ID
MD
NY
MN
KS
VT
ND
NJ
OK
TX
VA
FL
IL
NH
NM
SD
WY
MI
NE
NV
IA
MO
WI
MS
GA
ME
LA
OH
AL
RI
PA
NC
TN
SC
KY
IN
AR
WV

1980

year

1990

CO
W
ND
A
MA
MN
UT
HI
MD
AK
OR
CT
NE
VT
KS
CA
IL
MT
NH
NJ
W
Y
NY
AZ
MI
ID
NM
SD
RI
FL
W
I
VA
IA
TX
ME
MO
OK
GA
NC
OH
AL
NV
PA
SC
IN
MS
TN
LA
KY
AR
WV

2000

share of highly educated in employment
Average US

38

MN
HI
MA
ND
WA
CO
MD
NE
CT
AK
NH
IL
KS
OR
VT
MI
NJ
MT
UT
VA
NY
RI
IA
WI
AZ
CA
SD
ID
MO
NC
ME
WY
FL
NM
GA
OH
PA
TX
OK
AL
SC
IN
TN
KY
MS
NV
AR
LA
WV

2010

Table Appendix
Table A1: Summary statistics: yearly growth in each decade, average across US states
60’s

70’s

80’s

90’s

2000-2006

Foreign Employment (as
percentage of total)

0.1%

0.3%

0.25%

0.5%

0.5%

Total Employment ( N̂ )

2.5%

3.2%

2.1%

2.5%

1%

ŷ )

1.9%

1.8%

1.3%

0.9%

1.8%

( Kˆ − Yˆ )

-0.3%

-0.3%

-1%

-0.9%

+0.4%

2.0%

0.6%

1.6%

1.4%

2.0%

Annual Growth Rate of:

Gross Product per Worker (
Capital-Output ratio

Total Factor Productivity
Hours per Worker

Â

-0.02%

1.2%

0.4%

0.3%

-0.04%

hˆ

2.1%

3.0%

2.8%

0.9%

0.02%

β̂

2.9%

2.6%

3.4%

0.9%

0.4%

x̂

Share of Highly Educated
Skill-bias of Technology

Note: The variables are constructed as described in the text. We are reporting the yearly growth rates (averaging across states and years of the decade) by decade for
each variable.

39

