NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE GRAVITY OF KNOWLEDGE
Wolfgang Keller
Stephen R. Yeaple
Working Paper 15509
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15509
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2009

An earlier version of this paper circulated under the title "Gravity in the Weightless Economy". We
thank four referees, Robert Mo¢ tt and Dirk Krueger as editors, and Nick Bloom, Gene Grossman,
Stefania Garetto, Gordon Hanson, Ann Harrison, Pete Klenow, Rod Ludema, Jim Markusen, Marc
Melitz, Ulrich Muller, Jim Rauch, Carol Shiue, Eric Verhoogen, Jonathan Vogel, Bill Zeile, as well
as seminar participants at the 2008 Philadelphia Fed Trade Conference, the 2009 NBER ITO conference,
the 2010 NBER ITI Summer Institute, Colorado, Columbia, Georgetown, George Washington, Hong
Kong, Hong Kong Science and Technology, LSE, Paris School of Economics, Stanford, UBC, and
Utrecht for useful comments. We also thank Gordon Hanson for providing us with data. The statistical
analysis of …rm-level data on U.S. multinational corporations reported in this study was conducted
at U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis under arrangements that maintained legal confidentiality requirements.
Views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bureau of Economic
Analysis, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Wolfgang Keller and Stephen R. Yeaple. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Gravity of Knowledge
Wolfgang Keller and Stephen R. Yeaple
NBER Working Paper No. 15509
November 2009, Revised April 2010, Revised February 2012
JEL No. F1,F2,O33
ABSTRACT
How large are spatial barriers to transferring knowledge? We analyze the international operations of
multinational firms to answer this fundamental question. In our model firms can transfer bits of knowledge
to their foreign affiliates in either embodied (traded intermediates) or disembodied form (direct communication).
Knowledge transfer costs interact with the knowledge intensity of production to determine the geographic
structure of multinationals' input sourcing as well as its competitiveness in foreign markets. The model
shows how data on observable trade costs and features of multinationals'global operations reveal the size
and nature of knowledge transfer costs. Our empirical analysis confirms the model's predictions using
firm-level data, quantifies the aggregate implications of the model for the structure of multinationals'
operations, and demonstrates that transfer costs shape the knowledge content of intra-firm trade flows.
Wolfgang Keller
Department of Economics
University of Colorado-Boulder
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
and NBER
Wolfgang.Keller@colorado.edu
Stephen R. Yeaple
Department of Economics
The Pennsylvania State University
520 Kern Building
University Park, PA 16802-3306
and NBER
sry3@psu.edu

1

Introduction

The development and di¤usion of knowledge is center stage in many …elds of economics.
Modern theories of growth and international trade, for instance, place little emphasis on
the accumulation of tangible factors such as capital and labor, focusing almost entirely on
access to knowledge. With the recent advances in communication technology, the access
to knowledge is greater than it has ever been, but just how mobile is knowledge? This is
a central question to much of economics that is addressed here.
The paper starts from the premise that knowledge moves over geographic space either
in embodied or disembodied form. When knowledge moves in embodied form the costs of
moving it can be measured as the cost of goods trade. The intangibility of disembodied
knowledge, however, makes its movements hard to observe, and the costs of moving this
knowledge are di¢ cult to assess. We shed new light on this issue by casting the question
in terms of the operations of multinational …rms. Multinationals account for much of the
world’s research and development (R&D), and they have an incentive to endow o¤shore
a¢ liates with their knowledge as e¢ ciently as possible–after all, knowledge transfer costs
raise overall costs and therefore reduce competitiveness.
Multinational a¢ liates, it turns out, sell less the further away they are from their home
country, akin to the gravity …nding in trade. Moreover, this gravity e¤ect is strongest for
high-R&D, or knowledge-intensive, goods. Our model focuses on the di¢ culties of communicating knowledge from one person to another versus the costs of moving knowledge
in goods. Knowledge can often not fully be codi…ed, and communicating knowledge is
prone to errors.1 The relatively high costs of knowledge-intensive production lead to both
lower a¢ liate sales and the …rm’s shifting its mix from disembodied (direct communication) towards embodied (trade) knowledge transfer. The paper tests and quanti…es a new
model of knowledge transfer ‡eshing this out.
In the model multinational …rms produce …nal goods composed of individual intermediate inputs which vary in the extent that their production requires non-codi…ed knowledge. Inputs highly dependent on non-codi…ed knowledge are called knowledge intensive.
Because not all knowledge can be codi…ed, o¤shore production calls for communication
between home country CEOs and a¢ liate managers. We assume that communication
is more costly the more knowledge-intensive inputs are, but these costs are invariant to
physical distance. Alternatively, the multinational can transfer knowledge by shipping
ready-to-go inputs embodying the knowledge. This entails no communication costs since
the input is produced near the expert at home, however shipping incurs trade costs that
1

Arrow (1969) views knowledge transfer costs mainly as communication costs between teacher and
student.

1

rise in geographic distance. The reason why multinational sales in knowledge-intensive
industries su¤er most strongly from gravity is that here disembodied knowledge transfer
costs are highest, and to avoid them means embodied knowledge transfer whose costs rise
in distance.
Two sharp, …rm-level predictions emerge from this analysis. First, the knowledge
intensity of production a¤ects the level of a¢ liate sales around the world. The competitiveness of a¢ liates, measured in terms of their sales, falls as trade costs rise, and
the e¤ect of trade costs is strongest for knowledge-intensive goods, precisely because it
is here that the scope for o¤shoring is most limited by costly disembodied knowledge
transfer. Second, the knowledge intensity of production a¤ects the composition of knowledge transfers that the multinational will employ. The a¢ liate’s cost share of imports
gives the relative importance of embodied knowledge transfer. It falls more slowly with
distance in knowledge-intensive industries than in less knowledge-intensive industries. As
trade costs increase, multinational a¢ liates substitute away from importing inputs but
their ability to do so is constrained by how high disembodied knowledge transfer costs
are. Therefore, trade costs have the weakest in‡uence on a¢ liate imports in relatively
knowledge-intensive industries.
These two predictions are tested using information on the sales and intermediate
goods trade of individual multinationals from the United States’ Bureau of Economic
Analysis. Confronting the model with this rich micro dataset, we …nd striking support for
both predictions using variation in multinational activity across industries and countries.
Consistent with the model, there is strong evidence that both the level of a¢ liate sales and
its imports are a¤ected by the ease to which knowledge can be transferred across space.
A quantitative analysis based on these micro estimates shows that both market size and
geography are central determinants of aggregate foreign direct investment (FDI). This is
in contrast to the benchmark model which largely ignores the geography dimension.
Moreover, the model predicts that as trade costs change relative to communication
costs, the nature of trade in terms of its knowledge intensity changes systematically.
Speci…cally, an increase in trade costs makes disembodied knowledge transfer more attractive so that the average knowledge intensity of inputs that continue to be traded
increases. Despite the large body of work on the factor service content of trade, this
is one of the few results on the knowledge content of trade that we are aware of. We
…nd strong supportive evidence for this prediction from the international trade of U.S.
multinational …rms.
This paper develops a new theory for the distribution of knowledge across countries,
the subject of much analysis in macroeconomics and growth (Lucas 1993, Aghion and
Howitt 1998, and Jones 2002). At the same time, our analysis provides a new framework
2

for explaining the labor market e¤ects of o¤shoring (Blinder 2006, Levy and Murnane
2005) in terms of the …rms’ ability to transfer knowledge abroad. The allocation of
activities within …rms and across geographic space speaks not only to international trade
(Antras, Garicano, and Rossi-Hansberg 2008) but also to regional economics (Krugman
1991) and industrial organization (Acemoglu, Aghion, Lelarge, van Reenen, and Zilibotti
2007), because the impact of …rm organization on economic structure and performance is
felt at all of these levels.
In international trade, frictions to economic activity in geographic space are commonly
called trade costs. Virtually always they are discussed in terms of gravity, the …nding
that the volume of trade is declining in distance (see Anderson and van Wincoop 2004).
While spatial frictions are important as well between regions within a country (Hillberry
and Hummels 2003, Glaeser and Kohlhase 2004), these frictions are not well understood.
Knowledge, as an intangible, seems ideally suited to overcoming spatial frictions, although
there appear to be limits to the transfer of knowledge. The productivity e¤ects of R&D are
declining in distance (Keller 2002), and recent work by Irrazabal, Moxnes, and Opramolla
(2010), Ramondo and Rodriguez-Clare (2010), and Arkolakis, Ramondo, Rodriguez-Clare,
and Yeaple (2011) is consistent with substantial knowledge transfer costs. We provide
unique insights on the nature of spatial frictions by matching a model of disembodied
versus embodied knowledge transfer to micro data on all key dimensions, testing, and
quantifying it.
This paper makes also progress in the literature on multinational …rms. First, we extend the canonical model in which …rms can transfer their knowledge without cost to their
a¢ liates (Helpman 1984, Markusen 1984).2 In particular, by generalizing the benchmark
model with heterogeneous …rms by Helpman, Melitz, and Yeaple (2004), our analysis recon…rms the importance of geography for aggregate FDI sales, an important issue that
cannot be handled by the benchmark model. Moreover, in addition to well-known in‡uences such as factor cost di¤erences (Hanson, Mataloni, and Slaughter 2005), we establish
knowledge transfer costs as a determinant of the vertical specialization within multinational …rms. Further, in our analysis the vertical specialization decision is determined
jointly with the multinational’s sales. This highlights the forces generating complementarity between trade and FDI when there is substitution at the activity level (Blonigen
2001). Finally, the analysis shows that the multinational …rms’trade-o¤ between disembodied and embodied knowledge transfer shapes the knowledge content of international
trade.
The remainder of the paper is as follows. The following section 2 introduces the
2

Antras, Garicano, and Rossi-Hansberg (2008) and Burstein and Monge-Naranjo (2009) have recently
analyzed knowledge embodied in people.

3

model and shows that knowledge intensity a¤ects both the level of o¤shoring as well
as the breakdown between the …rm’s production at home and abroad. Also we show
how the …rm’s choice on disembodied versus embodied knowledge transfer a¤ects the
knowledge intensity of trade across di¤erent trade partners. Moreover, section 2 derives
the estimating equations implied by the model. Our data on individual U.S. multinational
…rms is described in section 3. Section 4 provides evidence on the …rm-level predictions
of the model. Section 5 quanti…es and discusses the model’s implications for aggregate
multinational activity. In section 6 we examine the robustness of our micro econometric
results, while in section 7 evidence is presented on the knowledge content of trade along
the line of the model’s prediction. A number of concluding observations are o¤ered in
section 8.

2

Theory

We begin by introducing the main elements of our model. Any country has a large number
of …rms that can each produce a unique variety of a di¤erentiated …nal good. A given …rm
in the home country can sell its good to consumers abroad in one of two ways. First, the
good can be produced at home and exported. Second, the …rm can turn multinational,
which means setting up an a¢ liate in the foreign country, producing there, and selling
locally. By exporting, the …rm incurs trade costs that vary across countries, while if the
…rm serves the foreign market through a¢ liate sales it has to pay a …xed cost of opening
a plant and it faces the costs of transferring its knowledge: productivity abroad is lower
than at home.
Each di¤erentiated …nal good is produced from a range of intermediate goods and
services. The intermediate activities may include market research, R&D toward product
design, organization of shop ‡oor production, …nal assembly, marketing and advertising,
and legal services. The ease of knowledge transfer varies by activity. It is relatively di¢ cult, for example, to transfer R&D activities abroad because this technological knowhow
is highly non-codi…ed.
This set-up leads to an exports-versus-FDI trade-o¤ for the …rm at the level of assembly, and conditional on FDI, the …rm faces an exports-versus-FDI decision at the level of
each intermediate input. For a given foreign market, inputs with high knowledge transfer
costs will be produced at home and exported (embodied knowledge transfer), while inputs
with low transfer costs will be produced abroad (disembodied knowledge transfer). As
distance to the foreign market increases, the trade costs of exporting increase. Firms
equate trade and disembodied knowledge transfer costs at the margin, and a¢ liates located far from home have relatively high costs. Because higher costs reduce sales, a¢ liates
4

in relatively distant countries sell less than a¢ liates in more nearby countries (gravity).
In the remainder of this section, we …rst describe the model assumptions, followed by
the derivation of the structure of multinational activity that they yield, and we also discuss
an extension. We then move to the equations that will be estimated in the empirical work.
To improve exposition, all proofs are relegated to the Appendix.
Model Assumptions Consider a world populated by K countries indexed by k and
j. Country k is endowed with Lk units of labor, the only primary factor of production.
In each country, the representative consumer has preferences over I di¤erentiated goods
and one homogeneous good Y given by
U=

I
X
i=1

i

ln

Z

!i 2

q(! i )

1

d! i

i

1

+

1

I
X
i=1

i

!

ln Y;

(1)

where i is the expenditure share of good i, i is the set of available varieties of good i,
q(! i ) is the quantity of variety ! i , > 1 is the elasticity of substitution across varieties,
and Y is the quantity of the outside good consumed. Each country produces good Y
using a single unit of labor and so wages everywhere can be normalized to unity.3
In country k, there are Nki …rms in industry i that have the ability to produce a
unique variety using a variety-speci…c composite intermediate. Firms are heterogeneous
in terms of their productivity: Firm ! i with productivity '(! i ) requires 1='(! i ) units of
the composite intermediate to produce one unit of output. In industry i, the composite
intermediate is produced from a continuum of (…rm-speci…c) intermediates that vary in
their knowledge intensity:
Z 1
1
1
1
i
(zj i ) m(z) dz
M =
,
(2)
0

where m(z) is the quantity of an intermediate of knowledge intensity z, (zj i ) is the
cost share parameter of intermediate z in an industry with knowledge intensity i , and
1 is the elasticity of substitution across intermediates. It is assumed that in all
R1
industries 0 (zj i )dz = 1. We give meaning to di¤erent knowledge intensities across
industries by assuming that (zj i ) is log supermodular in z and i .4 Speci…cally, if
z 0 > z 00 and 1 > 2 , that is, industry 1 is more knowledge intensive than industry 2; then
0j 1)
(z 00 j 1 )
>
. Intuitively, a more knowledge-intensive
log supermodularity implies (z
2
0
(z j )
(z 00 j 2 )
industry is so because it requires relatively more knowledge-intensive intermediate inputs
than a less knowledge intensive industry.
3

Wage equalization is not crucial to what follows. Keller and Yeaple (2008) show that similar results
are obtained in a model where factor costs are lower in the South than in the North.
4
Costinot (2009) has employed these concepts recently.

5

Each …rm must decide whether and how to serve each of the world’s K markets. A
…rm in industry i that is located in country j can always assemble its variety in country
j and then export the …nished good to any country k, which requires iceberg-type trade
costs ijk 1. For j = k, ijk = 1, and for j 6= k, ijk > 1; 8i. Alternatively, this …rm may
assemble its …nal good in country k 6= j to serve the local market, which requires the …rm
to incur …xed cost fka . Once a …rm has decided where to assemble its …nal product to
serve country k, it must decide where to produce each intermediate input. If intermediate
z is produced in home country j, one unit of labor produces one unit of intermediate z. If
that intermediate is exported from country j to country k (embodied knowledge transfer),
it is subject to the iceberg-type trade cost ijk . Alternatively, the a¢ liate in country k can
produce that intermediate for itself (disembodied knowledge transfer). Local production of
an intermediate allows the …rm to avoid trade costs, but exposes the a¢ liate to e¢ ciency
losses that are increasing in the knowledge intensity of production. As in Arrow (1969)
this e¢ ciency loss stems from the lack of physical proximity between the inventors of the
technological knowledge (located in country j) and the users of this knowledge (located
in country k 6= j).5 This e¢ ciency loss takes the form of a increase in the local labor
requirement and is given by the function t(z), where t(0) = 1, t0 (z) > 0, and limz!1 t(z) >
i 6
jk .
In summary, trade costs vary across countries and industries while knowledge transfer
costs due to communication failure vary across inputs of di¤erent knowledge intensities
but not across foreign countries. Knowledge transfer costs are zero only when CEOs
and production managers can meet face-to-face. Note that while face-to-face contact will
clearly be the exception for day-to-day problem solving in a multinational–a …rm that is
spread over di¤erent countries–it might occur only rarely even for multi-plant operations
within a country. This is a point we will return to in the conclusions.
The geography of input sourcing The cost of obtaining input z of a foreign
assembly plant facing trade costs of is c(z) = minft(z); ijk g: The assumptions on the
function t(z) guarantee that there exists a marginal input

5

zb( ) = t 1 (

i
jk ).

(3)

Technological knowledge is di¢ cult to communicate because it is often not fully codi…ed (Polanyi
1966), and it is most easily transferred through face-to-face interaction because that allows immediate
feedback (see Koskinen and Vanharanta 2002).
6
In an earlier version of the paper, we provided explicit microfoundations for a speci…c functional
form with these properties. Speci…cally, more knowledge intensive intermediates required more tasks to
be completed and each task had a constant probability of failure due to imperfect communication.

6

such that inputs z < zb( ) are produced locally and inputs z > zb( ) are imported.7
This sourcing pattern combined with equation (2) implies that the cost of the composite
intermediate input to an a¢ liate facing trade cost with knowledge intensity of i is
CM ( ;

i

Z

)=

0

Letting "M C ( ;

i

zb( )

(zj i )t(z)1 dz +

MC

( ;

i

) = R zb(

)

0

1

zb( )

(zj i )dz

!11

:

(zj i )t(z)1

(4)

) with respect to trade costs, we have

R1

1

"

i

) be the elasticity of C M ( ;

1

Z

(zj i )dz
:
R1
i
dz + 1
(zj
)dz
zb( )

zb( )

(5)

This expression can be used to prove the following lemma.

Lemma 1 Let industry 1 be knowledge intensive relative to industry 2 ( 1 > 2 ). Then
the elasticity of marginal cost with respect to trade costs is greater in industry 1 than
industry 2, i.e. "M C ( ; 1 ) > "M C ( ; 2 ) > 0.
The marginal cost of production of an a¢ liate in the relatively knowledge intensive
industry is more sensitive to trade costs than of an a¢ liate in the less knowledge-intensive
industry because the former relies more heavily on imported inputs than the latter. To see
this, …rst note that Shephard’s lemma implies that the share of imported inputs M ( ; i )
in total costs T C( ; i ) is
( ;
The import cost share ( ;

i

i

)

M ( ; i)
= "M C ( ;
T C( ; i )

i

):

) varies across countries and industries as follows.

Proposition 1 ( import cost share) Let industry 1 be knowledge intensive relative to
industry 2 ( 1 > 2 ). (i) The import cost share is greater in industry 1 than industry
2 for any given level of , ( ( ; 1 ) > ( ; 2 )); (ii) the import cost share is declining in
trade cost in all industries; and (iii) the rate of decline in the import cost share is slower
in the more knowledge intensive industry (@ log ( ; 2 )=@ < @ log ( ; 1 )=@ < 0).
7

For ease of notation we omit the indices on

whenever possible.

7

The geography of a¢ liate sales Proposition 1 and Lemma 1 are important implications of the model: the a¢ liates of …rms in more knowledge intensive industries are
less able to substitute away from imported inputs as trade costs rise and so their marginal
costs are more sensitive to trade costs. Our data allow us to measure the import cost
share ( ; i ) directly, but data on a¢ liate marginal costs C M ( ; i ) do not exist. To infer
variation in marginal costs across countries, in the following we establish a link between
the marginal costs of a¢ liates and their host country sales.
The preferences (1) imply that demand in country k is
1

Bki (pik ('))

i

q (') =

1

(6)

;

where pik (') is the price of a variety in industry i charged in country k by a …rm with
productivity ', and Bki is the markup-adjusted demand level for industry i in country
k.8 The optimal pricing rule for a …rm facing the iso-elastic demand curve given by (6)
is to charge a constant mark-up over marginal cost of producing the …nal good, pik (') =
Cf ( ; i)
, where
1
'
(
C M ( ; i ) if country k is served via a local a¢ liate
i
f
C ( ; )=
;
if country k is served by exports from j
where C M ( ; i ) is given by equation (4).
For a …rm of productivity ' local a¢ liate sales are

Rki (';

;

i

)=

(

Bki '

1

CM ( ;
0

i

)

1

if B i ' 1 C M ( ;
otherwise

i 1

)

1

fka

:
(7)

According to equation (7), the sales of local a¢ liates are zero if the pro…ts of exporting
the …nal good exceed those of opening a local a¢ liate (the right hand side condition)
and positive otherwise. Conditional on opening an a¢ liate, sales are large when (a) the
foreign market is large (Bki ), (b) when the …rm is more productive (' 1 ), and (c) when
the cost of the composite intermediate is low (C M ( ; i )). An important implication of
equation (7) is that variation across countries in …xed costs (fka ) to open an a¢ liate only
a¤ect the likelihood that a …rm invests in a given foreign location, while it does not a¤ect
the volume of sales conditional on entry.
Let "R ( ; i ) be the elasticity of a¢ liate local sales revenue with respect to trade costs
. We have the following proposition concerning this elasticity:
8

This is Bki

1
1

i

Ek =

R

!i 2

i

pk (! i )1

d! i .

8

Proposition 2 (A¢ liate Sales) Conditional on opening an a¢ liate, (i) an increase in
trade costs is associated with lower a¢ liate sales ("R ( ; i ) < 0), and (ii) the elasticity
of these sales with respect to trade costs is larger in absolute value in more knowledge
intensive industries.
The intuition for the e¤ect of trade costs on the intensive margin (the volume of sales
conditional on entry) is straightforward: the marginal costs of …rms in more knowledge
intensive industries are rising faster in trade costs because they have less scope for substituting local production for imported intermediates and so their local sales are more
sensitive to trade costs as well.
Extension: Fixed Costs of Knowledge Transfer Recent quantitative models
of multinational production typically maintain tractability by assuming that knowledge
transfer costs take the form of variable, not …xed costs.9 This is also the case here, even
though it is worth noting that our framework allows already for …xed costs of a¢ liate
production (fka ), which are absent in much of the literature. Nevertheless, …xed costs may
be particularly relevant in the context of knowledge transfers. While a full treatment is
beyond the scope of this paper, the following extension captures what we think would be
their central implication in any model: …rms with large operations incur …xed costs of
knowledge transfers in order to lower their marginal costs, while small …rms do not.
Suppose that …rms may invest in information and communication technology (ICT) in
order to lower the e¢ ciency cost of knowledge transfer, but doing so requires incurring an
additional …xed cost F T . Having installed ICT, the e¢ ciency loss of remote production
falls from t(z) to t( z); 2 (0; 1) for all z and for all foreign locations. In this setting,
the following proposition holds.
Proposition 3 In each industry, there exists a threshold productivity '
b ICT such that
…rms with productivity ' > '
b ICT incur the …xed cost F T . Firms that incur the …xed cost
have lower import cost shares in all countries relative to other …rms in their industry.
Firms that reduce the e¢ ciency loss of disembodied technology transfer reduce their
reliance on imported intermediates and reduce their a¢ liates’marginal cost of production.
It is only pro…table to incur this …xed cost when aggregate a¢ liate sales will be large,
which will happen when the scale of a …rm’s foreign operations is large as will be the case
if it is very productive (high ').
9

Burstein and Monge-Naranjo (2009), McGrattan and Prescott (2010), Ramondo (2007), and Ramondo and Rodriguez Clare (2010).

9

In the empirical analysis that follows, we develop model speci…cations that capture
Propositions 1 and 2, which are driven by variable knowledge transfer costs. At the same
time, we will also allow for …xed costs of knowledge transfer as captured by Proposition
3.
Key model predictions to be tested The model has a number of implications for
multinational activity and trade. First, it predicts that the average knowledge intensity
of trade between countries is increasing in the distance between them (from equation (3)).
Further, the model has testable implications for multinational behavior at the …rm level
(Propositions 1, 2, and 3). The empirical analysis below will focus on the predictions
that are speci…c to our model, as opposed to the result that import cost shares and sales
are declining in trade costs, which could be simply due to cultural or taste di¤erences
increasing with distance from home. The main empirical implications for imports and
sales as a function of knowledge intensity, based on Propositions 1 and 2, are summarized
as follows.
Hypothesis 1: The percentage rate of decline of the share of inputs imported from the
i
i
home country in total costs (IMjk
=T Cjk
) as trade costs ( ijk ) increase is slower in
relatively knowledge-intensive industries (high i ).
Hypothesis 2 : Holding …xed the demand level, Bki , the percentage rate of the decrease
i
in a¢ liates’local revenues (Rjk
) as trade costs ( ijk ) increase is faster in more
knowledge-intensive industries (high i ).
In deriving these hypotheses, we have strived to keep the model simple and the set
of assumptions parsimonious. Central is the ability of …rms to choose between embodied knowledge transfer using imported inputs and the disembodied knowledge transfer
required for o¤shore production. First, we assume that a¢ liate import costs rise in distance while disembodied transfer costs do not, but all we need is that the disembodied
transfer costs rise at a slower rate than trade costs. Second, the knowledge intensity of
di¤erent activities matters because their technologies can be more or less codi…ed. We
assume that communication costs vary with the degree of codi…cation while trade costs do
not, although it is enough for our results if communication costs rise faster in knowledge
intensity than trade costs. These two, arguably mild, assumptions yield that a¢ liates
import the relatively knowledge intensive inputs so that the average knowledge intensity
of trade rises with distance. Finally, the assumption of log supermodularity, which here
simply means that knowledge intensive industries use more knowledge intensive intermediates in a precisely de…ned manner, allows the model to be connected to …rm-level data

10

so that Hypotheses 1 and 2 can be tested.10
Estimating Equations Based on this theory we now specify an econometric model
of the input sourcing and local sales behavior of U.S. multinational a¢ liates. Three
elements are critical. First, to test Hypotheses 1 and 2, the e¤ect of changes in trade
costs on both the …rm’s input sourcing and sales decisions must vary with knowledge
intensity. Second, in the presence of …xed costs of opening an a¢ liate it is important to
correct for potential selection of …rms across destinations. Third, the model must account
for local demand conditions and …rm productivity.
Intensive Margin We begin by specifying the a¢ liate’s reliance on inputs imported
from its home country conditional on owning an a¢ liate. The cost share of imported
inputs of an a¢ liate of …rm ! in industry i in country k at time t is given by
ln

i
M!kt
i
T C!kt

=

CS
!t

CS
1

+

+

CS
i
2 KIt

ln

i
k

+

CS
X

i
ln Xkt
+ "i!kt ;

(8)

i
where CS
!t is an …rm-year …xed e¤ect, KIt is our measure of knowledge intensity, and
i
11
k is an ad valorem measure of trade costs between the United States and country k.
i
Further, Xkt
is a vector of controls including important host country characteristics (such
as market size), and "i!kt is the error term.12
The model has the following predictions on the signs of the coe¢ cient estimates. First,
while in general an increase in trade costs is associated with the increased o¤shoring of
CS
i
production to the a¢ liate so that CS
1 + 2 KIt < 0, according to Hypothesis 1 this
e¤ect should be less pronounced in more knowledge intensive industries so that CS
2 > 0.
i
Our model of the local a¢ liate sales, ln R!kt , of …rm ! in industry i in country k at
time t is symmetric to (8) up to the coe¢ cients and so is given by

i
ln R!kt
=

R
!t

+

R
1

+

R
i
2 KIt

ln

i
k

+

R
X

i
+
ln Xkt

i
!kt :

(9)

The sales of a¢ liates in their host country should be decreasing in trade costs so that
R
R
i
1 + 2 KIt < 0, and according to Hypothesis 2 this e¤ect should be more pronounced
R
in knowledge intensive industries so that R
2 < 0. The prediction 2 < 0 is exactly the
opposite to the model’s prediction in the import cost share equation, where CS
2 > 0: The
fact that import and sales behavior are predicted to vary in qualitatively di¤erent ways
as trade costs change provides a powerful test of the theory.
10

For a formal treatment, see section B.1, where also a number of additional assumptions are discussed.
We have dropped the source country subscript j as it is always the United States in our data.
12
We do not include KIti by itself because since all …rms belong to a single industry the speci…cation
controls for industry-year …xed e¤ects.
11

11

We will estimate (8) and (9) through two methods. First the …rms’locational decisions
are taken as given and these equations are estimated via ordinary least squares (OLS).
We then adjust the econometric model to allow for locational decisions to be endogenous
and explicitly model the extensive margin. In the presence of …xed costs of opening a
foreign plant, …rms that face unusually large costs abroad relative to the cost of exporting
their …nal good or face unusually low demand abroad will not be observed in our data.
Therefore, all of the variables included in equations (8) and (9) also feature in the likelihood that an a¢ liate appears in our sample. Fortunately, theory also indicates that …xed
costs associated with opening a foreign plant will in‡uence the likelihood of observing an
a¢ liate without a¤ecting the level of activity conditional on being observed, see equation
(7). Thus, proxies of …xed costs at the country-level are appropriate exclusion restrictions.
We estimate the likelihood that an a¢ liate appears in our sample with a probit model.
In the two-step Heckman (1976) model this probit is estimated in conjunction with
variants of our import cost share and sales equations. The changes relative to equations
(8) and (9) are as follows. First, since selection is based on …rm characteristics, we want
to employ cross-…rm variation; consequently we replace the …rm-year …xed e¤ects with
industry and year …xed e¤ects. Second, we include parent domestic sales as a proxy for
…rm productivity. If …xed costs to disembodied knowledge transfer are important, we
would expect that …rm productivity enters with a negative sign in the import cost share
equation as more productive …rms sell enough units to justify the local …xed cost. In the
sales equation we expect to …nd a positive coe¢ cient on …rm productivity, indicating that
relatively productive …rms sell more than less productive …rms.
In addition to selection, there are a number of other important econometric and measurement issues. First, to address the potential endogeneity of knowledge intensity, KIti ,
we eskew …rm-level measures of knowledge intensity in favor of industry averages and control for …rm-…xed e¤ects where possible. Second, we show empirical results for a number
of plausible measures of knowledge intensity. Also a range of robustness checks with other
determinants of multinational activity will be conducted.
We now turn to describing the data set.

3

Data

Firm-level data of the international structure of U.S. multinationals’operations come from
the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) surveys of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad.13 A
13

U.S. direct investment abroad is de…ned as the direct or indirect ownership or control of a single U.S.
legal entity of at least ten percent of the voting securities of an incorporated foreign business enterprise
or the equivalent interest in an unincorporated foreign business enterprise.

12

U.S. multinational …rm is the combination of a single U.S. legal entity that has made
the direct investment, called the U.S. parent, and at least one foreign business enterprise,
called the foreign a¢ liate. As a result of con…dentiality assurances and penalties for noncompliance, the BEA believes that coverage in this survey is close to complete and the
level of accuracy is high.
We have linked the BEA data for each U.S. parent whose main-line-of-business is a
manufacturing industry to each of its majority-owned foreign a¢ liates for each of the
benchmark years 1994, 1999, and 2004. For each U.S. parent we observe the location
of all of their manufacturing a¢ liates, the value of the a¢ liates’imports of intermediate
inputs from the United States, and the value of a¢ liate sales to various destinations.14
A large share of the typical a¢ liate’s imports come from its U.S. parent …rm (intra-…rm
trade). These data are aggregated over each country-year pair to form a single …rmcountry-year observation for each of our main dependent variables: a¢ liate import cost
shares and local a¢ liate sales. In addition to local sales, we also present results on a¢ liate
sales to the U.S. and to third countries. Each observation is assigned to the parent …rm’s
industry.15 In our …nal sample, the activity of more than 1,000 U.S. multinationals and
3,000 a¢ liates is class…ed into 48 distinct industries.16
We also use the BEA data for …rm productivity and to construct our main measure
of knowledge intensity. Firm productivity is measured by the market share of the parent
…rm in the United States.17 For each parent …rm, we observe total R&D expenditures and
the parent …rm’s total sales by year. Aggregating over each industry for each year, we
construct the industry’s R&D intensity, the ratio of R&D expenditures to sales. We use
primarily R&D intensity as the variable measuring the unobserved knowledge intensity.
It is a plausible measure of knowledge intensity because the outcome of R&D is often tacit
information. Moreover, in industries with high R&D intensity production techniques are
subject to rapid change and frequent communication needs between managers in the home
country and the a¢ liate.
We also consider alternative measures of knowledge intensity. Several of these are
inspired by the recent literature on o¤shoring (Levy and Murnane 2005, Costinot, Oldenski, and Rauch 2009). According to this literature, o¤shoring of production activities
is relatively more di¢ cult in industries in which production activites are non-routine or
that require the exercise of judgment. We use the Occupational Information Network
14

Intermediate input imports in the BEA data are identi…ed as imports "for further processing". We
have also employed the broader measure of all a¢ liate imports, which gives similar results.
15
To do so we have concorded the later year NAICS-based categories into 1994 SIC-based categories.
16
In three food processing industries and one fabricated metal industry, there is virtually no trade
between parent and a¢ liate. These industries were dropped from the sample.
17
This is consistent with heterogeneous …rm models in the spirit of Melitz (2003).

13

(O*NET) data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics that ranks occupations by the extent
to which these occupations require (i) the extensive analysis of data, (ii) the processing
of information, or (iii) the exercise of judgement and the need for decision making. Aggregating over occupations using labor requirements by industry for the year 2004, we
construct alternative measures of the di¢ culty of o¤shoring activities by industry. We
also employ industry-level values of the share of computers in total capital as alternative
measures of knowledge intensity (source: Bureau of Labor Statistics).
The ad-valorem measure of trade costs is de…ned as
i
kt

i
;
= 1 + f cikt + tarif fkt

i
where f cikt is an ad-valorem measure of freight costs, and tarif fkt
is an ad-valorem measure of tari¤s, both at the industry-country-year level. Freight costs, f cikt , are constructed
from trade values including cost, insurance, freight (c.i.f.) to values that do not include this (free on board, or f.o.b. values) in the Feenstra, Romalis, and Schott (2002)
dataset following the methodology of Hanson, Mataloni, and Slaughter (2005).18 The
i
tari¤ measure, tarif fkt
is calculated from …gures in the United Nations’ Trade Analysis and Information System (TRAINS) dataset and extracted with the World Integrated
Trade Solutions (WITS) software of the World Bank, where we use the same method of
computing industry-level values as employed to construct freight costs.
We now turn to a number of other variables. According to the model the size of foreign
demand determines the scale of foreign operations and so directly a¤ects the volume of
local sales and indirectly can a¤ect the import cost share. Therefore, we include GDP and
the size of the host country’s population, which are taken from the Penn World Tables.
Other controls are motivated by determinants of FDI that are outside our model. To
allow for comparative advantage to a¤ect the structure of a¢ liate operations, we control
for factor price di¤erences across countries by interacting a country’s skill abundance
with an industry’s skill intensity and a capital abundance with capital intenity. Our
measure of skill abundance is human capital per worker, and the analogous measure of
capital abundance is capital per worker (source: Hall and Jones 1999). We also consider
comparative advantage based on institutional quality as proposed by Nunn (2007), which
is also the source of our skill and capital intensity variables.
We employ a number of variables that are directly related to international transactions
costs: an indicator variable for common language between the host country and the U.S.,
18

From U.S. import data disaggregated by country-industry-year, the freight cost is computed as the
ratio of freight and insurance charges to the customs value of imports. The resulting …gures are then
aggregated to BEA industry classi…cations using U.S. exports to that country as weights. Note that these
proxy trade costs are based on the industry of …nal production itself, not on information on the trade
costs of intermediate inputs; the latter is not available.

14

from Hanson, Mataloni, and Slaughter (2005), and the costs of making a phone call,
from the World Competitiveness Yearbook (1999). Moreover, some research suggests
that multinationals may engage in transfer pricing by altering the value of within-…rm
transactions to reduce their global tax burden. We address this by including the host
country’s maximum marginal corporate tax rate (source: University of Michigan World
Tax Database).
A major strand of work views multinational …rms as vehicles that internalize (within
the …rm) relationships where contracting on the transfer of technological knowledge is crucial (Ethier 1986). We expect that countries in which intellectual property rights (IPRs)
are strongly enforced will be those in which relationships between independent …rms are
more prevalent. In contrast, countries with weak IPRs may require more frequently the
in-house, that is, multinational, mode of organization. To make sure that our results are
not principally driven by make-versus-buy decisions related to a country’s IPR regime,
we control for the quality of country’s IPR regime using data from Park (2008).
Recent work has also emphasized that the quality of a country’s legal institutions will
a¤ect the boundary of the …rm in the presence of contract incompleteness, especially for
knowledge-intensive goods. While our analysis is consistent with both FDI and foreign
outsourcing, we want to be certain that our …ndings are not primarily due to factors that
determine the make-versus-buy decision. We include therefore as another variable the
quality of the judicial system of a country; this has recently been emphasized by Nunn
(2007), which is also the source of our data.
In the sample selection speci…cations we proxy for country-level …xed costs using two
measures. First, the di¢ culty of entry due to barriers is captured through World Bank
data from the World Development Indicators database. We use as exclusion restrictions
the Costs of Starting a Business and a country’s Foreign Market Potential, de…ned as
the distance-weighted size of a country’s surrounding markets. As our dependent variable
is solely related either to domestic demand (local a¢ liate sales) or trade frictions with
the United States (import cost share) it is not directly determined by the proximity of
a country to other potential markets. Yet, in a model that allowed for a¢ liates to serve
not only the local but also third-country markets the proximity of other large markets
would motivate an additional in‡ow of FDI. This motivates the use of Foreign Market
Potential as an exclusion variable (source: CEPII Market Potentials Database). In our
analysis of the knowledge intensity of trade we employ the U.S. Census Bureau’s data
base on related party trade, while disaggregated data on R&D and sales, as well as the
relationship between …rm size and …rm rank is obtained from the COMPUSTAT database.
Major features of our data are as follows.19 About 56% of all a¢ liate sales are going
19

Full summary statistics are shown in Table A of the Web Appendix.

15

to the local market, while about 17% of total a¢ liate sales are to the United States, and
the remaining 27% are sales to third countries. If one takes the share of sales that are
destined for the United States as an indicator of factor-cost driven FDI, sometimes called
vertical FDI, the implication is that U.S. outward FDI is predominantly motivated by
non-factor cost motives–such as market access.20 The knowledge intensity of an industry
is measured by R&D over sales, with a sample mean of 4.5%, while the mean trade costs
are about 14%. Finally, the average import cost share is about 5%, with a one standard
deviation above the mean of 37%. This means that while many a¢ liates do not import
large amounts of goods from their parents, imported intermediates play a major role for
some a¢ liates. Of course, the literature has long considered the transfer of knowledge,
not goods, as key to the theory of multinationals (Markusen 2002, Ch. 1). By examining
goods and knowledge ‡ows within the same framework, we provide a synthesis view.
The following section presents the empirical results.

4

Empirical Results

We begin the presentation of the results by providing evidence on the a¢ liate’s import
cost share and a¢ liate sales, equations (8) and (9), taking the location of a¢ liates as
given. The estimation method is OLS, which has the bene…ts that the results are easily
interpreted and that we can rely on variation across a¢ liates of a given multinational …rm
and a given year. Next, we estimate the full model by accounting for the location decision
of multinationals, where the sales and import cost equations are estimated jointly with
a selection equation determining entry in a particular foreign market. As we will show
there is strong evidence in support of the model.
Table 1a shows the results for the intensive margin of multinational activity. In this and
the following tables, evidence on the import share and sales of the a¢ liate are presented
side by side in order to highlight the di¤erential impact of knowledge intensity on these
two aspects of multinational activity. In column 1 we include only trade costs, T C, and
the trade cost-knowledge intensity interaction (T C KI), in addition to …rm-year …xed
e¤ects. The linear trade cost e¤ect is negative while the T C KI coe¢ cient is positive.
A less pronounced decline of the import share with trade costs for knowledge intensive
industries is expected from the model, because communication problems in knowledge
intensive industries limit the substitution of FDI for trade.
20

Among the a¢ liate sales to the U.S., the great majority go to the parent company. This is consistent
with the idea that the a¢ liate primarily adds unskilled-labor intensive stages before the intermediate
product is sent back to the parent. In contrast, local sales are predominantly to una¢ liated parties, and
third-country sales are split between a¢ liated and una¢ liated parties.

16

A number of country variables that may also a¤ect the a¢ liates’import cost shares
are added in column 2. While the host country’s population and its GDP are not signi…cant, the host country’s maximal corporate tax rate has a positive sign. This is consistent
with a role for transfer pricing, where multinationals overcharge the value of shipments
to a¢ liates if these are located in high-tax countries. Skill endowment and capital endowment variables have no signi…cant relation with the import share, however a high IPR
index is associated with lower imports. As long as a¢ liate production leads to stronger
technological learning for …rms in the host country than exporting from home (Keller and
Yeaple 2009), high levels of IPR protection will make multinational …rms less reluctant
to move sensitive production processes abroad because it is associated with less leakage
of technological knowledge. Further, high judicial quality in the host country favors local
production over imports from the home country. To the extent that local production
involves outsourcing to independent suppliers while imports are primarily within …rm,
this is in line with recent work based on the property rights approach of the …rm (Antras
2003).
Communication problems are central to our analysis of international knowledge transfer, and we include two direct measures of communication costs in the speci…cation shown
in column 2. A¢ liate imports are relatively high both in English-speaking host countries
and in countries that are expensive-to-call. To the extent that o¤shore production requires
advice via frequent telephone conversations, the latter is consistent with our emphasis on
communication costs. One might also expect that better communication through a common language leads to lower imports, however, we …nd the opposite. Importantly, the
inclusion of these variables does not change the …nding that a¢ liate imports are less sensitive to trade costs in knowledge-intensive industries (Hypothesis 1), even though the
coe¢ cient on T C KI falls somewhat with the inclusion of the variables.
As we have shown above, di¤erences across …rms will a¤ect their location behavior. In
the empirical analysis below, these …rm di¤erences will be modeled and not di¤erenced out
through …rm …xed e¤ects. It is thus useful to see how the results of Table 1a change as we
replace …rm …xed e¤ects with industry …xed e¤ects, and add a …rm-level variable, parent
sales, as proxy for …rm productivity. Column 3 shows that the results are quite similar.
Moreover, the more productive …rms tend to have relatively low import shares. This is
consistent with …xed costs of knowledge transfer, as shown in Proposition 3 above.21
The results for local a¢ liate sales are shown on the right side of Table 1a. Sales are
declining in trade costs from the United States, and this e¤ect is particularly strong in
knowledge intensive industries (column 4). The latter …nding con…rms Hypothesis 2 of
the model. Adding country variables does not change this result, even though the e¤ect
21

This …nding is not only due to di¤erences in a¢ liate age, see Table G in the Web Appendix.

17

become somewhat less pronounced (column 5). A¢ liate sales are larger in countries with
high GDP, because the potential for sales is higher in these markets. The …nding that
high IPR leads to low imports and to high a¢ liate sales suggests that with strong IPR
regimes multinationals are willing to move more technological knowledge. Moreover, sales
are falling in the host countries’judicial quality and its skill endowment, in part perhaps
because such countries have the same comparative advantage as the United States.
In column 6 we show sales results with industry- instead of …rm …xed e¤ects. While
most results are similar, in particular the coe¢ cient on T C KI, there are some di¤erences. The linear trade cost coe¢ cient is not signi…cant anymore, and moreover, neither
judicial quality nor the host country’s skill endowment a¤ect a¢ liate sales anymore. The
coe¢ cient on parent sales is positive and less than one. This suggests that relatively productive …rms sell more also through their foreign a¢ liates, although home productivity
advantages translate abroad less than one for one.
So far our empirical analysis has exploited variation across industries with di¤erent
knowledge intensity as well as variation across di¤erent host countries, and one might
wonder to what extent the results are driven by either dimension. One way to explore this
is to introduce country …xed e¤ects in the regression, as commonly done in the gravity
of trade literature. Moreover, one might be concerned with the fact that T C is the
only country variable interacted with knowledge intensity, the key industry characteristic,
because the T C KI variable might simply capture variation that is due to an omitted
variable. In the following Table 1b, therefore, we explore these concerns.
The import cost share speci…cation in column 1 of Table 1b is the same as column 3 of
Table 1a except that country …xed e¤ects have been included. We see that country …xed
e¤ects matter, for example in that the R2 rises and the size of the linear T C coe¢ cient is
lower, however the estimate for the T C KI interaction is quite similar to before. Further,
it may be that IP R protection plays a particularly important role for knowledge-intensive
industries for internalization reasons. We therefore include the IP R KI interaction
while at the same time dropping the country …xed e¤ects (column 2 of Table 1b); the
IP R KI variable turns out to be not signi…cant. In column 3 we include two additional
knowledge-intensity interactions, with skill endowment and with judicial quality, while
in column 4 also country …xed e¤ects are included as well. In either speci…cation the
coe¢ cient estimate for the T C KI variable is positive, consistent with Hypothesis 1,
and quantitatively similar.
We perform the same steps for the a¢ liate sales equation in the four columns of Table
1b on the right, and here the outcome is somewhat di¤erent. While the inclusion of country
…xed e¤ects by themselves does not impact the estimate on the trade cost-knowledge
intensity (T C KI) variable by much (column 5), if on top of that all three additional
18

knowledge-intensity interaction variables are included the coe¢ cient on T C KI falls
to around -13 and is only marginally signi…cant (column 8). However, this seems to
be due in large part to the high correlation of the skill-, judicial quality-, and IP Rknowledge intensity interactions, which all enter signi…cantly if added jointly (column 7)
even though this is not the case if they are added one at a time. For example, in the
speci…cation underlying column 6 the IP R KI coe¢ cient is estimated to be negative
(and insigni…cant) whereas upon the inclusion of further knowledge-intensity interactions
it turns positive and signi…cant, see column 7. This suggests that including a large
number of knowledge-intensity interactions generates a speci…cation error that makes
the results unreliable. Overall, we conclude from this analysis that the …ndings are not
primarily driven by cross-industry variation and omitted alternative knowledge intensity
interactions. In section 6 below we will perform further robustness analyses.
Multinational A¢ liate Entry and Activity In the following we treat the entry
decision of the multinational …rm in a particular foreign market jointly with the decisions
of how much to sell and which fraction to import from the home country. Our analysis
employs Heckman’s (1976) well-known two-step approach to analyze the extensive margin
of multinational operation. In the …rst step, we run a probit to estimate the probability of
the presence of a given multinational …rm in a given host country. From this we obtain the
Mills ratio, which addresses the sample selection problem under the assumptions made in
Heckman (1976).22
The results are presented in Table 2. The …rst three columns are for the import
cost share as the dependent variable, while the last three are for sales. Each column
presents results for a speci…cation with a di¤erent set of exclusion variables in the selection
equation, shown in the lower part of Table 2. In all speci…cations and in both step one
and step two, the full list of country variables of Table 1a is included. While we present
some on the …rst and more detail on the second step of the estimation, not all coe¢ cients
are reported to save space.
Consider …rst column 1 of Table 2. The number of observations now is 45,121, the
sum of cases where a¢ liate activity is actually observed and where the …rm did end up
not opening an a¢ liate in this particular country. The exclusion variable in column 1 is
the World Bank’s Cost of Starting a Business. Because these …xed costs are independent
of the volume of imports and sales, this measure can plausibly serve as an exclusion
restriction. The Costs of Starting a Business enters with a negative sign, consistent with
22

To address sample selection with Heckman’s (1976) approach we have to make strong parametric
assumptions, including joint normality, and our analysis of sample selection is speci…c to those. This is
the reason why we report the less restrictive OLS results for the intensive margin.

19

the hypothesis that host countries in which there are higher …xed costs of starting a
business are less likely to attract multinational a¢ liates. Also the signi…cant Mills ratio
indicates that selection is an issue.
Countries with larger population are more likely to have inward FDI, a …nding consistent with …xed costs of FDI. In addition, …rms with larger parent sales are more likely
to open an a¢ liate abroad. This is in line with our model and it con…rms the well-known
result that FDI entry is driven in part by high …rm productivity.
What is the key impact of selection in terms of knowledge transfer and the gravity of
multinational sales? Comparing column 1 of Table 2 with column 3 of Table 1a, in the
Heckman speci…cation trade costs have smaller impact on reducing the import cost share
than according to the least squares speci…cation (coe¢ cient on T C of 1:7 versus 3:7).
Primarily, this appears to be due to a¢ liates that operate at high distances from the U.S.
which tend to have low import cost shares, and the main way this is captured by the least
squares estimator is a high (in absolute terms) elasticity of imports with trade costs.
Once selection is accounted for it appears that …rms that operate in high-T C locations
tend to be high productivity …rms. In the Heckman results the coe¢ cient on parent sales
in the second stage is much higher (in absolute terms) than in the least-squares regression
( 0:37; versus 0:05). Accounting for the selection of …rms at high versus low values of
trade costs may therefore explain why the coe¢ cient on T C moves closer to zero.
While this shows that selection has an important e¤ect on the trade cost elasticity of
the a¢ liates import cost share, the impact on the degree to which the trade cost elasticity
varies with knowledge intensity is much smaller: the coe¢ cient on T C KI changes only
from about 24 to about 20 (see Table 1a, column 3, and Table 2, column 1). The evidence
in favor of Hypothesis 1 thus far is, according to these Heckman results, not driven by
the extensive margin decision of …rms.
This result is robust to employing di¤erent exclusion variables. In column 2 we employ the foreign market potential (FMP) of the host country, computed as the distanceweighted size of the market, excluding the host market itself. A high FMP raises the
probability that a U.S. …rm opens an a¢ liate in that country (coe¢ cient of about 0.23).
There is less evidence for sample selection than before, with the Mills ratio insigni…cant.
This may have to do with changes in the sample size. At the same time, the trade costknowledge intensity interaction variable T C KI is positive and its magnitude is similar
to before.
In column 3 both Costs of Starting a Business and FMP are employed as exclusion
variables. They both come in with the expected sign, and the Mills ratio is signi…cant.
In the second-step the import cost share is declining in trade costs, and this e¤ect is less
strong in knowledge-intensive industries. This result con…rms earlier evidence in favor of
20

Hypothesis 1.
Turning to the second hypothesis, Table 2 on the right side shows the in‡uence of
knowledge intensity on the gravity of U.S. a¢ liates’sales. Because the selection equations
for the import cost shares and sales di¤er only in terms of the number of uncensored
observations (see Table 2, bottom), the estimated coe¢ cients are similar.23 The Mills
ratio is now positive. This is what one expects if some unobserved determinant of opening
an a¢ liate in a particular country, such as …rm productivity, at the same time leads to
higher a¢ liate sales.
How does accounting for sample selection a¤ect the sales results? First, compared to
the earlier results of Table 1a, column 6, sales are falling now stronger (and signi…cantly,
at standard levels) with trade costs, with the coe¢ cient on T C moving from around -0.2
to -0.8 in Table 3. Second, the impact of productivity on a¢ liate sales becomes somewhat
stronger than before. Taken together, accounting for sample selection means lower sales
in distant locations, especially if the …rm has relatively low productivity. The …ndings
regarding Hypothesis 2 are unchanged: gravity in sales is particularly strong in industries
where knowledge is di¢ cult to transfer. We estimate coe¢ cients on the T C KI variable
of about -18, versus -16 in the comparable least-squares speci…cation. We conclude that
the support for our model’s Hypotheses 1 and 2 is not due to selection generating the
particular sample for which we observe FDI.24
It turns out that the previous results for the trade cost-knowledge intensity variable are
largely unchanged in a number of robustness checks discussed in Section 6. We therefore
now turn to discussing the economic magnitudes implied by our estimates.

5

Economic Magnitudes

In this section, we use the model together with the econometric estimates to quantify
the economic impact of disembodied knowledge transfer costs. First, we parameterize the
cost function by using the econometric estimates and calculate the implied e¤ect of the
disembodied knowledge transfer frictions on a¢ liates’marginal costs. This should shed
light on the puzzling reports of plants overseas being less productive than home plants
of the same …rm even though to the casual observer the plants appear to be identical.
Second, building on the a¢ liate cost estimates we further parameterize the model to assess
how important disembodied knowledge transfer costs are in explaining aggregate sales of
23

There is a subtle di¤erence in the interpretation of the …rst step: in the import speci…cations, the
a¢ liate is present and has positive imports, while for sales, it is that the a¢ liate is present.
24
We have explored whether these Heckman results change appreciably with the inclusion of additional
knowledge intensity interactions; as shown in Table C of the Web Appendix, this is not the case.

21

multinational a¢ liates.
A¢ liate Marginal Cost To operationalize the cost equation (4), we assume that
the elasticity of substitution across intermediate inputs is equal to unity, that the knowledge transfer cost function is given by t(z) = exp( z), and that the cost share function
(zj i ) is exponential with parameter 1= i . This implies that
ln

i
Mjk
=
i
T Cjk

1
i

ln

i
k:

i
By further assuming that 1= i = 0
1 KI we arrive at a reduced form that is exactly
consistent with our estimating equation. Using the coe¢ cient estimates from column 1
of Table 1a and evaluating the expression at the average knowledge intensity, we obtain
1=
= 2:794 36:089 0:042 = 1:278:25 As we are working with industry averages,
industry indices are henceforth dropped.
With this parameterization, the marginal cost of obtaining the composite intermediate
for the average a¢ liate is
1

C M ( k ; ) = exp

1

k

:

(10)

Aggregating trade costs using export weights to obtain country-level average trade costs
( k ) and using the estimate of 1= , we can compute the marginal cost of a given a¢ liate
relative to the marginal cost of a plant in the United States.
The results on average for certain groups of countries are shown in Table 3a. In column
1 the (relative) cost of a plant in the U.S. are shown; it is equal to one irrespective of
the destination of …nal sales. Trade frictions induce variation in the costs of serving
foreign markets through exporting and embodied technology transfer, see column 2. The
multinational a¢ liate’s average costs inclusive of disembodied knowledge transfer costs,
C M ( k ; ), is shown in column 3, while the a¢ liate’s average costs under the assumption
that countries were to reduce their tari¤s by 50% are shown in column 4.
The last row of Table 3a indicates that, across all countries, the average a¢ liate’s
marginal cost of production is 9 percent higher than that of a U.S. plant while the marginal
cost of exporting is 10 percent higher.These estimates indicate that the endogenous choice
between disembodied and embodied knowledge transfer–both of which entail costs–ties
the costs of a¢ liate operation to that of shipping from home, and the marginal cost savings
obtained by opening a local a¢ liate are smaller than in the standard trade-versus-FDI
25

The Table 1a, column 1 estimates are preferred to make this calculation because without other
variables the coe¢ cients have a structural interpretation in terms of the model.

22

framework. Were host countries to embark on a 50% tari¤ liberalization, the average e¤ect
would be to lower the a¢ liate cost disadvantage relative to a U.S. plant by 22 percent
(column 4). At the other extreme, if trade in intermediate inputs would be banned ( k
approaches 1) so that …rms could only rely on disembodied knowledge transfer, the cost
of the average a¢ liate would rise to 119 percent above that of a U.S. plant.
Gravity and Knowledge Transfer We now assess the ability of the mechanism
in the model to explain aggregate a¢ liate sales. To do this, we further parameterize the
model. First, we assume that the distribution of productivities over the mass of …rms is
distributed Pareto, G(') = 1 ' . We show in the Web Appendix that the aggregate
a¢ liate sales made by home country …rms in country k is then given by
Rk =

1
N ( )1
+1
h

C M ( k ; )1

h

Bki

1

i

C M ( k ; )1

h

(fka )1
1
k

1

i
1

(11)
1

i

This expression shows that aggregate sales can be decomposed into three components
isolated in equation (11) by square brackets. The …rst captures di¤erences across countries
in the level of demand, Bk , facing a typical U.S. …rm. The second is di¤erences across
countries in the size of the …xed cost, fka , of openning an a¢ liate. The last bracketed term
captures the direct impact of trade costs on aggregate a¢ liate sales to investing abroad
in the presence of embodied and disembodied knowledge transfer costs.
It is useful to compare this expression with that for the standard proximity bene…t
model of multinational production, Helpman, Melitz, and Yeaple (2004; HMY), which
our analysis generalizes. In their model aggregate a¢ liate sales are given by the same
expression as equation (11) except that C M ( k ; ) is …xed at unity. In both models, an
increase in k raises the proximity bene…t of FDI production because it avoids rising trade
costs. In HMY this is the only e¤ect, and consequently the model implies that a¢ liate
sales are rising in trade costs. In our model, there are two other e¤ects. First, on the
intensive margin an increase in k raises C M ( k ; ) and so it reduces a¢ liate sales. Second,
on the extensive margin because a¢ liates reduce their marginal cost relative to the parent
from k only to C M ( k ; ) (not to 1), the proximity bene…t of a¢ liate operation is only
1
1
C M ( k ; )1
rather than 1
:
k
k
By parameterizing (11) using (10) and employing estimates for and 1 , each of the
square-bracketed terms in equation (11) and its equivalents in the HMY model can be
computed, see the Web Appendix.26 The terms are separable in logarithms, so that we
can directly assess the importance of each mechanism for aggregate a¢ liate sales. Because
26

We choose

= 6 to be consistent with a twenty percent mark-up over marginal cost. Our estimate

23

market size and geography are the two central determinants of multinational activity, we
do so by projecting the log of each square-bracketed term on the log host country GDP
and the log of bilateral trade costs, akin to the gravity equation in trade. The results are
shown in Table 3b.
The …rst column shows results from a regression of local a¢ liate sales on host country
GDP and trade costs; this uses aggregate data from the publicly available 1999 U.S.
benchmark survey (n = 30). Sales vary roughly one for one with GDP, and a one percent
increase in trade costs is associated with a 10 percent fall in a¢ liate sales. How do
these results match up with the standardh trade-versus-FDI
i model of HMY? In column 2,
1
1
1
; the HMY analog of the third
labeled Marginal Cost, we run the log of 1
k
bracketed term in equation (11), on the gravity variables log GDP and log trade costs.27
The coe¢ cient estimate on trade cost is precisely estimated at around 0.7. This coe¢ cient
says that on account of the Marginal Cost mechanism, higher trade costs lead to higher
a¢ liate sales. It captures the essence of the proximity argument for FDI: opening more
a¢ liates abroad is the way to avoid rising trade costs. However, as the Data regression
shows, an increase in trade costs is associated with lower a¢ liate sales. The standard
model gets this part of the story wrong, and the only way to rationalize within the
model the lower sales in high-trade cost destinations is to pick up that high-trade cost
destinations also tend to have relatively low demand for U.S. products (see column 4).
The results of the Marginal Cost regression for our model, with the third squarebracketed term of equation (11) as the dependent variable, are shown in column 5. The
coe¢ cient estimate on trade cost is equal to -2.89. The fact that this is negative means
that a¢ liates’marginal cost increases contribute to a¢ liates having lower sales in hightrade cost locations. Lower sales with rising trade costs is a major feature of FDI data
(see column 1), and higher marginal cost is an excellent candidate for explaining lower
sales in virtually any economic model, so we …nd this qualitative result comforting.
The negative co¢ cients on trade cost in Fixed Cost and Market Size regressions
(columns 6 and 7) mean that higher …xed costs and lower market size in high-trade
cost destinations also help to account for the overall …nding of lower a¢ liate sales in hightrade cost locations.28 It is natural to ask how quantitatively important disembodied
knowledge transfer costs, as captured in our analysis by the Marginal Cost term, are in
of
1 = 1:09 is obtained by running a log-rank - log size regression on U.S. manufacturing data. This
estimate is above the 1.01 used by Irrazabal et al (2010) and slightly below the average industry value
found by Helpman, Melitz, and Yeaple (2004) using European …rm-level data.
27
In constructing this Marginal Cost term, weh employ our
i estimates on k ; ; and as described above.
28

1

1
The Fixed Cost dependent variable is log (fka )
. Because
1 > 1, the results indicate that
…xed costs are increasing in GDP and increasing in the size of trade cost.

24

accounting for variation in aggregate a¢ liate sales. Given the log-additivity of the three
square-bracketed terms that are the dependent variables in Table 3b, columns (5), (6),
and (7), the sum of the coe¢ cients on the trade cost regressor is by construction equal
to -10.11, the value in the Data regression. Thus, we compute as the contribution of the
Marginal Cost, Fixed Cost, and Market Size terms in explaining the overall gravity of
multinational a¢ liate sales about 29% (=(-2.89)/(-10.11)), 16%, and 56%, respectively,
as given in the last row of Table 3b. In conclusion, not only can our model explain lower
a¢ liate sales in more distant markets, which the standard model cannot, but the gravity
of knowledge mechanism is quantitatively important with almost 30% of the total e¤ect.29
In the following we examine the robustness of the …rm-level estimates.

6

Alternative Measures of Knowledge Intensity and
other Robustness Analysis

In Table 4, we present results for two alternative measures of knowledge intensity. The …rst
is a measure of the importance of a particular occupational skill required in an industry.
This variable is based on information in the U.S. Department of Labor’s O*NET database.
Here we focus on the importance of Analyzing Data as determinant of the knowledge
intensity of an industry.30 The second measure is the share of information technology
(IT) capital in total capital, speci…cally, the computer share.
In Table 4, the R&D intensity results are repeated in columns 1 and 4 for convenience.
with OLS estimates in Panel A on top and two-step Heckman results in Panel B at the
bottom. Generally the di¤erences between Panel A and Panel B are small, and we focus
the discussion on the latter. If knowledge intensity is proxied by Analyzing Data, we
estimate a positive coe¢ cient on the trade cost-knowledge intensity (T C KI) variable
in the import cost share equation (column 2B, Table 4). This is in line with Hypothesis
1. While the size of the coe¢ cient is not comparable to that of the R&D intensity
speci…cation in column 1B due to di¤erent scales, the Analyzing Data variable performs
better in the sense that the T C KI coe¢ cient is more precisely estimated than with
R&D intensity, and the empirical …t of the equation is somewhat improved.
29

If we compute C M based on a speci…cation that account for factors not in the model, including wage
di¤erences leading to comparative advantage such as column 2 in Table D (in the Web Appendix), this
leads to a value of 1=
= 1:979 21:915 0:042 = 1:06; and, following the same steps as before, the
contribution of disembodied knowledge transfer to the gravity in a¢ liate sales is estimated at about 29%
as well.
30
The exact de…nition is: "Identifying the underlying principles, reasons, or facts of information by
breaking down information or data into separate parts."

25

Turning to the sales results on the right, using the Analyzing Data variable the coe¢ cient on T C KI is estimated at 0.029 and not signi…cant at standard levels in the sales
speci…cation (column 5B). This suggests that the skill of Analyzing Data is not important
in explaining why a¢ liate sales fall particularly strongly with trade costs in certain industries. In contrast, a high computer share is very powerful in explaining gravity for a¢ liate
sales (column 6B): the linear trade cost coe¢ cient is not signi…cant anymore, while the
coe¢ cient on the T C KI interaction variable is precisely estimated. At the same time,
the computer share in total capital yields a negative coe¢ cient on T C KI in the import
cost share equation (see column 3B), which is not what is expected if the computer share
were a good proxy for knowledge intensity in the light of the model. This may be related
to the fact that the linear T C variable is not signi…cant in the import cost share equation
in column 3B.
These results can be summarized as follows. We …nd that the Analyzing Data variable
performs very well in the import cost share equation (a result that is con…rmed for other
O*NET measures as shown in the Web Appendix). Moreover, a particular type of information technology capital, namely computers, performs well as an alternative proxy for
knowledge intensity in the sales equation. This constitutes support for the model going
beyond identifying knowledge intensity with R&D intensity. At the same time, there is no
strong support from either the O*NET measures or the computer share for both hypotheses. Speci…cally, while the O*NET variables determine well the split between imports and
local a¢ liate activity, they do not predict well the level of a¢ liate sales. And while the
computer share predicts well the level of a¢ liate sales, in line with earlier work on foreign
outsourcing (Feenstra and Hanson 1999), it does not predict well the import share of the
a¢ liate.
In conclusion, none of these alternative measures are perfectly suited for testing the
theoretical mechanism in the model. The available variables pick up speci…c aspects of
the sophistication, codi…ability, and communicability that make their performance vary
depending on the speci…c aspect of multinational operation that is analyzed, and one
interpretation of the results is that R&D intensity is the most comprehensive measure of
knowledge transfer di¢ culties.
We have estimated additional speci…cations to examine the robustness of the results
with respect to factors outside the model, including comparative advantage, sales to
the U.S. and other foreign countries, as well as the ease of communication. Moreover,
exploiting the panel structure of the data we have explored dynamic knowledge transfer
e¤ects, and also considered additional measures of knowledge intensity. These results,
discussed in the Web Appendix, indicate that our …ndings in support of Hypotheses 1
and 2 of the model are robust.
26

We now turn to implications of the theory for the knowledge content of multinational
trade.

7

The Knowledge Intensity of Multinational Trade

The model predicts that as trade costs rise, multinationals o¤shore the production of
increasingly knowledge-intensive activities, and so the a¢ liates’imports become increasingly concentrated in goods that are knowledge intensive as well (this follows from equation
3). To examine whether this is borne out by the data, we compute the average knowledge intensity of U.S. exports to a¢ liates in other countries from the related-party trade
data of the U.S Census Bureau.31 Across 500 possibly traded six-digit NAICS industries
with varying R&D intensities, this average re‡ects the extensive margin of the knowledge
intensity of multinational trade.
Figure 1 shows a positive relationship between knowledge intensity and trade costs.32
Moreover, with an R2 of 0.44 the …t is quite tight. One might be concerned that this bivariate relationship is driven by other factors, such as the variables that were employed in
the regression analysis in section 4. A more speci…c concern is that the relationship re‡ects
trade costs rising more slowly in distance for highly knowledge-intensive goods because
these goods, to some extent intangibles, have lower weight-to-value ratios. However, we
have found that the relationship between average knowledge intensity and trade cost is
robust to these considerations, see section E of the Web Appendix. This constitutes
an important con…rmation of the model’s prediction regarding the knowledge content of
multinational trade.
We now turn to some concluding observations.

8

Conclusions

How large are barriers to transferring knowledge across space, and what is the nature of
these barriers? To provide answers to these fundamental questions, we have analyzed the
structure of the international operations of U.S. multinational …rms. Because these …rms
develop production knowledge in one location and then seek to deploy this knowledge as
31

This covers all related-party trade between U.S. entities and foreign entities, where a related-party is
one in which there exists at least a 6 percent ownership share. We employ Census rather than BEA data
because the former has much greater industry detail while at the same time the …rm-level information of
the BEA is here not required. The data is for the year 2002.
32
Data is in logs; the best-…t line corresponds to a weighted regression, with GDP as weights.

27

e¢ ciently as possible across the globe, we can infer much from their behavior about the
size and the nature of knowledge transfer costs.
We proposed a model in which trading inputs means embodied knowledge transfer,
while input production through FDI involves disembodied knowledge transfer. The costs
of transfer vary with the knowledge intensity and the destination market. For each component of knowledge, …rms select the transfer mode in order to minimize their cost of
serving each foreign market, and a¢ liate costs re‡ect an endogenous mixture of disembodied and embodied knowledge transfer costs. We derived several key predictions from
this mechanism. In particular, because production of …rms in knowledge intensive industries requires more non-codi…ed knowledge, these …rms rely more on embodied knowledge
transfer and the a¢ liates’ production cost is more sensitive to variation in trade costs.
Also, if disembodied knowledge transfer entails substantial …xed costs, large …rms will
employ a higher ratio of disembodied to embodied knowledge transfer.
Using rich panel data on individual U.S. multinational …rms, we con…rmed these predictions of the model. Our results provide evidence that the knowledge intensity of production a¤ects the level of foreign sales as well as the composition of disembodied versus
embodied technology transfer that …rms use. We show that only when amended with
our knowledge transfer mechanism can the standard multinational …rm model explain
why sales decline with distance from home. Moreover, our mechanism can account quantitatively for a signi…cant portion of the variation in aggregate a¢ liate sales. Finally,
we con…rm the model’s prediction that the knowledge intensity of trade rises with the
distance between trade partners.
Economists know little about the impact of relative cost changes for disembodied versus embodied knowledge transfer, even though both appear to be changing at a rapid
pace. Communicating knowledge-intensive information may become cheaper through
video-conferencing compared to telephone calls, while at the same time the knowledge
embodied in trade inputs becomes more movable because trade barriers and transportation costs are falling. Our results suggest that spatial frictions –in form of both costs of
trading goods and of transferring knowledge –cannot be addressed independently. This
research provides a starting point for assessing the impact of such changes for production
and trade across the globe.
Even in the world of the internet we …nd that spatial barriers to disembodied knowledge
transfer are large, and this has implications for many …elds of economics, such as industrial
organization, productivity and innovation, and development. In industrial organization
it has been shown that …rms that are part of a domestic production chain do not nearly
transfer as many goods within the chain as existing theories of vertical integration suggest,
a …nding which may be due to the fact that the key inputs determining …rm organization
28

are knowledge inputs (Hortacsu and Syverson 2009). If so, the spatial organization of
…rms depends critically on the spatial barriers to disembodied knowledge transfer, and as
spatial barriers to disembodied knowledge transfer fall, vertical links between …rms will be
increasingly invisible as there is less embodied knowledge transfer and more disembodied
transfer.
Our …ndings are consistent with the view that the returns to the accumulation of
knowledge are reduced in the presence of barriers to e¤ective knowledge transfer, which
has implications for the literature on innovation and productivity. Moreover, our work
suggests in general that the more knowledge intensive a production process is, the less
likely its knowledge will spatially di¤use, which has important implications for crosscountry income convergence. Given the relative simplicity of the mechanism highlighted
in this paper, we hope to incorporate it into models of endogenous innovation and growth
in future work.

References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, Claire Lelarge, John van Reenan, and Fabrizio
Zilibotti (2007), “Technology, Information and the Decentralization of the Firm,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 122: 1759-1799.
[2] Aghion, Philippe., and P. Howitt (1998), Endogenous Growth Theory, MIT Press:
Cambridge, MA.
[3] Anderson, James, and Eric VanWincoop (2004),“Trade Costs,”Journal of Economic
Literature, 42, 691-751.
[4] Antras, Pol. (2003), "Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure", Quarterly Journal of
Economics 118: 1375-1418.
[5] Antras, Pol., Luis. Garicano, and Esteban. Rossi-Hansberg (2008), "Organizing O¤shoring: Middle Managers and Communication Costs," in E. Helpman, D. Marin,
and T. Verdier (eds.), The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, Harvard
University Press.
[6] Arkolakis, Costas, Natalia Ramondo, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, and Stephen Yeaple
(2011).“Proximity versus Comparative Advantage: A Quantitative Theory of Trade
and Multinational Production,”mimeo, Penn State University.
[7] Arrow, Kenneth (1969). “Classi…catory Notes on the Production and Transmission
of Technological Knowledge,”American Economic Review 59(2): 29-35.
29

[8] Blinder, Alan. (2006), “O¤shoring: The Next Industrial Revolution?,” Foreign Affairs, March/April 2006, pp.113-128.
[9] Blonigen, Bruce. (2001), "In Search of Substitution Between Foreign Production and
Exports", Journal of International Economics, Vol. 53 (February 2001), pp. 81-104.
[10] Burstein, Ariel, and Alexander Monge-Naranjo (2009), "Foreign Know-how, Firm
Control, and the Income of Developing Countries", Quarterly Journal of Economics
124(1): 149-195.
[11] Costinot, Arnaud (2009), “An Elementary Theory of Comparative Advantage",
Econometrica 77,4: 1165-1192.
[12] Costinot, Arnaud, Lindsay Oldenski, and James Rauch (2009), "Adaptation and
the Boundary of Multinational Firms", Review of Economics and Statistics.93(1):.
298-308.
[13] Ethier, Wilfred (1986), “The Multinational Firm,”Quarterly Journal of Economics.
[14] Feenstra, Robert, and Gordon Hanson. (1999). “The Impact of Outsourcing and
High-Technology Capital on Wages: Estimates for the United States, 1979-1990.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(3): 907-40.
[15] Feenstra, R., J. Romalis, and P. Schott (2002), "U.S. Imports, Exports, and Tari¤
Data, 1989-2001", NBER Working Paper # 9387.
[16] Gabaix, Xavier and Rustam Ibragimov. (2011), “Rank-1/2: A Simple Way to Improve the OLS Estimation of Tail Exponents,” Journal of Business Economics and
Statistics. 29(1):. 24–39.
[17] Glaeser, E.L. and J.E. Kohlhase (2004), “Cities, Regions and the Decline of Transport
Costs,”Papers in Regional Science 83(1): 197–228.
[18] Hall, R., and C. Jones (1999), "Why do some countries produce so much more Output
per Worker than other Countries?",Quarterly Journal Economics
[19] Hanson, Gordon, Raymond Mataloni, and Matthew Slaughter (2005). “Vertical Production Networks in Multinational Firms,”Review of Economics and Statistics 87(4):
664-678.
[20] Heckman, James (1976), “The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation, Sample Selection and Limited Dependent Variables,”Annals of Economic and
Social Measurement.
30

[21] Helpman, Elhanan (1985), "Multinational Corporations and Trade Structure", Review of Economic Studies 52: 443-458.
[22] Helpman, Elhanan (1984). “A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational Corporations," Journal of Political Economy 92(3): 451-471.
[23] Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, and Stephen R. Yeaple (2004), “Exports versus
FDI with Heterogenous Firms,”American Economic Review.
[24] Hillberry, Russell, and David Hummels (2003), “Intra-national Home Bias: Some
Explanations”, Review of Economics and Statistics 85: 1089-1092.
[25] Hortacsu, Ali, and Chad Syverson (2009), “Why Do Firms Own Production Chains?”
mimeo University of Chicago.
[26] Irarrazabal, Alfonso, Andreas Moxnes, and Luca David Opromolla (2010). “The Margins of Multinational Production and the Role of Intra-Firm Trade,”mimeo, University of Oslo.
[27] Jones, Chad (2002), “Sources of U.S. Economic Growth in a World of Ideas,”American Economic Review 92 (1): 220-239.
[28] Keller, Wolfgang (2002), ”Geographic localization of international technology di¤usion”, American Economic Review 92: 120-142.
[29] Keller, Wolfgang, and Stephen Yeaple (2009), "Multinational Enterprises, International Trade, and Productivity Growth: Firm-Level Evidence from the United
States", Review of Economics and Statistics, November.
[30] Keller, Wolfgang, and Stephen Yeaple (2008), "Global Production and Trade in the
Knowledge Economy", NBER Working Paper # 14626.
[31] Koskinen, K.U., and H. Vanharanta (2002), "The role of tacit knowledge in innovation processes of small technology companies", International Journal of Production
Economics 80: 57-64.
[32] Krugman, Paul (1991), “Increasing Returns and Economic Geography,” Journal of
Political Economy 99(3): 483-499.
[33] Levy, Frank and Richard Murnane (2005),“How Computerized Work and Globalization Shape Human Skill Demands,”mimeo, MIT.
[34] Lucas, Robert (1993), “Making a Miracle,”Econometrica 61 (1993): 251-272.
31

[35] Markusen, James (2002), Multinational Firms and the Theory of International Trade,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[36] Markusen, James (1984). “Multinationals, Multi-Plant Economies, and the Gains
from Trade,”Journal of International Economics 16: 205-226.
[37] Melitz, Marc (2003) "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocation and Aggregate Industry Productivity", Econometrica.
[38] McGrattan, Ellen, and Edward Prescott (2010), "“Technology Capital and the U.S.
Current Account," American Economic Review 100(4): 1493–1522.
[39] Nunn, N. (2007), "Relationship-Speci…city, Incomplete Contracts and the Pattern of
Trade," Quarterly Journal Economics, 122(2): 569-600.
[40] Park, Walter (2008), "International Patent Protection: 1960 - 2005", Research Policy.
[41] Polanyi, M. (1966), The Tacit Dimension, Garden City, New York: Doubleday.
[42] Ramondo, Natalia (2007), "Size, Geography, and Multinational Production", mimeo,
University of Texas.
[43] Ramondo, Natalia and Andres Rodriguez-Clare (2010). “The Gains from Openness:
Trade, Multinational Production, and Foreign Ideas,”mimeo, Penn State University.
[44] Romalis, John (2004), “Factor Proportions and the Structure of Commodity Trade,”
American Economic Review, 94(1):.67-97.
[45] World Competitiveness Yearbook (1999), World Competitiveness Yearbook, IMD
Business School, http://www.imd.ch/
[46] Yeaple, Stephen R. (2003), “The Complex Integration Strategies of Multinational
Firms and Cross-Country Dependencies in the Structure of Foreign Direct Investment,”Journal of International Economics, 2003, 60(2): 293-314.

32

A

Appendix

A.1

Proof of Lemma 1 - Elasticity of Marginal Cost

Proof is by contradiction. Suppose "M C ( ; 1 ) < "M C ( ; 2 ), then from (5) the following
condition must hold
R1
R1
1
(zj
)dz
(zj 2 )dz
zb
zb
< R zb
R1
R1
R zb
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
(zj
)t(z)
dz
+
(zj
)dz
(zj
)t(z)
dz
+
(zj 2 )dz
0
zb
0
zb
which simpli…es to
Z 1
Z
1
(zj )dz
zb

0

zb

1

2

(zj )t(z)

Z

dz <

1

2

(zj )dz

zb

Z

0

zb

1

(zj 1 )t(z)

dz:

(12)

Let z 0 > z 00 , then log supermodularity implies
1

(z 0 j 1 ) (z 00 j 2 )t(z 00 )

1

> (z 0 j 2 ) (z 00 j 1 )t(z 00 )

:

Now integrate this expression with respect to z 00 over [0; z 0 ) and integrate this expression
with respect to z 0 over [z 0 ; 1) to obtain
Z z0
Z 1
Z z0
Z 1
1
2
2
1
1
(zj 1 )t(z) dz:
(zj )dz
(zj )t(z) dz >
(zj )dz
z0

z0

0

0

Replacing z 0 with zb yields an expression that contradicts (12). QED

A.2

Proof of Proposition 1 - Import Cost Share

Part (i) follows directly from Lemma 1 and the de…nition of the import cost share. To
prove part (ii) take the logarithm of (5) and di¤erentiate with respect to to obtain
@ ( ;
@

i

)
( ;

i

)

=

(

1)(1

( ;

i

))

@b
z
(b
zj i)
R1
< 0:
@ zb (zj i )dz

To prove part (iii), use (13), the fact that part (i) implies ( ;
that the monotone likelihood ratio property implies

to obtain
"
(

QED

1)(1

R1
zb

( ;

2

1

)> ( ;

2

(13)

), and the fact

(b
zj 1)
(b
zj 2)
R
<
;
1
(zj 1 )dz
(zj 2 )dz
zb

@b
z
(b
zj 2)
R
)) +
@ zb1 (zj 2 )dz

#

33

<

"

(

1)(1

( ;

1

@b
z
(b
zj 1)
R
)) +
@ zb1 (zj 1 )dz

#

<0

A.3

Proof of Proposition 2 - Gravity of A¢ liate Sales

Parts (i) and (ii) follow from the fact that the elasticity of local a¢ liate sales revenue
with respect to trade costs is proportional to the elasticity of marginal cost with respect
to trade costs:
"R ( ; i ) = (1
)"C M ( ; i );
and from Lemma 1.QED

A.4

Proof of Proposition 3 - Fixed Cost of Knowledge Transfers

We …rst show that the a¢ liates of a …rm that installs ICT equipment have lower marginal
costs and a lower import cost share in all countries relative to a …rm that does not We
then show that only highly productive …rms will install such equipment.
The marginal imported input, ze( ), of the a¢ liate of a …rm that has incurred F T that
faces trade costs is given by ze( ) = zb( )= > zb( ),where zb( ) is given by equation (4).
The marginal cost of the composite intermediate of such a …rm, C M ( ; i ; ), is
!1=(1 )
Z
Z
CM ( ;

i

; )=

0

ze( )

(zj i )t( z)1 dz +

1

1

(zj i )dz

ze( )

which is strictly increasing in . Hence, C M ( ; i ; ) < C M ( ; i ; 1) for < 1.
The import cost share is
R1
1
(zj i )dz
ze( )
i
( ; ; ) = R ze( )
;
R1
i
i
1 dz + 1
(zj
)dz
(zj
)t(
z)
ze( )
0

where < 1 if F T ( i ) is incurred and
( ; i ; 1). Suppose instead that ( ; i ;
R1
(zj i )dz
ze( )
R ze( )
R1
i
1 dz + 1
(zj
)t(
z)
(zj
0
ze( )
R zb( )
(zj i )t(z)1
0
R ze( )
(zj i )t( z)1
0

= 1 otherwise. We now show that ( ; i ; ) <
) > ( ; i ; 1), then
R1
(zj i )dz
zb( )
> R zb( )
R1
i
i
1 dz + 1
)dz
(zj
)t(z)
(zj i )dz
0
zb( )
R1
(zj i )dz
dz
zb( )
> R1
>1
i
(zj
)dz
dz
ze( )

where the last step follows from zb( ) < ze( ). Hence,
Z ze( )
Z zb( )
i
1
0>
(zj )t( z) dz +
(zj i ) t( z)1
zb( )

t(z)1

dz

0

Because t( z)1
t(z)1 for
1 the term on the right hand of this expression must
be positive, which contradicts the assertion. We conclude that ( ; i ; ) < ( ; i ; 1):
34

The pro…t on sales to country k of a …rm of productivity ' in industry i with an
a¢ liate in country k is given by
i;ICT
k

(') = Bki '

1

CM ( ;

i

; )1

fka ;

(14)

and the pro…t of this …rm were it to not install the ICT would be
i;N
k

(') = max Bki '

1

CM ( ;

i

; 1)1

fka ; 0 :

(15)

Let K ICT be the set of countries the …rm would open an a¢ liate if it installs ICT and
let K N be the set of countries the …rm would open an a¢ liate if it did not install ICT.
It is immediate from the condition in (8) that K N
K ICT because C M ( ; i ; )1 >
C M ( ; i ; 1)1 so the pro…t associated with local production will be higher relative to
exporting from the home country. The pro…t gain associated with installing ICT is thus
given by
X
i;ICT
i;N
(')
FT:
k
k (')
K ICT

This expression is strictly increasing, continuous and unbounded from above in ' and
negative for su¢ ciently small ', hence there exists a cuto¤ productivity '
b ICT that satis…es
P
i;ICT
i;N
'
b ICT
'
b ICT = F T . Further, all …rms with ' > '
b ICT will invest
k
k
K ICT
in ICT and all others will not. QED

35

B
B.1

Web Appendix
Generalizations of the Theory

In this section, we elaborate on generalizations of the simple model presented in the
paper lead to qualitatively similar results. First, the assumption that shipping costs were
uniform across goods could have been weaken to all these costs to vary across goods
according to
g(z)
jk (z) = jk
where g(z)
1 and t0 (z) > g 0 (z). The key assumption is that trade costs do not rise
faster than disembodied knowledge transfer costs. Second, the assumption that knowledge
transfer costs did not rise in trade costs can be adjusted so that
t(z; ) = ( )t(z);
where 0 ( ) 0 and 0 ( )= ( ) < 1. The key assumption is that trade costs rise faster in
distance than do disembodied knowledge transfer costs. Third, the assumption that the
only variation across industries was in the composition of inputs used in the production
of the composite intermediate input can be generalized to allow an industry’s knowledge
intensity to a¤ect intermediate input transfer costs directly according to
ti (z) = t( i )f (z);
where t0 ( i ) > 0. As long as f (z) is not too convex in z it is straightforward to show
that this is su¢ cient to generate our results, and it reinforces the composition e¤ect in
the model.
Some of the model assumptions cannot be generalized. For instance, if the elasticity
of substitution across goods is relatively low in knowledge intensive industries, as opposed
to be identical across industries as we have assumed, this would limit the transmission of
higher marginal costs to a¢ liate sales, thereby confounding Proposition 2 which supports
Hypothesis 2. In contrast, if inputs were relatively substitutable in knowledge intensive industries, which seems implausible, this too would have confounding e¤ects on the
relationship between trade costs and the import share.

B.2

Decomposition for the Gravity Regression

This section contains the supporting material for the decomposition implemented in section 5.

36

Deriving the Decomposition Equations From equation (8) in the text, we …nd
that all …rms with productivity exceeding a cuto¤ ('
'
b k ) will open an a¢ liate in
country k. This cuto¤ is the solution to
Bk (b
'k )

1

C M ( ; )1

1

= fka :

(16)

The total sales of a¢ liates to country k and industry i is obtained by aggregating over
the individual …rms that own an a¢ liate:
Z 1
Rk = N
Rki ('; k ; )dG(')
'
bk
Z 1
M
1
= N Bk C ( k ; )
' 1 dG(')
M

1

= N Bk C ( k ; )

'
bk

+1

'
bk

+

1

substituting for the cuto¤ using (16), we obtain (11). We now derive an expression for
the …xed cost of opening an a¢ liate in country k. First, note that the number of home
…rms that own an a¢ liate in country k is given by Nk = N '
b k Combining this expression
with (11) and (16), we arrive at the following expression:
Rk
= fka
Nk

C M ( k ; )1
+ 1 C M ( k ; )1

1
k

:

(17)

This equations shows that the …xed cost parameters for each country can be recovered
given estimate of k and C M ( k ; ) that were discussed in the …rst half of the quantitative
section, average a¢ liate size Rk =Nk , and parameters and . Finally, given this same
information and the derived fka , we can then use (11) to isolate the mark-up adjusted
demand level Bk .
Estimating dispersion As a generalization of Helpman, Melitz, and Yeaple (2004),
we may estimate the bundle of parameters =(
1) as done in that paper. We employ
COMPUSTAT data for 1999 and calculate the domestic sales as the di¤erence between
total …rm revenues and the value of exports. As the Pareto approximation of the size
distribution is only appropriate in the upper tail, we restrict attention to the top 10% of
…rms. Using the bias correction method in Gabaix and Ibragimov (2011), the regression
of the logarithm of a …rm’s rank in the distribution on the logarithm of a …rm’s sales
yields a coe¢ cient of 1.093 with a T-statistic of over 104 and an R-squared in excess of
0.98.

37

C

Summary Statistics

Table A gives summary statistics for the …rm-level BEA sample, while Table B provides
summary statistics for the country-level analysis of the knowledge intensity of multinational trade of section 7 in the text.

D

The robustness of the …rm-level estimation results

In this section a number of additional robustness checks are discussed.
Additional Knowledge Interactions To complement our analysis in the text that
has included additional knowledge intensity interactions to examine whether the results on
T C KI are driven by omitted variables (Table 1b), we now report analogous results for
the Heckman (1976) estimator, see Table C. In column 1 the IPR interaction IP R KI is
added in the import cost share equation; it does not enter signi…cantly and the trade costknowledge intensity variable is virtually unchanged compared to before (see colum 3, Table
2). Similar results are obtained by including in addition the skill endowment-knowledge
intensity interaction as well as the judicial quality-knowledge intensity interaction, see
Table C, column 2.
Including further knowledge intensity interactions reduces the coe¢ cient estimate on
T C KI in the sales equation in absolute value, from about -18 to about -13, see column
4 of Table C. Also here, however, part of this appears to be driven by a speci…cation
error arising from the high degree of correlation between the three additional knowledge
intensity interactions: the IP R KI variable changes from negative (almost signi…cant) to
positive (and signi…cant) upon the inclusion of the skill- and judicial quality-knowledge
interactions. Overall we conclude that the results for the estimates on the trade costknowledge intensity variable are robust to the inclusion of additional knowledge intensity
interactions.
Comparative Advantage The model of Helpman (1985) suggests that imports
of intermediate inputs should be high when countries are very di¤erent in terms of their
endowments so that comparative advantage plays a role. In his model, high human capital
countries develop technologies and intermediates of relatively high skill intensity. In the
following we consider three speci…c sources of comparative advantage, arising from skill
abundance, capital abundance, and institutional factors. Our approach, following Romalis
(2004) and Nunn (2007), is based on multiplying a country characteristic (such as skill
abundance) by the corresponding industry characteristic (skill intensity). If the empirical
38

support for Hypotheses 1 and 2 presented above masks comparative advantage forces at
work, including these variables should alter our …ndings on the T C KI variable.
The results from including all three sources of comparative advantage in the imports
regression are shown in columns 1 (OLS) and 2 (Heckman) of Table D. It turns out that
none of the comparative advantage interaction variables has a signi…cant e¤ect on the
import cost share of U.S. multinational a¢ liates, and consequently, the impact on the
trade cost-knowledge intensity (T C KI) variable is small.
On the right side of Table D the corresponding results for a¢ liate sales are shown.
Generally, comparative advantage has a stronger impact on a¢ liate sales than on the
a¢ liate’s import cost share. According to the Heckman speci…cation (column 4), U.S.
a¢ liates have relatively low local sales of skill intensive goods in skill abundant countries.
This may be because the host country has a comparative advantage in the same goods
that U.S. multinationals specialize in and so product market competition is more intense.
We also …nd that a¢ liate sales are higher in countries with an institutional comparative
advantage. While the three comparative advantage interactions raise the (absolute) size
of the T C KI coe¢ cient somewhat, overall there is little evidence to suggest that our
previous results on Hypotheses 1 and 2 are importantly driven by comparative advantage.
Third-Country and Richer FDI Patterns So far we have analyzed the sales of
multinational a¢ liates to una¢ liated parties in the local (host country) market. We are
mindful however that a¢ liate sales also go back to the home market, the United States, in
which case the products were most likely intermediate goods. Another possibility is that
a¢ liate sales go into third markets. This may be …nal products, a phenomenon that is
sometimes called export platform FDI. It could also be that multinational …rms maintain
a network of a¢ liates abroad in which di¤erent a¢ liates specialize in particular inputs,
so that the multinational’s input sourcing decisions are not exclusively between home and
host country. As noted above, the FDI data we are working with allows to separate sales
to the local (host country) market from sales to home (the U.S.) and from sales to third
markets. In this section we expore these di¤erent sales destinations; see Table E for the
results.33
On the left side, we repeat the OLS and Heckman results for local sales from Tables
1a and 2 for convenience. Results for onward sales to third markets are in columns 3
and 4, for sales to the U.S. in columns 5 and 6, while columns 7 and 8 show results for
All Sales. Consider …rst a¢ liate sales to third countries. Here, the impact of trade costs
33

For a¢ liate imports, we know the fraction that is intermediate inputs ("for further processing"), as
well as the fraction that comes from the multinational parent as opposed to other U.S. entities. The large
majority of imports in the data are intermediates shipped by the parent.

39

is positive, in line with a ’trade-cost jumping’ argument: if the sales do not go to the
local market, they are higher the further away the host country is from the United States.
This is because a greater distance to the United States means that the …rm would have
to incur higher and higher trade costs if it would not sell through an a¢ liate. Also note
that host country GDP is not as important for third-market sales as it is for local sales.
This supports our interpretation of the coe¢ cient in the local sales regressions as being a
measure of sales potential. Moreover, whether the local language is English or not has no
signi…cant impact on third-market sales. While in the case of third-market sales there is
no evidence that sample selection matters, the coe¢ cient on T C KI remains negative
and, with about -36, it is about twice as large in absolute value as in the case of local
sales.
An even stronger impact of knowledge intensity on the degree of gravity in a¢ liate
sales exists in the case of sales back to the United States, as seen from the results in
columns 5 and 6. This is plausible because for these sales there is typically two-way
shipping, intermediate goods from the U.S. to the FDI host country, and back to the
United States. The linear trade cost e¤ect for a¢ liate sales to the U.S. is also larger than
for local- or third-market sales. Moreover, the GDP of the host country plays even less of
a role for a¢ liate sales to the U.S. than for third-market FDI. This suggests that market
access considerations do not drive this FDI, but lower factor cost motives (assembly in the
South) may be the motive. As expected, the results for All Sales in columns 7 and 8 pick
up elements from all three sales destinations. The coe¢ cient on the trade cost-knowledge
intensity interaction is about -30, which supports Hypothesis 2 derived above. We take
the results on T C KI to mean that frictions to disembodied knowledge transfer matter
whether there are strong market access motives to FDI or not.
Imports from A¢ liates in Third-Countries In the model, all imports of the
a¢ liates come from the U.S., both from the parent and from una¢ liated sources located
in the United States. One might be concerned, however, that imports from third-country
a¢ liates may be higher whenever more embodied knowledge is imported from the parent
country. If this were the case and the e¤ect would ‘pass’ the control variables, it may
produce an important bias for our import share results. Unfortunately in the BEA data
(and nowhere else that we know of) there is no information on bilateral trade of a¢ liates
with non-parent countries. To explore this possibility in a more limited way we have
pursued two strategies, see Table F for results.
In the …rst, we add a measure of prevalence of third-country sales on the right hand side
of the regression. It is reasonable to assume that third-country a¢ liate imports will tend
to be high whenever third-country sales (which we observe) are high. While third-country
40

imports could come also from una¢ liated parties, and correspondingly third-country sales
could be to una¢ liated parties, we expect there to be a strong positive correlation between third-country sales and imports from a¢ liates in third countries. We have thus
computed the ratio of third-country sales of its a¢ liates relative to its total sales for each
multinational …rm, and include it on the right hand side of our hypothesis 2-regressions.
The results are in Table F, column (2) for OLS and column (4) for the full model including extensive margin, compared to the benchmark results in (1) and (3), which are
from Table 1a and Table 2, respectively. In both the OLS and the Heckman speci…cation,
the third-country sales variable enters signi…cantly with a negative coe¢ cient, indicating
that imports from the U.S. tend to be low whenever third-country sales are high. This is
consistent with imports from the parent and imports from third-country a¢ liates being
substitutes for each other. While the third-country sales variable enters signi…cantly, its
inclusion has virtually no e¤ect on our estimates of the trade cost x knowledge intensity
(T C KI) variable.
We have also split the sample into two subsamples, the observations with low imports
from the U.S. and the observations with high imports from the U.S. If our result is
obtained primarily because a¢ liates that import relatively much from the U.S. import
relatively much embodied knowledge in general, one would expect that the results for the
sample with generally low imports from the U.S. are quite di¤erent than the results for
the sample with generally high imports from the U.S. In Table F, columns (5) and (6)
we report the results for these two samples. The estimated coe¢ cients on the T C KI
intensity variable are very similar in both subsamples, even though the coe¢ cient for the
low import share sample is less precisely estimated.
Overall we conclude from this that it is unlikely that the results in support of Hypothesis 2 are in imported ways driven by imports from a¢ liates from third-countries that are
not accounted for.
The Nature of International Knowledge Transfer: Dynamics In our static
model, the costs of knowledge transfer are variable in the sense that per unit of intermediate good produced in the a¢ liate, the resource costs are higher than if it was produced in
the multinational home country. In a multi-period setting, it would be possible to distinguish between a number of di¤erent knowledge transfer costs. First, it may be that there
are ongoing communication frictions that do not diminish over time, perhaps because the
number of possible problems is very large relative to the actual number of production
steps that are required. Second, it may be that some of the knowledge transfer costs are
of the once-and-for-all type. In the latter case, one would expect that over time a¢ liates
produce more locally and import less from home. While making the model fully dynamic
41

is beyond the scope of this paper, given the panel nature of our data where a¢ liates are
(potentially) observed in 1994, 1999, and 2004, Table G provides evidence on this.
The speci…cations in Table G are identical to those in Table 1a and Table 2 except that
we include a variable which is equal to one if the a¢ liate existed in the previous period
(…ve years earlier). In the intensive-margin speci…cation for the import cost share, Table
G, column 1, the a¢ liate age variable comes in positive, whereas once sample selection is
accounted for a¢ liate age has a negative coe¢ cient (column 2). The latter is consistent
with the idea that technology transfer costs are in part …xed, in the sense that over time
the a¢ liate relies more on local input production. Moreover, the largely unchanged coef…cient on the trade cost-knowledge intensity variable T C KI indicates that these …xed
technology transfer costs exist side-by-side with ongoing (variable) technology transfer
costs. Note that the coe¢ cient on parent sales changes from about -0.3 to -0.15 with the
inclusion of the age variable. One interpretation of that is that …rm productivity is to
some extent captured by parent sales and to some extent by age.
A similar picture emerges in the a¢ liate sales speci…cations, see Table G on the right
side. If the a¢ liate had existed …ve years earlier already, it tends to have higher sales, and
the coe¢ cient on parent sales in the Heckman speci…cation falls from 0.66 to 0.60 (Table
2, column 6, and Table G, column 4). Again it appears that age is an alternative proxy
for …rm productivity, and moreover, as before the coe¢ cient on the trade cost-knowledge
intensity variable is largely unchanged.
Additional Knowledge Intensity Results In this section we extend our analysis
of alternative measures of knowledge intensity from Table 4 in the paper with …ve other
measures of knowledge intensity. There is, …rst of all, a frequently used measure of skills
in the labor force, the share of non-production workers in all workers. Second, we present
results on three additional occupational measures derived from the O*NET database,
namely:
1. Processing information (Mental Processes): Compiling, coding, categorizing, calculating, tabulating, auditing, or verifying information or data.
2. Updating and using relevant information (Work Activities): Keeping up-to-date
technically and applying new knowledge to your job.
3. Judgment and decision making (System Skills): Consider the relative costs and
bene…ts of potential actions to choose the most appropriate one.
Third, results are shown for a second information capital variable, namely the share
of communication capital in total capital (from the Bureau of Labor Statistics). Table H
42

reports the trade cost-knowledge intensity (T C KI) coe¢ cient for both least squares
and two-step Heckman speci…cations, for both import cost share and a¢ liate sales.
The main …ndings are as follows. First, the communication capital share does not appear to capture the notion of knowledge intensity as laid out in the model, as the T C KI
coe¢ cient is estimated imprecisely in all four cases. Second, the three O*NET variables
give similar results, which are also similar to the Analyzing Data variable employed in
Table 4 in the text: proxying knowledge intensity by an O*NET variable yields results
in the import equation that support the model, and that are in fact stronger than for
R&D intensity. At the same time, the O*NET variables do not predict well how the
gravity of a¢ liate sales varies with knowledge intensity according to the model. Finally,
the results based on the share of non-production workers are quite similar to those using
the occupation-based O*NET variables. Overall, this analysis is in line of what we found
in Table 4 as discussed in the text.
Communication Costs The model assumes that communication costs are symmetric across countries so that only trade costs vary across locations, but this may not be the
case in the data. Moreover, it is plausible that trade costs are high when communication
costs are high as well, and in that case trade costs will pick up the communication cost
di¤erences that is omitted from the regression. A straightforward way of assessing the
importance of such e¤ects is to include the communications variables, common language
and the costs of phone calls, multiplied by knowledge intensity in the analysis. Table I
shows these results.
In the case of the import cost share prediction, the …rst column repeats the main
results from Tables 1a and 2 for convenience. Column 2 indicates that while the common
language-knowledge intensity variable plays no role, the interaction of phone call and
knowledge intensity enters negatively (and the linear phone call coe¢ cient increases).
Generally, there is less FDI in high phone call cost countries, consistent with the higher
communication costs to those countries, unless it is an a¢ liate in a knowledge intensive
industry. One explanation might be that conversations over the phone (as opposed to
face-to-face) cannot fully address the tacit nature of production in knowledge intensive
industries. The trade cost-knowledge intensity coe¢ cient increases, so that the di¤erence
in the ability to shift from imports to FDI between low- and high-knowledge intensity
industries is now magni…ed.
In the a¢ liate sales results on the right side of Table I, we see that including the
additional communication cost variables strenghtens the support for the prediction of the
model. Here the common language interaction variable matters more: common language
is associated with higher sales, unless the industry is knowledge intensive. The coe¢ cient
43

on T C KI increases slightly (in absolute value) from around -17 to -23. Generally the
results, especially for sales, are consistent with the idea that variation in communication
costs plays some role in explaining a¢ liate activity. At the same time any omitted variable
problems resulting from that are likely to be small and do not a¤ect the evidence in favor
of Hypothesis 1 and Hypothesis 2.
Overall we conclude from this analysis that the …rm-level estimates reported in the
text are robust to a broad set of issues.

E

The Knowledge Intensity of Multinational Trade:
Regression Results

In section 7 of the paper we have discussed the relationship between trade costs from the
United States and the knowledge intensity of multinational trade that is implied by the
model. In this section we examine the robustness of the positive relationship shown in Figure 1 by moving to a multiple regression framework, see Table J. The …rst column reports
the simple bivariate relationship that is plotted in Figure 1.34 An increase in trade costs
is associated with an increase in the average knowledge intensity of U.S. multinational
trade. Indeed, this single regressor accounts for 44 percent of the variation as indicated
by the R-squared. In column 2, we add a number of country control variables to the
regression. The knowledge intensity of multinational trade is lower in large, developed
countries where English is spoken. None of the other coe¢ cients are statistically significant. The coe¢ cient on trade costs is still signi…cantly positive but moderately smaller
than in the bi-variate case.
One concern is that the relationship re‡ects trade costs rising more slowly in distance
for highly knowledge-intensive goods because these goods, to some extent intangibles,
have lower weight-to-value ratios.To see if this is the case, we have calculated the average
weight-to-value ratio of goods traded between the U.S. and each host country and include
that measure in the regression; see column 3.35 The weight-to-value variable turns out to
be not statistically signi…cant, while the coe¢ cient on trade costs retains its approximate
magnitude and level of statistical signi…cance. The model’s prediction that multinational
…rms change the knowledge content of their international trade in relation to geographic
distance (and trade costs) thus …nds strong support in the data.
34

These are weighted least squares results, with GDP as the weight; the results are qualitatively similar
when not weighted..
35
This variable is computed from detailed U.S. Census imports data, adding the values of air and vessel
shipments and dividing by the sum of their weight.

44

Table 1a: Technology transfer and multinational activity

Trade costs
Trade costs x
knowledge intensity
Population
GDP
Tax rate
Skill endowment
Capital endowment
Intellectual property rights
prot’n index
Judicial quality
Common language
Cost of phone call
Parent Sales

(1)
‐2.794
[0.030]
36.089
[0.001]

Import Share
(2)
‐3.786
[<.001]
24.906
[0.039]
‐0.628
[0.150]
0.410
[0.324]
0.962
[0.017]
1.004
[0.214]
‐0.089
[0.661]
‐0.408
[0.007]
‐2.950
[0.012]
0.468
[<.001]
0.499
[<.001]

(3)
‐3.672
[<.001]
23.761
[0.022]
‐0.495
[0.229]
0.357
[0.366]
0.916
[0.010]
0.685
[0.381]
0.073
[0.709]
‐0.420
[0.001]
‐2.579
[0.024]
0.481
[<.001]
0.550
[<.001]
‐0.050
[0.012]

(4)
‐2.942
[<.001]
‐23.110
[0.036]

Sales
(5)
‐0.770
[0.085]
‐17.149
[0.055]
‐0.207
[0.296]
0.753
[<.001]
‐0.266
[0.075]
‐0.390
[0.083]
0.483
[<.001]
0.179
[0.018]
‐0.852
[0.058]
0.438
[<.001]
0.016
[0.770]

(6)
‐0.213
[0.612]
‐19.405
[0.016]
‐0.218
[0.269]
0.725
[<0.001]
‐0.310
[0.032]
‐0.434
[0.034]
0.498
[<.001]
0.137
[0.058]
‐0.816
[0.075]
0.407
[<.001]
0.093
[0.093]
0.564
[<.001]

Firm‐Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Industry & Year Fixed
Yes
Yes
Effects
R‐squared
0.377
0.447
0.139
0.449
0.557
0.346
# of observations
5,875
5,644
5,961
7,921
7,581
7,726
Note: Dependent variables: imports for further processing from the U.S. relative to total affiliate sales in columns (1),
(2), (3), and (4); local affiliate sales to unaffiliated customers in columns (5), (6), (7), and (8). Robust p‐values allow for
clustering by country‐year and are shown in brackets.

Table 1b: Technology transfer choices and additional covariates

Trade costs
Trade costs x
knowledge intensity
Population
GDP

(1)
‐0.933
[0.127]
25.123
[0.005]
‐0.416
[0.538]
‐0.450
[0.116]

Skill endowment
Skill endowment x
Knowledge intensity
Intellectual property rights
prot’n index
Intellectual property rights
prot’n index x knowledge
intensity
Judicial quality

0.060
[0.495]

Import Share
(2)
(3)
‐3.670
‐3.729
[<.001]
[<.001]
23.629
25.499
[0.023]
[0.015]
‐0.496
‐0.502
[0.227]
[0.219]
0.357
0.367
[0.365]
[0.349]
0.683
1.401
[0.382]
[0.201]
‐14.605
[0.070]
‐0.406
‐0.479
[0.003]
[0.002]
‐0.234
1.545
[0.688]
[0.190]
‐2.581
[0.024]

(4)
‐0.939
[0.113]
25.123
[0.005]
‐0.526
[0.384]
‐0.465
[0.098]

‐9.225
[0.296]
0.009
[0.932]
1.369
[0.263]

(5)
0.423
[0.279]
‐17.757
[0.017]
‐0.430
[0.487]
1.375
[<.001]

0.071
[0.382]

Sales
(6)
(7)
‐0.208
‐0.346
[0.622]
[0.396]
‐19.661
‐14.998
[0.017]
[0.091]
‐0.218
‐0.221
[0.268]
[0.252]
0.725
0.732
[<.001]
[<.001]
‐0.436
0.606
[0.034]
[0.008]
‐21.180
[<.001]
0.158
0.088
[0.029]
[0.283]
‐0.387
1.532
[0.400]
[0.036]

(8)
0.270
[0.462]
‐13.289
[0.107]
‐0.947
[0.102]
1.382
[<.001]

‐20.455
[<.001]
0.036
[0.664]
1.519
[0.044]

‐2.913
‐0.817
‐1.461
[0.041]
[0.074]
[0.001]
Judicial quality x
5.430
0.247
11.482
10.973
knowledge intensity
[0.523]
[0.977]
[0.005]
[0.008]
Parent Sales
‐0.032
‐0.050
‐0.050
‐0.033
0.564
0.564
0.565
0.564
[0.102]
[0.011]
[0.010]
[0.095]
[<.001]
[<.001]
[<.001]
[<.001]
Industry & Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country Fixed Effects
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
R‐squared
0.223
0.139
0.141
0.223
0.358
0.346
0.349
0.362
# of observations
5,961
5,961
5,961
5,961
7,726
7,726
7,726
7,726
Note: Dependent variables: imports for further processing from the US parent relative to total affiliate sales in columns
(1), (2), (3), and (4); local affiliate sales to unaffiliated customers in columns (5), (6), (7), and (8). Also included are the
other independent variables of Table 1a, namely Tax rate, Capital endowment, Common language, and Cost of phone
call. Robust p‐values allow for clustering by country‐year and are shown in brackets.

Table 2: Technology transfer and the extensive margin

Trade costs
Trade costs x
knowledge intensity
Parent Sales

Trade costs
Trade costs x
knowledge intensity
Parent Sales
Population
GDP
Cost of Starting
Business
Foreign Market
Potential
Mills Ratio: λ
Wald χ2
(59 d.o.f.)
# of obs.

Import Share
(1)
(2)
Second Stage
‐1.744
‐3.806
[0.002]
[<.001]
20.599
24.030
[0.046]
[0.011]
‐0.365
‐0.028
[<.001]
[0.594]
Selection Equation
‐0.982
‐1.087
[<.001]
[<.001]
3.762
1.510
[0.229]
[0.623]
0.216
0.214
[<.001]
[<.001]
‐0.272
‐0.185
[<.001]
[<.001]
0.671
0.594
[<.001]
[<.001]
‐0.181
[<.001]
0.225
[<.001]
‐1.993
0.137
[<.001]
[0.659]
819.98
960.12
[<.001]
[<.001]
45,121
46,562

(3)

(4)

Sales
(5)

‐2.037
[<.001]
22.349
[0.024]
‐0.297
[<.001]

‐0.751
[0.036]
‐18.060
[0.005]
0.665
[<.001]

‐1.607
[<.001]
‐16.034
[0.023]
0.835
[<.001]

‐0.772
[0.029]
‐18.223
[0.004]
0.658
[<.001]

‐0.904
[<.001]
3.560
[0.250]
0.217
[<.001]
‐0.297
[<.001]
0.675
[<.001]
‐0.188
[<.001]
0.257
[<.001]
‐1.572
[<.001]
883.34
[<.001]
45,121

‐0.857
[<.001]
3.043
[0.298]
0.242
[<.001]
‐0.182
[<.001]
0.648
[<.001]
‐0.174
[<.001]

‐0.937
[<.001]
0.662
[0.818]
0.240
[<.001]
‐0.095
[0.044]
0.568
[<.001]

‐0.767
[<.001]
2.719
[0.348]
0.243
[<.001]
‐0.201
[<0.001]
0.644
[<.001]
‐0.183
[<.001]
0.269
[<.001]
0.541
[<.001]
1,853.08
[<.001]
45,121

0.579
[<.001]
1,755.42
[<.001]
45,121

0.237
[<.001]
1.607
[<.001]
1,456.15
[<.001]
46,562

(6)

Note: Dependent variables: imports for further processing from the US parent relative to total affiliate sales in columns
(1), (2), and (3); local affiliate sales to unaffiliated customers in columns (4), (5), and (6). All specifications include in both
stages the following variables: Population, GDP, Parent Sales, Tax rate, Skill Endowment, Capital Endowment,
Intellectual Property Rights Index, Judicial Quality, Common Language, and Cost of Phone Call (not all estimates shown).
All specifications include industry and year fixed effects. P‐values are shown in brackets.

Table 3a: The Marginal Cost of Exporting versus FDI Production
(for the average firm)
Cost of Plant in
the U.S.
Canada
South America
Europe
Australia, New
Zealand and Asia
Global

Cost of Affiliate,
Actual

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

Cost of U.S. Plant
inclusive of trade
costs
1.02
1.16
1.06
1.12

1.02
1.14
1.05
1.10

Cost of Affiliate
after 50% Tariff
Cut
1.02
1.10
1.05
1.07

1.00

1.10

1.09

1.07

Table 3b: Knowledge Transfer and Aggregate Affiliate Sales
Dependent
Variable
GDP
Trade Cost

Data
Local
Sales
(1)
0.92
(6.94)
‐10.11
(‐3.86)
0.69
100%

Helpman, Melitz, Yeaple (2004)
Marginal
Fixed
Market
Cost
Costs
Size
(2)
(3)
(4)
‐0.002
‐0.04
0.96
(‐0.48)
(‐7.03)
(7.04)
0.692
‐0.538
‐10.27
(10.99)
(‐4.66)
(‐3.80)
0.82
0.74
0.69
‐7%
5%
102%

This Paper
Marginal
Fixed
Cost
Costs
(5)
(6)
0.00
‐0.04
(0.30)
(‐5.19)
‐2.89
‐1.57
(‐31.39)
(‐10.51)
0.97
0.83
29%
16%

Market
Size
(7)
0.96
(7.03)
‐5.65
(‐2.10)
0.66
56%

R‐squared
Share of Trade Cost
Effect
Notes: All variables are in logarithms. The constant term is suppressed in all regressions. Robust t‐statistics in
parentheses. N = 30 observations.

Table 4: Alternative Measures for Knowledge Intensity
Import Share
Panel A: Intensive Margin
Knowledge Intensity
R&D
variable
Intensity
(1A)
Trade costs
‐3.786
[<.001]
Trade costs x
24.906
knowledge intensity
[0.039]
Population
‐0.628
[0.150]
GDP
0.410
[0.324]
R‐squared
0.447
# of obs
5,644

Analyzing
Data
(2A)
‐12.267
[<.001]
0.169
[<.001]
‐0.618
[0.143]
0.405
[0.315]
0.450
5,644

Computer
Share
(3A)
‐0.547
[0.600]
‐131.109
[0.042]
‐0.511
[0.238]
0.297
[0.471]
0.448
5,644

Sales
R&D
Intensity
(4A)
‐0.770
[0.085]
‐17.149
[0.055]
‐0.207
[0.296]
0.753
[<.001]
0.557
7,581

Analyzing
Data
(5A)
‐2.484
[0.066]
0.020
[0.376]
‐0.249
[0.209]
0.795
[<.001]
0.556
7,581

Computer
Share
(6A)
0.047
[0.924]
‐80.025
[0.002]
‐0.207
[0.291]
0.754
[<.001]
0.557
7,581

Panel B: Ext. & Int. Margin
(1B)
(2B)
(3B)
(4B)
(5B)
(6B)
Trade costs
‐2.037
‐9.190
‐0.109
‐0.772
‐3.013
0.253
[<.001]
[<.001]
[0.875]
[0.027]
[0.007]
[0.595]
Trade costs x
22.349
0.140
‐71.218
‐18.223
0.029
‐97.429
knowledge intensity
[0.029]
[<.001]
[0.044]
[0.003]
[0.135]
[<.001]
Population
‐0.375
‐0.355
‐0.298
‐0.233
‐0.279
‐0.229
[0.049]
[0.061]
[0.117]
[0.071]
[0.030]
[0.076]
GDP
‐0.259
‐0.250
‐0.311
0.922
0.970
0.936
[0.192]
[0.205]
[0.114]
[<.001]
[<.001]
[<.001]
Mills ratio: λ
‐1.572
‐1.486
‐1.496
0.541
0.551
0.593
[<.001]
[<.001]
[<.001]
[<.001]
[<.001]
[<.001]
Wald χ2
883.34
923.64
894.72
1,853.08
1,838.26
1,839.96
(57 d.o.f.)
[<.001]
[<.001]
[<.001]
[<.001]
[<.001]
[<.001]
# of obs
45,121
45,121
45,121
45,121
45,121
45,121
Note: Dependent variables: imports for further processing from the US parent relative to total affiliate sales in
columns (1), (2), and (3); local affiliate sales to unaffiliated customers in columns (4), (5), and (6). Panel A:
Specifications by least squares, firm‐year fixed effects included. Robust p‐values allow for clustering by country‐
year and are shown in brackets. Panel B: Specifications by two‐step Heckman, industry and year fixed effects
included. Second‐stage coefficients reported. Exclusion variables: Cost of Starting Business, Foreign Market
Potential. P‐values are shown in brackets. Other variables included: Tax rate, Skill Endowment, Capital
Endowment, Intellectual Property Rights index, Judicial Quality, Cost of Phone Call, and Common Language.

Table A: Summary Statistics for Section 4
Mean

Standard Deviation

10.900
10.388

1.696
1.771

7.932
9.236
13.705

2.850
2.509
1.544

Import Cost Share

‐3.005

1.961

Industry Characteristics
R&D Intensity
Analyzing Data
Computer Share
Skill Intensity
Capital Intensity
Contract Intensity

0.045
51.974
0.024
0.426
0.804
0.538

0.039
8.677
0.011
0.124
0.395
0.202

Firm‐level data
Affiliate Sales, total
To local unaffiliated
customers
To U.S. customers
To 3rd country customers
Parent Sales

Other Variables
Trade Cost
0.133
0.108
Phone Call
0.621
0.605
IPR protection index
3.701
1.080
GDP
19.521
1.244
Population
10.205
0.984
Tax Rate
3.524
0.241
Common Language
0.231
0.422
Skill Endowment
0.772
0.216
Physical Capital Endowment
10.250
0.983
Judicial Quality
0.669
0.212
Cost of Starting a Business
1.074
0.662
Foreign Market Potential
14.487
1.198
Note: All variables, except Industry Characteristics and Common Language, are in natural logaritms.

Table B: Summary Statistics for Section 7
Mean
Standard Deviation
Knowledge Intensity
‐3.471
0.128
Trade Costs
0.065
0.019
Cost of Phone Call
0.582
0.619
IPR Protection Index
1.393
0.150
GDP per Capita
9.429
0.756
Population
16.138
1.424
Maximal Tax Rate
‐1.093
0.516
Common Language
0.085
0.252
Skill Endowment
0.801
0.207
Judicial Quality
0.694
0.202
Value‐to‐Weight
0.385
1.383
Note: All variables except Common Language are in natural logarithms.

Table C: Technology transfer in the full model with additional covariates

Trade costs
Trade costs x
knowledge intensity
Intellectual property rights
Protection
Intellectual property rights
protection x knowledge intensity
Judicial quality
Judicial quality x
knowledge intensity
Skill endowment
Skill endowment x
knowledge intensity
Cost of Starting
Business
Foreign Market Potential
Mills Ratio: λ
Wald χ2
# of observations

Import Share
(1)
(2)
Second Stage
‐2.058
‐2.008
[<.001]
[<.001]
22.818
21.013
[0.022]
[0.037]
‐0.635
‐0.689
[<.001]
[<.001]
0.386
1.740
[0.390]
[0.107]
‐1.622
‐1.476
[<.001]
[0.007]
‐4.432
[0.435]
1.431
1.590
[<.001]
[<.001]
‐3.226
[0.545]
Selection Equation
‐0.188
‐0.187
[<.001]
[<.001]
0.258
0.259
[<.001]
[<.001]
‐1.572
‐1.549
[<.001]
[<.001]
884.26
895.06
[<.001]
[<.001]
45,121
45,121

Sales
(3)

(4)

‐0.763
[0.031]
‐18.570
[0.004]
0.241
[<.001]
‐0.464
[0.122]
‐1.088
[<.001]

‐0.965
[0.007]
‐12.710
[0.055]
0.176
[0.009]
1.435
[0.040]
‐1.878
[<.001]
14.236
[<.001]
0.565
[0.012]
‐23.756
[<.001]

‐0.593
[<.001]

‐0.183
[<.001]
0.269
[<.001]
0.540
[<.001]
1,853.21
[<.001]
45,121

‐0.183
[<.001]
0.270
[<.001]
0.567
[<.001]
1,879.32
[<.011]
45,121

Note: Dependent variables: imports for further processing from the US parent relative to total affiliate sales in
columns (1) and (2); local affiliate sales to unaffiliated customers in columns (3) and (4). All specifications include
also in both stages the following variables: Population, GDP, Parent Sales, Tax rate, Capital Endowment, Common
Language, and Cost of Phone Call (not all estimates shown). All specifications include industry and year fixed
effects. P‐values are shown in brackets.

Table D: Technology Transfer and Comparative Advantage
Import Share
Sales
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Trade costs
‐3.782
‐1.979
‐0.762
‐0.522
[<.001]
[<.001]
[0.089]
[0.144]
Trade costs x
24.767
21.915
‐16.703
‐23.667
knowledge intensity
[0.040]
[0.030]
[0.056]
[<.001]
Population
‐0.663
‐0.372
‐0.185
‐0.202
[0.124]
[0.052]
[0.346]
[0.116]
GDP
0.445
‐0.265
0.733
0.897
[0.279]
[0.183]
[<.001]
[<.001]
Tax rate
0.978
1.149
‐0.274
‐0.457
[0.015]
[<.001]
[0.067]
[<.001]
Skill Endowment
0.778
1.570
‐0.273
0.948
[0.345]
[0.003]
[0.302]
[0.007]
Skill Endow. x
3.386
‐0.324
‐1.853
‐3.609
Skill Intensity
[0.252]
[0.771]
[0.328]
[<.001]
Capital Endowment
‐0.106
‐0.178
0.497
0.623
[0.601]
[0.159]
[<.001]
[<.001]
Capital Endow. x
0.049
‐0.121
‐0.051
0.016
Capital Intensity
[0.348]
[0.180]
[0.021]
[0.770]
Judicial Quality
‐2.738
‐1.230
‐1.363
‐1.808
[0.039]
[0.034]
[0.002]
[<.001]
Judicial Quality x
‐0.477
‐0.679
0.987
1.334
Contract Intensity
[0.609]
[0.284]
[0.021]
[0.002]
Intell. Property
‐0.423
‐0.619
0.193
0.248
Rights Index
[0.005]
[<.001]
[0.011]
[<.001]
Cost of Phone Call
0.499
0.625
0.018
0.045
[<.001]
[<.001]
[0.741]
[0.262]
Common Language
0.473
‐0.350
0.434
0.650
[<.001]
[0.002]
[<.001]
[<.001]
Parent Sales
‐0.298
0.662
[<.001]
[<.001]
Mills ratio: λ
‐1.581
0.554
[<.001]
[<.001]
R‐squared
0.448
0.558
884.65
1878.37
Wald χ2
(62 d.o.f.)
[<.001]
[<.001]
# of observations
5,644
45,121
7,581
45,121
Note: Dependent variables: imports for further processing from the US parent relative to total affiliate sales in
columns (1) and (2); local affiliate sales to unaffiliated customers in columns (3) and (4). Specifications (1) and (3)
are least squares, and (2) and (4) are two‐step Heckman with Cost of Starting Business and Foreign Market
Potential as exclusion variables. (1) and (3) have firm‐year fixed effects and robust p‐values based on clustered
s.e.s at the country‐year level are shown in brackets; (2) and (4) have industry and year fixed effects, with p‐values
in brackets.

Table E: Sales to different customers: Local, Third‐country, U.S., and All

Trade costs
Trade costs x
knowledge
intensity
Population
GDP
Tax rate
Skill
endowment
Capital
endowment
IPR prot’n
index
Judicial
quality
Common
language
Cost of phone
call
Parent Sales
Mills ratio: λ

Local Sales
Intensive Int. & Ext.
Margin
Margin
‐0.770
‐0.772
[0.085]
[0.029]
‐17.149
‐18.223
[0.055]
[0.004]
‐0.207
[0.296]
0.753
[<.001]
‐0.266
[0.075]
‐0.390
[0.083]
0.483
[<.001]
0.179
[0.018]
‐0.852
[0.058]
0.438
[<.001]
0.016
[0.770]

‐0.233
[0.071]
0.922
[<.001]
‐0.433
[<.001]
‐0.591
[<.001]
0.622
[<.001]
0.216
[<.001]
‐1.087
[<.001]
0.642
[<.001]
0.034
[0.395]
0.658
[<.001]
0.541
[<.001]

Third‐Country Sales
Intensive Int. & Ext.
Margin
Margin
2.808
2.863
[0.005]
[<.001]
‐36.442
‐38.376
[0.049]
[0.002]
‐0.224
[0.660]
0.477
[0.345]
‐1.482
[<.001]
‐2.445
[<.001]
‐0.289
[0.251]
0.999
[<.001]
2.730
[0.025]
0.124
[0.575]
‐0.710
[<.001]

‐0.219
[0.333]
0.338
[0.156]
‐1.252
[<.001]
‐2.510
[<.001]
‐0.382
[0.002]
0.976
[<.001]
2.655
[<.001]
0.065
[0.639]
‐0.712
[<.001]
0.559
[<.001]
‐0.072
[0.776]

U.S. Sales
Intensive Int. & Ext.
Margin
Margin
‐4.859
‐1.405
[0.005]
[0.167]
‐60.503
‐47.242
[0.049]
[0.014]
‐0.131
[0.819]
‐0.007
[0.990]
1.740
[<.001]
‐1.299
[0.103]
‐0.555
[0.111]
0.160
[0.624]
‐0.737
[0.587]
0.944
[<.001]
‐0.558
[0.012]

‐0.571
[0.086]
‐0.351
[0.285]
1.971
[<.001]
0.122
[0.767]
‐1.213
[<.001]
‐0.171
[0.264]
‐0.705
[0.364]
‐0.339
[0.044]
‐0.059
[0.584]
0.243
[<.001]
‐2.283
[<.001]

All Sales
Intensive Int. & Ext.
Margin
Margin
‐0.314
0.252
[0.549]
[0.425]
‐31.022
‐30.078
[0.003]
[<.001]
‐0.242
[0.224]
0.589
[0.003]
‐0.125
[0.343]
‐1.044
[<.001]
0.244
[0.020]
0.416
[<.001]
‐0.070
[0.875]
0.447
[<.001]
‐0.119
[0.078]

‐0.270
[0.018]
0.484
[<.001]
‐0.030
[0.689]
‐0.910
[<.001]
0.115
[0.060]
0.322
[<.001]
0.054
[0.842]
0.290
[<.001]
‐0.090
[0.014]
0.555
[<.001]
‐0.255
[0.015]

Firm‐Year FEs
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Industry and
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year FEs
R‐squared
0.557
0.537
0.504
0.567
2
Wald χ (59
1,853.08
1,822.86
1,048.01
2,665.31
d.o.f)
[<.001]
[<.001]
[<.001]
[<.001]
# of
7,581
45,221
5,132
45,121
4,496
45,121
8,184
45,121
observations
Note: dependent variable is local affiliate sales to unaffiliated customers in columns (1) and (2); affiliate sales to
third countries in columns (3) and (4); sales to the U.S. in (5) and (6); and all affiliate sales in columns (7) and (8).
Specifications (1), (3), (5) and (7) by least squares, and specifications (2), (4),(6) and (8) by two‐step Heckman;
exclusion variables Cost of Starting Business and Foreign Market Potential. p‐values, robust and allowing for
clustering by country‐year in columns (1), (3), (5), and (7) are shown in brackets.

Table F: Imports from affiliates in third‐countries
Ordinary Least
Squares

Trade costs
Trade costs x
knowledge intensity
Parent Sales

(1)
‐3.672
[<.001]
23.761
[0.022]
‐0.050
[0.012]

Third‐Country Sales

(2)
‐3.601
[<.001]
23.424
[0.023]
‐0.036
[0.052]
‐0.787
[0.010]

Mills Ration: λ
Industry & Year Fixed
Effects
R‐squared
Wald χ2

Yes

Yes

0.139

0.141

Heckman Second
Stage
(3)
‐2.037
[<.001]
22.349
[0.024]
‐0.297
[<.001]

‐1.572
[<.001]
Yes

(4)
‐2.008
[<.001]
22.385
[0.024]
‐0.268
[<.001]
‐1.429
[<.001]
‐1.532
[<.001]
Yes

Low
Import
Share
(5)
‐1.029
[0.042]
11.987
[0.191]
0.031
[0.180]

High
Import
Share
(6)
‐1.197
[0.001]
11.494
[0.055]
‐0.033
[0.013]

Yes

Yes

0.071

0.091

883.34
896.03
[<.001]
[<.001]
# of observations
5,961
5,961
45,121
45,121
3,003
2,958
Note: Dependent variable: imports for further processing from the US parent relative to total affiliate sales. Other
independent variables included are Population, GDP, Tax rate, Skill Endowment, Capital Endowment, Intellectual
property rights protection index, Judicial quality, Common language, and Cost of phone call. Exclusion variables in
the Heckman specifications are Cost of Starting Business and Foreign Market Potential. P‐values are shown in
brackets, robust to clustering by country‐year in the OLS specifications.

Table G: The Nature of Technology Transfer Costs and Dynamics

Trade costs
Trade costs x
knowledge intensity
Affiliate existed in (t‐1)
Population
GDP
Tax rate
Skill Endowment
Capital Endowment
Judicial Quality
Intell. Property
Rights Index
Cost of Phone Call
Common Language
Parent Sales
Mills ratio: λ

Import Share
(1)
(2)
‐3.691
‐2.746
[<.001]
[<.001]
22.404
23.409
[0.053]
[0.017]

(3)
‐0.722
[0.087]
‐17.199
[0.040]

(4)
‐0.634
[0.061]
‐18.300
[0.004]

0.329
[0.001]
‐0.446
[0.274]
0.246
[0.531]
0.950
[0.017]
0.969
[0.211]
‐0.030
[0.875]
‐2.559
[0.022]
‐0.422
[0.002]
0.515
[<.001]
0.370
[0.003]

0.578
[<.001]
‐0.234
[0.201]
0.755
[<.001]
‐0.291
[0.039]
‐0.353
[0.074]
0.423
[<.001]
‐0.687
[0.087]
0.175
[0.024]
0.071
[0.209]
0.355
[<.001]

1.476
[<.001]
‐0.242
[0.057]
0.914
[<.001]
‐0.475
[<.001]
0.462
[0.003]
0.539
[<.001]
‐0.854
[0.004]
0.187
[0.001]
0.061
[0.116]
0.504
[<.001]
0.596
[<.001]
0.830
[<.001]

‐1.678
[<.001]
‐0.378
[0.047]
‐0.058
[0.764]
1.081
[<.001]
1.122
[<.001]
‐0.075
[0.439]
‐2.093
[<.001]
‐0.526
[<.001]
0.538
[<.001]
0.017
[0.852]
‐0.146
[<.001]
‐1.581
[<.001]

Sales

R‐squared
0.447
0.572
2
876.98
2,647.04
Wald χ
(60 d.o.f.)
[<.001]
[<.001]
# of observations
5,961
45,121
7,726
45,121
Note: Dependent variables: imports for further processing from the US parent relative to total affiliate sales in
columns (1) and (2); local affiliate sales to unaffiliated customers in columns (3) and (4). Specifications (1) and (3)
are least squares, and (2) and (4) are two‐step Heckman with Cost of Starting Business and Foreign Market
Potential as exclusion variables; second step results shown. (1) and (3) have firm‐year fixed effects and robust p‐
values based on clustered s.e.s at the country‐year level are shown in brackets; (2) and (4) have industry and year
fixed effects, with p‐values in brackets.

Table H: Additional Knowledge Intensity Results
Share of Non‐
Production
Workers
Panel A: Least Squares
Import
Share
Sales
Panel B: Two‐step
Heckman
Import
Share
Sales

10.000
[0.003]
1.283
[0.531]

Knowledge Intensity variable
ProcInfo
Upknow
JudgInfo

0.185
[<.001]
0.033
[0.194]

0.171
[<.001]
0.024
[0.348]

0.207
[<.001]
0.042
[0.172]

Communication
Capital Share

‐44.474
[0.684]
15.506
[0.876]

8.335
0.163
0.161
0.180
‐13.649
[0.002)
[<.001]
[<.001]
[<.001]
[0.905]
1.107
0.044
0.030
0.053
38.365
[0.537]
[0.039]
[0.138]
[0.031]
[0.625]
Note: Reported is the coefficient for the Trade Cost x Knowledge Intensity variable. Each entry corresponds to a
separate estimation. In the Import Share results, the dependent variable is imports for further processing from the
U.S. relative to total affiliate sales. In the Sales results, the dependent variable is local sales to non‐affiliated parties.
Second‐step results are shown in the Heckman specifications, where the exclusion variables are Cost of Starting a
Business and Foreign Market Potential. OLS specifications include firm‐year fixed effects, and two‐step Heckman
specifications have industry and year fixed effects. All specifications include Trade Costs, Population, GDP, Tax rate,
Skill endowment, Capital endowment, Intellectual Property Rights protection, Judicial quality, Common Language,
and Cost of Phone Call. P‐values in brackets; they are robust and clustered on country‐year for OLS, and following
Heckman (1976) in the two‐step specifications.

Table I: Additional Results on Communication and Technology Transfer
Import Share

Sales

Panel A: Least Squares
Trade Costs
Trade costs x Knowledge
intensity
Common Language
Common Language x Knowledge
intensity
Cost of Phone Call

(1A)
‐3.786
[<.001]
24.906
[0.039]
0.468
[<.001]

0.499
[<.001]

Cost of Phone Call x Knowledge
Intensity

(2A)
‐4.041
[<.001]
30.215
[0.021]
0.507
[0.003]
‐2.110
[0.280]
0.638
[<.001]
‐2.828
[<.001]

(3A)
‐0.770
[0.085]
‐17.149
[0.055]
0.438
[<.001]

0.016
[0.770]

(4A)
‐0.540
[0.311]
‐21.635
[0.081]
0.665
[<.001]
‐4.516
[<.001]
0.016
[0.830]
0.517
[0.589]

Panel B: Two‐step Heckman
(1B)
‐2.037
[<.001]
22.349
[0.029]
‐0.347
[0.003]

(2B)
(3B)
(4B)
Trade costs
‐2.786
‐0.772
‐0.383
[<.001]
[0.027]
[0.290]
Trade costs x Knowledge
40.347
‐18.223
‐25.875
intensity
[<.001]
[0.003]
[<.001]
Common Language
‐0.310
0.642
0.904
[0.025]
[<.001]
[<.001]
Common Language x Knowledge
‐0.954
‐5.373
intensity
[0.486]
[<.001]
Cost of Phone Call
0.624
0.882
0.034
‐0.051
[<.001]
[<.001]
[0.395]
[0.357]
Cost of Phone Call x Knowledge
‐5.337
1.676
intensity
[<.001]
[0.022]
Note: Dependent variables: imports for further processing from the US relative to total affiliate sales in columns
(1) and (2); local affiliate sales to unaffiliated customers in columns (3) and (4). Columns (1) and (3) repeat results
from Tables 2 and 3 for convenience. Panel A: Specifications by least squares, firm‐year fixed effects included.
Robust p‐values allow for clustering by country‐year and are shown in brackets. Panel B: Specifications by two‐
step Heckman, industry and year fixed effects included. Second‐stage coefficients reported. Exclusion variables:
Cost of Starting Business, Foreign Market Potential. P‐values are shown in brackets. Other variables included: GDP
per capita, Population, Tax rate, Skill Endowment, Capital Endowment, Intellectual Property Rights index, and
Judicial Quality. Also included in the two‐step Heckman specifications are Parent Sales.

Table J: The Knowledge Intensity of Multinational Trade
(1)
5.111
[<.001]

(2)
3.700
[<.001]
0.008
[0.755]
0.076
[0.603]
‐0.099
[0.058]
‐0.064
[<.001]
0.071
[0.166]
‐0.067
[0.086]
‐0.154
[0.240]
0.245
[0.192]

(3)
Trade Costs
3.231
[0.014]
Phone Call
0.015
[0.539]
IPR Protection
0.131
Index
[0.378]
GDP per capita
‐0.095
[0.083]
Population
‐0.070
[<.001]
Tax Rate
0.093
[0.055]
Common Language
‐0.021
[0.669]
Skill Endowment
‐0.221
[0.120]
Judicial Quality
0.152
[0.417]
Weight‐to‐Value
0.013
[0.417]
R‐squared
0.440
0.793
0.802
N
39
36
35
Note: The dependent variable is the average knowledge intensity of U.S. related‐party exports. All
regressions have a constant (coefficient not reported). All variables except Common Language are in
natural logarithms. Robust t‐statistics shown in brackets.

