NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN EMPIRICAL EVALUATION OF THE LONG-RUN RISKS MODEL FOR ASSET
PRICES
Ravi Bansal
Dana Kiku
Amir Yaron
Working Paper 15504
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15504

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2009

Yaron thanks the Rodney White Center for financial support. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Ravi Bansal, Dana Kiku, and Amir Yaron. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

An Empirical Evaluation of the Long-Run Risks Model for Asset Prices
Ravi Bansal, Dana Kiku, and Amir Yaron
NBER Working Paper No. 15504
November 2009
JEL No. E0,G0,G1,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
We provide an empirical evaluation of the forward-looking long-run risks (LRR) model and highlight
model differences with the backward-looking habit based asset pricing model. We feature three key
results: (i) Consistent with the LRR model, there is considerable evidence in the data of time-varying
expected consumption growth and volatility, (ii) The LRR model matches the key asset markets data
features, (iii) In the data and in the LRR model accordingly, past consumption growth does not predict
future asset prices, whereas lagged consumption in the habit model forecasts future price-dividend
ratios with an R2 of over 40%. Overall, our evidence implies that the LRR model provides a coherent
framework to analyze and interpret asset prices.

Ravi Bansal
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
1 Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
ravi.bansal@duke.edu
Dana Kiku
Finance Department
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
kiku@wharton.upenn.edu

Amir Yaron
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2256 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
yaron@wharton.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

The economic sources of risks and the magnitude of predictability of asset prices,
consumption, dividends, and volatility are topics of considerable interest for financial
economists.

Cash-flow predictability and asset price fluctuations impose economic

restrictions that help evaluate the plausibility of asset pricing models. In this paper, we
empirically evaluate the long-run risks (LRR) model of Bansal and Yaron (2004) along
these challenging dimensions. In our analysis, we also highlight some key economic and
quantitative differences between the LRR model and the external habit model of Campbell
and Cochrane (1999).
The Bansal and Yaron (2004) LRR model contains two long-run risk channels: (i) longrun fluctuations in expected growth, and (ii) long-run fluctuations in consumption volatility.
The model features an Epstein and Zin (1989) life-time utility function, with investor
preference for early resolution of uncertainty. Shocks to expected growth and consumption
volatility are long-lasting and alter investor’s expected growth and volatility computations
for long-horizons. Equity prices in the model are determined by expected growth and
consumption volatility and, therefore, may help predict future growth and uncertainty. In
this sense, the LRR model is forward-looking. In contrast, asset prices in the external
habit model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999), in which consumption and dividends are
i.i.d, are driven by time-varying risk aversion that moves in response to the entire history
of consumption growth. Asset prices in this external habit model are backward-looking
as lagged consumption significantly influences their movements. It is evident that the two
models have considerable differences in their implications for predictability of asset prices,
consumption growth, dividends, and volatility of returns.

1

We calibrate the LRR model of Bansal and Yaron (2004) and use an improved model
solution based on the approximate analytical method as in Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2007b).
The model configuration we use for the LRR model is taken from the refined calibration
provided in Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2007a). In terms of the data, we confine our attention
to the long annual sample from 1929 to 2008, due to its long span and the fact that this
sample experienced various episodes of high turbulence in asset markets, a feature that
should not be ignored, as recent financial market events underscore.
1

Throughout the paper the external habit model refers to the Campbell and Cochrane (1999) specification.
Our analysis does not evaluate implications of other variants of habit models.

1

The key data-features we focus on are: (i) consumption and return predictability,
(ii) relation between consumption volatility and asset prices, (iii) predictability of return
volatility, and (iv) price-dividend ratio predictability via consumption.

We also make

observations regarding empirical evidence on the magnitude of preference parameters, in
particularly, the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, and discuss model implications for
the yield curve and their fit to the observed data. Our statistical analysis is carried out
by using the model-based finite sample empirical distribution, which is also the approach
pursued in Beeler and Campbell (2009).2 Our model inferences are robust to using alternative
methods to construct standard errors as confirmed by the results reported in Bansal, Kiku,
and Yaron (2007a).
We show that in the data consumption growth is highly predictable at both short- and
long-horizons. A vector autoregression (VAR) based on consumption growth, price-dividend
ratio, and the real risk-free rate implies consumption predictability at the one- and fiveyear horizons of more than 20%, which is statistically different from zero. The VAR-based
predictability of consumption growth in the LRR model is of the same magnitude as in the
data. Using a VAR framework, Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2006) also find strong evidence
of predictable variations in consumption growth. Our evidence indicates that there can
be significant loss of information about variation in expected consumption growth rates in
univariate predictive regressions considered in Beeler and Campbell (2009). Even then, we
document that if one relies only on the price dividend ratio to forecast future consumption,
the regression statistics implied by the LRR model are well within the two standard error
(2-SE) from the data.
Consistent with the literature, we find that future equity returns are predictable by
current dividend yields. However, the evidence for return predictability in the data is very
fragile – confidence bands for predictive R2 ’s include zero, suggesting lack of predictability.
Further, when we predict future returns using the better behaved variable, dividend-price
ratio less the real risk-free rate, the level of return predictability declines from 31% to only
about 9% at the five-year horizon.3 After accounting for standard errors, we show that the
2

Beeler and Campbell (2009) examine several aspects of the LRR model. According to their reported
standard errors, the LRR model matches all the data features they focus on within the usual two standard
error range.
3
The difference in the magnitude of R2 ’s from the dividend yield-based regression and the predictive
regression based on the adjusted dividend-price ratio is most likely due to the very high persistence of the
dividend yield in the data (see also Hodrick (1992) and Stambaugh (1999)).

2

LRR model is consistent with the observed predictability of returns.
Bansal and Yaron (2004) show that in the LRR model consumption volatility is a source
of systematic risk as shocks to it carry a separate risk premium. They further document
that in the data a rise in current consumption volatility lowers the price-dividend ratios
and that future consumption volatility can be forecasted by current price-dividend ratios.
As highlighted in Bansal and Yaron (2004), this evidence suggests that the elasticity of
intertemporal substitution (IES) is larger than one. Bansal, Khatchatrian, and Yaron (2005)
document the robustness of the negative relation between consumption volatility and asset
price and further confirm that movements in consumption volatility are indeed an important
risk channel. Beeler and Campbell (2009) also explore the dynamics of return volatility
inside the LRR model. In particular, they consider an integrated return volatility measure
and explore its predictability properties. We show that quantitatively, the LRR model
matches the sign and the magnitude of the inverse relation between prices and consumption
uncertainty and accounts for the observed predictable variation of the integrated volatility
of asset returns.
The LRR model and the habit model provide an interesting contrast in the context of
predictability of price to dividend ratios. In the data, forecasting future price to dividend
ratios with lagged consumption yields an R2 close to zero. Consistent with the data, in the
LRR model, lagged consumption growth rates do not predict future prices. In fact, the R2
in the LRR model and in the data are almost identical. As mentioned above, asset prices
in the Bansal and Yaron (2004) model are determined by expectations of future growth and
volatility, and therefore changes in these expectations drives movements in current pricedividend ratios. In contrast, in the habit model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999), asset
prices are driven by backward consumption as lagged consumption growth forecasts future
price-dividend ratios with an R2 of more than 40%. In terms of differences in economic
implications, the LRR model would attribute the sharp recent decline in equity prices to
a decline in future expected growth and a rise in volatility of future growth. The habit
model, on the other hand, would attribute the decline in equity prices to past and current
reductions in consumption growth and a resulting rise in risk-aversion. In all, the data
evidence regarding future price predictability with lagged consumption raises considerable
doubt regarding the key channel featured in the Campbell and Cochrane (1999) habit model.
Overall, our results (i) support the view that there is a small long-run predictable
component in consumption growth, and that consumption volatility is time-varying, (ii)
3

confirm that the forward-looking LRR model can account for the key dynamic properties
of asset market data, and (iii) suggest that there is little empirical support for the key
mechanism in the backward-looking habit model, that lagged consumption growth forecasts
asset prices. Our conclusions are in sharp contrast to Beeler and Campbell (2009) regarding
the fit of the LRR model and the empirical plausibility of the habit model.
The paper continues as follows. Section 2 outlines the LRR model and highlights its
key features. Section 3 discusses the results of our empirical analysis. Section 4 provides
concluding comments.

2

Long-Run Risks Model

In this section we specify a model based on Bansal and Yaron (2004). The underlying
environment is one with complete markets and a representative agent has Epstein and Zin
(1989) type recursive preferences and maximizes her life-time utility,
·

1−γ
θ

Vt = (1 − δ)Ct

³
+δ

£

1−γ
Et Vt+1

¤´ θ1

θ
¸ 1−γ

,

(1)

where Ct is consumption at time t, 0 < δ < 1 reflects the agent’s time preference, γ is the
coefficient of risk aversion, θ =

1−γ
1
1− ψ

, and ψ is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution

(IES). Utility maximization is subject to the budget constraint,
Wt+1 = (Wt − Ct )Rc,t+1 ,

(2)

where Wt is the wealth of the agent, and Rc,t is the return on all invested wealth.
Consumption and dividends have the following joint dynamics:
∆ct+1 = µc + xt + σt ηt+1
xt+1 = ρxt + ϕe σt et+1
2
= σ̄ 2 + ν(σt2 − σ̄ 2 ) + σw wt+1
σt+1

(3)

∆dt+1 = µd + φxt + πσt ηt+1 + ϕσt ud,t+1 ,
where ∆ct+1 and ∆dt+1 are the growth rate of consumption and dividends respectively. In
4

addition, we assume that all shocks are i.i.d normal and are orthogonal to each other. As in
the long run risks model of Bansal and Yaron (2004), µc + xt is the conditional expectation
of consumption growth, and xt is a small but persistent component that captures long run
risks in consumption growth. For parsimony, as in Bansal and Yaron (2004), volatility of
consumption and dividends is driven by a common time-varying component. As shown in
their paper, predictable variations in the conditional second moment of growth rates lead to
time-varying risk premia. Dividends have a levered exposure to the persistent component
in consumption, xt , which is captured by the parameter φ. In addition, we allow the i.i.d
consumption shock ηt+1 to influence the dividend process, and thus serve as an additional
source of risk premia. The magnitude of this influence is governed by the parameter π. Save
for this addition, the dynamics are similar to those in Bansal and Yaron (2004).
As in Epstein and Zin (1989), for any asset j, the first order condition yields the following
asset pricing Euler condition,
Et [exp (mt+1 + rj,t+1 )] = 1,

(4)

where mt+1 is the log of the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution (IMRS), and rj,t+1
is the log of the gross return on asset j. The log of the IMRS, mt+1 , is given by
mt+1 = θ log δ −

θ
∆ct+1 + (θ − 1)rc,t+1 ,
ψ

(5)

where rc,t+1 is the continuous return on the consumption asset. To solve for the return on
wealth (the return on the consumption asset), we use the log-linear approximation for the
continuous return on the wealth portfolio, namely,
rc,t+1 = κ0 + κ1 zt+1 + ∆ct+1 − zt ,

(6)

where zt = log(Pt /Ct ) is the log of the price to consumption ratio (i.e., the valuation ratio
corresponding to a claim that pays consumption) and κ’s are log linearization constants
which are discussed in more detail below.
To derive the dynamics of asset prices we rely on approximate analytical solutions (instead
of the polynomial-based numerical approximation in the original paper of Bansal and Yaron

5

(2004)), which we find provide a more accurate solution to the model.4

This easy-to-

implement solution technique allows us to better address certain predictability dimensions.
Specifically, we conjecture that the price to consumption ratio follows,
zt = A0 + A1 xt + A2 σt2

(7)

and solve for A’s using the Euler equation (4), the return equation (6) and the conjectured
dynamics (7). In solving for the price-consumption ratio we impose model consistency
between its mean, z̄, and approximation κ’s, which themselves depend on the average priceconsumption ratio. This allows us to make sure that any change in the model parameters that
alters z̄ is also incorporated in the approximation constants. The model-based endogenous
solution for z̄ is thus obtained by solving the equation,
z̄ = A0 (z̄) + A2 (z̄)σ̄ 2 ,

(8)

and recognizing that approximation constants that enter A’s are defined by κ0 = log(1 +
exp(z̄)) − κ1 z̄ and κ1 =

exp(z̄)
.
1+exp(z̄)

The solutions for A’s that describe the dynamics of the price-consumption ratio are
determined by the preference and technology parameters as:
A0

·
´2 ¸
³
1
θ³
1´
2
=
µc + κ1 A2 (1 − ν)σ̄ +
κ1 A2 σw
log δ + κ0 + 1 −
1 − κ1
ψ
2

A1 =

1−

1
ψ

(9)

1 − κ1 ρ

A2 = −

(γ − 1)(1 − ψ1 )
2 (1 − κ1 ν)

·

³ κ ϕ ´2 ¸
1 e
1+
1 − κ1 ρ

Bansal and Yaron (2004) show that solution (9) captures the intuition that, as long as IES
is larger than one, the substitution effect dominates the wealth effect. Consequently, high
expected growth raises asset valuations, while high consumption volatility lowers the priceconsumption (and price-dividend) ratio. This is an important implication of the model as it
may help identify the magnitude of IES in the data.
4

Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2007b) evaluate various approaches and find the approximate analytical
solution to be the most accurate and easy to implement.

6

Given the solution for zt , the innovation to the return to wealth can be derived, which
in turn allows us to specify the innovations to the IMRS and facilitates the computation of
risk premia of various assets. In particular, it follows that the risk premium on the stock
market portfolio is derived from three sources of risks. Specifically,
2
Et [rm,t+1 − rf,t + 0.5σt,r
] = βη,m λη σt2 + βe,m λe σt2 + βw,m λw σw2 ,
m

(10)

where βm,j , j = {η, e, w} are the betas of the market return with respect to the “short-run”
risk (ηt ), the long-run growth risk (et ), and the volatility risk (wt ), respectively. The market
return betas are determined by the underlying preferences and cash-flow dynamics and are
presented in Appendix. λ’s represent the corresponding market prices of risks that, as shown
in Bansal and Yaron (2004), are given by:
λη = γ

³
1 ´ κ1 ϕe
λe = (1 − θ)κ1 A1 ϕe = γ −
ψ 1 − κ1 ρ
h
³
´³
κ1
κ1 ϕe 2 i
1´
1+(
λw = (1 − θ)κ1 A2 = − γ − 1 γ −
) .
ψ 2 (1 − κ1 ν)
1 − κ1 ρ

(11)

Note that, due to separation between risk aversion and IES, each risk carries a separate
premium. In power utility framework, where IES equals the reciprocal of risk aversion, only
short-run risks receive compensation, while long-run and volatility risks carry no separate
risk premia. The market prices of risks in equation (11) show that preference for early
resolution of uncertainty (i.e., γ larger than the reciprocal of IES) is required for long-run
risks to earn a positive risk premium.
Table I provides the parameter configuration we use to calibrate the model – these are
chosen to match several key statistics of consumption and dividend data. The parameter
values are identical to those in Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2007a) and referred to as BKY
parameter configuration in Beeler and Campbell (2009). This calibration refines the Bansal
and Yaron (2004) configuration in two directions. First, the persistence of volatility shocks is
assumed to be higher; second, dividend shocks are assumed to be correlated with short-run
shocks in consumption growth, while in Bansal and Yaron (2004) the correlation between
the two is set at zero. These changes enhance the role of the volatility channel relative to
Bansal and Yaron (2004).

7

The LRR model specification as stated in equation (3), for analytical tractability and
ease of solution, assumes that volatility shocks are normally distributed. In simulations,
we address the possibility of negative realizations by discarding negative draws. We have
also evaluated the approach of replacing negative realizations of σ 2 with a small positive
number and found the results to be virtually identical in the two cases. Note that the
standard deviation of volatility shocks (σw ) is quite small relative to its mean. The fraction
of negative realizations, therefore, is also small, averaging about 0.6% of the draws at our
calibrated values. A conceptually cleaner approach is pursued in Bansal and Shaliastovich
(2009), who follow Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2001), and assume that volatility shocks
have a gamma distribution which ensures positivity of the volatility process. Bansal and
Shaliastovich (2009) show that the model implications in the gamma distribution case are
similar to the gaussian case presented here.

3

Empirical Findings

We use annual data on consumption and asset prices for the time period from 1929 till 2008.
The annual data provides the longest available data span and is arguably the least susceptible
to measurement errors. This sample also contains various episodes of crisis in asset markets,
a feature, as recent financial market events underscore, that cannot be ignored or excluded
from the sample. Focusing on the post-war data, as some papers do, can be misleading as
this sample ignores a number of important volatile asset market and macro-economic events.
Consumption data are based on seasonally adjusted per-capita series on real consumption
from the NIPA tables available on the Bureau of Economic Analysis website. Aggregate
consumption is defined as consumer expenditures on non-durables and services. Growth
rates are constructed by taking the first difference of the corresponding log series. Our asset
menu comprises the aggregate stock market portfolio on the value weighted return of the
NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ from CRSP and a proxy of a risk-less asset. The real interest
rate is constructed by subtracting the trailing 12-month realized annual inflation from the
annualized yield on the 3-month Treasury bill taken from the CRSP treasury files. Use
of other estimates of expected inflation to construct the real rate does not lead to any
significant changes in our results. Descriptive statistics for consumption growth, the return
and dividend yield of the aggregate stock market, and the risk-free rate are presented in

8

Table II. All entries are expressed in real percentage terms.
In calibration and simulations, following the standard in the literature, we assume that
the decision interval of the agent is monthly. To make the model-implied data comparable
to the observed annual data, we appropriately aggregate the simulated monthly observations
and construct annual growth rates and annual asset returns. The price-dividend ratio, as in
the data, is constructed by dividing the end-of-year price by the trailing sum of 12-month
dividends.
For statistical inference, as in Drechsler and Yaron (2007) and Beeler and Campbell
(2009), we sample from the calibrated model and construct the finite-sample empirical
distribution for various statistics of interest.

Reported statistics are based on 10,000

simulated samples with 79 × 12 monthly observations that match the length of the actual
data. We report the median and tail percentiles of the monte-carlo distributions. In addition,
we present population values that correspond to the statistics constructed from a long-sample
of 10,000 annualized observations.

3.1

Equity Premium & Risk-free Rate Puzzles

Table II displays the model implications for the unconditional moments of consumption
and dividend growth rates, the equity return, price-dividend ratio and the risk-free rate.
Overall, the model matches all these dimensions quite well. In particular, our calibration
accounts for the first-order (and unreported higher order) autocorrelations of consumption
growth. It is worth noting that the first-order autocorrelation of consumption growth in
the data is 0.46, which is much higher than the one implied by monthly i.i.d growth rates
even after accounting for time-aggregation. According to the results of Working (1960), the
annual autocorrelation with i.i.d growth rates would only be 0.25.5 The model based finitesample empirical distribution shows that the model matches the unconditional moments of
consumption and dividends data quite well.
The model matches the level and volatility of the equity returns and the risk-free rate
quite well. The average excess return in our data set is around 7%. For comparison, the
model-implied risk premium of the stock market portfolio averages 6.9%. In the model, as
in the data, the volatility of equity returns is about 20%, which is much higher than the
5

It would be even lower under plausible scenarios of measurement errors in monthly consumption data.

9

volatility of the underlying cash-flow growth rates. Consistent with the data, the modelimpled mean and volatility of the real risk-free rate are around 1% per annum.
An insightful experiment is to evaluate the contribution of various risk sources to the
equity risk-premium. In our calibration, short-run risks contribute 25%, long-run growth
risks contribute 32%, and long-run volatility risks contribute 43% to the overall risk premium.
The two persistent sources combined account for 75% of the equity premium.
It is important to note that the long-run growth risk is critical for explaining the equity
risk premium, as it not only accounts for a significant portion of the premium itself but
also magnifies the contribution of the volatility risk. In the absence of the long-run growth
risk (i.e., if the variance of xt is zero), the annualized equity premium is only 0.92%. The
population value of the volatility of the price-dividend ratio in this case is about 0.19. If, on
the other hand, the long-run growth risk is present but the volatility channel is shut down,
the annualized equity premium is 3.95% but the variance of the price-dividend ratio drops to
0.09. Thus, the long-run growth risk is important for the level of the equity risk-premium,
while the volatility channel is important for the variability of asset prices.

3.2

Consumption, Dividends & Return Predictability

Table III provides evidence on consumption predictability using a VAR with consumption
growth, real risk-free rate, and the log price-dividend ratio.

The R2 for consumption

predictability starts at 26% at the 1-year horizon and drops only to 22% at the 5-year
horizon.6

Thus, consumption growth in the data is strongly predictable at both short

and long horizons, which is consistent with consumption predictability evidence reported in
Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2006) and Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2007b). Table III further shows
that the LRR model fully duplicates the documented pattern of consumption predictability.
Note that a monthly i.i.d consumption growth process, time-aggregated to the annual
frequency, would imply an R2 of only 6% for the first year and close to zero for the second
and subsequent years. Our empirical evidence, therefore, casts doubt on the view that
consumption growth is i.i.d, as often assumed in the literature (e.g., Campbell and Cochrane
(1999)).
Panel A of Table IV provides the results of consumption growth predictability using the
6

As in Hodrick (1992), R2 are constructed by exploiting the dynamics of the first-order VAR specification.

10

log of the dividend-price ratio as the only regressor. Estimates of slope coefficients (β̂) in
these regressions for various horizons are presented in Panel B of the table. In the data, the
R2 ’s in these regressions are 7% at the 1-year horizon and close to zero at the 5-year horizon.
The model-implied evidence reveals a similar modest forecasting power of the price-dividend
ratio. In particular, the population R2 in these predictive regressions is only 7% and 4% at
the one- and five-year horizons, respectively. Likewise, the model-implied regression slopes,
on average and in population, are close to the corresponding point estimates. Note that
in the LRR model, variation in price-dividend ratios is driven by two state variables: the
conditional mean and volatility of consumption growth. Therefore, the price-dividend ratio
by itself may not forecast future growth rates in any significant manner. Consequently,
univariate regressions of future consumption growth on current price-dividend ratios, also
considered in Beeler and Campbell (2009), may fail to capture all the predictable variation in
consumption growth. As shown above, consumption growth in the data is highly predictable
when one relies on a multivariate regression setting and a richer information set to learn
about predictable variation in expected growth rates.
In all, the model and the data are a close match in terms of short and long-run
consumption predictability. Recent work by Kaltenbrunner and Lochstoer (2006) and Croce
(2005) shows that consumption and savings decisions of agents in a production economy lead
to low-frequency movements in consumption growth, similar to those in the LRR model.
Table V provides evidence on dividend predictability using a VAR with dividend growth,
real risk-free rate, and the log price-dividend ratio. In the data, the R2 in dividend predictive
regressions starts at 15% and rises to 28% at the 5-year horizon and then gradually tapers off.
The model implications for dividend growth predictability lines up with the data.7 Table
VI documents evidence on short- and long-horizon dividend predictability using only the
price-dividend ratio as the regressor. The data feature modest predictability, with an R2 in
the range of 6-10%, and the slope coefficients varying from 0.08 at the 1-year horizon to 0.11
at the 5-year horizon. After accounting for sampling uncertainty, the LRR model matches
both the R2 ’s and the estimated slopes quite well.
Our evidence of growth rate predictability is robust to alternative measures of asset cash
7

This evidence is consistent with dividend predictability documented in Bansal, Dittmar, and Kiku (2009).
They find that cash-flow growth rates of the aggregate stock market, as well as book-to-market and size sorted
portfolios are strongly predictable at both short and long horizons, and highlight the importance of long-run
predictable variations in asset cash flows for understanding the term structure of the risk-return trade-off.

11

flows. In particular, a VAR for earnings growth, price-earnings ratio and risk-free rate yields
a predictive R2 for the earnings growth of 35% at the 1-year horizon and about 40% at the
5-year horizon. Bansal, Khatchatrian, and Yaron (2005) and Ang and Bekaert (2007) also
examine predictability of dividend and earnings growth rates in univariate and multivariate
regression settings and find similar strong evidence of predictable variation in asset cash
flows.
Table VII provides evidence on predictability of multi-period excess returns by the log
of the price-dividend ratio. Consistent with evidence in earlier papers, the R2 rises with
maturity, from 4% at the 1-year horizon to about 31% at the 5-year horizon. The modelimplied predictability of equity returns is somewhat lower, but the data R2 ’s are well inside
the 2-SE confidence bands. Return predictability is known to be highly uncertain. Not
surprisingly, the model-based confidence bands for the R2’s are wide and include both zero
(indicating lack of predictability) and the sample estimate. As shown in Panel B, the slope
coefficients in the multi-horizon return projections implied by the model are of the right sign
and magnitude compared to those in the data. Recall that variation in the risk premia in
the Bansal and Yaron (2004) model is entirely due to variation in consumption volatility.
Shutting down the volatility channel by assuming homoscedastic growth rates will make the
conditional risk premia constant.
It is well-known that the return predictability evidence is quite fragile. To highlight
this, in Table VIII we run the same multi-horizon return regressions as above but alter the
regressor. Instead of the traditional price-dividend ratio, we use the log dividend yield minus
the real risk-free rate. Conceptually, subtracting the real risk-free rate from the dividendprice ratio should virtually make no difference to its predictive ability, as only short-horizon
risks embodied in the risk-free rate are subtracted from the dividend yield. In the LRR
model or the habit-based model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999), the implications for
return predictability with the dividend-price ratio or the real-rate adjusted dividend yield
are the same. In the data, however, return predictability with the adjusted dividend yield is
much weaker than the one implied by the price-dividend ratio. As shown in Tables VII and
VIII, the level of the 5-year horizon R2 drops from 31% to only 9% once the dividend-price
ratio is replaced with the adjusted dividend yield. This evidence raises serious concerns about
the magnitude of return predictability in the data. The difference in predictability evidence
reported in Table VII and Table VIII suggests that much of the ability of the dividend yield to
predict future returns might be spurious and due to the very high persistence of the observed
12

price-dividend ratio (e.g., Stambaugh (1999)). Adjusting the dividend-price ratio for the
risk-free rate lowers the persistence in the predictive variable and ensures that the regressor
is well behaved. This alleviates the possibility of spurious regression and provides more
reliable estimates. Therefore, the magnitude of predictability with the adjusted dividend
yield of about 5-10% at long horizons, in our view, is more plausible and close to what
should be considered realistic. As shown in Table VIII, the LRR model matches the level
of predictability and slope coefficients from the regressions based on the adjusted dividend
price ratio quite well.

3.3

Forward & Backward Looking Models

Alternative asset pricing models generally match the equity and risk-free rate puzzles, and
therefore may be hard to distinguish by focusing only on this dimension. However, it may
be possible to learn about the plausibility of different models by evaluating the link between
price-dividend ratios and consumption growth. In the LRR model, current price-dividend
ratios are determined by time-varying expected growth and consumption volatility. Hence,
current prices anticipate the future state of the economy: a drop in current price-dividend
ratios, in the model, reflects either a decline in future expected growth and/or a rise in
future volatility. In this sense, the LRR model is forward-looking. In contrast, in the habit
model, the shock of habit is driven by lagged consumption growth, and a reduction in growth
rates raises risk-aversion, the equity premium, and the discount rate leading to a fall in the
current price-dividend ratio. That is, backward consumption plays an important role in
determining current prices. This important distinction between the two models provides an
avenue to evaluate their plausibility in the data. To accomplish this we also solve the habit
model. In particular, we simulate cash-flow and asset price data from the habit model, using
the same calibration as in Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and relying on their numerical
solution methods. As the broader set of model implications for asset returns are already
well-reported in their paper, for brevity, we do not repeat them here.
To highlight the key distinction across the two models, we run the following regression:
pt+1 − dt+1 = α0 +

L
X

αj ∆ct−j + ut+1

j=0

In the data and the simulated data we regress the log of price dividend ratio on L lags of
13

consumption growth.
Table IX reports the evidence in the data and the two models for various lag-lengths
8

L.

In the data, at all lag-lengths this predictability is close to zero. For example, for

the 5-year lag-length, the backward consumption predictability is only 4%. In the LRR
model, the backward consumption predictability is close to zero as well. However, in the
habit model, the backward consumption predictability is quite large – at the 5-year laglength, lagged consumption predicts future prices with an R2 of 42%. At the 10-year
horizon, the predictability, in the population, is 50%.9 This is not surprising as prices in the
Campbell and Cochrane (1999) model are driven primarily by the habit stock and, hence,
by movements in the lagged consumption. The lack of predictability of price dividend ratios
by past consumption growth in the data, presents an important challenge for habit models
which emphasize the backward-looking consumption predictability channel for asset price
determination. Related evidence regarding the predictability of price-dividend ratios in the
LRR and habit model, in a set-up where dividends and consumption are cointegrated, is also
presented in Bansal, Gallant, and Tauchen (2007). Yu (2007) also explores the distinction
between the forward-looking LRR model and the backward-looking habit model by looking
at long-horizon correlations of returns with consumption growth and finds that the LRR
model matches the data much better. More recently, Lustig, Nieuwerburgh, and Verdelhan
(2009), provide data-driven non-parametric estimates of the wealth to consumption ratio
and the risk premium on aggregate wealth and compare the LRR and habit-models; they
document that their estimates and findings are quite close to the LRR model.
To highlight the distinction between the two models, consider the sharp decline in asset
prices over the 2007-2008 period. According to the LRR model, the decline would be
attributed to a decline in expected growth and/or a rise in consumption-volatility. To explain
the same decline, the Campbell and Cochrane habit model would argue that a string of past
and current negative consumption shocks raises risk aversion and the discount rate leading
to a decline in asset prices. As shown in Table IX, there is not much evidence for this channel
as lagged consumption does not forecast movements in future prices.
8

To have a uniform metric for drawing inferences and model comparison, in Table IX, we rely on the
data-based standard errors constructed using a block-bootstrap.
9
The data R2 ’s are well below the 2.5-percentile of the finite-sample distributions of the habit model for
all lag lengths.

14

3.4

Volatility

As discussed above, Bansal and Yaron (2004) introduce the volatility channel and show
that volatility risks are priced and contribute to the equity risk premia. Fluctuations in
volatility are the source of time-varying risk premia in the model (that is, risk premia varies
as aggregate risk varies). An important implication of the volatility channel in the LRR setup, with a preference for early resolution of uncertainty, is that higher volatility lowers the
price-dividend ratio. Table X reports the evidence on the relation between asset prices and
consumption volatility. The annual realized volatility of consumption is measured by fitting
an AR(1) process to consumption growth and taking the absolute value of the residuals. At
Pj=K
date t, the K-horizon future realized volatility is measured by log j=1
|ut+j |, where ut is
the date-t consumption residual. We regress this measure of volatility on the current pricedividend ratio to see how well current asset prices predict future consumption volatility. In
the data, the predictive R2 rises from 4% to 21%, indicating that consumption volatility is
indeed predictable and time-varying. The model matches this data dimension very well –
the model confidence bands include the data R2 ’s and, similar to the data, the magnitude
of the model-implied R2 rises with horizon. Panel B reports the slope coefficients from these
regressions. In the data, the current price-dividend ratio and volatility at all horizons are
negatively related. The size of the slope coefficients is quite large, and the model captures
their magnitude quite well. Bansal, Khatchatrian, and Yaron (2005) show that the negative
relationship between valuation ratios and future uncertainty is robust to alternative measures
of volatility, cash-flow data, and is present in several other countries in addition to the US.
Beeler and Campbell (2009) evaluate the LRR model by also asking how much
predictability does the model imply for an integrated return volatility measure. To construct
this measure, we regress the monthly returns on the log price to dividend ratio and sum the
monthly squared residuals to construct an integrated annual return volatility measure. Table
XI shows that in the data, the predictability starts at 10% and declines to 6% – the confidence
bands for this R2 and the slope coefficient reported in Panel B contain the data magnitudes.
The model median captures the signs of the slope coefficients in this regression quite nicely.
This underscores the economics in the LRR model, that when IES is larger than one, higher
consumption volatility (and return volatility) are negatively related to the price-dividend

15

ratio.10
In terms of the volatility channel, recent work in Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2007b),
estimate the LRR model and show that both components of the long-run risk model, longrun expected growth and long-run volatility fluctuations contribute to the cross-sectional
dispersion of expected returns. Related evidence showing that the volatility channel is
important for the cross-section is also provided by Tédongap (2006).
Empirical evidence presented in Sections 3.1-3.4 is robust to alternative methods
of computing standard errors.

We have also evaluated the model fit using the data-

based (bootstrap) confidence regions for all statistics of interest. We construct empirical
distributions by re-sampling the observed data 10,000 times in blocks of 8 years with
replacement and find that the inference based on the bootstrap standard errors is virtually
unchanged from the one reported above.

3.5

Parameter Magnitudes

In terms of the preference parameters, the magnitude of risk aversion in the LRR model is 10
or below, which is consistent with the magnitudes argued for in Mehra and Prescott (1985).
The Campbell and Cochrane habit model, in contrast, relies on extreme risk-aversion that
can be as high as 250 in some states.
There is considerable debate about the magnitude of the IES in the data. A large
number of papers (Hansen and Singleton (1982), Attanasio and Weber (1989), Beaudry and
van Wincoop (1996), Vissing-Jorgensen (2002), Attanasio and Vissing-Jorgensen (2003),
Mulligan (2004), Gruber (2006), Guvenen (2006), Hansen, Heaton, Lee, and Roussanov
(2007), Engegelhardt and Kumar (2008)) show that the IES is large and indeed greater than
one. Hall (1988) and Campbell (1999), however, argue that IES is small and close to zero.
There seems to be little agreement on the magnitude of IES in the data, and both high and
low magnitudes seem possible.
The Hall (1988) and Campbell (1999) argument for low IES is typically based on
10

Note that in Table VII of Beeler and Campbell (2009), they use a monthly price-dividend ratio, while
in the data the price-dividend is based on the end-of-year price divided by the trailing sum of 12 month
dividends. Once this is fixed and the model price-dividend ratio is treated as in the data, their evidence
is consistent with ours and, as described in the text, the LRR model also performs quite well along the
integrated volatility dimension.

16

measuring the slope coefficient from regressing consumption growth on the real rate. In
the data this slope coefficient is indeed small. However, Bansal and Yaron show that this
regression slope coefficient is downward biased and, hence, cannot be a guide for the true
value of the IES in the economy, if consumption volatility is time-varying. Beeler and
Campbell (2009) question the magnitude of this bias. However, Table VIII in their paper
reports that the population magnitude of the IES is 1.5, while the finite sample estimate
using Hall’s approach of regressing consumption growth on the real rate is only 0.93; this
is a big bias in statistical and economic terms, as the estimated value, in contrast to the
population value, is below one. Beeler and Campbell also suggest using an instrumental
variable approach to circumvent the bias highlighted in Bansal and Yaron (2004). While the
bias is smaller in this case, the estimate of IES in the data reported by Beeler and Campbell,
is larger than one.
The central issue about IES is its true value in the data and if it is larger than one. It
seems to us that a better approach to measure the IES is to use a larger set of model-based
moment restrictions, for example, some that exploit the level of the real rate, the consumption
volatility effects on price-dividend ratios, and incorporate the conditional version of the
Euler equation associated with the real bond. Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2007b) pursue the
approach of using a larger set of moments and find the estimate the IES to be larger than
one, while Hansen, Heaton, Lee, and Roussanov (2007) use the level restrictions and report
the IES estimate close to one. In all, a larger than one IES is consistent with the data.

3.6

Yield Curve

Evaluating the model implications for the yield curve, Bansal and Yaron (2004), Piazzesi
and Schneider (2007), Bansal and Shaliastovich (2009) show that the real curve is downward
sloping. That is, real bonds provide insurance in the model. This implication of the model
is consistent with the real yield curve data from the UK (comparable data sample for the
US is not available). In particular Evans (1998) shows that the real yield curve in the UK is
downward sloping. Hence, the real yield curve implications of the LRR model are consistent
with the data.
Piazzesi and Schneider (2007) and Bansal and Shaliastovich (2009) show that the nominal
yield curve in the LRR model is upward sloping since the inflation risk-premia in the model
increases with maturity. Bansal and Shaliastovich (2009) further show that the model can
17

account for the predictability evidence on bond returns and the violations of the expectations
hypothesis documented for nominal bonds.11
Beeler and Campbell (2009) argue that, for some calibrations, the price of the real console
(a real bond that pays one unit of consumption in every period) is infinity in the LRR model.
This is hardly surprising, as even in the standard CRRA model with i.i.d consumption
growth, the real yield curve is flat and the yield can be negative when risk aversion is
sufficiently high or when consumption volatility is high — in this case, the price of a pure
discount bond at infinity is infinity. The price of the console will also be infinity. This
model implication for the CRRA model and for the LRR model should not be a concern, as
a proper equilibrium exists and the price of the consumption claim (i.e., aggregate wealth)
in the economy is finite. Also, there are no data counterparts to a real console. Nominal
consoles do exist (deliver one dollar each period) and the price of the nominal console is
finite in the LRR model, as the nominal yields are positive and the nominal yield curve is
upward sloping.

3.7

Additional Considerations

In addition to data features such as the equity-premium and the risk-free rate puzzles,
about which which we mostly learn from the time-series, there are additional puzzles, which
primarily focus on the cross-sectional differences in expected returns, such as the differences
in returns to size sorted, book-to-market sorted, and momentum sorted portfolios (see Fama
and French (1992)). These data features also help learn about model dynamics and economic
sources of risks. The cross-sectional differences in expected returns on these assets must
reflect differences in systematic risks. To evaluate the LRR model, Bansal, Dittmar, and
Lundblad (2005) measure the exposure of cash-flows to long-run consumption growth risks
for 30 portfolios, sorted by size, book-to-market, and momentum. They show that these longrun cash-flow betas can explain more than 60% of the cross-sectional differences in expected
returns of these 30 portfolios. At the same time, exposure to short-term consumption shocks
or markets betas have almost no explanatory power in accounting for the cross-sectional
differences in expected returns. This evidence in the cross-section is robust to alternative
ways of measuring the exposure of cash-flows to long-run consumption shocks. Bansal,
11

In addition, they document that the model can account for the violations of the expectations hypothesis
in currency markets, that is differences in expected returns between foreign and domestic bonds.

18

Dittmar, and Kiku (2009) measure long-run consumption betas of the cross-section of assets
by exploiting the cointegrating relation between aggregate consumption and dividends and
show that this long-run cointegration-based dividend beta is critical for explaining both the
cross-sectional differences in short-horizon expected returns and the long-horizon differences
in expected returns. These papers underscore the importance of LRR consumption-based
cash-flow risks in explaining differences in expected returns across assets. Malloy, Moskowitz,
and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009) focus on consumption of stock-holders and show that long-run
risks in their consumption also accounts for the cross-section of assets returns.
Using simulations from a calibrated model, Kiku (2006) shows that the LRR model can
simultaneously account for the differences in value and growth returns and the empirical
failure of the standard CAPM betas. Santos and Veronesi (2006) evaluate the ability of the
habit-based model to explain the cross-section of book-to-market returns, and show that the
benchmark model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) implies a “growth” premium. They
argue that since growth firms are characterized by a relatively long duration of their cash
flows, they are more sensitive to discount rate risks than value firms and, consequently, have
to carry a high risk premium inside the habit model. As a result the habit-based model
cannot account for the cross-sectional differences in expected returns.
Most recent work on LRR models incorporates jumps in the expected growth and/or
volatility dynamics. Eraker and Shaliastovich (2008) provide a framework for analyzing
jumps in the growth rates and consumption volatility. They show that this can help account
for some of the puzzling options markets features. More extensively, Drechsler and Yaron
(2007) incorporate jumps in the expected growth and volatility dynamics and show that
this augmented LRR framework can explain the volatility premium in options markets.
Drechsler (2008) highlights the effect of model uncertainty in the LRR framework with
jumps. Bansal and Shaliastovich (2008) incorporate a confidence risk channel in the LRR
framework that includes jumps; this extention opens up a channel for jumps in expected
returns and yields significantly higher predictability of asset excess returns, relative to the
LRR benchmark model without jumps. Shaliastovich (2008) shows that this broader LRR
set-up can empirically account for several option market puzzles.

19

4

Conclusions

In this article we provide an empirical evaluation of the Bansal and Yaron (2004) LRR model
and compare some key features of the model to the Campbell and Cochrane (1999) habit
model. We show that the LRR model matches the key asset market facts quite well, and
all the model implications are well within the usual two standard error confidence range
from the data. We provide statistical evidence which shows that consumption growth and
consumption volatility are predictable both in the short and in the long run, and the LRR
model replicates this data feature. Bansal and Yaron (2004) develop and underscore the
importance of the volatility channel in their LRR model, this channel leads to volatility
shocks receiving separate risk compensation in asset markets. The volatility channel of
Bansal and Yaron (2004) also help identify the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, as a
large IES is needed to capture an important data feature that higher consumption volatility
lowers asset prices. We show that the data and the LRR model are quite consistent in their
quantitative implications for the volatility and valuation link.
We provide an important distinction between the Campbell and Cochrane (1999) habit
model and the Bansal and Yaron (2004) LRR model. Price-dividend ratios in the habit
model are driven by long lags of consumption and, consequently, past consumption growth
forecast future price-dividend ratios with an R2 of up to 40%. In the data this predictability
is close to zero. In the LRR model, the price-dividend ratio is forward-looking as it is driven
by anticipations of future growth and risk (consumption volatility). Therefore, consistent
with the data, lagged consumption growth in the LRR model does not predict future
price-dividend ratios. The large predictability of future price-dividend ratios with lagged
consumption raises considerable questions about the plausibility of the habit model.
Our evidence calls for estimation procedures, which can incorporate a wide range of data
features to evaluate the LRR, habit-based, or other models. An early approach is pursued
in Bansal, Gallant, and Tauchen (2007), who use the Efficient Method of Moments (EMM)
to empirically test these models. The moments they use in their EMM approach would have
to be considerably extended to entertain all the data features discussed in this paper.

20

Appendix
The price-dividend ratio for the market claim to dividends, zm,t = A0,m + A1,m xt + A2,m σt2 ,
where
A0,m

·
´2 ¸
1
1³
2
=
Γ0 + κ0,m + µd + κ1,m A2,m (1 − ν)σ̄ +
κ1,m A2,m − λw σw2
1 − κ1,m
2

A1,m =
A2,m

φm −

1
ψ

(12)

1 − κ1,m ρ

·
´¸
1
1³
2
2
=
Γ2 +
(π − λη ) + (κ1,m A1,m ϕe − λ² )
1 − κ1,m ν
2

where Γ0 = log δ −

1
µ
ψ c

·
³
´2 ¸
θ
2
− (θ − 1) A2 (1 − ν)σ̄ + 2 κ1 A2 σw
and Γ2 = (θ − 1)(κ1 ν − 1)A2

The risk premium is determined by the covariation of the return innovation with the
innovation into the pricing kernel. Thus, the risk premium for rm,t+1 is equal to the asset’s
exposures to systematic risks multiplied by the corresponding risk prices,
Et (rm,t+1 − rf,t ) +

2
0.5σt,r
m

³

´
= −Covt mt+1 − Et (mt+1 ), rm,t+1 − Et (rm,t+1 )
= λη σt2 βη,m + λe σt2 βe,m + λw σw2 βw,m

where the asset’s βs are defined as,
βη,m = π
βe,m = κ1,m A1,m ϕe
βw,m = κ1,m A2,m

21

References
Ang, Andrew, and Geert Bekaert, 2007, Stock Return Predictability: Is it There?, Review
of Financial Studies 20, 651–707.
Attanasio, Orazio P., and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2003, Stock-Market Participation,
Intertemporal Substitution, and Risk-Aversion, American Economic Review, Papers and
Proceedings, 383–391.
Attanasio, Orazio P., and Guglielmo Weber, 1989, Intertemporal Substitution, Risk Aversion
and the Euler Equation for Consumption, Economic Journal 99, 59–73.
Bansal, Ravi, Robert F. Dittmar, and Dana Kiku, 2009, Cointegration and Consumption
Risks in Asset Returns, Review of Financial Studies 22, 1343–1375.
Bansal, Ravi, Robert F. Dittmar, and Christian Lundblad, 2005, Consumption, dividends,
and the cross-section of equity returns, Journal of Finance 60, 1639–1672.
Bansal, Ravi, Ron Gallant, and George Tauchen, 2007, Rational Pessimism, Rational
Exuberance, and Asset Pricing Models, Review of Economic Studies 74, 1005–1033.
Bansal, Ravi, Varoujan Khatchatrian, and Amir Yaron, 2005, Interpretable Asset Markets?,
European Economic Review 49, 531–560.
Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku, and Amir Yaron, 2007a, A Note on the Economics and Statistics
of Predictability: A Long Run Risks Perspective, Working paper.
Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku, and Amir Yaron, 2007b, Risks for the Long Run: Estimation and
Inference, Working paper.
Bansal, Ravi, and Ivan Shaliastovich, 2008, Confidence Risk and Asset Prices, Working
paper.
Bansal, Ravi, and Ivan Shaliastovich, 2009, A Long-Run Risks Explanation of Predictability
Puzzles in Bond and Currency Markets, Working paper.
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of
Asset Pricing Puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481–1509.

22

Barndorff-Nielsen, Ole E., and Neil Shephard, 2001, Non-Gaussian Ornstein-Uhlenbeckbased Models and Some of Their Uses in Financial Economics, Journal of Royal Statistical
Society 63, 167–241.
Beaudry, Paul, and Eric van Wincoop, 1996, The Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution:
An Exploration Using A Panel of State Data, Economica 63, 495–512.
Beeler, Jason, and John Y. Campbell, 2009, The Long-Run Risks Model and Aggregate
Asset Prices: An Empirical Assessment, NBER Working paper 14788.
Campbell, John Y., 1999, Asset prices, Consumption and the Business Cycle, Handbook
of Macroeconomics, Volume 1, pp. 1231-1303; John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford,
editors.
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999, By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based
Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205–
255.
Croce, Mariano Massimiliano, 2005, Long-Run Productivity Risk: A New Hope For
Production-Based Asset Pricing, Working paper.
Drechsler, Itamar, 2008, Uncertainty, Time-Varying Fear, and Asset Prices, Working paper.
Drechsler, Itamar, and Amir Yaron, 2007, What’s Vol Got to Do With It, Working paper.
Engegelhardt, Gary V., and Anil Kumar, 2008, The Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution:
New Evidence from 401(k) Participation, Working paper 0812, Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas.
Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley E. Zin, 1989, Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the
Intertemporal Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,
Econometrica 57, 937–969.
Eraker, Bjørn, and Ivan Shaliastovich, 2008, An Equilibrium Guide to Designing Affine
Pricing Models, Mathematical Finance 18, 519–543.
Evans, Martin, 1998, Real Rates, Expected Inflation and Inflation Risk Premia, Journal of
Finance 53, 187–218.

23

Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1992, The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns,
Journal of Finance 59, 427–465.
Gruber, Jonathan, 2006, A Tax-Based Estimate of the Elasticity of Intertemporal
Substitution, NBER Working paper 11945.
Guvenen, Fatih, 2006, Reconciling Conflicting Evidence on the Elasticity of Intertemporal
Substitution: A Macroeconomic Perspective, Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 1451–
1472.
Hall, Robert, 1988, Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption, Journal of Political
Economy 96, 339–357.
Hansen, Lars, John Heaton, and Nan Li, 2006, Consumption strikes back?, Working paper,
University of Chicago.
Hansen, Lars Peter, John Heaton, Junghoon Lee, and Nikolai Roussanov, 2007,
Intertemporal Substitution and Risk Aversion, Handbook of Econometrics 6.
Hansen, Lars Peter, and Kenneth Singleton, 1982, Generalized Instrumental Variables
Estimation of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models, Econometrica 63, 767–804.
Hodrick, Robert, 1992, Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns:

Alternative

Procedures for Inference and Measurement, Review of Financial Studies 5-3, 357–386.
Kaltenbrunner, Georg, and Lars Lochstoer, 2006, Long-Run Risk through Consumption
Smoothing, Working paper.
Kiku, Dana, 2006, Long Run Risks and the Value Premium Puzzle, Working paper, Duke
University.
Lustig, Hanno, Stijn Nieuwerburgh, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2009, The Wealth-Consumption
Ratio, Working paper, NYU.
Malloy, Christopher, Tobias Moskowitz, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2009, Long-Run
Stockholder Consumption Risk and Asset Returns, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward C. Prescott, 1985, The Equity Premium: A Puzzle, Journal of
Monetary Economics 15, 145–162.
24

Mulligan, Casey B., 2004, What do Aggregate Consumption Euler Equations Say about the
Capital Income Tax Burden?, NBER Working paper 10262.
Piazzesi, Monika, and Martin Schneider, 2007, Equilibrium Yield Curves, Working paper,
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006.
Santos, Tano, and Pietro Veronesi, 2006, Habit Formation, the Cross Section of Stock
Returns, and the Cash-Flow Risk Puzzle, Working paper.
Shaliastovich, Ivan, 2008, Learning, Confidence and Option Prices, Working paper.
Stambaugh, Robert, 1999, Predictive Regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 375–
421.
Tédongap, Roméo, 2006, Consumption Volatility and the Cross-Section of Stock Returns,
Working paper.
Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, 2002, Limited Asset Market Participation and the Elasticity of
Intertemporal Substitution, Journal of Political Economy 110, 825–853.
Working, Holbrook, 1960, Note on the Correlation of First Differences of Averages in a
Random Chain, Econometrica 28, 916–918.
Yu, Jianfeng, 2007, The Long and the Short of Asset Prices: Using Long Run ConsumptionReturn Correlations to Test Asset Pricing Models, Working paper.

25

Table I

Configuration of Model Parameters

Preferences

Consumption

Dividends

δ

γ

ψ

0.9989

10

1.5

µ

ρ

φe

σ̄

ν

σw

0.0015

0.975

0.038

0.0072

0.999

0.0000028

µd

φ

π

ϕ

0.0015

2.5

2.6

5.96

Table I reports configuration of investors’ preferences and time-series parameters that describe dynamics
of consumption and dividend growth rates. All the parameters are taken from Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron
(2007a). The model is calibrated on a monthly basis.

26

Table II

Dynamics of Growth Rates and Prices

Moment

Data
Estimate

E[∆c]
σ(∆c)
AC1(∆c)

Model
(SD)

Median

2.5%

5%

95%

97.5%

Pop

1.92
2.12
0.46

(0.33)
(0.52)
(0.15)

1.80
2.47
0.39

0.72
1.52
0.15

0.92
1.64
0.19

2.73
3.60
0.57

2.93
3.84
0.60

1.79
2.83
0.45

E[∆d]
σ(∆d)
Corr(∆d, ∆c)

1.36
11.05
0.57

(0.88)
(2.72)
(0.21)

1.84
14.11
0.46

-2.79
8.53
0.22

-1.96
9.19
0.26

5.64
20.02
0.62

6.52
21.15
0.65

1.45
15.83
0.46

E[R]
σ(R)
E[p−d]
σ(p−d)
AC1(p−d)

7.84
20.16
3.36
0.45
0.87

(1.97)
(2.14)
(0.13)
(0.08)
(0.09)

8.12
20.44
3.14
0.18
0.62

3.59
12.45
2.79
0.11
0.33

4.38
13.62
2.85
0.11
0.38

13.62
30.15
3.29
0.28
0.79

14.96
31.90
3.32
0.30
0.82

8.75
23.37
3.07
0.26
0.79

0.86
1.74

(0.89)
(0.33)

1.24
0.94

0.10
0.54

0.31
0.59

1.78
1.46

1.86
1.59

1.05
1.22

E[Rf ]
σ(Rf )

Table II presents descriptive statistics for aggregate consumption growth, dividends, prices and returns of the
aggregate stock market, and the risk-free rate. Data statistics along with standard deviations of bootstrap
distributions (in parentheses) are reported in “Data” panel. The data are real, sampled on an annual
frequency and cover the period from 1930 to 2008. “Model” panel presents the corresponding moments
implied by the Long-Run Risks model. The first five columns in the right panel represent percentiles of
finite sample monte-carlo distributions. Population values (Pop) are computed from a very long sample of
simulated data. Means and volatilities of returns and growth rates are expressed in percentage terms.

27

Table III

VAR-implied Predictability of Consumption Growth

Data
1yr
3yr
5yr
10yr
15yr
20yr

Model

Estimate

Median

2.5%

5%

95%

97.5%

Pop

0.26
0.24
0.22
0.17
0.13
0.11

0.32
0.34
0.31
0.21
0.15
0.11

0.10

0.13

0.50

0.54

0.10

0.13

0.57

0.61

0.08

0.12

0.55

0.60

0.05

0.07

0.45

0.50

0.03

0.05

0.35

0.41

0.02

0.04

0.28

0.33

0.27
0.30
0.31
0.27
0.22
0.17

Table III presents predictive R2 ’s for consumption growth implied by a first-order VAR model for
consumption growth, price-dividend ratio of the aggregate stock market portfolio and risk-free rate. Data
statistics are reported in “Data” panel. The data employed in estimation are real, compounded continuously,
sampled on an annual frequency and cover the period from 1930 to 2008. “Model” panel presents
predictability evidence implied by the Long-Run Risks model. The first five columns in the right panel
represent percentiles of finite sample monte-carlo distributions. Population values (Pop) are computed from
a very long sample of simulated data.

28

Table IV

Predictability of Consumption Growth by PD-Ratio
Panel A: Predictive R2 ’s
Data
1yr
3yr
5yr

Model

Estimate

Median

2.5%

5%

95%

97.5%

Pop

0.07
0.02
0.00

0.14
0.10
0.08

0.00

0.01

0.36

0.41

0.00

0.00

0.37

0.42

0.00

0.00

0.37

0.43

0.07
0.05
0.04

Panel B: Predictive Slopes
Data
1yr
3yr
5yr

Model

Estimate

Median

2.5%

5%

95%

97.5%

Pop

0.01
0.01
0.00

0.05
0.10
0.12

0.01

0.01

0.09

0.10

-0.03

-0.01

0.20

0.22

-0.09

-0.06

0.28

0.32

0.03
0.05
0.06

Table IV presents R2 ’s and slope coefficients from projecting 1-, 3- and 5-year consumption growth onto
lagged price-dividend ratio of the aggregate stock market portfolio. Data statistics are reported in “Data”
panel. The data employed in estimation are real, compounded continuously, sampled on an annual frequency
and cover the period from 1930 to 2008. “Model” panel presents predictability evidence implied by the LongRun Risks model. The first five columns in the right panel represent percentiles of finite sample monte-carlo
distributions. Population values (Pop) are computed from a very long sample of simulated data.

29

Table V

VAR-implied Predictability of Dividend Growth

Data
1yr
3yr
5yr
10yr
15yr
20yr

Model

Estimate

Median

2.5%

5%

95%

97.5%

Pop

0.15
0.25
0.28
0.27
0.22
0.19

0.26
0.20
0.16
0.10
0.07
0.05

0.09

0.12

0.44

0.47

0.06

0.08

0.39

0.43

0.04

0.05

0.36

0.39

0.02

0.03

0.29

0.32

0.01

0.02

0.23

0.28

0.01

0.01

0.18

0.23

0.14
0.18
0.20
0.19
0.15
0.13

Table V presents predictive R2 ’s for dividend growth implied by a first-order VAR model for cash-flow
growth, price-dividend ratio of the aggregate stock market portfolio and risk-free rate. Data statistics are
reported in “Data” panel. The data employed in estimation are real, compounded continuously, sampled on
an annual frequency and cover the period from 1930 to 2008. “Model” panel presents predictability evidence
implied by the Long-Run Risks model. The first five columns in the right panel represent percentiles of
finite sample monte-carlo distributions. Population values (Pop) are computed from a very long sample of
simulated data.

30

Table VI

Predictability of Dividend Growth by PD-Ratio
Panel A: Predictive R2 ’s
Data
1yr
3yr
5yr

Model

Estimate

Median

2.5%

5%

95%

97.5%

Pop

0.10
0.08
0.06

0.20
0.09
0.06

0.04

0.05

0.40

0.42

0.00

0.00

0.31

0.36

0.00

0.00

0.32

0.38

0.11
0.05
0.04

Panel B: Predictive Slopes
Data
1yr
3yr
5yr

Model

Estimate

Median

2.5%

5%

95%

97.5%

Pop

0.08
0.12
0.11

0.35
0.45
0.49

0.12

0.16

0.56

0.60

0.19
0.26
0.30

-0.06

0.02

0.94

1.04

-0.33

-0.20

1.26

1.43

Table VI presents R2 ’s and slope coefficients from projecting 1-, 3- and 5-year dividends growth of the
aggregate stock market portfolio onto lagged price-dividend ratio. Data statistics are reported in “Data”
panel. The data employed in estimation are real, compounded continuously, sampled on an annual frequency
and cover the period from 1930 to 2008. “Model” panel presents predictability evidence implied by the LongRun Risks model. The first five columns in the right panel represent percentiles of finite sample monte-carlo
distributions. Population values (Pop) are computed from a very long sample of simulated data.

31

Table VII

Predictability of Excess Return by PD-Ratio
Panel A: Predictive R2 ’s
Data
1yr
3yr
5yr

Model

Estimate

Median

2.5%

5%

95%

97.5%

Pop

0.04
0.19
0.31

0.01
0.03
0.05

0.00

0.00

0.07

0.10

0.00

0.00

0.18

0.22

0.00

0.00

0.27

0.32

0.01
0.03
0.04

Panel B: Predictive Slopes
Data
1yr
3yr
5yr

Model

Estimate

Median

2.5%

5%

95%

97.5%

Pop

-0.09
-0.27
-0.43

-0.09
-0.26
-0.39

-0.38

-0.33

0.11

0.15

-0.96

-0.82

0.25

0.34

-1.39

-1.21

0.38

0.57

-0.08
-0.24
-0.38

Table VII presents R2 ’s and slope coefficients from projecting 1-, 3- and 5-year excess return of the aggregate
stock market portfolio onto lagged price-dividend ratio. Data statistics are reported in “Data” panel. The
data employed in estimation are real, compounded continuously, sampled on an annual frequency and cover
the period from 1930 to 2008. “Model” panel presents predictability evidence implied by the Long-Run
Risks model. The first five columns in the right panel represent percentiles of finite sample monte-carlo
distributions. Population values (Pop) are computed from a very long sample of simulated data.

32

Table VIII

Predictability of Excess Return by Adjusted Dividend Yield
Panel A: Predictive R2 ’s
Data
1yr
3yr
5yr

Model

Estimate

Median

2.5%

5%

95%

97.5%

Pop

0.04
0.06
0.09

0.01
0.03
0.05

0.00

0.00

0.07

0.10

0.00

0.00

0.18

0.22

0.00

0.00

0.27

0.32

0.01
0.03
0.04

Panel B: Predictive Slopes
Data
1yr
3yr
5yr

Model

Estimate

Median

2.5%

5%

95%

97.5%

Pop

0.91
1.59
2.37

0.93
2.63
4.21

-1.64

-1.33

3.60

4.44

-4.93

-3.71

9.89

11.64

-7.83

-5.37

13.96

16.70

0.74
2.18
3.72

Table VIII presents R2 ’s and slope coefficients from projecting 1-, 3- and 5-year excess return of the aggregate
stock market portfolio onto lagged dividend yield adjusted by the risk-free rate. Data statistics are reported
in “Data” panel. The data employed in estimation are real, compounded continuously, sampled on an annual
frequency and cover the period from 1930 to 2008. “Model” panel presents predictability evidence implied
by the Long-Run Risks model. The first five columns in the right panel represent percentiles of finite sample
monte-carlo distributions. Population values (Pop) are computed from a very long sample of simulated data.

33

Table IX

Predictability of PD-Ratio by Consumption Growth

Data
1yr
3yr
5yr

LRR Model

Habit Model

Estimate

2.5%

5%

95%

97.5%

Pop

Median

Pop

Median

0.02
0.03
0.04

0.00

0.00

0.10

0.12

0.01

0.01

0.15

0.17

0.02

0.03

0.25

0.29

0.01
0.01
0.01

0.03
0.06
0.09

0.19
0.33
0.41

0.19
0.33
0.42

Table IX presents R2 ’s in regressions of price-dividend ratio onto 1, 3 and 5 lags of consumption growth. Data
statistics along with percentiles of the corresponding bootstrap distributions are reported in “Data” panel.
The data employed in estimation are real, compounded continuously, sampled on an annual frequency and
cover the period from 1930 to 2008. “LRR Model” panel presents predictability evidence implied by the LongRun Risks model. “Habit Model” panel shows the corresponding statistics in the habit model of Campbell
and Cochrane (1999). Median represents the 50%-percentile of finite sample monte-carlo distributions.
Population values (Pop) are computed from a very long sample of simulated data.

34

Table X

Predictability of Volatility of Consumption Growth by PD-Ratio
Panel A: Predictive R2 ’s
Data
1yr
3yr
5yr

Model

Estimate

Median

2.5%

5%

95%

97.5%

Pop

0.04
0.14
0.21

0.03
0.08
0.11

0.00

0.00

0.13

0.16

0.00

0.00

0.32

0.38

0.00

0.00

0.41

0.46

0.07
0.21
0.29

Panel B: Predictive Slopes
Data
1yr
3yr
5yr

Model

Estimate

Median

2.5%

5%

95%

97.5%

Pop

-0.58
-0.54
-0.54

-0.95
-0.90
-0.78

-3.00

-2.67

0.40

0.68

-2.35

-2.17

0.14

0.28

-2.19

-1.96

0.13

0.27

-1.00
-0.95
-0.93

Table X presents R2 ’s and slope coefficients from projecting 1-, 3- and 5-year volatility of consumption
growth onto lagged price-dividend ratio of the aggregate stock market portfolio. Data statistics are reported
in “Data” panel. The data employed in estimation are real, compounded continuously, sampled on an annual
frequency and cover the period from 1930 to 2008. “Model” panel presents predictability evidence implied
by the Long-Run Risks model. The first five columns in the right panel represent percentiles of finite sample
monte-carlo distributions. Population values (Pop) are computed from a very long sample of simulated data.

35

Table XI

Predictability of Volatility of Excess Return by PD-Ratio
Panel A: Predictive R2 ’s
Data
1yr
3yr
5yr

Model

Estimate

Median

2.5%

5%

95%

97.5%

Pop

0.10
0.07
0.06

0.20
0.28
0.28

0.01

0.02

0.47

0.50

0.02

0.04

0.59

0.65

0.02

0.04

0.61

0.67

0.39
0.55
0.58

Panel B: Predictive Slopes
Data
1yr
3yr
5yr

Model

Estimate

Median

2.5%

5%

95%

97.5%

Pop

-0.04
-0.07
-0.07

-0.05
-0.13
-0.20

-0.09

-0.08

-0.02

-0.01

-0.26

-0.23

-0.05

-0.03

-0.41

-0.38

-0.06

-0.03

-0.08
-0.23
-0.38

Table XI presents R2 ’s and slope coefficients from projecting 1-, 3- and 5-year volatility of excess return
of the aggregate stock market portfolio onto lagged price-dividend ratio. Data statistics are reported in
“Data” panel. The data employed in estimation are real, compounded continuously, sampled on an annual
frequency and cover the period from 1930 to 2008. “Model” panel presents predictability evidence implied
by the Long-Run Risks model. The first five columns in the right panel represent percentiles of finite sample
monte-carlo distributions. Population values (Pop) are computed from a very long sample of simulated data.

36

