                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   IMPORT COMPETITION AND QUALITY UPGRADING

                                           Mary Amiti
                                        Amit K. Khandelwal

                                        Working Paper 15503
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15503


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2009




This paper was previously circulated under the title "Competition and Quality Upgrading." We thank
Nina Pavcnik, David Weinstein and participants at seminars at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
Yale University, Geneva Graduate Institute and the European Research Workshop (ERWIT) in Madrid
for many useful suggestions. We thank Spencer Amdur for excellent research assistance. All errors
are our own. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent
those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Mary Amiti and Amit K. Khandelwal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Import Competition and Quality Upgrading
Mary Amiti and Amit K. Khandelwal
NBER Working Paper No. 15503
November 2009, Revised February 2010
JEL No. F1

                                              ABSTRACT

It is important to understand the factors that influence a country's transition from the production of
low-quality to high-quality products since the production of high-quality goods is often viewed as
a pre-condition for export success and, ultimately, for economic development. In this paper, we provide
the first evidence that countries' import tariffs affect the rate at which they upgrade the quality of their
products. We analyze the effect of import competition on quality upgrading using highly disaggregated
export data to the U.S. from fifty-six countries in 10,000 products using a novel approach to measure
quality. As predicted by recent distance to the frontier models, we find that lower tariffs are associated
with quality upgrading for products close to the world quality frontier, whereas lower tariffs discourage
quality upgrading for products distant from the frontier.


Mary Amiti
International Research
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty St
New York, NY 10045-0001
Mary.Amiti@ny.frb.org

Amit K. Khandelwal
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 606, 3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
ak2796@columbia.edu
                         Competition and Quality Upgrading                                  2


1.   Introduction

     A fundamental question facing governments is how policy can promote economic growth.
It is generally accepted that innovation is a key channel to fostering growth, however, it
is less clear how to create the right incentives to encourage innovation. Empirical studies
have found that innovation increases with competition (see Geroski 1995, Nickell 1996 and
Blundell, Griﬃth, and Van Reenen 1999), yet these findings were at odds with theories from
industrial organization that suggest that competition could actually discourage innovation.
According to theory, pro-competitive policies may cause firms to under-invest if they are
able to capture only a fraction of the benefits of innovation while incurring the full invest-
ment costs. This appropriation argument dates back to a negative relationship between
competition and innovation suggested by Schumpeter (1943). Policies that protect innova-
tion rents could therefore encourage incumbent firms to increase investment. More recent
theories, though, suggest that the relationship between competition and growth need not
be monotonic. Hausmann and Rodrik (2003), Aghion and Howitt (2005), and Acemoglu,
Aghion, and Zilibotti (2006) show that policies that initially facilitate growth could in fact
inhibit growth at later stages of economic development. Aghion, Blundell, Griﬃth, Howitt,
and Prantil (henceforth, ABGHP, 2009) develops an industry model in which a firm’s re-
sponse of innovation to competition policy or increased entry threat depends on how far it
is from the world technology frontier.
     Subsequent empirical studies have found support for this nonmonotonic relationship
between competition and innovation (see, for example, Aghion, Bloom, Blundell, Griﬃth,
and Howitt, henceforth, ABBGH 2005, ABGHP 2009, and Vandenbussche, Aghion, and
Meghir 2004). However, all these studies have been confined to either single country analysis
or aggregate cross-country studies. Empirically investigating these theories with aggregate
country data is diﬃcult because competition policy can take many forms and is likely
to be correlated with other country characteristics, such as relative factor endowments.
While industry studies within countries circumvent problems associated with cross-country
analysis, the findings are diﬃcult to generalize across countries that span a wide income
distribution. The lack of internationally comparable measures of growth at a micro level
has prevented previous studies from adopting a hybrid approach that takes account of cross
country and within country characteristics.
     In this paper, we analyze the nonmonotonic relationship between competition policy
and innovation formalized in these theories using highly disaggregate data. Our sample
comprises 10,000 products across fifty-six countries. We are able to circumvent some of
the problems that have plagued previous studies by using a novel approach that measures
product quality, which serves as our proxy for innovation. We infer a product’s quality
based on the approach by Khandelwal (forthcoming). In our framework, we estimate the
quality of each product exported to the U.S. by using both price and quantity information,
                             Competition and Quality Upgrading                                             3


where, conditional on price, higher quality is assigned to products with higher market
shares. The framework provides quality measures that are internationally comparable across
countries and over time. We can therefore exploit very detailed information on countries’
quality performance to address potential endogeneity concerns in cross-country studies. To
measure competition in each country, we use detailed industry-level tariﬀs on its imports,
which, again, are comparable across industries and countries. Thus, countries with high
tariﬀ barriers are those where competitive forces are weaker. Moreover, since tariﬀs are
a policy instrument, they may be less subject to endogeneity concerns compared to other
measures of competition, such as the Herfindahl index, a measure that summarizes the
concentration of firms, used in many studies. The high level of disaggregation of both the
tariﬀ and the quality measures is crucial for isolating the eﬀects of competition on innovation
that are distinct from other channels, such as changes in a countries’ relative endowments,
product-specific productivity shocks, changes in consumer demands, or changes in countries’
institutional structures.
    To allow for the possibility of a nonmonotonic relationship between competition and
quality upgrading, we draw on models by Aghion and Howitt (2005), ABBGH (2005) and
ABGHP (2009) to guide our empirical analysis. The key idea behind these models is that
the eﬀect of competition on innovation activity depends on firms’ proximity to the world
technology frontier. These models highlight two forces. First, for firms far from the tech-
nology frontier, an increase in competition reduces incentives to innovate because ex post
rents from innovation are eroded by new entrants; this idea is similar to the Schumpeterian
appropriability eﬀect of competition. Following ABGHP (2009), we refer to this as the
discouragement eﬀect. As firms approach the frontier, however, competition can increase
incentives to innovate because it reduces firms’ pre-innovation rents by more than it reduces
its post-innovation rents. We refer to this force as the escape competition eﬀect.1
    We examine predictions of these models by allowing the eﬀect of competition on quality
upgrading, our measure of innovation, to depend on a product’s proximity to the world
frontier, defined as the highest-quality product exported to the U.S. in a given year. Our
empirical results provide support for the nonmonotonic relationship between competition
and quality upgrading predicted by the theory. Products that face a relatively high degree
of competition in their home market (i.e., low import tariﬀs) exhibit relatively slower quality
upgrading when they are distant from the world frontier. In contrast, for products close to
the world frontier, a competitive home market is associated with faster quality upgrading.
    Our results are consistent with the nonmonotonic relationship between competition and
innovation found in the industrial organization literature. Moreover, our disaggregated
   1
    ABGHP (2009) refer to this as the “escape-entry” eﬀect which dominates when incumbent firms are in
a neck-and-neck industry. In Acemgolu, Aghion and Zilibotti (2006), it is referred to as a “selection eﬀect”;
in their model, pro-competitive policies stimulate innovation when firms are close to the technology frontier
due to a selection eﬀect of more talented entrepreneurs.
                           Competition and Quality Upgrading                                       4


approach enables us to study the eﬀects of competition on quality upgrading across a wide
income distribution. We show that the theory has support in both high and low income per
capita countries provided there is a minimum level of institutional quality.2 This result is
intuitive given that, in countries with multi-dimensional sources of market frictions, changes
in import tariﬀs are likely to have limited eﬀects on the competitive pressures faced by
domestic firms. Thus, the results suggest that a minimum institutional “quality” may be
needed for the mechanisms of the model to operate.
     Within the trade literature, there are a number of studies that have analyzed the re-
lationship between tariﬀs and productivity. For instance, firm-level studies by Pavcnik
(2002), Amiti and Konings (2007) and Topalova (2007), and cross-country studies by Roma-
lis (2006) have found a positive relationship between trade liberalizations and productivity.
Other studies, such as Bustos (2008), find a relationship between trade liberalization and
technology adoption. However, our study is the first to allow for the potential nonmonotonic
relationship depending on proximity to the frontier using tariﬀs as the competition measure.
Our results suggests that understanding where industries are located along the world fron-
tier is important for understanding its future performance following a trade liberalization.
     The support we find for a nonmonotonic relationship between import tariﬀs and quality
growth can also help shed light on why the trade and income growth literature has produced
mixed results. In a survey of this literature, Rodriguez and Rodrik (2002) discuss how the
results are often sensitive to identification strategies and controls, and explain the diﬃculty
of disentangling the mechanisms through which trade aﬀects income growth using cross-
country regressions. In this paper, we show that omitting country-year fixed eﬀects, which
of course cannot be included in aggregate cross-country regressions, can change the sign on
the tariﬀ coeﬃcient; and how allowing for a more flexible nonmonotonic relationship can
also alter the conclusions. Although we focus on the link between tariﬀ liberalization and
one particular channel of growth - quality growth - to the extent that quality growth has
implications for income (see, for instance, Hausmann, Hwang, and Rodrik 2006), our results
oﬀer a lens into the mechanism for the relationship between trade and income growth.
     The remainder of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we provide a sketch of the model
in ABGHP (2009) which serves as the basis for our empirical specification. In Section 3,
we outline our empirical strategy and the methodology used to infer product quality. In
Section 4, we present the results, and in Section 5, we conclude.
  2
    As discussed in more detailed below, we rely on the World Bank’s Doing Business Report to infer a
country’s business climate.
                                   Competition and Quality Upgrading                           5


2.       Model

    We draw on the model in ABGHP(2009) to guide our empirical specification.3 It is
a multisector Shumpeterian growth model where entry threat aﬀects innovation by in-
cumbents. A final good, yt , is produced under perfect competition with a continuum of
intermediate inputs, xt (i):
                Z   1
         yt =           At (i)1−α xt (i)α di,   α ∈ (0, 1) ,                                 (1)
                0

where At (i) is the productivity associated with input i. The final good is used as capital in
producing intermediates. Only two firms are capable of producing an innovation for each
intermediate input. The model assumes Bertrand competition, so that if two firms have
equal technology, then profits are zero; and if the two technologies diﬀer, then the leader has
positive profits. It is assumed that the world technology frontier, At grows at an exogenous
rate, γ > 1.
     There are three possible types of firms: type 1 firms are at the frontier, with At−1 (i) =
At−1 ; type 2 firms are one step behind the frontier, with At−1 (i) = At−2 ; and type 3 firms
are two steps behind the frontier, with At−1 (i) = At−3 . Innovation allows the incumbent to
increase productivity by γ and keep up with the growth of the frontier, but technological
progress is step-by-step. The last firm type is automatically upgraded by γ (the model does
not allow for leapfrogging).
     In each period and in each of the intermediate sectors, there is only one potential entrant
that can pay an entry cost to enter. It is assumed that when entry occurs, it takes place at
the frontier. Thus, an entrant captures the entire market and becomes the new leading firm
unless the incumbent leader is also at the frontier after innovation, in which case the new
entrant chooses not to enter. The entrant observes post-innovation technology, thus would
not pay the entry cost if the incumbent was at the frontier because Bertrand competition
would drive profits to zero. An incumbent laggard never invests in innovation because at
best it would catch up to its rival and earn zero profits. Thus in steady state, there are never
two type 1 or type 2 firms. ABGHP(2009) demonstrate that in equilibrium there are only
three possible states: (1) type 1 leader; (2) type 2 leader; and (3) two type 3 incumbents.
     To solve for equilibrium, ABGHP (2009) shows that a firm chooses its investment z
to maximize the expected net profit gain from innovation less the cost of research and
development. Noting that it is never profitable for a laggard to innovate, they solve the
first-order conditions for a state 1 and a state 2 leader. Denote probj as the probability
that the potential entrant pays the cost of entry in sector j, which depends negatively
                                                         0
on an exogenous common cost parameter, Λ, so probj (Λ) < 0. This cost parameter can be
     3
    We refer the reader to ABGHP (2009) for the full model and to Aghion and Howitt (2005) for an
overview of models that provide similar insights under diﬀerent assumptions.
                         Competition and Quality Upgrading                                   6


interpreted as a measure of competition, with a higher Λ implying less competition. Then in
state 2 sectors, they show that the probability of increasing innovation, ∂z2 /∂Λ, is positive
due to the “discouragement eﬀect.” That is, firms behind the frontier know they cannot
survive entry even if they successfully innovate; thus any policies that reduce the cost of
entry will discourage innovation for firms behind the frontier. In contrast, in state 1 sectors
where the leader is at the frontier, a reduction in Λ that increases the entry threat increases
innovation: ∂z1 /∂Λ < 0. A larger entry threat increases the incumbent leader’s losses from
entry if it does not innovate, thus increasing the incentive to escape entry by innovating.
    Expected productivity growth, gi , in each sector is proportional to innovative investment,
thus:
      dg1     ∂z1                  dg2    ∂z2
            =     (γ − 1) < 0;          =      (γ − 1) > 0.                                 (2)
       dΛ     ∂Λ                    dΛ     ∂Λ
This implies that for firms at the frontier (sector 1 firms), a reduction in the entry cost
(tougher competition) increases innovation and growth. Conversely, for firms behind the
frontier (sector 2 firms), a reduction in the entry cost decreases innovation and growth.

3.     Empirical Specification

   The implications of the model are that innovation is a nonmonotonic function of com-
petition that depends on the firm’s proximity to the world technology frontier:

       innovation = f (competition, proximity to the frontier).                            (3)

To explore this relationship, we need to obtain a measure of innovative activity, proximity
to the frontier, and competition.

3.1.    Innovation

    Innovative activity may involve developing new production techniques, new products or
upgrading the quality of existing products. Measuring all of these aspects is challenging
because of the complexity of these diﬀerent attributes and the dearth of data that is com-
parable across countries. We overcome some of these diﬃculties by focusing on the quality
element of innovation using a novel approach developed in Khandelwal (forthcoming). We
measure a product’s quality using export data to the United States. We rely on a country’s
exports to the United States rather than its production to infer quality because the trade
data are available at a highly disaggregate level, which is important for our analysis, and
because these data are comparable across countries and time. Moreover, we are likely to
capture the highest quality products within a country given the evidence that exporting
firms tend to be more productive, employ higher skilled workers, more likely to obtain
International Organization Standard (ISO) certifications, and produce higher unit value
products relative to nonexporters (e.g., see Bernard et al. 2007, Verhoogen 2008, Kugler
                          Competition and Quality Upgrading                                     7


and Verhoogen 2008). There is also evidence that higher unit value goods are exported
to higher income countries (e.g., see Hallak 2006, Bastos and Silva 2009, and Manova and
Zhang 2009).

3.2.   Methodology for Measuring Quality

    Following Khandelwal (forthcoming), we use a procedure to estimate a product’s quality
from both export prices and market share information. This is in contrast to the literature
in international trade that often uses prices or unit values (value divided by quantity) as
a proxy for quality (e.g., Schott 2004, Hallak 2006). The obvious advantage of using unit
values is that they are easily calculated in the trade data. However, if products possess
both vertical (e.g., comfort) and horizontal (e.g., style) attributes, unit values may be
inappropriate proxies for quality. For example, consider women’s trousers, defined at the
HS 10-digit level (HS 6204624020), exported to the U.S. in 2005 by India and Venezuela.
The unit values (inclusive of transportation and tariﬀ costs) associated with these imports
were $140 and $163, respectively. Under the price-equals-quality assumption, Venezuelan
trousers would be assigned higher quality. However, the income per capita of Venezuela
exceeds India’s by ten-fold and so it is possible that the diﬀerences in unit values also reflect,
in part, the wage diﬀerential. Our measure of quality also takes into account diﬀerences in
market shares; thus for two products with identical unit values, the product with a higher
market share is assigned higher quality (how much higher quality depends, as seen below, on
the slope of the demand schedule). Indeed, India exported over 1 million units more than
Venezuela; and after accounting for these diﬀerences in market shares, the methodology
described below assigns a higher quality to Indian trousers, despite lower prices.
    To estimate quality, we use a nested logit demand framework, based on Berry (1994).
In this framework, quality is defined as the vertical component of the model and has a
structural definition as the mean valuation that U.S. consumers attach to an imported
product. The intuition behind this approach is that higher quality is assigned to products
that have higher market shares, conditional on prices. We closely follow the set up in
Khandelwal (forthcoming) and summarize the estimation procedure here.
    To understand the nested logit structure, first we need to describe how the data are
classified. We define products as the HS 10-digit codes, which is the most disaggregated
U.S. trade data classification. A U.S. import from a country within a product is called a
variety. All products can be mapped into a coarser 5-digit SITC (revision 3) classification
code, which we refer to as the industry. For example, an industry may be men’s knit
shirts, and within this industry, shirts are classified into products that can vary by fabric
material (e.g., cotton, wool, etc.). Chinese cotton and Japanese wool shirts are examples of
varieties. We use the HS 10-digit products as the nests for our application. As shown below,
the nested logit allows for more plausible substitution patterns than the logit by allowing
                              Competition and Quality Upgrading                                              8


diﬀerences in the correlation among consumer preferences for varieties within a nest than
for varieties across nests.
    We derive the structural equation for a single SITC industry, comprising many varieties,
and then estimate this equation separately for each industry (thus we suppress industry
subscripts). Consumer n has preferences for HS product h imported from country c (e.g.,
variety ch) at time t. The consumer purchases the one variety that provides her with the
highest indirect utility, given by
                                                     H
                                                     X
       Vncht = λ1,ch + λ2,t + λ3,cht − αpcht +             μnht dch + (1 − σ)   ncht .                     (4)
                                                     h=1

The λ terms represent the variety’s valuation that is common across consumers (notice that
these terms are not subscripted by n). The first term, λ1,ch , is the time-invariant valuation
that the consumer attaches to variety ch. The second term, λ2,t , controls for secular time
trends common across all varieties. The λ3,cht term is a variety-time deviation from the fixed
eﬀect that consumers observe but that we as the econometricians do not. Consequently, this
last component of quality is potentially correlated with the variety’s unit value inclusive of
transportation and tariﬀ costs, pcht .
    The horizontal component of the model is captured by the random component,
    PH
       h=1 μnht dch + ncht . The term ncht is assumed to be distributed Type-I extreme value
and explains why a low-quality variety that is expensive is ever purchased. The former term
interacts the common valuation that consumer n places on all varieties within product h,
μnht , with a dummy variable dch that takes a value of 1 if country c’s export lies in product
h. This term generates the nesting framework because it allows consumer n’s preferences
to be more correlated for varieties within product h than for varieties across products.4 For
instance, a consumer who prefers Japanese wool shirts is more likely to prefer other wool
shirts rather than cotton shirts. The nested logit is designed to capture this preference
structure.
    An outside-variety completes the demand system. The outside option allows consumers
to choose a domestically produced variety instead of any imported variety. The consumer
chooses this outside option if the utility derived from the outside-variety exceeds that from
purchasing any inside option. The utility of the outside-variety is given by

       un0t = λ1,0 + λ2,t + λ3,0t − αp0t + μn0t + (1 − σ)         n0t .                                    (5)

The mean utility of the outside variety is normalized to zero; this normalization anchors
the valuations of the inside varieties. In the context here, one can think of the outside
                                                                                          S
   4
     As discussed in Berry (1994), Cardell (1997) has shown that the distribution of H      h=1 μnht dch is the
unique distribution such that if is distributed extreme value, then the sum is also distributed type-I extreme
value. The degree of within nest correlation is controlled by σ ∈ (0, 1] and is assumed to be identical across
all products. As σ approaches one, the correlation in consumer tastes for varieties within a nest approaches
one; as σ tends to zero, the nested logit converges to the standard logit model.
                                  Competition and Quality Upgrading                                               9


variety as the domestic substitute for imports, and we therefore set the outside variety
market share to one minus the industry’s import penetration. Note that the choice of
the outside variety proxy aﬀects the absolute growth rate of import qualities but not the
relative growth rate because our analysis includes year fixed eﬀects that are common to all
varieties. Once P
                the outside variety market share s0t is known, we can compute the industry
                           qcht
size: M KTt = ch6  =0
                 1−s0t   , where qcht denotes the import quantity of variety ch. The market
shares for imported varieties are then calculated as scht = qcht /M KTt .
    The consumer chooses variety ch if Vncht > Vnc0 h0 t . Under the distributional assumptions
for the random component of consumer utility, Berry (1994) has shown that the demand
curve from the preferences in equation (4) is

       ln(scht ) − ln(s0t ) = λ1,ch + λ2,t − αpcht + σ ln(vscht ) + λ3,cht ,                                    (6)

where vscht is variety ch’s share within product h at time t (the nest share).5
    Since the trade data do not record detailed characteristics of varieties, we exploit the
panel dimension of the data by specifying a time-invariant component of quality (λ1,ch )
with variety fixed eﬀects, and the common quality component (λ2,t ) with year fixed eﬀects.
The third component of quality, λ3,cht , is not observed and plays the role of the estimation
error.
    Since λ3,cht and the nest share are potentially correlated with the variety’s price, instru-
mental variables are required to identify the parameters. We instrument the price with the
variety’s transportation costs, which are obviously correlated with prices but may also be
correlated with quality if firms ship higher-quality goods in order to lower per unit trans-
port costs. This practice potentially raises concerns that trade costs may be correlated with
a variety’s quality (Hummels and Skiba 2004). However, the exclusion restriction remains
valid as long as transport costs do not aﬀect deviations from average quality, λ3,cht . In other
words, if an Australian firm chooses to export higher-quality varieties to the United States
because of distance, the instruments remain valid as long as shocks to transportation costs
do not aﬀect deviations from the firm’s average quality choice. Indeed, the Washington Ap-
ples phenomenon discussed in Hummels and Skiba (2004) identify the impact of distance on
prices using cross-country variation in distance rather than shocks to transport costs over
time. We also include exchange rates and the interaction of distance to the United States
   5
     If one adopts a logit demand system, the nest share disappears from equation (6). To understand why
this nest share term is important for inferring quality, consider the following example. Imagine there are
two shirts—Japanese wool and Italian cotton—that are identical in every dimension (including prices) and
evenly split the market. We would infer their qualities also to be equal. Now suppose an identical Chinese
cotton shirt enters and the market shares for the cotton shirts are 1/4 each and the wool shirt captures the
remaining 1/2. Without the nesting structure, we would infer that the quality of the Italian cotton shirt has
fallen in half (since its market share has fallen while its price remains the same), even though its underlying
attributes have not changed. The nested logit takes into account the correlated preferences within nests. So
although the market share for the Italian cotton shirt falls, its nest share (vscht ) also falls and so its inferred
quality would remain unchanged.
                              Competition and Quality Upgrading                                             10


with oil prices as additional instruments; these instruments vary at the country-year level.
Finally, vscht is also endogenous, and so we instrument this term with the number of vari-
eties within product h and the number of varieties exported by country c. As is frequently
assumed in the discrete choice literature (e.g., see Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes 1995), the
identification assumption is that entry and exit of other varieties will be correlated with ch’s
share within the nest, but uncorrelated with quality shocks. This would occur in a model of
monopolistic competition where all varieties are atomistic, or in an oligopoly model where
entry and exit decisions occur in the first stage and Nash prices and qualities are chosen in
the second stage of game.6
    A second issue that arises in estimating (6), first noted by Feenstra (1994) and also by
Hallak and Schott (2008), is the problem of unobserved or “hidden” varieties. To understand
how hidden varieties could confound the measurement of quality, suppose that the reason
India exported far more women’s trousers than Venezuela was simply that India exported
more unobserved twelve-digit HS varieties (for instance, more colors). If the Venezuelan
and Indian varieties were identically priced with equal market share, then when aggregating
to the observed ten-digit HS level, we would assign a larger market share to the Indian
varieties. From equation (6), India’s estimated quality would be biased upward simply due
to the hidden varieties. Drawing on standard models (e.g., Krugman 1980) that predict
that a the number of varieties produced is increasing in a country’s population, we use the
(log of) population as an additional covariate in (6).
    The demand curve that controls for the hidden-varieties problem is given by

       ln(scht ) − ln(s0t ) = λ1,ch + λ2,t − αpcht + σ ln(nscht ) + γ ln popct + λ3,cht ,                  (7)

where popct is the population in country c. The estimated parameters and the residual of
the regression define the quality of variety ch at time t as:

       λcht ≡ λ̂1,ch + λ̂2,t + λ̂3,cht .                                                                   (8)

From equation (7), we see that the quality of an imported variety is defined relative to
its market share after controlling for exporter size and price. More generally, our notion
of quality is an attribute that allows a variety’s price to rise without it losing market
share. One potential concern about this interpretation is that many factors unrelated to
quality could aﬀect market shares and therefore confound our measure of quality. However,
   6
     We note that the validity of using a count of varieties to instrument for vscht relies on weaker assump-
tions than those typically made in the discrete choice literature. The discrete choice literature typically
instruments vscht with the average characteristics of varieties (e.g., Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes 1995). This
practice assumes that the firms’ quality choices are fixed (or chosen before prices). Here, we only need that
the number of varieties is uncorrelated with the deviation from average quality, λ3,cht . This will be the case
in a model where entry and exit occur prior to the firms’ quality choice. For example, this occurs in models
where firms choose quality in the final stage of a multi-stage game of location, price, and quality decisions
(e.g., Vogel 2008).
                               Competition and Quality Upgrading                                           11


it is important to note that this set of factors is made much smaller by conditioning on
prices. For example, a variety may have a large market share if the exporting country is
geographically close to the United States. However, since the price includes transportation
costs the quality estimate is not capturing purely gravity eﬀects such as distance.7

3.2.1.    Proximity to Frontier

    We estimate equation 7 separately for each SITC (revision 3) industry and use the esti-
mated parameters of the regressions to define the qualities according to (8).8 We construct
the frontier measures by first taking a monotonic transformation of the quality measures to
ensure that all qualities are non-negative: λFcht = exp[λcht ]. We define a variety’s proximity
to the frontier as the ratio of its (transformed) quality to the highest quality within each
HS product:
                        λFcht
         P Fcht =                    ,                                                                    (9)
                    maxc∈ht (λFcht )

where the max operator chooses the maximum λFcht within a product-year and P Fcht ∈ (0, 1].
For varieties close to the frontier, this measure is close to one. For varieties far from the
frontier, this measure is close to zero.

3.3.     Competition

    To measure a country’s competitive environment, we collect disaggregated import tariﬀs
for each country in our sample. The tariﬀ data are obtained from WITS and are specified
at the HS 6-digit level and over time. That is, we measure the competitive environment of
an HS6 industry in South Korea by South Korea’s tariﬀs on imports in that industry. The
advantage of using tariﬀs as our measure for competition within a country is that they are
readily available at a disaggregate level and comparable across countries and time. Impor-
tantly, there is widespread evidence that tariﬀ reductions result in pro-competitive pressures
in the liberalizing countries which result in both a reallocation of resources towards more
competitive firms and exit of ineﬃcient firms.9 An alternative measure of competition often
used in studies is a Herfindahl concentration index, however these measures are unavailable
across a large sample of countries necessary for our study. Moreover, while concentration
measures have the advantage of encompassing a broader concept of competition, it is not
possible to discern what policies are causing the diﬀerences in concentration across indus-
tries, since it is an outcome of many policies.
   7
     Note that defining quality to be inclusive of a residual is analogous to the productivity literature that
interprets total factor productivity as the residual from conditioning output on observable inputs.
   8
     Note that separate industry regressions imply that quality cannot be compared across industries. We
include appropriate fixed eﬀects in our analysis below to account for this.
   9
     For instance, see Levinsohn (1993), Pavcnik (2002), and the comprehensive survey article by Tybout
(2003).
                            Competition and Quality Upgrading                                            12


4.     Data Description

    To estimate quality, we use U.S. import data from 1990 to 2005 at the HS 10-digit
level. Since unit values are notoriously noisy (GAO 1995), prior to estimating the demand
systems in equation (7), we trim the data along three dimensions: we drop variety-year
observations above or below the 1st and 99th percentile of unit values, exclude varieties
with annual price increases of more than 200 percent or price declines of more than 66
percent, and drop varieties with export quantities of fewer than ten. The quality estimates
obtained from equation (8) are also noisy and so we trim the qualities at the 5th and 95th
percentiles. We also drop any observations with five-year quality growth outside the 1st
and 99th percentiles. We trim along five year growth intervals since our dependent variable
below will be defined as quality growth over 5-year intervals.
    We obtain six-digit HS import tariﬀs for fifty-six countries for 1990, 1995, and 2000
from the World Bank’s World Integrated Trade Solution (WITS) database. The sample of
countries is limited by the availability of tariﬀ data for those years.10 The world quality
frontier for each product in each year is defined from the set of countries for which we have
tariﬀ data. The proximity to the frontier for each country’s products in each year is then
matched to its import tariﬀs. Table 1 reports summary statistics of the change in quality,
proximity to frontier, and tariﬀ levels for OECD and non-OECD countries,11 as well as
statistics for countries classified as having strong and weak business environments, high
DB and low DB, which we define below. The table shows that non-OECD countries have
faster quality growth than OECD countries, and they also have higher rates of protection.
The table also shows that non-OECD countries have slightly higher proximity to frontier
measures than OECD countries, but this is related to product composition. Controlling for
product-year fixed eﬀects, there is a positive and statistically significant correlation between
proximity to the frontier and income per capita.
    As would be expected, the quality estimates indicate that richer countries export higher
quality varieties within products.12 Thus, on average, more advanced countries sit atop
a product’s quality ladder while developing countries are further from the frontier. The
relationship between income and quality in 2005 is seen in Figure 1. The left panel of
Figure 1 plots the proportion of the total number of products a country exports for which it
is the quality “leader”, P Fcht = 1, against its income per capita, showing there is a positive
and statistically significant relationship.13 Similarly, there is a positive relationship between
  10
     If tariﬀ data were unavailable for a particular year, we included the data for the preceding year. Note
that tariﬀs are common for all countries within the European Union.
  11
     OECD countries include all those that joined the OECD before our sample period in 1990. Countries in
our sample that joined the OECD after 1990 include Mexico in 1994, and South Korea and Poland in 1996.
Taiwan is a member but cannot vote.
  12
     This was shown in Khandelwal (forthcoming) and consistent with findings in the previous literature.
  13
     The income per capita and population variables are obtained from the the World Development Indicators
                            Competition and Quality Upgrading                                    13


income and the fraction of highest-priced varieties in the right panel of the figure. Notice
in this panel that the positive relationship is steeper than the quality-based measure. In
particular, China is a clear outlier; although China exported the highest-priced variety in 9
percent of products in 2005, the quality-based measure indicates that China was the leader in
44 percent of the total number of products it exported to the U.S. There are several reasons
for this discrepancy. First, although China exports low-priced varieties, it has exceptionally
high market shares (it has the highest quantity in 59 percent of the products it exports),
particularly for labor-intensive products. That is, the procedure above yields high quality
estimates for China because its market shares are larger than the predicted market shares
given its price and the estimated elasticity of demand. Thus, the methodology will record
higher quality for China in these products. Second, trade statistics are recorded on a total
value basis rather than a value-added basis. Given the importance of processing trade for
Chinese exports, its value added will vary across sectors. For example, the Apple iPod is
“made in China” even though China’s value added accounts for a fraction of the production
(Linden, Kraemer, and Dedrick 2007). More generally, Koopman, Wang and Wei (2008)
estimate that China’s value added in computers may be as low 5 percent. If the U.S. Census
collected value-added trade data, China’s inferred quality would presumably be much lower.
Note that in Section 5.3, we will adopt several robustness checks in our analysis, including
using unit values as a proxy for quality, and excluding China from the analysis and frontier
definition.

5.   Quality Upgrading and Competition Results

    With the import tariﬀs and quality measures in hand, we can analyze the eﬀect of
competition on quality upgrading as in equation 3, allowing for the discouragement and
escape-competition forces. We use the following empirical specification to relate quality
growth to import tariﬀs, proximity to the frontier, and the interaction of the two, which
allows for a nonmonotonic relationship highlighted in ABGHP (2009):14

      ∆ ln λFcht = αht +αct +β 1 P Fcht−5 +β 2 tariﬀch,t−5 +β 3 (P Fch,t−5 ∗tariﬀch,t−5 )+εcht .(10)

The dependent variable, ∆ ln λFcht , is the change in a variety’s quality between period t and
t−5. All the explanatory variables are in levels for the period t−5. Our specification includes
both product-year fixed eﬀects (αht ) and country-year fixed eﬀects (αct ) which are critical to
the analysis. The product-year fixed eﬀects deal with two issues. One, because the qualities
are estimated separately across industries, the quality estimates are only comparable within
the industry or product. Including the product-year eﬀects ensures that the estimation only
exploits the variation between comparable qualities. Two, product-year fixed eﬀects control
database.
  14
     ABGHP (2009) specifies a similar estimating equation in their context.
                         Competition and Quality Upgrading                                   14


for shocks that are common to all varieties within a product such as demand shocks or
world-wide technology shocks that could also influence quality upgrading. The country-year
fixed eﬀects sweep out country-level shocks such as technological shocks, changes in relative
endowments, and changes in institutions that aﬀect competition. Thus, this specification
flexibly controls for diﬀerent shocks that may be correlated with tariﬀ changes and aﬀect
quality growth.
    The ABGHP model suggest that β 2 > 0 and β 3 < 0 (see equation 2). Thus, a fall in
tariﬀs would spur a variety’s quality growth in subsequent periods only if the product variety
is close to the world quality frontier (P Fcht−5 close to 1); this is consistent with the escape
competition eﬀect discussed above. In contrast, if a product variety is a long way from the
frontier, a fall in tariﬀs could reduce quality upgrading due to the discouragement eﬀect.
That is, products a long way from the frontier need high tariﬀs to protect rents in order to
promote quality upgrading. Note that β 1 < 0 implies that varieties that are far from the
frontier (P Fcht−5 close to 0) experience faster quality upgrading, implying convergence in
quality.

5.1.   Results

    Before estimating equation (10), we first look for a monotonic relationship between
competition and quality growth by regressing the growth in a variety’s quality on the home
market’s import tariﬀs and product-year fixed eﬀects, as in the trade and growth literature.
The first column of Table 2 shows that a fall in tariﬀs is associated with slower quality
upgrading. However, once we include country-year fixed eﬀects in column 2, to control for
factors such as changes in a country’s relative factor endowments or technology shocks,
the sign on the tariﬀ coeﬃcient switches sign, and is now negative indicating that a fall in
tariﬀs is associated with faster quality upgrading. These results highlight the importance of
controlling for country-year eﬀects that may be correlated with industry level competition
measures such as tariﬀs. In all subsequent regressions, we therefore include both country-
year and product-year fixed eﬀects.
    Next, we examine whether the relationship between quality upgrading and tariﬀs de-
pends on a variety’s proximity to the frontier according to the baseline regression in (10).
Column 3 shows there is a negative coeﬃcient on the lag proximity to the frontier, which
implies a faster catch-up for varieties far from the frontier. The positive coeﬃcient on tariﬀs
and the negative coeﬃcient on the interaction of tariﬀs with the proximity to frontier pro-
vide support for the eﬀects highlighted in ABGHP (2009). The negative coeﬃcient on the
interaction implies that the varieties close to the world frontier are more likely to upgrade
quality in response to tougher competition in the domestic market (the escape-competition
eﬀect). And the positive coeﬃcient on the linear tariﬀ variable implies that tariﬀs are likely
to have the opposite eﬀect for varieties distant from the world frontier (the discouragement
                             Competition and Quality Upgrading                                            15


eﬀect). Thus, the results support the theory of a non-monotonic relationship between tariﬀs
and quality upgrading.
     In column 4, we examine heterogeneity in the discouragement and escape-competition
eﬀects by allowing for separate eﬀects for OECD and non-OECD countries. The results
hold across both groups but the magnitudes of the tariﬀ coeﬃcients are much larger for
OECD countries. For OECD varieties that are distant from the frontier (P Fcht−5 close
to 0), a 10 percentage-point fall in tariﬀs is associated with a 4.2 percent fall in quality
upgrading. However, for OECD varieties close to the frontier, a fall in tariﬀs has the
opposite eﬀect: a 10 percentage-point fall in tariﬀs is associated with a 5.6 percent increase
in quality upgrading. For non-OECD varieties far from the frontier, a 10 percentage-point
fall in tariﬀs is associated with a 1.1 percent fall in quality upgrading; and for varieties close
to the frontier a 10 percentage-point fall in tariﬀs is associated with a 1.3 percent growth
in quality.

5.2.   Institutions and Quality Upgrading

    The results in column 4 of Table 2 raise the question as to why there are larger quality
responses in OECD countries than in non-OECD countries as tariﬀs change. For the eﬀects
in the theory to be present, market forces need to be able to operate. In particular, the po-
tential for entry and exit of firms is crucial for tariﬀs to invoke more competition in the home
market. However, nontariﬀ barriers, bureaucratic red tape, and other entry regulations are
likely to imply heterogeneity in the impact of tariﬀs on the competitive environment across
countries. In countries with more regulation, additional domestic reforms may be needed
so that lower tariﬀs induce further competition in the market.
    We test for heterogenous eﬀects in the tariﬀ-frontier interaction coeﬃcient according to
institutional quality in the first column of Table 3. To assess the quality of a country’s
institutions, we rely on a measure of the regulatory environment from the World Bank’s
Doing Business Survey.15 The index ranges from 0 to 1, with a higher value indicating a
better business environment. We separate countries into two groups, with HDB comprising
countries with a doing-business indicator greater than the median, and LDB comprising
countries with a doing business indicator lower than the median.16 Column 1 shows that for
countries with weak business environments, the magnitudes and significance on the tariﬀ
variables are much lower than for countries with strong business environments, with the
coeﬃcient on the linear tariﬀ term insignificant.
  15
     We construct an aggregate Doing Business Index by following the procedure outlined in World Bank
(2005). The Doing Business database tracks constraints along several dimensions, including the ease of
starting a business, enforcing contracts, obtaining credit, hiring and firing, etc. We compute each country’s
percentile ranking for each outcome. The aggregate Doing Business measure takes the (simple) average of a
country’s percentile rankings across the outcomes. A higher value indicates an environment more conducive
to conducting business.
  16
     See Table 1 for the list of countries classified as above and below the median Doing Business index.
                             Competition and Quality Upgrading                                             16


    Interestingly, the business environment indicator is picking up an eﬀect beyond diﬀer-
ences in income per capita. To see this, we allow for additional flexibility in the coeﬃcients
for strong and weak business environments further broken down by OECD and non-OECD
countries in the middle panel of Table 3 (columns 2a and 2b). The results indicate that
even non-OECD countries characterized by strong business environments display both the
discouragement and the escape-competition forces (see upper panel of column 2b). Yet,
for countries characterized by weak doing business indicators the coeﬃcients on the tariﬀ
variables are insignificant on both tariﬀ terms for both OECD countries and non-OECD
countries, and the coeﬃcient on the tariﬀ term for non-OECD countries becomes nega-
tive (see lower panel).17 This result suggests that a minimum institutional “quality,” and
not simply diﬀerences in income per capita, is required for the two forces to operate. In
particular, the lack of support for the models among weaker business-climate countries ap-
pears consistent with a variant on the Acemoglu, Aghion, and Zilibotti (2006) model that
discusses how political economy factors can inhibit the escape-competition eﬀect from op-
erating (see section 5.2 of Acemoglu et al. 2006). Since countries with poorer business
climates are unlikely to fit the theory, we restrict the subsequent analysis to the set of
countries characterized by a relatively stronger business environment.
    In column 3, we therefore reestimate equation (10) with only the sample of countries
with business environments above the median. The results indicate that for varieties far
from the frontier, a 10 percentage point fall in tariﬀs is associated with a 5.2 percent decline
in quality growth, while an equivalent tariﬀ decline for varieties close to the frontier is
associated with a 3.8 percent increase in quality growth. To get a sense of the economic
significance of these point estimates, we evaluate what a 10 percentage point change in
tariﬀs implies for varieties close to the frontier and for those distant from the frontier, and
compare these predicted changes to the actual change in quality for these varieties. Thus,
for varieties close to the frontier (P F > 0.9), the predicted mean change in quality is 3
percent, whereas the actual mean change in quality for these varieties is 13 percent. This
calculation implies that a 10 percentage point change in tariﬀs can account for around 20
percent of the actual change in quality. An analogous calculation for varieties distant from
the frontier (P F < 0.1), implies that a 10 percentage point change in tariﬀs can account
for around 10 percent of the actual change in quality.
    Figure 2 provides a graphical illustration of the key results of the nonmonotonic rela-
tionship between competition and quality upgrading predicted by ABGHP (2009) for the
set of countries with strong business environments, highlighting the discouragement and
  17
     Note that there are only two countries, Greece and Portugal, in the LDB-OECD grouping. The alterna-
tive OECD group, with all current members, would add Mexico to that subgroup, which results in significant
tariﬀ terms. One explanation for this finding is that the busines climate in the maquiladora region of Mexico,
where the majority of Mexico’s exports to the U.S. originate, are not accurately reflected in the DB measure.
More importantly, the results for all the other three groupings are unaﬀected by the OECD definition.
                              Competition and Quality Upgrading                                                17


escape-competition eﬀects in column 3 of Table 3. The figure plots the predicted quality
growth
                   F
            ∆ ln λ̂cht = β̂ 1 P Fcht−5 + β̂ 2 tariﬀcht−5 + β̂ 3 (P Fcht−5 ∗ tariﬀcht−5 )

against the P Fcht−5 , evaluated at the 10th (dashed line) and 90th tariﬀ percentiles. The
downward sloping lines indicate convergence in the data; varieties far from the frontier
experience faster quality upgrading than those that are proximate to the frontier. The
predicted quality growth line evaluated at the 90th percentile tariﬀ (a 20 percent tariﬀ) is
a clock-wise rotation of the 10th percentile tariﬀ (a 0 percent tariﬀ), and this reflects the
two forces. For varieties far from the frontier, moving from a high tariﬀ to a low tariﬀ is
associated with a decrease in the rate of quality upgrading, which is consistent with the
Schumpeterian discouragement eﬀect. However, for varieties close to the frontier, moving
from a high to a low tariﬀ is associated with a faster rate of quality upgrading, which
illustrates the escape-competition eﬀect.
    Khandelwal (forthcoming) notes that products diﬀer in their scope for quality diﬀeren-
tiation, where some products are characterized by a large dispersion of qualities, or “long”
quality ladders, while other productsare characterized by a smaller dispersion of quality,
or “short” quality ladders.18 These diﬀerences, which may be due to either technological
diﬀerences or consumer preferences, imply that products will diﬀer in their scope for quality
upgrading according to their quality ladder lengths. In Table 4, we interact all the variables
with an HS 10-digit product’s initial period quality “ladder” measure, which captures a
product’s scope for quality diﬀerentiation (see Khandelwal, forthcoming), to see if there
is more quality upgrading in products with higher quality ladders. The quality ladder is
measured as the (log) diﬀerence between the best and the worst quality within a product
in the baseline year, 1990. The results show that the response of quality upgrading to
changes in tariﬀs is larger in magnitude in products that possess a higher scope for quality
diﬀerentiation. This is intuitive, as we should expect limited quality upgrading in markets
in which significant quality upgrading is not feasible due either to technological constraints
or consumer preferences.

5.3.   Robustness

    In the remaining tables, we check the robustness of the results. One potential concern
is that the proximity variable is measured with error due to randomness or outliers of
the highest quality variety. In Table 5, we demonstrate that our results are robust to
alternative measures of the world frontier. In column 1, we check the sensitivity of the
results by excluding varieties at the world frontier (and so exclude observations for which
  18
    A market’s intrinisic scope for quality diﬀerentiation is closely related to an escalation principle developed
in Sutton (1998). Other papers that rely on hetergeneity in the scope for quality diﬀerences include Kugler
and Verhoogen (2008) and Johnson (2009).
                             Competition and Quality Upgrading                                            18


P Fcht−5 = 1). In column 2, we drop the top 2 varieties and redefine the frontier in equation
(9) using the third highest quality variety, rather than the maximum. In column 3, we
redefine the frontier based on the sample of varieties exported by HDB countries. In column
4, we redefine the frontier using qualities inferred from the data set after excluding China’s
exports. Recall that in Section 4, we noted that China’s export quality may be overstated
because of the nature of processing trade and because the export data record export values
rather than value added. To check that our results are not driven by this, we exclude
China’s exports to the U.S. from the data, re-estimate quality using equation (7), and
redefine the proximity to frontier measures excluding China. In column 4, we report the
baseline specification using these (China-excluded) quality measures. Table 5 illustrates
that the results are robust across all of these alternative measures of the world frontier.
    In our final robustness check of the frontier measure, we reestimate equation (10) using
unit values, the more common proxy for quality in international trade.19 Specifically, we
define the proximity to the frontier based on how far a variety’s price is from the maximum
price, and define the dependent variable as the change in log prices.20 Column 5 shows that
the magnitudes of the coeﬃcients are similar to our baseline estimates; for varieties close to
the unit value frontier, there is a negative relationship between tariﬀs and subsequent price
growth, and for varieties far from the frontier, there is a positive association. This result
shows that the discouragement and escape competition eﬀects appear when using prices,
instead of the alternative measure of quality proposed by Khandelwal (forthcoming).
    In Table 6, we address issues surrounding omitted variables, endogeneity and selection.
First, a potential concern is that firms are upgrading quality in response to lower tariﬀs
on intermediate inputs rather than tariﬀs on final goods. As input tariﬀs fall, firms can
access cheaper higher quality inputs, which can lead to higher quality outputs. If tariﬀs
on intermediate inputs and final goods are correlated, this omitted variable could bias our
coeﬃcients. In column 1 of Table 6, we include input tariﬀs in the baseline specification
and find that it has the expected negative sign, but it is insignificant.21 More importantly,
the significance and magnitudes of all the other variables are unaﬀected by the inclusion of
input tariﬀs.
    Second, there may be endogeneity concerns arising from countries possibly liberalizing
their industries selectively based on forces that we are unable to observe. For instance,
if countries receive productivity shocks that enable them to improve the quality of their
products, pressures against liberalizing those markets may subside. To the extent that
  19
      See Schott (2004), Hallak (2006), Baldwin and Harrigan (2007) and Johnson (2009).
  20
      We exclude observations that report unit value changes above the 99th and below the1st percentiles.
   21
      Interestingly, reestimating column 1 of table 5 on the countries below the median DB results in a
significant negative coeﬃcient on input tariﬀs. This is consistent with research on developing countries that
shows lower input tariﬀs improves access to higher quality foreign inputs (e.g., Halpern, Koren, Szeidl 2009,
and Goldberg, Khandelwal, Pavcnik, and Topalova 2008) and significantly raises productivity (see Amiti
and Konings 2007) .
                            Competition and Quality Upgrading                                            19


these shocks are country-specific, the country-year fixed eﬀects will control for productivity
shocks. Likewise, productivity (or demand) shocks that are common across all varieties
within a product will be captured by the product-year fixed eﬀects. However, productivity
shocks could be market-industry specific. To address this concern, we include the change in
a country’s total exports to the world for each HS 6-digit industry by year. The change in
industry-level exports for each country is a plausible proxy for productivity shocks: higher
productivity shocks are likely to be reflected in higher export growth.22 In column 2 of Table
6, we see that while the change in exports is positively correlated with quality upgrading, its
inclusion leaves the key results unchanged. Moreover, the magnitudes are extremely close
to the baseline results reported in column 3 of Table 3.
    We further address potential endogeneity concerns by exploiting a specific liberalization
episode: the ending of textile and clothing (T&C) quotas under the Multifiber Arrangement
(MFA) in 2005. A major breakthrough in the Uruguay Round was the agreement by devel-
oped countries to end their stringent quotas on developing countries’ T&C exports.While
the liberalization episode was anticipated, the quota removal was plausibly exogenous for
countries that exported T&C because of the WTO mandate to end the quota regime.23
In 1995, the U.S. published the HS product schedule to phase out the quotas over ten
years. Brambilla, Khandelwal and Schott (2008) show that China’s T&C exports surged
following MFA quota removals (it was eligible for quota removals after joining the WTO).
The surge was most pronounced in the products in which China was “bound”—products in
which China’s quota fill-rates exceeded 90 percent. After the quotas were removed, China’s
exports of bounded products immediately increased by more than 450 percent. Brambilla
et al. (2008) show that with few exceptions (notably Bangladesh and India), virtually all
countries’ T&C exports to the U.S. contracted because of China’s export explosion.24 Thus,
China’s exports following the end of the MFA represents a substantial increase in product
market competition for T&C HS products, and especially in the set of products that China
was bound.
    We exploit the MFA episode by restricting our analysis to the T&C products that
were covered by the MFA, and we assign an indicator variable—Bh — if China was subject
to binding quotas in that product.25 Based on Brambilla et al. (2008), product market
competition was the most severe in the bound products. We then estimate an analog to
  22
      We obtain a country’s total exports to the world, by HS6, from the UN Comtrade database.
  23
      Nonetheless, the U.S. did reimpose quotas on China’s expots in a handful of T&C HS codes in 2006.
However, the reimposition of the quotas was due to China’s export surge in 2005. The lobbying for new
quotas therefore precisely reflects the substantial increase in product market competition in 2005, the last
year of our sample.
   24
      This finding underscores the point that the quotas actually ensured gauranteed market access for many
countries’ textile and clothing exports.
   25
      We choose 1991 as the year to determine whether or not China was binding in the product because this
is the earliest year for which the binding quota information is available at the HS level. China was bound
in 18 percent of the T&C products.
                            Competition and Quality Upgrading                                         20


the baseline specification in equation (10) on the set of T&C products:

       ∆ ln λFcht = αht + αct + β 1 P Fcht−5 + β 2 (P Fch,t−5 ∗ Bh ) + εcht .                       (11)

The specification in (11) regresses quality upgrading on product-year and country-year fixed
eﬀects, the lag proximity to frontier, and its interaction with Bh .26 We again restrict the
analysis to the countries defined as having a relatively stronger business climate. Since
China only became eligible for quota removals after it entered the WTO in December 2001,
we focus on the period from 2000 to 2005. As before, we should observe β 1 < 0; varieties
that are far from the frontier experience faster growth due to convergence. The coeﬃcient
of interest is β 2 which captures the diﬀerential quality upgrading in bound and unbound
products according to a variety’s P F . This coeﬃcient should be positive; varieties that
are close to the frontier should experience relatively faster quality upgrading in China’s
bound products. We report the results in column 3 of Table 6. Consistent with the theory
and our earlier evidence, we observe that quality upgrading among high P F varieties is
faster in products that faced stiﬀer competition over this period. We also run an additional
placebo test by including the earlier periods of our sample. Since China’s exports remained
constrained by quotas prior to 2000, product market competition should not have increased
in the B products in 1990-95 and 1995-00. We check this placebo test by interacting P F
and P F ∗ B with a PostWTO indicator that takes a value of one in period 2000-05 and
a value of zero in periods 1990-95 and 1995-00. The coeﬃcient on the triple interaction
term is statistically significant implying that, as shown in the previous column, there is a
diﬀerential change in quality upgrading across China’s bound and unbound products after
China’s WTO entry. Moreover, there is no statistical diﬀerence between quality upgrading
across products in the periods before China’s WTO entry. These findings are entirely
consistent with product market competition stiﬀening in the bound products in the final
period of our sample, but having no diﬀerential impact in the earlier years.27 Thus, the
predictions of the model and our baseline results are verified using the MFA shock.
    A related concern with the baseline specification is that the coeﬃcients on P Fch,t−5
and (P Fcht−5 ∗tariﬀcht−5 ) might be downward biased because, all else equal, a high λch,t−5
implies a high P Fch,t−5 but a low ∆ ln λcht . Following Acemoglu, Aghion, and Zilibotti
(2006), we therefore instrument P Fch,t−5 (and the interactions) with its 5-year lag value.
Column 5 of Table 6 shows that the results are robust, with the coeﬃcients on the proximity
to frontier and the interaction becoming a little smaller in magnitude (compare with column
3 of Table 3). The results are also unaﬀected by the inclusion of the growth in world exports
in the instrumental variables estimation.
  26
    Note that because Bh is time-invariant, we are only able to identify the ineraction eﬀect.
  27
    Note that we do not report the interaction P F ∗PostWTO in the table for readibility purposes. This
coeﬃcient is insignificant which is consistent with product market competition not changing substantially
in China’s unbound products when the quotas were removed.
                             Competition and Quality Upgrading                                             21


     Third, an alternative source of bias could arise from selection. If a country does not
export a particular product we do not observe the quality of that good. Further, the
observation is only included in the estimation if the quality is observed in both periods t and
t − 5. It is diﬃcult to sign the selection bias since it is likely to depend on how tariﬀs aﬀect
entry and exit, and where the varieties are located on the PF distribution. For example,
suppose lower tariﬀs result in a country-product pair exiting from our sample. While its
quality change would be missing (the current period quality is not observed), one might
expect its quality to have fallen (i.e., its quality-adjusted price rises to the point where no
U.S. consumer chooses to import the variety). If the variety was already far away from the
frontier, then our coeﬃcient on tariﬀ (β 2 ) is biased downwards (that is, it is not positive
enough). If the exiting variety was close to the frontier, then the interaction coeﬃcient
(β 3 ) is also biased downwards implying that the estimated coeﬃcient is “too negative”.
On the other hand, if lower tariﬀs result in more varieties entering the sample, then the
selection bias implies that our coeﬃcients are biased upwards. This is because while the
quality change for entering varieties is missing (because the previous period quality is not
observed), entry into our sample can be viewed as a positive change in quality. Thus, for
varieties distant from the frontier, our estimate of β 2 is biased upwards (that is, it is “too
positive”), while for varieties close to the frontier, the baseline estimate of β 3 is not negative
enough. This makes it diﬃcult to sign the overall bias on both coeﬃcients due any selection
issues. Nonetheless, to address this selection issue, we implement a two-step Heckman
correction. For this estimation, we use freight costs that a country would have to incur
if it were to export that product. This variable plausibly aﬀects entry and exit decisions
into the U.S. export market but does not aﬀect the quality. We calculate this potential
freight cost by taking the freight cost of the closest neighboring country that does export
that product. The first stage probit (column 6) shows that the coeﬃcient on the freight
variable is negative and significant; this suggests that higher potential freight costs reduce
the probability of being in the sample. In the second stage, we include the inverse mills
ratio from the first stage regression, which is significant, implying that the error terms in
both regressions are correlated. However, the results in the second step (column 7) indicate
that the main coeﬃcients of interest are unchanged from the baseline specifications. Thus,
our results remain robust to controlling for potential selection biases.28

6.     Conclusion

    The search for policies to encourage innovation has been a major challenge for govern-
ments around the world. This paper shows that increasing competition by lowering import
tariﬀs is associated with faster quality upgrading — an important component of innovation
  28
    The results are also robust to including tariﬀs and growth in world exports in the first-stage probit, but
the sample is smaller because we do not have tariﬀ information for all censored varieties.
                         Competition and Quality Upgrading                                  22


— only if the product is close to the world technology frontier. For products distant from
the world technology frontier, lower tariﬀs discourage quality upgrading. These findings are
supportive of theories by ABGHP (2009) and consistent with more recent empirical studies
that have also found a nonmonotonic relationship between growth and competition.
    We build on previous studies by analyzing this relationship for highly disaggregated
products for countries that span a wide income distribution. We overcome diﬃculties faced
by other studies, which focus either on within country or aggregate cross-country analysis,
by adopting a novel approach to measure quality, based on Khandelwal (forthcoming),
which provides quality estimates that are internationally comparable. The advantage of
this approach is that it enables us to control for country-year specific eﬀects such as changes
in institutions that could be correlated with industry competition measures.
    Our results show that support is strongest for countries characterized by good business
climates, which is perhaps not surprising given that lower tariﬀs are unlikely to significantly
alter competitive environments in countries that face many other restrictions to competition.
Interestingly, the nonmonotonic relationship between competition and quality upgrading
holds for both OECD and non-OECD characterized by strong business climates. Thus,
our results suggest that a minimum institutional quality, and not simply higher income per
capita, is required for the two opposing forces in AGHP to operate.
    These findings also suggest that initial heterogeneity in industry characteristics is im-
portant for understanding subsequent industry performance following trade liberalizations.
In particular, aggregate implications of industry-level trade models, such as Melitz (2003),
may diﬀer according to the industry’s initial distance to the world frontier. Further research
on the implications of this heterogeneity may therefore be important.

References

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2001). “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
   Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review 91(5), 1369-
   1401.

Acemoglu, D., P. Aghion and F. Zilibotti (2006). “Distance to Frontier, Selection, and
   Economic Growth,” Journal of European Economic Association, 1(3), 37-74.

Aghion, P., N. Bloom, R. Blundell, R. Griﬃth and P. Howitt (2005) “Competition and
   innovation: An inverted U relationship,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2), 701-
   728.

Aghion, P., R. Blundell, R. Griﬃth, P. Howitt and S. Prantl (2009), “The Eﬀects of Entry
   on Incumbent Innovation and Productivity,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(1),
   20-32.
                        Competition and Quality Upgrading                              23


Aghion, P., L. Boustan, C. Hoxby, and J. Vandenbussche (2009), “The Causal Impact of
   Education on Economic Growth: Evidence from U.S,”, mimeo, Harvard University.

Aghion, P., R. Burgess, S. Redding, F. Zilibotti (2008), “The Unequal Eﬀects of Liber-
   alization: Evidence from Dismantling the License Raj in India,” American Economic
   Review, 98(4), 1397-1412.

Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (2004). “Growth with Quality-Improving Innovations: An Inte-
   grated Framework,” mimeo, Harvard University.

Aghion, P. and P.Howitt (2005). “Appropriate Growth Policy: A Unifying Framework,”
   mimeo, Harvard University.

Amiti, M. and J. Konings (2007). “Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs and Produc-
  tivity”, American Economic Review, 97(5), 1611-1638.

Baldwin, R. and J. Harrigan (2007). “Zeros, Quality and Space: Trade Theory and Trade
   Evidence”, NBER Working Paper 13214.

Bastos, P. and J. Silva (2009). “The Quality of a Firm’s Exports: Where You Export to
   Matters”, mimeo, University of Nottingham.

Berry, S. (1994). “Estimating discrete-choice models of product diﬀerentiation,” The RAND
   Journal of Economics, 25(2), 242-262.

Berry, S., J. Levinsohn and A. Pakes (1995). “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,”
   Econometrica, 63(4), 841-890.

Brambilla, I., A. Khandelwal and P. Schott (2008). “China’s Experience Under the Multi-
   fiber Arrangement (MFA) and the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing (ATC)”, NBER
   Working Paper 13346.

Broda, C. and D. Weinstein (2006). “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 121(2), 541-585.

Blundell, R., R. Griﬃth, and J. Van Reenen, “Market Share, Market Value and Innovation
   in a Panel of British Manufacturing Firms,” Review of Economic Studies, 66(3), 529—554.

Cardell, N. S. (1997). ”Variance Components Structures for the Extreme-Value and Logistic
   Distributions with Application to Models of Heterogeneity,” Econometric Theory, 13,
   185-213.

Djankov, S., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer (2002). “The Regulation of
   Entry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1), 1-37.
                        Competition and Quality Upgrading                               24


Feenstra, R. (1994). “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices,”
   American Economic Review, 84(1), 157-177.

General Accounting Oﬃce (1995). “U.S. Imports: Unit Values Vary Widely for Identically
   Classified Commodities,” Report GAO/GGD-95-90.

Gerschenkron, A. (1962). Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective. Harvard Uni-
   versity Press.

Goldberg, P.K., A. Khandelwal, N. Pavcnik and P. Topalova (2009). “Imported Intermediate
   Inputs and Domestic Product Growth: Evidence from India,” NBER Working Paper
   14416.

Hausmann, R. and D. Rodrik (2003). “Economic Development as Self-Discovery,” mimeo,
   Harvard University.

Hallak, J.C. (2006), “Product Quality and the Direction of Trade”. Journal of International
   Economics, 68(1), 238-265.

Hallak, J.C. and P.K. Schott (2008). “Estimating Cross-Country Diﬀerences in Product
   Quality,” mimeo, Yale University.

Halpern, L., M. Koren, and A. Szeidl. (2009). “Imports and Productivity,” mimeo, Central
   European University.

Hummels, D. and A. Skiba (2004). “Shipping the Good Apples Out”, Journal of Political
  Economy, 112(6), 1384-1402.

Johnson, R. (2009). Trade and prices with heterogeneous firms,” mimeo, University of
   California at Berkeley.

Khandelwal, A.K.(forthcoming) “The Long and Short (of) Quality Ladders”, Review of
  Economic Studies.

Koopman, R., Z. Wang, and S. Wei (2008), “How Much of Chinese Exports is Really
  Made In China? Assessing Domestic Value-Added When Processing Trade is Pervasive”,
  NBER Working Paper 14109.

Krugman, P. (1980) “Scale Economies, Product Diﬀerentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,”
   American Economic Review, 70(5), 950-959.

Kugler, M. and E. Verhoogen (2008). “The quality-complementarity hypothesis: Theory
  and evidence from Colombia”, NBER Working Paper 14418.
                       Competition and Quality Upgrading                              25


Levinsohn, J. (1993). “Testing the Imports-As-Market-Discipline Hypothesis”, Journal of
   International Economics, 35(1-2), 1-22.

Linden, G., K. Kraemer, and J. Dedrick (2007). “What Captures Value in a Global Inno-
   vation System?”, mimeo, UC Irvine.

Manova, K. and Z. Zhang (2009). “Export Prices and Heterogeneous Firm Models”, NBER
  Working Paper 15342.

Melitz, M. (2003). “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
   Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695-1725.

Melitz, M. and G. Ottaviano (2008). “Market Size, Trade, and Productivity,” Review of
   Economic Studies, 75(1), 295-316.

Nickell, S. (1996). “Competition and Corporate Performance,” Journal of Political Econ-
   omy, 104(4), 724—746.

Pavcnik, N. (2002). “Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements: Evidence
   from Chilean Plants.” Review of Economic Studies 69(1): 245-76.

Schumpeter, J. (1943). Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy (London: Allen Unwin).

Schott, P. (2004). “Across-Product versus Within-Product Specialization in International
   Trade,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(2), 647-678.

Topalova, P. (2007). “Trade Liberalization and Firm Productivity: The Case of India”, IMF
   Working Paper, WP/04/28.

Tybout, J. (2003). “Plant- and Firm-Level Evidence on ‘New’ Trade Theories,” in E. Choi
   and J. Harrigan (eds.) Handbook of International Trade (Oxford: Basil-Blackwell).

Vandenbussche, J., P. Aghion, and C. Meghir (2004), “Growth, Distance to Frontier and
   Composition of Human Capital”, mimeo, Harvard University.

Vogel (2008). “Spatial Competition with Heterogeneous Firms,” Journal of Political Econ-
   omy, 116(3), 423-466.
                          Competition and Quality Upgrading                                       26


7.   Tables and Figures


       Variables              OECD            Non‐OECD          High DB            Low DB
       ΔQualitycht            0.277             0.405            0.287               0.449
                             (1.116)           (1.074)          (1.111)            (1.063)
       PFcht‐5                0.508             0.559            0.520               0.557
                             (0.351)           (0.332)          (0.347)            (0.333)
       Tariffc,h6,t‐5         0.076             0.251            0.091               0.310
                             (0.061)           (0.262)          (0.104)            (0.280)
       Countries                20                36               29                  27
       Observations          74,053            57,204           94,274              36,983
       Notes: Table reports summary statistics of changes in quality, lag proximity to frontier
       and lag tariffs. Mean values are reported with standard deviations in parentheses. DB
       refers to the World Bank's Doing Business Report and we split countries between
       those above and below the median values. Countries above the median DB in our
       sample are: Australia*, Austria*, Belgium/Luxembourg*, Canada*, Chile, Denmark*,
       Finland*, France*, Germany*, Hong Kong, Ireland*, Italy*, Japan*, Malaysia,
       Netherlands*, New Zealand*, Nicaragua, Norway*, Poland, Singapore, South Africa,
       South Korea, Spain*, Sweden*, Taiwan, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey*, and UK*. Countries
       below the median DB in our sample are: Argentina, Bangladesh, Brazil, China,
       Colombia, Costa Rica, Egypt, El Salvador, Greece*, Guatemala, Honduras, India,
       Indonesia, Kenya, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
       Portugal*, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, Uruguay, Venezuela, and Vietnam. Stars denote
       OECD countries.


                                    Table 1: Summary Statics
                        Competition and Quality Upgrading                                   27




Regressors                              (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)
 PFcht‐5                                                         ‐0.823 ***
                                                                  0.014
  Tariff c,h6,t‐5                     0.207 ***    ‐0.070 **     0.214 ***
                                      0.014         0.033        0.048
  PFcht‐5 X Tariff c,h6,t‐5                                      ‐0.438 ***
                                                                  0.048
OECD Indicator interacted with
 PFcht‐5                                                                      ‐0.737 ***
                                                                               0.021
  Tariff c,h6,t‐5                                                              0.416 **
                                                                               0.165
  PFcht‐5 X Tariff c,h6,t‐5                                                   ‐0.973 ***
                                                                               0.220
Non‐OECD Indicator interacted with
 PFcht‐5                                                                      ‐0.943 ***
                                                                               0.020
  Tariff c,h6,t‐5                                                              0.113 **
                                                                               0.050
  PFcht‐5 X Tariff c,h6,t‐5                                                   ‐0.241 ***
                                                                               0.051
  Product‐Year FEs                        yes          yes            yes          yes
   Country‐Year FEs                       no           yes            yes          yes
   R‐squared                             0.54         0.54           0.58         0.58
   Observations                      131,257       131,257       131,257      131,257
Notes: Table reports regression results of change in (log) quality of a variety on the
lag HS6 level tariff faced in the origin country, the varieties lag proximity to frontier
and the interaction. Columns 1 reports quality growth on tariffs. Columns 2
introduces country‐year fixed effects. Column 2 reports the baseline specification
with the interaction between proximity to frontier and tariffs. Columns 4 estimates
separate coefficients for the OECD and non‐OECD countries (the OECD dummy is not
reported). All regressions include product‐year fixed effects. Standard errors
clustered by exporting country (with EU countries treated as one country because of
its common trade policy). Significance * .10 **.05 *** .01.

    Table 2: Quality Upgrading, Competition, and Distance to Frontier
                            Competition and Quality Upgrading                                      28




                                            OECD Indicator Non‐OECD Indicator HDB Countries
                      All Countries          interactions     interactions        Only
Regressors                    (1)                   (2a)              (2b)          (3)
Countries Above Median DB
 PFcht‐5                  ‐0.769 ***             ‐0.739 ***          ‐0.836 ***      ‐0.810 ***
                           0.017                  0.021               0.027           0.019
 Tariffc,h6,t‐5                 0.438 ***        0.420 **             0.413 ***       0.524 ***
                                0.089            0.167                0.104           0.094
 PFcht‐5 X Tariffc,h6,t‐5      ‐0.790 ***        ‐0.991 ***          ‐0.622 ***      ‐0.907 ***
                                0.111             0.221               0.130           0.119
Countries Below Median DB
 PFcht‐5                  ‐0.992 ***             ‐0.652 ***          ‐1.037 ***
                           0.026                  0.114               0.027
 Tariffc,h6,t‐5                 0.033            0.590               ‐0.017
                                0.058            0.702                0.059
 PFcht‐5 X Tariffc,h6,t‐5      ‐0.121 **         ‐0.740              ‐0.051
                                0.057             0.985               0.058
Product‐Year FEs                 yes                          yes                       yes
Country‐Year FEs                 yes                          yes                       yes
R‐squared                        0.58                         0.58                     0.58
Observations                 131,257                       131,257                      94,274
Notes: Column 1 reports regression results of change in (log) quality of a variety on the lag
HS6 level tariff faced in the origin country, the varieties lag proximity to frontier and the
interaction, with each coefficient interacted with a dummy variable if the country is above
(HDB) or below (LDB) the median Doing Business value. Panel two introduces an additional
interaction if the country is an OECD country. Column 2a reports the OECD interactions and
column 2b reports the non‐OECD interactions; note that these coefficients are estimated in a
single regression. Column 3 reports the baseline specification for just countries above the
median Doing Business values. See footnote of Table 1 for a list of the country classificatoins.
All regressions include product‐year and country‐year fixed effects. Standard errors
clustered by exporting country (with EU countries treated as one country because of the
common trade policy). Significance * .10 **.05 *** .01.


                  Table 3: Quality Upgrading, Competition, and Institutions
    Competition and Quality Upgrading                    29




Regressors                                      (1)
PFcht‐5                                     ‐0.660 ***
                                             0.033
PFcht‐5 X Ladderh                           ‐0.059 ***
                                             0.015
Tariffc,h6,t‐5                              0.311 **
                                            0.157
Tariffc,h6,t‐5 X Ladderh                    0.135 *
                                            0.071
PFcht‐5 X Tariffc,h6,t‐5                    ‐0.533 ***
                                             0.188
PFcht‐5 X Tariffc,h6,t‐5 X Ladderh          ‐0.229 **
                                             0.106
Product‐Year FEs                             yes
Country‐Year FEs                             yes
R‐squared                                   0.58
Observations                             74,729
Notes: Table reports the results where baseline
coefficients are interacted with a product's
quality ladder (Ladderh), defined as the
difference between the best and worst quality
within a product in the baseline year, 1990. The
regression includes product‐year and country‐
year fixed effects and is run on the set of HDB
countries only. The number of observations fall
because we use the ladder variable defined in
1990. Standard errors clustered by exporting
country (with EU countries treated as one country
because of the common trade policy).
Significance * .10 **.05 *** .01.



                 Table 4: Quality Ladders
                              Competition and Quality Upgrading                                     30




                                          Frontier
                                        Defined After Frontier   Exclude China
                                        Dropping Top Defined on from Quality
                           Exclude PF=1 2 Qualities HDB Countries Estimation        Unit Values
Regressors                      (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)             (5)
PFcht‐5                       ‐1.025 ***   ‐0.784 ***   ‐0.778 ***     ‐0.868 ***      ‐1.106 ***
                               0.024        0.022        0.017          0.019           0.018
Tariff c,h6,t‐5               0.423 ***    0.529 ***     0.511 ***      0.424 ***       0.285 ***
                              0.099        0.123         0.094          0.095           0.059
PFcht‐5 X Tariffc,h6,t‐5      ‐0.726 ***   ‐0.774 ***   ‐0.841 ***     ‐0.883 ***      ‐0.496 ***
                               0.127        0.146        0.115          0.117           0.115
Product‐Year FEs            yes             yes              yes             yes            yes
Country‐Year FEs            yes             yes              yes             yes            yes
R‐squared                  0.58           0.586            0.584            0.57          0.214
Observations             83,552          73,326           94,274         90,276          91,754
Notes: Table reports regression results of change in (log) quality of a variety on the lag HS6
level tariff faced in the origin country, the varieties lag proximity to frontier and the
interaction along with additional controls. Column 1 excludes observations with a proximity
to frontier equal to one. Column 2 removes the top two qualities from each product and re‐
defines the proximity to frontier measure (that is, the third highest quality becomes the
frontier). Column 3 re‐defines the frontier measure using just the sample of HDB countries.
Column 4 uses quality measures from estimating equation (7) excluding China and then re‐
running the baseline regression (10). Column 5 uses unit values as the proxy for quality, and
so it regresses the change in unit values on tariffs, a unit value proximity to frontier measure,
and the interaction. All regressions include country‐year and product‐year fixed effects, and
run on the set of high DB countries. Standard errors clustered by exporting country (with EU
countries treated as one country because of the common tariff). Significance * .10 **.05 ***
.01.


                           Table 5: Alternative Proxy to Frontier Measures
                                Competition and Quality Upgrading                                                      31



                                             World        MFA        MFA                1st Stage Heckman
                                 Input       Export       (final     (all       IV       Probit   Selection
                                 Tariffs     Growth      period)   periods) Regression (Heckman) Correction
Regressors                          (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)             (6)           (7)
PFcht‐5                         ‐0.815 *** ‐0.806 *** ‐1.180 *** ‐1.156 *** ‐0.436 ***                   ‐0.818 ***
                                 0.019      0.019      0.057      0.044      0.036                        0.019
Tariff c,h6,t‐5                 0.511 *** 0.487 ***                            0.431 **                   0.538 ***
                                0.100     0.095                                0.195                      0.094
PFcht‐5 X Tariffc,h6,t‐5        ‐0.907 *** ‐0.870 ***                          ‐0.769 ***                ‐0.913 ***
                                 0.121      0.121                               0.252                     0.119
World Export Growthc,h6,t                    0.047 ***
                                             0.007
Input Tariff c,h6,t‐5           0.055
                                0.169
PFcht‐5 X Bh                                             0.267 *** 0.048
                                                         0.092     0.078
PFcht‐5 X Bh X PostWTOt                                            0.219 *
                                                                   0.114
Log Potential Freightc,h6,t‐5                                                               ‐0.097 ***
                                                                                             0.002
Inverse Mills Ratioc,h6,t                                                                                ‐2.844 ***
                                                                                                          0.239
Product‐Year FEs                  yes          yes         yes        yes          yes            no         yes
HS2‐Year FEs                       no           no          no         no           no           yes          no
Country‐Year FEs                  yes          yes         yes        yes          yes           yes         yes
R‐squared                        0.58         0.59       0.623       0.65         0.07          0.17        0.58
Observations                  92,612       90,868         8655     25097        35,156      922,606      94,274
Notes: Table reports regression results of change in (log) quality of a variety on the lag HS6 level tariff faced in
the origin country, the varieties lag proximity to frontier and the interaction along with additional controls.
Column 1 includes lag input tariffs as a control. Column 2 includes a measure of a country's HS6‐level world
export growth. Column 3 restricts the analysis to 2000‐2005 and to products that were subject to quotas under
the MFA. These products are taken from Brambilla et al. (2008). The "B" dummy that takes a value of one if
China's fill rate exceeded 90 percent in 1991 for that product; fill rate information is also taken from Brambilla
et al. (2008). Column 4 includes all periods and interacts PF X B with a dummy "PostWTO" that takes a value of
one in the period 2000‐2005. We suppress the coeffient on PF * PostWTO for readibility purposes (the
coefficient is not statistically significant). Column 5 instruments the lag proximity to frontier with the previous
period lag PF measure (i.e., the lag‐lag proximity to frontier). Using the lag‐lag PF measure is why the number
of observations falls. Column 6 reports the first‐stage probit regression of the probability of being observed in
the sample on the (log) potential freight measure, country‐year fixed effects and HS2‐year fixed effects.
Column 7 includes the inverse mills ratio obtained from column 6 to correct for selection. All regressions
(excluding column 6) include country‐year and product‐year fixed effects and are run on the set of high DB
countries. Standard errors clustered by exporting country (with EU countries treated as one country because of
the common tariff). Significance * .10 **.05 *** .01.

                                           Table 6: Robustness Checks
                                                                           Competition and Quality Upgrading                                                                                               32




                                                                Quality Leaders                                                                                          Price Leaders
                                                                           2005                                                                                                 2005




                                                                                                                                  .5
                           .5




                                                                                                      Fraction of the Country's Products with Highest Price
Fraction of Country's Products with Highest Quality




                                                                     CHN




                                                                                                                                                  .4
                                           .4




                                                                                                                                                                                           ITA NOR
                                                                                                                                      .3
                               .3




                                                                                                                                                                                             FRAJPN
                                                                                                                                                                                              GBR

                                                                                       CAN                                                                                                     DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                            DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                              IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                            BLX
                                                                                                                                                                                             CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                            AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                             NLD
                                                                                                                         .2
                  .2




                                                                                       DEUJ PN
                                                                                     ITA                                                                                                  NZL
                                                               PAK
                                                                              CHL
                                                                              MEX     TWN                                                                                                 ESP

                                                               IND                      G
                                                                                      FBLX
                                                                                        RABR                                                                                         CHL SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                          GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                    POL PRT
                                                                                 SAU
                                                                                                             .1




                                                                                   KOR
      .1




                                                              KEN           BRA
                                                                             VENARG NZL    NOR                                                                        KEN    MARTUN
                                                              BGD                 GRCNLDHKG
                                                                                        IRL
                                                                                         DNK
                                                                                                                                                                             CHN BRAMEXARG
                                                                     PRYSLV
                                                                         PER POL PRTESP
                                                                                      AUS                                                                              IND PRYPER          KORTWN
                                                                  IDN
                                                                   HND COL
                                                                         THA URY                                                                                  NPL       PHL THA
                                                                                                                                                                                  TUR          HKG
                                                                   LKAEGY
                                                                    PHL    TUR                                                                                            IDN  COL CRI
                                                                                                                                                                           LKAEGY   VEN
                                                                  NIC  GTM CRI                                                                                          PAKHNDGTM
                                                               VNM MAR
                                                          NPL            TUN                                                                                           VNMNIC SLV
                                                                                                                                                                      BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                      URY
                           0




                                                                                                                                  0




                                                      5    6     7     8    9    10       11     12                                                           5    6     7     8    9    10     11    12
                                                                Log Income Per Capita                                                                                   Log Income Per Capita




                                                                             Figure 1: Quality and Price Leaders
                                         Competition and Quality Upgrading                                   33




             .2          0
Predicted Quality Growth
 -.6     -.4 -.8 -.2




                             0            .2            .4              .6            .8                 1
                                                       Proximity to Frontier

                                      5th Percentile Tariff: 0%            95th Percentile Tariff: 20%
Predict quality growth excludes values of estimated HS-year and country-year FEs




                                 Figure 2: Predict Quality Growth and Proximity to Frontier
