NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON THE OPTIMAL TAXATION OF
CAPITAL INCOME IN THE OPEN ECONOMY

David G. Hartman

Working Paper No. 1550

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1985

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation and project in Productivity and Industrial change in
the World Economy. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 155O
January 1985

On the Optimal Taxation of Capital
Income in an Open Economy

ABSTRACT

The optimal taxation of foreign and domestic investors' incomes is
examined with a simple overlapping—generations model.
Even when tax rates are allowed to discriminate between these groups,
the optimal tax rates on both domestic and foreign investors' incomes in the
small open economy are identical and equal to the optimal rate of tax in the
closed economy. In light of the emphasis in the literature on the extent to
which the elasticity of international flows might lower optimal capital income
taxes, this conclusion is quite a surprise.

In the large open economy, the optimal tax rate on foreign investors'
income alone is a weighted average of one and the small economy tax rate. The
optimal tax rate on domestic income is, again, unaffected by the openness of
the economy.
When a uniform tax rate must be set in the large open economy, it is
generally higher than the optimal tax rate for a closed economy, a conclusion
contrary to the conventional wisdom. However, a higher elasticity of international capital flows is associated with a lower tax rate, as expected, but
the rate remains above the closed—economy rate.
In summary, openness matters for optimal tax policy, primarily in the
case of the large economy. The reason is mainly the ability to burden foreign
investors with a tax liability.

David C. Hartman
Vice President and Chief
International Economist
Data Resources, Inc.
24 Hartwell Avenue
Lexington, MA 02173

On the Optimal Taxation of Capital Income in the Open Economy

The first Reagan term brought fundamental shifts in the U.S. tax

treatment of savings and investment. Even prior to this complete reorientation
of policy toward an encouragement of capital formation, the taxation of capital
income had become probably the most popular topic of researchers in public

finance, and interest has increased since. In light of the growing integration
of the world's economies, it is curious that in all of the recent literature on

taxation

and investment, little attention has been devoted to international

capital flows.
At best, authors recognize the possibility of capital flowing abroad
and point out that international flows could prove to be problematic for their

closed—economy results.1 A major exception is the work of Goulder, Shoven, and
Whalley (1983), in which investment abroad is explicitly incorporated in a

large general equilibrium model of the U.S. GSW conclude that if capital
outflows are highly elastic, the welfare effects of various tax changes can be

drastically altered. International capital mobility is, thus, viewed in the
literature as a potential constraint on domestic policymaking which becomes
important only under the condition that the degree of mobility is quite high.

Having focused on the elasticity of international capital flows as

the

key factor in determining whether the traditional closed—economy models of

public finance are appropriate, researchers have been reassured by the findings
of

Feldstein and Horioka (1980) and Feldstein (1983) that capital apparently

does not flow freely across national boundaries. The conclusion that inelastic
capital flows are not a matter of great concern has been shown in a previous

paper to be deceptively simple (see Hartman (1985)). What the existing litera—

—2—

ture has ignored and that paper highlighted the possibility that foreign
ownership of a portion of the domestic capital stock could imply that a tax

burden could be imposed on those "outside the system." That is, a welfare gain
to the economy could result from tax revenue collections from foreign
investors. Since the tax revenue change can be a first—order effect, as corn—
pared to the welfare effects of capital income taxation in a closed (and otherwise non—distorted) economy, this consideration could loom large in the
determination of welfare effects, as Hartman (1985) suggests.

It was, until very recently, understandable that the presence of
foreign—owned capital in the U.S. was ignored despite its growing magnitude,

since the U.S. position was that of a large net creditor. In fact, though, it
is far from obvious that the net flows being outward implies that welfare ana-

lyses can neglect the gross inflows. Now, with the U.S. becoming a net debtor
nation and the foreign—owned portion of the U.S. capital stock growing rapidly,
it is far more difficult to ignore the foreign component.

In this paper, the issue of optimal taxation of capital income is
addressed in the context of an economy facing an elastic supply of capital from

abroad. It will be of particular interest to investigate whether the optimal
tax is lowered by "openness" in line with the conventional wisdom, or raised,
as one might suspect based on the fact that tax burdens borne by foreign

investors represent a domestic welfare gain. While our primary motivation is
to determine how, if at all, the openness of the economy affects the optimal
tax rate on all capital income, it is also simple to derive an optimal tax rate
for foreign—owned capital for situations in which that rate can be set indepen—

—3—

dently.

To clarify the role of the open econorrr assumption yet adequately

address the motivation for saving and investing, we choose a much—simplified

overlapping—generations model for analysis. As is true of similar models in
general, the justification for taxing capital income on welfare grounds is very
limited for the closed economy.

2. A Simple Growth Model
The purpose of this section is to lay out the elements of a steady—
state growth model with overlapping generations of individuals who work in the

first period of their lives and are retired in the second period.2 Since our
focus will be on the effects of foreign ownership of capital on the optimal tax
rate, the approach will not lead to quite as compact a specification as could

be used in a closed—economy analysis. At the same time, the model will be specified quite simply; in particular, it will take no account of complications
such as government investment or the labor supply response examined by

Feldstein (l98).3 We simplify further by assuming that any deficiency in tax
revenue from that required to finance a fixed per capita level of government

expenditure is made up through use of a lump—sum tax. By building on such a
straightforward closed—economy model in which a very traditional set of optimal
taxation results obtain, we can more readily highlight the implications of
"openness

Our simple economy is characterized by population growth at rate n.

The utility of each of

=

Nt(1+n) members of the younger generation at time

—4—

t is given by u =

u(c1,

c2) where c1 is consumption in the working years and

C2 is consumption during retirement. The young employ

of capital which

lasts only one period and, thus, represents the savings (s1) of the older
generation during the prior period. Production per person can be expressed as
f(k), where k

[Kt/(Nt(1+n)fl. The gross—of—tax return paid to members of the

older generation equals rk per worker (or, equivalently-, rk((1+n)/n) per

recipient). The young, in turn, save

s = ESt/(Nt(1+n))] per capita. In

steady state, S must, of course, equal k(1+n). Dropping the time subscript
for simplicity, the young's consumption is period 1 (the period of work)
equals:
(2.1)

c = f(k)—rk—s

Suppose, further, that the government spends

=

[Gt/(Nt(1+n))1

in each

period, financing their expenditure by a "tax" at rate t on the capital income

of retirees and/or a lump sum "tax" on retirees. We will allow either "tax" to
be negative if such a result turns out to be optimal. Per capita consumption
of today's young in their retirement is given by:
(2.2)

c2 =

(l+r(l—t))s—[g—trs]

(l+r)s—g

The government utilizes its capital income taxing and lump—sum taxing
capabilities to maximize steady—state utility, subject to the constraints of

technolor and of consumers' and producers' decisions. Consumers optimize

across the two periods by choosing s such that:
(2.3)

—U1 + U2 (1+r(1—t)) = 0

The government, in turn, would evaluate tax changes according to:

—5—

dc
dt

1 dt

U

dc

l+r(1—t) dt

From (2.1), (2.2), (2.I), and the condition of steady—state growth in capital,
the government sets:

(2.5)

0 =

/U1 =

[—ku-

—

(i+n)1

+

l+r(1_t)1+E + k(1+n)--1

With some tedious manipulation, we arrive at the optimal tax rate:

/

,_.,

2.oi

(n—r)

t0

1(l+n) dk/dt
—r k dr[dt +

ii

It is useful at this point to define the capital demand and
supply elasticities:

(2.1)

ek

— dk r

•ri-

e

ds r(1—t)

To simplify our descriptions of the results, we will usually implicitly assume

that e > 0, although a postive value is not assured. Now, we can re—write the
optimal tax expression as:

(2 8)

—
opt

(n-r)
(l+n)ek_r

As expected in so simple a model with the possibility of lump—sum taxation, the
optimal tax on capital income is zero if the economy is at the "golden rule"

level of capital per worker already (that is, if f'=n). Otherwise, there is
some scope for a "tax" (positive or negative) to improve welfare by moving the
economy in the direction of the golden rule.

This result highlights the point made by Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980)
that the optimal tax moves the economy part way to the golden rule; the result

—6-.

is

even clearer when rewritten as:

(2.9)

rt =

(1+n)ek

This equation illustrates the tradeoff being made between reducing the distor—
tionary effects of the tax and realizing the benefits of getting the net rate
of return facing savers "correct't in the sense of the golden rule. If, for
instance, the capital demand schedule is perfectly inelastic, so that distortions are absent, a subsidy or tax, as the case may

be,

is imposed, to insure

equality of the rate of growth and the net rate of return to capital.

Since this result is not surprising (see Atkinson and Stiglitz
(1980), Feldstein (1981), and Ihori (198)-)), it will not be discussed in further

detail. It is intended mainly as a basis for comparison with later findings for
the open economy.

3. A Model of the Small Open Economy
The simplest type of open economy to analyze is the "small" open eco-

nomy, faced with a perfectly elastic supply of capital from abroad. The small
open economy will probably not provide the most interesting results, since the
ability to burden foreign investors with a capital income tax was a critical

element in our belief that openness might matter for tax policy. The govern-

ment of a small open economy can impose no such burden. Nevertheless, the
small economy case is a useful starting point since the model is simple to
describe and is also the characterization almost exclusively found in the

public finance literature. There are several similar tax questions we will

—7—

address in turn: the optimal differential tax on foreigners' capital income
when the domestic tax rate is fixed, the optimal differential tax when the
domestic tax rate is set simultaneously and optimally, and the optimal uniform
tax rate for all capital income.

A. The Optimal Tax on Foreign Investors' Incomes with a Fixed Domestic
Tax Rate
We begin our analysis with an issue which has attracted the most
attention from economists in the past: the optimal taxation of foreign

investors' returns, when the domestic tax rate is given. The conventional wid—
som holds that a country faced with highly—elastic capital inflows should not

tax foreign investors' incomes. For reasons we will examine in some depth, the
result obtained here is quite at variance with the received wisdom.

The model is very similar to that already considered, except that the
presence of foreign—owned capital supplied with infinite elasticity (assuming
that the autarky return in the domestic econoriy exceeds the world return)
implies complete separation of the savings and investment decisions.

Furthermore,

the net—of—tax rate of return earned by

foreigners is determined

Thus, the tax rate, t*, and the foreign return, r*, determine the
gross domestic rate of return as r*/(l_t*). As before, consumption in the
abroad.

first

period is given by equation (2.1), which now simply indicates that gross

payments to all capital owners plus the workers' savings must account for the

entire non—consumed production of the economy. Consumption in period 2,
however, must

explicitly

capital, and is given by:

reflect the payment of taxes by foreign owners of

—8—

(3.1)

c2 =

(1+r)s

—

[g_t*r(k(1+n)_s)

That is, the lump sum tax on the older generation is reduced to the extent
that the foreign—owned portion of the capital stock generates tax revenue.

The government, then, optimally sets t so that:

(3.2)

0 =

dU
=
/U1

ds dr

dr

[—k- —

ds dr +

+ [(l+r)T_

—

-1- 1-.* (1 , '4

—

"'dr dt*

dt*

dr

+

rk

+

dr

_i

dr dt*

or

*
3.3

es
—
—

(l+n)e k + e
k
s

+

(n—r(l—t))
(l+n)ek + e

Ignoring the second term for the moment, it may

be

somewhat awkward but is

quite helpful to think of the optimal tax on foreign investors' income as being
a weighted average of the fixed tax rate on domestic investors' income and
zero, with the weights being determined by the relative elasticities of
domestic savings supply and domestic investment demand.

The result is highly intuitive when we consider that a tax on foreign
investors distorts the domestic investment decision, while a differential tax
on foreign investors' returns differentiates the domestic investors' returns

from the given world level, distorting the domestic savings decision. The
higher is the elasticity of capital demand relative to the domestic savings
supply, the more is the optimal tax on foreign investors pushed toward zero and
away from the domestic tax rate.

The second term is a "golden rule" adjustment to the optimal tax,

—9—

which affects the optimal tax rate unless t has been set so that nr(l—t).
Since we have indicated nothing about how t is determined, we cannot be much

more specific about the implications of this expression. We can see, however,
that the extent to which the economy is pushed toward the golden rule depends

on the elasticities of the savings and investment relations. Also, it is clear

(as long as e > 0, as we are assuming throughout) that t is positively
related to t. So, if the domestic tax rate is fixed at a level below the optimum, the optimal tax rate on foreign investors' incomes is reduced as well.

More interesting is the problem of setting both t and t simultaneously, to which we will now turn.

B. The Optimal Tax Rates on Foreign and Domestic Investors' Incomes
In determining simultaneously the optimal tax rate on foreign

investors' returns and domestic investors' returns, the government's basic
behavior is governed by the same equations for utility and consumption in

Section 3.A. This time, however, the government is able to differentially
influence the net rate of return which determines k (by changing t*) and that

then,

which determines s (by changing t). Corresponding to (3.2) ,

= —k- + l+r(l_t)

0 =

rk*

dE1r +

+

t*k*

+

is:

t*r(l+n) .i

so,

(

)

= (n—r(l—t))
opt

(1+n)ek

For comparison purposes, the optimal tax on domestic investors is given by:
(3.6)

0 =

/TJ

— — ds +

l+r(l—t) t(i+r)--

—

t*r-]

—10—

or:
(3.7)

t

opt

=

t, thus

t

=

t
opt

(n—r(l—t))
= _________
(l+n)ek

(n—r)
_________

(l+n)ek_r

This conclusion deserves emphasis. Despite the fact that the nature
of foreign investors' and domestic investors' behavior may be quite different,

both tax rates are independently set to be equal. Also, they are non—zero only
when the world economy does not generate a rate of return consistent with the
golden rule growth path.

Furthermore, looking back at equation (2.8) we note that the optimal
tax rate on capital income is the same as that produced in a closed—economy

model. That is, the small

economy's optimal tax olicy

for

capital income

is uniform and identical to that of the closed economy. While such a
conclusion is certainly striking and clearly at odds with the conventional wis-

dom, the intuition is straightforward. Obviously, the government of the small
open economy is unable to burden the foreign investor with any tax liability.
The tax rate placed on the foreign investor is translated directly into an

impact on the domestic rate of return. Conversely, the only way the return to
capital in the domestic market (and, hence, the domestic rate of capital for—

mation) can be altered is by taxing the foreign investor. In general, the
objectives toward which the closed economy directs tax policy must be met by

taxing foreign investors' incomes. In this case, the taxation of foreign
investors is dictated by the desire to move the economy toward the golden rule.
An equivalent tax rate applied to the domestic investor is required for an
efficient level of savings to be generated in the domestic economy, although

—1]—

the domestic tax rate has no influence on the rate of capital formation. Thus,
the problem of how to tax the foreign investor is directly analogous to the
problem of capital taxation in the closed economy, despite the fact that the

questions, at first glance, seem unrelated. Consequently, it is hardly
surprising in retrospect that the optimal tax formulae for the domestic
investor in the closed economy and the foreign investor in the small economy
should turn out to be identical.

It should be noted that it is because the foreign investor cannot be
forced to share any burden of the tax, that a tax is levied only for "golden

rule" reasons. That is, if any other government policies can be used to
achieve n=r, then a zero tax on capital income, regardless of recipient, is

optimal. In the closed economy, government debt or social security could be
used as alternative instruments, but in the open economy the options are
limited to those affecting foreign investment.
Parenthetically, it should also be noted that if a small

open economy

is somehow prevented from taxing the income of foreign investors, it should not

tax domestic capital income either. Naturally, such a result is necessary to
insure the optimality of domestic savings decisions.

C. The Optimal Uniform Tax Rate on Domestic and Foreign Investors' Incomes
Since the exercise carried out in Section B led to a uniform tax rate
on foreign investors and domestic investors, the tax treatment appropriate to
situations which the taxing authority is forced to set a uniform tax rate is

obviously the same (given by equation (3.1)). When we relax the strict small

—12—

open economy assumption in the next section, a variety of factors will contribute to the inequality of optimal tax rates set separately and, thus, make the
restriction of equal rates a binding constraint on government action.

1. A Model of the Large Open Economy
The optimal tax analysis for an open economy sufficiently "large" to
influence the net return it mast pay to foreign investors is significantly more

complex than that for the small open economy. At the same time, it is probably
the case for a number of countries, and is certainly true of the United States,

that the small economy assumption is unrealistic. Thus, we turn to the more
complex situation; as in Section 3, we will consider the setting of an optimal
tax on the foreign investor under three different assumptions about the way the
tax on domestic investors is determined.

A. The Optimal Tax on Foreign Investors' Incomes with a Fixed Domestic
Tax Rate
As before, we first take the domestic tax rate as pre—deterinined.

The government's optimization problem remains basically the same as before, but
now we mast take explicit account of the simultaneous determination of the
domestic rate of return (and, hence, domestic savings and investment) and any

tax—induced change in the level of foreign investment. Since the supply of
foreign capital is no longer determined simply as the excess of domestic capital demand over supply, k* mast be explicitly introduced (as will be its

elasticity e ):

(11.1)

c2 =

(l+r(1—t))s

—

g_trs.t*rk*

=

(l+r)s

—

[g_t*rk*]

—13--

The basic relations to be solved are, then, the familiar equation for welfare
change, plus:

dc1
.2)

ds

dr - -kfw

= (l+r)- +
(4.I)

S

+k

=

+

rk*

+

t*r-. + t*k*--

k(1+n)

The optimal tax is, finally, given by:

(

5)

-—
opt

es
(l+n)ek

+

es

e
l+ek*

+

(n-r(1+t))
(l+n)ek +

e-

e
l+ek*

1

÷

l+ek

The optimal tax expression could have been written in a slightly more
compact form, but each of the three terms in p4.5) represents a distinct motive

for taxing foreign investor's income. The first term obviously represents the
"domestic tax factor." In this term, the domestic tax rate is multiplied by an
expression representing the domestic savings elasticity relative to the
domestic investment demand elasticity and an expression in the elasticity of

foreign capital supply. The first bracketed expression, as noted in our
discussion in Section 3.A, can be viewed as a weighting factor indicating that
the optimal foreign investors' tax rate is pushed closer to the domestic
investors' tax rate as investment demand is relatively less elastic (and, hence,
the distortionary effect on investment of discouraging capital inflows is

less). The second bracketed expression in the first term indicates that this
domestic tax factor becomes less important as the elasticity of foreign capital
supply is lower.

Similarly, the second term of p4.5) consists of the familiar "golden
rule factor" multiplied by the same expression in the elasticity of foreign

capital supply. Again, this factor becomes less important as the foreign capital supply elasticity declines.
In turn, as the supply of capital by foreign investors becomes less
elastic, the final term, which we can call the "revenue factor" comes to domi-

nate tax policy. That is, the less elastic is the supply, the greater is the
fraction of the tax borne by the foreign investor and the higher is the optimal

tax. Thus, for instance, as the elasticity goes to zero, the optimal tax rate
approaches one.

A simple way of viewing (1.5) is that the optimal tax is a weighted
average of the optimal tax derived in the small open economy case (given by

(3.3)) and one, with weights ek*I(l+ek*)I and l/(l+ek*)]. The government
would like to tax away all the return earned by foreign investors, but is

restrained by the foreign investors' response to tax policy. The significance
of that response determines the extent to which the government moves away from
that revenue objective and toward matching domestic tax policy and moving
toward the golden rule path, as would the government which could impose no burden on foreign investors.

B. The Optimal Tax Rates on Foreign and Domestic Investors' Incomes
Now, suppose that the domestic tax rate is also a flexible element of

government policy and can be set jointly with t in order to improve welfare in
the steady state. The mathematical exercise is similar to those previously
carried out, so the only expressions we will report here are the basic maxirni—

—15—

zation result:

(lt.6)

0 =

dU

--/U1

=

dr

—k--w

+

1

dr

1+r(1—t) Es--- +

dk*

trT t*k*.
dr

+

+

rk*}

and the optimal tax rate expression which follows from it:

(1

.1 *t

(nr(l_t))

)

(1+n)ek

ek*

1

+

l+ek*

l+ek*

Similar to the result of the previous section, this expression is
readily interpretable as the weighted average of one and the optimal tax rate

previously derived for the small open economy. As discussed in Section 3.B it
also is equal to a weighted average of one and the optimal domestic tax rate
derived for the closed economy case. Expression (lt.T), then, reflects a

balancing of the desire to collect tax revenue from the returns of foreign
investors and the desire to treat domestic and foreign investors similarly in
terms of pushing of the capital stock toward the golden rule level.
Since a major focus of this exercise is on the impact of foreign

investment on the optimal domestic tax rate, that rate is also derived. It

might be supposed, because t is available as an instrument for influencing the
level of foreign investment, that t

would be the same as in the closed—
opt

economy case. Algebraic manipulation yields:

(.8)

(n—r(l—t)) —

t0p

(k*/k)(1_t*(1+ek

(l+n)ek +

ek

k*/k

which, when combined with V4.T), does, indeed, imply that

(

9)

t

opt

—

n-r(1-t)
(l-4-n)ek

the same conclusion as in the closed economy (and in the small open economy).
Thus, the presence of foreign investment does not alter

the optimal

domestic

—i6—

tax

policy so long as the tax rates facing foreign and domestic investors can

be differentiated.

C. The Optimal Uniform Tax Rate on Domestic and Foreign Investors' Incomes
Unlike the case of the small open economy, in which the optimal
domestic and foreign investor tax rates turned out to be equal even when not
constrained to be so, the revenue term in (14.1) implies an important difference

in the case of the large economy. Thus, the setting of an optimal uniform tax
rate is a distinct problem here.
This exercise is the most interesting one in the context of our main
original question, that of the extent to which an economy open to foreign
investment would optimally select a different domestic tax policy than would a

closed economy. To simplify the presentation, we recognize that the consumption derivatives are the same as given by (14.2) and (14.3),

with

t* replaced by

t. Solving for the derivative of welfare with respect to t and setting it
equal to 0 yields:

e +es/k*

14

k*
s
— (n—r(i—t))1
+
1
+
opt
ek*
(l+n)ek

es/k*

+

1
l+ek* +

es/k*

Thus, the optimal uniform tax rate on domestic and foreign investors'

incomes exceeds the optimal tax rate for the closed economy. In particular,
the optimal rate turns out to be a weighted average of one and the closed eco-

nomy rate of tax or subsidy. The more inelastic are the supply of foreign
capital and the supply of domestic savings, the higher is the optimal tax rate.

While the former conclusion is not consistent with the prevailing wisdom, the

—17—

latter is.

5.

Conclusions
In this paper, we have examined the optimal taxation of foreign and

domestic investors' incomes. The model is a very simple one in which the only
reason for taxing capital income in the closed economy is to move the economy

closer to the golden rule rate of capital formation. Other complications could
be introduced and some additional exercises have been carried out, but the
broad outlines of optimal policy seem likely to be similar to the results
obtained consistently throughout this paper.

The choice of an optimal capital income tax rate for the closed economy is made to partially close the gap between the economy's undistorted

equilibrium and the golden rule. Tecause capital income taxes cause efficiency
losses, the elasticity of supply of capital is the factor (inversely)
influencing the extent to which the golden rule should be approached.

it is something of a surprise that the optimal tax rates on both
domestic and foreign investors' incomes (when these can be set separately) in
the small open economy are identical and equal to the optimal tax rate that

would be set in the closed economy. The reason for this result is that the tax
rate on foreign investors' incomes in the small open economy is the only
instrument available to affect the level of the domestic capital stock and,

thus, move the economy toward the golden rule. The tax rate on domestic
investors' incomes, by contrast, affects only the savings rate and should be
set to avoid any unnecessary welfare losses suffered if savings were distorted.

—18—

In the lar&e open economy, the tax rate on foreign investors' incomes

alone is used to meet two objectives: approaching the golden rule as in the
small economy case but also shifting a tax burden onto foreign investors (whose

welfare is assumed not to matter). The optimal rate is simply a weighted
average of one and the small economy tax rate, with the optimal tax rate rising

toward one as foreign investment is less elastic in supply. The optimal tax
rate on domestic investment income is, again the same as in the small open economy and the closed economy, since there is no "revenue" effect on welfare to
motivate a different outcome.

With respect to the question of primary importance, we note that in
setting an optimal tax rate to apply to all capital income in the small open
economy, we reach the conclusion that the openness of the economy does not

matter —

the

same optimal tax rate reflecting deviations from the golden rule

prevails.

In the large economy, by contrast, the government's optimal tax
policy is affected by the possibility of and elasticity of the inflow of

foreign capital. The optimal tax rate to be applied uniformly to capital
income turns out to be a weighted average of one and the tax rate that would be

set in the closed economy or the small open economy. That is, the optimal tax
rate is higher than that for the closed economy. An exception would be the
case of a negative doemstic elasticity of savings which exceeds, in absolute
value, the elasticity of supply of foreign capital, since the weights are
determined by the weighted sum of •the two supply elasticities. The general
conclusion is directly in contradiction to the received wisdom that the open—

—19--

ness of the economy should tend to lower the optimal tax rate. In fact,
through, increased openness (an increase in the elasticity of foreign capital
supply) is associated with a lower optimal tax rate (one closer to that derived
for the closed economy), since the possibility for extracting a tax burden from
foreigners is reduced relative to the foreign investment discouraged.
In summary, then, the openness of the large economy timatters?? but,

somewhat surprising, the openness of the small economy does not. The impact of
openness itself (that is, the presence of foreign investment) on the optimal
capital income tax does not accord with the arguments ordinarily made; but, the
extent of the openness (that is, the elasticity of foreign investment) affects

the optimal tax in a direction consistent with our intuition. Nevertheless, the
optimal tax rate remains above that derived for the closed economy.

—20—

Footnotes

1. See, for example, Boadway (1919), Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980), and

Kotlikoff (198). An exception is, naturally, the literature which directly
focuses on the tax treatment of the foreign income of multinational cor—

porations. For an excellent review, see Caves (1982). An analysis to which
the current paper owes a great deal, Dutton (1982), provides another example.
However, this literature does not address the broader issues of tax policy in
the open economr.

2. We, thus, have chosen simplicity over the richness of multi—period
specifications, such as those used by Summers (1981) and Auerbach and Kotlikoff

(1983). Our model is constructed much more in the spirit of King (1980), for
example.

3. We also ignore such issues as the bequest motive for savings, the
possibility of technical progress, and the availability of other policies to
affect savings, as well as the welfare effects of tax policy along the path to

a new steady state. We also follow the tradition of not discounting future
generations' welfare, to simplify the algebra.

—21—

References

Atkinson, Anthony B., and Joseph Stiglitz, Lectures in Public Economics,
New York: McGraw—Hill Company, 1980.

Auerbach, Alan J., and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, "National Savings, Economic
Welfare, and the Structure of Taxation," in Behavioral Simulation
Methods in Tax Policy Analysis, ed, Martin S. Feldstein, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1983, pp. )459—98.

Boadway, Robin W., Public Sector Economics, Cambridge, MA: Winthrop, 1919.

Caves, Richard E., Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis, Cambridge
Surveys of Economic Literature, Cambridge University Press, 1982.

Dutton, John, "The Optimal Taxation of International Investment Income: A
Comment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1982, 91(2), pp. 313—380.

Feldstein, Martin S., and Charles Horioka, "Domestic Savings and International
Capital Flows," Economic Journal, June 1980, )40, pp. 31)4—329.

Feldstein, Martin 5,, "Domestic Savings and International Capital Movements
in the Long Run and the Short Run," European Economic Review, March/April
1983, 21, pp. 129—151.

Feldstein, Martin S., "On the Theory of Optimal Taxation in a Growing Economy,"
NBER Working Paper #l435, August, 1981.

Goulder, Lawrence H., John B. Shoven, and John Whalley, "Domestic Tax Policy
and the Foreign Sector," in Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy

—22-.

Analysis, ed, Martin S. Feldstein, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1983, pp. 333_36L.

Hartman, David G., "The Welfare Effects of the Capital Income Tax in an
Open Economy," NBER Working Paper, 1985.

Ihori, Toshihiro, "Partial Welfare Improvements and Capital Income Taxation,"
Journal of Public Economics, l981, 21, pp. 101—109.

King, Mervyn A., "Savings and Taxation," in Public Policy and the Tax System,
eds., G.A. Huges and G.M. Heal, London, 1980, pp. 1—35.

Kotlikoff,

Laurence J., "Taxation and Savings: A Neoclassical Perspective,"

Journal of Economic Literature, December 198)4, 22@), pp. 15T6—1629.

Shoven, John B., "Saving in the U.S. Economy," in Removing Obstacles to Economic
Growth, eds, Michael L. Wachter and Susan M. Wachter, Philadelphia,
University of Pennsylvania Press, 198)4, pp. 181—223.

Summers, Lawrence H., "Capital Taxation and Capital Accumulation in a Life

Cycle Growth Model," American Economic Review, September 1981, 8i),
pp. 533.)4)4.

