                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                          ART AND MONEY

                                         William N. Goetzmann
                                            Luc Renneboog
                                         Christophe Spaenjers

                                          Working Paper 15502
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w15502


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2009




The authors would like to thank Tony Atkinson, Fabio Braggion, Elroy Dimson, Richard Grossman,
Emmanuel Saez, and John Turner for helpful comments and data. Spaenjers thanks the Netherlands
Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) for financial support. Part of this paper was written while
Spaenjers was a Chazen Visiting Scholar at Columbia University, whose hospitality is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by William N. Goetzmann, Luc Renneboog, and Christophe Spaenjers. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Art and Money
William N. Goetzmann, Luc Renneboog, and Christophe Spaenjers
NBER Working Paper No. 15502
November 2009
JEL No. D31,G1,Z11

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the impact of equity markets and top incomes on art prices. Using a long-term
art market index that incorporates information on repeated sales since the eighteenth century, we demonstrate
that both same-year and lagged equity market returns have a significant impact on the price level in
the art market. Over a shorter time frame, we also find empirical evidence that an increase in income
inequality may lead to higher prices for art, in line with the results of a numerical simulation analysis.
Finally, the results of Johansen cointegration tests strongly suggest the existence of a long-term relation
between top incomes and art prices.


William N. Goetzmann                                  Christophe Spaenjers
School of Management                                  PO Box 90153
Yale University                                       5000 LE Tilburg
Box 208200                                            the Netherlands
New Haven, CT 06520-8200                              c.spaenjers@uvt.nl
and NBER
william.goetzmann@yale.edu

Luc Renneboog
PO Box 90153
5000 LE Tilburg
the Netherlands
Luc.Renneboog@uvt.nl
1. Introduction



Unless cast in platinum and covered with diamonds, as in the case of a 2007 Damien Hirst sculpture, a
work of art has little intrinsic value. Nevertheless, works of art from time to time have fetched shockingly
high prices, at least from the perspective of ordinary wage earners. The highest prices have been paid for
creations of deceased artists, but also living artists – Hirst being the exemplar – have commanded multi-
million dollar (or pound) sums for their work. The inelastic supply in the art market makes the demand for
art “the only meaningful driver of investment returns” (Mandel, 2009). Indeed, the price of an art object is
only limited by how much collectors are willing and able to spend on it. When individuals’ buying power
rises, this can be expected to lead to higher art consumption, and thus to a higher price level in the art
market.

          Given the fixed and relatively limited supply of art works, how wealthy the wealthy are may
matter more to the determination of art prices than total wealth. The Economist (2006) puts it as follows:
“Trophy asset prices may be a function of the huge dispersion of incomes. What is the point of being rich
if you cannot drink the finest wines while gazing at the world'
                                                              s most famous artworks on the walls of your
penthouse flat?” This is especially relevant because many so-called “high net worth individuals” seem to
be attracted to art assets, and often consider investing a considerable part of their wealth in it (Cap
Gemini, 2008).

          One way to measure changes in wealthy individuals’ buying power, is to look at stock market
returns. Equities are typically held more widely among the most affluent. Without explicitly making this
point, a number of studies (cf. Section 2) have indeed looked at the relation between stock market
movements and art market trends. In this study, we extend this work over a much longer time frame,
starting our study in the first half of the nineteenth century. By doing this, we may benefit from the fact
that, at least in the earlier periods of our time frame, the art market was much less globalized, enabling a
less noisy measurement of the correlation between the equity market and the art market than has
previously been possible. Additionally, we differentiate between capital growth and dividend yield.

          An alternative way may be to consider the evolution of top incomes over time. Especially if top
incomes also go the wealthiest individuals, they should proxy reasonably well for art collectors’ buying
power. Insofar as equities make up only a small percentage of the total value of these same individuals’
assets (including human capital), changes in top income may be more relevant than equity market
movements. The simple simulation model in Section 3 of this paper, which builds on previous work by
Goetzmann and Spiegel (1995), shows how changes in total income, the income distribution, and the



                                                                                                          2
population of art collectors may have an impact on art prices. We also empirically investigate the link
between total income and its distribution on the one hand and art prices on the other. Somewhat
surprisingly, this relationship has not been analyzed before.

        In our empirical analysis, we first construct an art price index that covers the period 1765-2007,
using transaction data from Reitlinger (1961) and the Art Sales Index. Since the initial selection of artists
conforms to British taste, and most of the art sales considered took place in Great Britain, we relate our
GBP-denominated art price index to British equity market and income series. Our results show that over
the period 1830-2007, there is a strong positive relation between equity market and art market movements.
Both same-year and lagged equity capital changes show significant positive correlation with changes in art
prices. The effect is robust to several alternative specifications. Next, we also find some evidence of a
relation between income inequality and art prices over the period 1908-2005, the time frame for which the
inequality data are available. The significance of this result is driven by the large variation in the British
income distribution during the first half of the twentieth century. For the post-war period, we find weak
evidence that art prices are influenced by U.S. income inequality. Finally we demonstrate the existence of
a cointegrating relationship between top income and art prices over our time period, which suggests that
top incomes are fundamental in setting the price level in the art market. This result holds even when only
the post-war period is considered.

        This paper contributes to the literature in a number of respects. First, it constructs an annual long-
run art index, which is used to re-estimate the relationship between art and the stock market. The results
strengthen previous evidence on the impact of equity markets on art prices. Second, it sheds light on the
fundamentals of art prices; more specifically, it is the first study to investigate the interaction between
income, inequality, and art prices. Third, it adds additional evidence to the growing literature on wealth
effects and luxury consumption.

        The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 outlines the relevant literature on
art prices, stock market wealth effects, and the market fundamentals of real assets. Section 3 outlines a
simple model that relates total income and income inequality to art prices, and shows simulation results.
Section 4 presents the data for our empirical part, while Section 5 gives an overview of our results.
Section 6 concludes.




                                                                                                            3
2. Related literature



Since the first studies by Anderson (1974) and Stein (1977), an expanding literature has investigated the
returns to art investments. For example, using different estimation techniques and ever-larger auction sales
datasets, Baumol (1986), Pesando (1993), Goetzmann (1993), Mei and Moses (2002), Campbell (2008),
Pesando and Shum (2008), and Renneboog and Spaenjers (2009) have studied the price appreciation of art
over time, and compared the returns to those on financial assets. In addition, researchers have focused on
the price determinants of art objects, anomalies in the price formation in the art market, and the
diversification potential and collateral value of art.1 We refer to Ashenfelter and Graddy (2003) and
Ginsburgh et al. (2006) for more complete reviews of the literature on art auctions, prices, and price
indices. In a recent contribution to the literature, Mandel (2009) demonstrates how a utility dividend
derived from conspicuous art consumption may affect art returns in a consumption-based asset pricing
model.

           There is relatively little work on the link between the art market and the broader economy, despite
the anecdotal evidence that highlights the importance of the relationship. Goetzmann (1993) shows that art
has a positive beta with respect to the stock market over the very long term. In contrast, however, Mei and
Moses (2002) report a correlation coefficient of not more than 0.04 between the S&P 500 and their art
index (annual real returns, 1950-1999). Pesando and Shum (2008) find a correlation of 0.21 between the
same stock index and their index for modern prints (semi-annual real returns, 1977-2004). Some of these
differences may be due to the use of different intervals of observation and estimation, or to drawbacks of
the repeat-sales regression, the method commonly used to build art indices. The low correlations may also
be caused by a focus on U.S. stocks; the art market has become a global trading place over the last few
decades. Indeed, Renneboog and Spaenjers (2009), using a hedonic pricing approach, report a much
higher positive correlation (0.38) between a global art price index and the returns on a global stock index,
than between the same art index and the S&P 500 (0.19) (annual real returns, 1951-2007).


1
    See Renneboog and Spaenjers (2009) for a recent example of how a hedonic regression model can shed light on the
price determinants of art objects. Anomalies in the art market include biases in presale estimates (Mei and Moses,
2005), violations of the law of one price (Pesando, 1993), lower returns for items that have been bought in (Beggs
and Graddy, 2008), and anchoring effects (Beggs and Graddy, 2009). Many authors have also investigated whether
there is a “masterpiece effect”, in the sense that better art makes a better investment, as first put forward by Pesando
(1993), but the evidence is conflicting. The collateral value of fine art is investigated by McAndrew and Thompson
(2007).



                                                                                                                      4
        Even when present, correlations may not completely capture financial market wealth effects, for
different reasons. First, most art indices aggregate pricing information over a calendar year while the
financial returns are normally year-to-year changes in daily (or continuously) updated indices. This leads
to non-synchroneity in the measured returns. Second, it may take some time before the wealth created in
financial markets finds its way to art markets. Therefore, different authors have looked at the lagged
relation between investor wealth and art prices. Goetzmann (1993) finds that, at least between 1900 and
1986, art prices seemed to follow stock market trends. Also Chanel (1995) and Worthington and Higgs
(2003) present evidence that stocks markets Granger-cause art prices. However “the exact strength and
persistence of this causal relationship” (Worthington and Higgs, 2004) remain unclear. Moreover, the
relation between wealth and art prices over the longer run is still largely a puzzle. For example, Ginsburgh
and Jeanfils (1995) find no long-term impact of stock markets on art markets. Similarly, Worthington and
Higgs (2003) and Chanel (1995) conclude that it is hard to make long-run forecasts of art prices. It is
important to note that, up until now, the art markets literature has typically not considered proxies for
changes in investors’ wealth other than financial market movements.

        While the issue of art as a financial asset has long been of interest to scholars interested in the role
of art in the economy, a broader economic issue is the relationship between consumption and the financial
markets. Standard pricing models typically assume a representative investor as the marginal investor in the
economy. Recent research has relaxed that assumption and considered how the concentration of financial
wealth in a small, wealthy cohort may affect asset pricing. Given the failure of the consumption CAPM to
explain the relationship between aggregate consumption and equity prices, scholars have conjectured that
prices might be set by the very wealthy, or at least by stock market participants only. Poterba (2000)
argues that one would expect the strongest relationship between consumption and asset prices among the
cohort households that own the majority of all stocks. Since a high share of the consumption of these
households typically concerns luxury goods, this would imply a solid link between stock market wealth
fluctuations and luxury spending. With respect to durable luxury goods in inelastic supply, such as art and
wine, Poterba (2000) notes that the concentration of stock ownership and associated wealth gains in the
1990s has led to an increased demand for such goods, which in turn resulted in “significant price
appreciations”. Empirically, Aït-Sahalia et al. (2003) find a strong correlation between stock market
returns and luxury consumption (and show that this result goes a far way in explaining the equity premium
puzzle). Likewise, Hiraki et al. (2009) provide compelling evidence that such a “luxury consumption
hypothesis” is valid in the art market. The authors use data on stock market returns, import/export flows,
and art prices to show that wealth shocks to Japanese investors affected their art purchases in the 1980s,
and that this led to higher prices for art.




                                                                                                              5
          A large literature also investigates the fundamentals of house prices, another important real asset
class. The studies in this field have at times related house prices to per capita income, for example to
investigate whether real estate can be considered overpriced (Case and Shiller, 2003). However, some
recent studies have acknowledged the importance of the income distribution in determining price levels as
well. For example, Nakajima (2005) shows that rising earnings inequality in the United States may have
been an important factor in the rise of real estate prices in the second half of the twentieth century, through
an increased demand for precautionary savings that made the housing asset more attractive than financial
assets. More directly related to the effects we are interested in here, Gyourko et al. (2006) demonstrate
that “the thickness and length of the right tail of the income distribution” can have an important effect on
real estate prices. In places that are desirable, but where little new housing is constructed, high-income
families will outbid lower-income families for scarce housing, effectively driving up prices. Prices will
thus rise faster when population or income inequality increases. The authors claim that “in this sense,
living in a superstar city is like owning a scarce luxury good”. In a recent addition to the literature, Van
Nieuwerburgh and Weill (2009) show how the increase in house price dispersion in the United States over
the last three decades can be explained by increases in the cross-sectional productivity dispersion (which
directly translates into wage dispersion in their model). The simulation model in the next section makes
clear how population growth, changes in total income, and shocks in income inequality may affect prices
in the art market. In contrast to the situation in the real estate market, where there are important spatial
differences in supply elasticity, the supply in the art market is (almost completely) fixed.



3. A model of income (inequality) and art returns



In this section we develop a model of art prices and income. The model is then used to simulate the effects
of changes in the income distribution and the induced relationship between asset and art returns. Our
model is based on Goetzmann and Spiegel (1995). However, we focus on income instead of on a global
risky asset portfolio: we assume that an art collector buys art out of his income in each period, as he builds
up his collection. Income is assumed here to include both investment and employment income.2 In
contrast to Goetzmann and Spiegel (1995), we allow for increases in the population. In addition, in order
to make our simulations exercise more realistic, we model the transactions in the art market as outcomes



2
    In our empirical part, our income variable will not include realized equity capital gains, and therefore will be
combined with equity market proxies. See the description of the data in the next section for more information.



                                                                                                                  6
of second-price auctions. The price paid by the bidder with the highest private valuation thus equals the
second highest valuation, and not his own one.



3.1. The model



The price that a collector is willing to pay for a work of art is expressed as:
                    Vijt = λij γ i mt                                                                              (1),

where   ij   is the fraction of his income art collector i is willing to invest in painting j,                 i   is the fraction of
total income earned by investor i, and mt is the total global income at time t. When we assume that there
are Nt collectors in time t, the highest bid for art object j at time t can be expressed as:
                    Pjt = max i [Vijt , i = 1,..., N t ]                                                           (2).

Assuming w(b) and w(s) represent the winning bidders at the date of purchase, b, and the date of sale, s,
the price appreciation of object j between purchase and sale can be expressed as follows:
                    Pjs         λ w( s ) j γ w( s ) m s
                          =                                                                                        (3).
                    Pjb         λ w ( b ) j γ w ( b ) mb
Taking logs yields:

                          Pjs                 λ w( s ) j      γ w( s )     m
                    ln              = ln                 + ln          + ln s                                      (4).
                          Pjb                 λ w(b ) j       γ w( b )     mb

        In our T-period model, the growth rates in total income are random draws from a normal
distribution with mean and standard deviation both equal to                     > 0.   ij,   which reflects collector i’s personal
taste of work j, is drawn from a normal distribution with mean and standard deviation                              > 0. We consider
Z works of art. In each period, every painting is sold with a probability equal to p. They are sold to the Nt
art collectors at that point in time. The works are sold through an English ascending-bid auction: the
collector with the highest valuation wins the auction, but the price paid is equal to the second highest
valuation. The population of art buyers increases by a number n in each period.

        We construct a repeat sales art price index from the simulated transactions in the model, via the
following equation:
                    R = Xµ + ε                                                                                     (5),
where R is a vector of log returns, X is a matrix of dummy variables equal to 1 for all t for which b < t                          s
for each observation (and zero otherwise), and                  is a vector of log geometric return estimates that can be




                                                                                                                                   7
used to construct the index. We use the exponents of              to build our indices, in line with, for example,
Ginsburgh et al. (2006).3



3.2. Simulations



We can now simulate an art market, and see how the art price indices relate to the global changes in
income. We first generate a series of average per capita income data over 20 periods, putting the first
differences’ mean and standard deviation ( ) equal to 0.05. We stick to this once randomly generated
series throughout our simulations. The personal taste variable has a mean and and standard deviation ( )
of 0.15. We put the number of art works (Z) for which we follow prices equal to 50. We assume that every
artwork is auctioned off in every period, thus p = 1, but the seller can simply buy the item back if he still
has the highest valuation. (In other words, we consider buy-ins as transactions at the second-highest
valuation in the market.) In the first period, the number of collectors (N1) is equal to 20, and this number
grows with n equal to 2 in each period. In each period, total income is equal to the average per capita
income times the number of collectors. In the first scenario, each investor gets a share ( i) of total income
that is drawn from a uniform distribution between zero and twice the average per capita income. However,
after T = 10, there is a shock in the income distribution, leaving everyone with the average per capita
income from T = 11 until T = 20. Scenario 1 is thus that of a decrease in income inequality. In a second
scenario, everyone starts with the average per capita income, but as from T = 11, the share of total income
of each investor is again drawn from a uniform distribution. Scenario 2 is thus the opposite of scenario 1:
inequality increases. Simulations for both scenarios are repeated ten times, starting from the same
randomly generated income time series. We also repeat the analysis with n, i.e. the increase in the
population of art collectors per period, equal to 5 (instead of 2).

           Summing up, there are three separate forces that will drive art prices in our simple model: (i)
changes in income, (ii) changes in income inequality, and (iii) changes in the art buying population. The
results of our simulations are shown in Figure 1.

                                              [Insert Figure 1 about here]

           Panels A and B of Figure 1 show the randomly generated per capita income index (equal over
both scenarios and all simulations), and the average art price indices for the two values of n. The index

3
    In our empirical part, we will correct our coefficients for bias introduced by the concavity of the log function, as
explained in Section 4. There is less need for such a correction in our simulations thanks to the very small standard
deviations in cross-sectional returns. In any case, it would not change our findings.



                                                                                                                      8
values in the first period are put equal to 1. We see that the art price indices move in line with the income
index. However, for the first ten periods, art prices are higher in the first scenario, where the total income
is distributed unequally, than in the second one, while the opposite is true for the second half of our time
frame. We also see a clear drop in prices in Panel A after the introduction of an identical income for
everyone, and a sharp rise in art prices in Panel B after the income distribution becomes more unequal. In
short: income inequality leads to higher art prices.

          We also learn from Panels A and B that we get higher index values when the inflow of collectors
into the market is larger. Panels C and D show one reason for this. They show that the evolution of the
average private valuation    of the winning bidder in each period changes over time in the first ten periods
(with the average valuation in the first period normalized to 1). It is clear that we will see stronger
increases in the winning bidders’ relative valuations when more collectors are flowing into the art market,
since this creates a larger chance that someone with a very high private valuation of a piece enters the
market. We find weaker increases when the income is distributed evenly (Panel D), backing up previous
claims about the importance of income inequality.

          However, there is also another, less straightforward mechanism driving art price trends in our
simulation, stemming from the second-price set-up. Panels E and F present the average percentage of the
price paid to the valuation of the winning bid. In Panel E, in the first periods, the winning bidder has to
pay less than 80% of his own valuation to buy the work, but this percentage generally increases over time.
Again, the increase is higher when more art buyers enter the auction market. Not suprisingly, this
percentage is higher when incomes are identical for everyone (Panel F).

          Our model thus predicts that art prices will rise with average income, and, when controlling for
income, with income inequality. Cross-sectionally, we would also expect to see stronger price increases
where the population of art collectors grows more strongly. In the next section, we will consider the first
two predictions, but not the third one, due to the fact that we limit ourselves to data from one country with
a rather stable growth in population over the time frame considered. The total income measures utilized
will combine information both on average income and population, but the variation in changes in total
income is mainly driven by fluctuation in average income.



4. Data



In this section, we first construct a long-run art price index based on repeated sales information extracted
from a historical resource and on online sales database (subsection 4.1). Since our art market index is


                                                                                                            9
mainly built on sales in London, and is expressed in British pounds, we also collect equity market and
income data for Great Britain (subsection 4.2). Insofar as it were mainly British individuals buying the
considered artists at British auctions over our time frame, this seems a valid procedure. Of course, even
though many of the great American collections of European art were already formed in the late 19th and
early 20th centuries, the art market became much more integrated over the course of the second half of the
twentieth century. Moreover, our art transaction dataset also contains somewhat more non-British sales for
this period. If anything, these factors should work against finding significant results. Tests for stationarity,
descriptive statistics, and correlations for our variables are discussed in subsection 4.3.



4.1. Art prices



We start by building a long-term art price index. To do so, we go back to the auction sales data collected
by Gerard Reitlinger in his 1961 book ‘The Economics of Taste’, which was the first book in a series of
three, and investigated the history of the British paintings and drawings market. The artists whose sales
are listed in Reitlinger mostly conform to English standards of taste; Guerzoni (1995) reports that
Reitlinger took into account sales of the “most important and prestigious collections”. All transaction
prices in Reitlinger (1961) are expressed in British pounds. Reitlinger’s data have previously been used to
calculate the returns on art by, amongst others, Anderson (1974), Baumol (1986), and Goetzmann (1993).
In line with these studies, we identify all repeated sales within Reitlinger’s book. (Reitlinger adds a short
note, such as “see [year]” or “£[amount] in [year]”, to many transactions, which makes it possible to
correctly identify repeated sales.) This gives us a dataset of 1,094 sales pairs until 1961, excluding buy-
ins. We then look up all 6,661 works listed in Reitlinger’s book in the dataset constructed in Renneboog
and Spaenjers (2009), which contains more than one million transactions from the online database Art
Sales Index [http://www.artinfo.com/artsalesindex] since the 1920s until 2007, and try to identify resales
of those same works. We only classify a transaction as a resale when there is a unique match of a non-
ambiguous title, which occurs in 387 cases.4 About two thirds of these resales took place in Great Britain.


4
    We classify a transaction in the Art Sales Index as a match to a sale in Reitlinger’s list if we find strong evidence of
the existence of only one work with the same title by the same artist. Also, we exclude objects with attribution
classifications and with very general titles (or titles that point to a much-used subject of the artist), and objects that
went to museums according to Reitlinger. Additionally, for the last ten years of our time frame, we can consult the
provenance of the work in the online catalogue description on http://www.invaluable.com and delete a limited
number of observations, for which the ownership history contradicted the original classification from our dataset.



                                                                                                                        10
However, also for the other transactions we have prices in British pounds. In total we thus end up with a
dataset containing 1,481 repeated sales. Since the data are very sparse for the first decades covered by
Reitlinger, we delete the thirteen pairs for which the purchase occurred prior to 1765. This leaves us with
1,468 repeated sales.

        There are some well-documented selection issues with the data. First, Reitlinger included a
disproportionate high number of sales from Christie’s London. However, if the sales at Christie’s were
representative for the higher end of the British market, this does not have to be a major issue. Second,
Reitlinger also included relatively more artists that were famous in the beginning of the 1960s. The
addition of transactions since the publication of the book, which affect the estimation of the whole index,
should alleviate concerns about a potential upward bias. Third, in his critical review of the Reitlinger data
series, Guerzoni (1995) shows that some transactions in between sales pairs seem to be missing. However,
this is also the case in other repeated sales studies, and should not be expected to impact our index
strongly. A more general concern is the survivorship bias in the art market. Simulating an art investment
portfolio, without requiring resale, Goetzmann (1996) shows that survivorship issues can put a significant
upward bias on estimated returns. However, insofar as this bias does not change significantly over time,
this is not a problem in the context of this research. (It is a more pressing issue when solely focusing on
the performance of art as an investment.)

        It is important to stress that, despite the caveats outlined in the previous paragraph, the Reitlinger
data still constitute a unique overview of auction sales since the end of the eighteenth century. Also, the
art price index is a means to an end here. Our use of the Reitlinger data and the repeat-sales methodology
is a function of a desire to examine very long term trends in income and asset market behavior. For shorter
time frames, return series can estimated more precisely via a hedonic approach that uses characteristics
data not available in Reitlinger.

        To get an estimate of the index        over T periods based on N repeated sales observations, we
follow the Bayes formulation of a repeat sales regression, which imposes some additional restrictions on
the estimation, outlined in Goetzmann (1992, 1993):
                                                    −1

                 µˆ =    (           )     1
                             X 'Ω X + κ I − J
                                −1

                                           T
                                                         X 'Ω −1 R                            (6),

where X again is a N x T matrix of dummy variables indicating the holding period for each object, the
weights in      are the times between sales, and R is the N-dimensional vector of logged returns.
Additionally, J is a matrix of ones, and    is a constant that divides the variance of the residual error by the
variance of the index:




                                                                                                             11
                          σ2
                     κ=                                                                                (7).
                          σ µ2

We approximate          by first running a simple GLS repeat sales regression on our data, which provides us
with estimates of          and     . The Bayes formulation avoids spurious negative autocorrelation in the
estimated return series, and leads to a much more accurate estimator when the number of observations is
relatively small (Goetzmann, 1992).

           A good approximation of the annual arithmetic returns is then given by exp(µˆ t + σˆ t2 2) , where

the cross-sectional variance of the return can be estimated in the second stage of the Case-Shiller repeat-
sales regression under the assumption that it is constant over time (Goetzmann, 1992). This specification
corrects for a downward bias of the arithmetic mean that is due to the log transformation of the art prices.
The return estimates can then be used to build a price index over the period of interest.

           We perform the analysis outlined in the previous paragraph using our dataset of repeated sales.
All prices were deflated using the U.K. RPI (Officer, 2009b) before the log transformation. (We start from
real prices because the Bayes repeated sales estimator implies the assumption that the returns conform to a
prior distribution, which is more realistic in the context of real returns.) The resulting art price index, in
real British pounds, is shown in Figure 2.

                                              [Insert Figure 2 about here]

           A visual inspection of the figure suggests a relationship between the real economy and art prices.
For example, we see significant price drops during World War I, over the Great Depression in the 1930s,
and after the oil crisis in 1973. There is no such an effect over the second World War, but the price level
then was already the lowest of the whole twentieth century. Consistent with previous studies that have
investigated the late twentieth century art market, we find strong price appreciations throughout the 1960s,
during the art market boom at the end of the 1980s, and in the first years of the 2000s. We will
henceforward refer to the natural log of our art price index as Art.



4.2. Equity and income data



We build a history of British stock price returns, based on the following sources: Acheson et al. (2009) for
the period 1830-1870,5 Grossman (2002) for the period 1870-1913, and Dimson, Marsh, and Staunton

5
    We start our analysis in 1830 instead of 1825 due to data constraints on the GDP variable (cf. infra).



                                                                                                              12
(2002, 2009) for the years thereafter. We create yearly indices covering total return, capital appreciation,
and dividend yield, transformed into real terms by deflating by the U.K. RPI (Officer, 2009b). The natural
log series are called Equities, Equities (capital), and Equities (dividend).

           A recent literature has investigated the evolution of top incomes over the course of the twentieth
century. Atkinson and Piketty (2007) document that the general pattern is one of a decline of top income
in the inter-war period (mainly due to a decline of top capital income), and a sudden rise in top income in
the Anglo-Saxon countries since the 1970s (mainly thanks to a rise of top wages, i.e. executive
compensation, in those countries). We use data from Atkinson and Piketty (2010) – who themselves rely
on income tax data – to build a consistent series of the share of total income received by the top 0.1% of
all income-earners in the U.K. for the period 1908-2005.6 This series will be referred to as Inequality. We
refer to Atkinson (2007) for more details on data sources and methodology. However, it is important to
note that the data exclude most capital gains and losses, and certain remunerations in kind. Our variable
will thus not simply capture stock market wealth effects, even though one can expect equity prices and top
income shares to be highly positively correlated, which will make it hard to disentangle the effects of both
variables.

           Atkinson (2007) observes that the time trends in the distribution of income among the employed
and the distribution of wealth among individuals are similar. This is important in our context for two
related reasons. First, it suggests that we are measuring the share of income earned by the wealthy.
Second, it indicates that, by measuring (changes in) inequality in the income distribution, we also proxy
for (changes in) inequality in the distribution of wealth.

           We also borrow data on the (natural log of) total personal income (in real terms) from Atkinson
(2007) for the years 1908-2005.7 This series is called Income. We calculate a similar series Top income
that indicates how large a share of total income (in percent) the top 0.1% gets in every year. Yearly data



6
    The top income share data were downloaded from Emmanuel’s Saez website (September 16, 2008). Over the
period 1908-2007, data on the top 0.1% income share are missing for a number of years, even though, at least in
some cases, data for other top groups are available. For the period 1908-1912, we estimate the share of the top 0.1%
based on the coefficients of a linear probability model (without intercept) that relates the top 0.1% share to the top
0.05% and top 0.01% shares. The model was estimated based on the period 1913-1922. We estimate a similar model
relating the top 0.1% share to the top 1% and top 0.5% shares using data from the periods 1982-1986 and 1993-1997
to get estimates of the top 0.01% for the 1987-1992 time frame. For the years 1961 and 1980 we linearly interpolated
the income share based on the shares in the surrounding years.
7
    The updated data series was provided by Tony Atkinson.


                                                                                                                  13
on an alternative measure of total income, namely real GDP, come from Officer (2009a). The data are
available from 1830 to 2007, and the logged series is indicated by GDP.



4.3. Tests for stationarity, descriptive statistics, and correlations



As is well known, relating non-stationary series to each other would lead to spurious results. Therefore,
we first want to determine whether our series are stationary or not. Table 1 shows the results of our
Dickey-Fuller tests, which test for the existence of a unit root in time series. Next to the test statistics for
the standard Dickey-Fuller test, we also report the results for an “augmented” version with one lagged
difference, which accounts for potential second-order autocorrelation. In each case, the null hypothesis is
that of a unit root, or non-stationarity.

                                            [Insert Table 1 about here]

        The results in Table 1 show that we cannot reject the null hypothesis for all our original time
series, implying that we cannot exclude non-stationarity. However, when considering the first differences
in our time series, which measure the rate of change or indeed the return, we are able to reject non-
stationarity at very high significance levels. Henceforward, we will thus mainly work with the first
differences of the variables of interest.

        Table 2 gives the descriptive statistics for these first differences. We see an average annual log
return over the whole time frame for our art series of 2.97%, with a standard deviation of almost 11%; for
equities the mean is 6.74%, with a standard deviation of more than 15%. As can be expected, we find
much lower volatility in the series measuring the changes in GDP and total income. The average first
difference in Inequality is small (-0.06%), but the standard error is 0.32%, indicating some variation in
this variable. We also include the regression results of an autoregressive model with two lags in Table 2,
to measure autocorrelation in the first differences. One can see that several of our first-differenced
variables have highly significant first-order autocorrelation in returns. We will have to take this into
account in our empirical analysis in Section 5.

                                            [Insert Table 2 about here]

        Table 3 gives an overview of the pairwise correlations between the different variables. The returns
on art have a significantly positive correlation with the total equity returns and capital growth in equities,
and with changes in GDP. We also witness a strong positive correlation between art returns and changes
in income inequality, and a weaker positive correlation between the first differences in art prices and those



                                                                                                             14
in top income. Note that there is also highly significant positive correlation between   Equities (and both
of its components) and       Inequality, even though the latter measure does not include capital gains. This
may be due to business cycle effects.

                                            [Insert Table 3 about here]



5. Empirical results



The results of our comovement analysis are outlined in subsection 5.1. First, we look at the relation
between the equity market and the art market. Second, we consider the correlation between changes in
income inequality and art returns. Third, we combine equity returns and changes at the top of the income
distribution into a single analysis. Thereafter, we undertake a cointegration analysis in subsection 5.2, to
investigate whether we can identify a long-run driver of art prices. Subsection 5.3 splits the time series
into a period prior to 1945 and a post-war period.



5.1. Comovement



First we investigate the relationship between art prices and equity markets. The data series constructed in
Section 4 enable a long-term view. Panel A of Table 4 outlines the baseline regression results; all models
are estimated using ordinary least squares. Model (1) relates our market returns to yearly changes in our
measure of income for which we have information since 1830, namely GDP. We thereafter include equity
market returns in our analysis. However, since the price of an equity is a ‘stock’ variable measured at
year-ends (and thus not a ‘flow’ variable like GDP or dividends), we also include the lagged first
differences for both Equities and Equities (capital). Models (2) and (3) look at overall equity returns,
while models (4) and (5) differentiate between capital growth and dividend yield. We present Newey-
West standard errors that account for first-order autocorrelation in the error terms, which Durbin-Watson
test statistics indicate is present (not reported).

                                            [Insert Table 4 about here]

        The results for the estimation of model (1) in Panel A indicate that overall income does not
explain art price changes at a meaningful statistical significance level. The coefficient on        GDP is
positive, but has a p-value of 0.101. It is possible that the low variation in GDP changes makes it hard to
identify the effect of changes in total income. Models (2) and (3) in Panel A of Table 4 show positive


                                                                                                         15
coefficients on both same-year and lagged equity market returns that are strongly significant. The results
of model (4) and (5) show that it is mainly capital gains and losses that drive art returns. This is no
surprise given the correlation table already showed a positive correlation of art returns with equity capital
changes, but no significant correlation with the first differences of the dividend index.

           The comovement of the equity prices and the art market is also nicely illustrated in Figure 3,
which plots the evolution of the series Art and Equities (capital) over our time frame. Although the equity
index is more volatile, we see similar trends in our art price index and the equity capital index in many
periods.

                                          [Insert Figure 3 about here]

           Up to now, we have considered the relation between equity market movements and changes in the
price level in the art market. We found strong evidence that capitals gains and losses drive art prices, and
only very weak evidence that a proxy for overall income is helpful in explaining art price trends.
However, we also want to look deeper into the link between income inequality and art prices. Panel B of
Table 4 reports the results of a number of regression models that links art returns to proxies for both total
income and its distribution. Data on these variables are available for the period 1908-2005, which limits
our analysis to that time frame.

           Again, the first models indicate that changes in overall income variables (such as GDP or total
personal income) do not have a statistically significant relation to art returns. Models (3) and (4) add the
first differences in Inequality to the regression specification, and in both cases we find positive and highly
significant coefficients, indicating that art prices rise when income inequality goes up, in line with our
simulation model. (The coefficient in model (4) suggests that a one percentage point increase in the share
of total income held by the top 0.1% leads to a increase in art prices of about 15 percent.) Model (5)
relates art price changes to the changes in Top income, the variable that combines the personal income
variable with the proxy for income inequality. In contrast to the coefficients on           Income, we see a
(weakly) significant positive relation.

           We illustrate the trends of total personal income, the share held by the top 0.1%, and art prices
between 1908 and 2005 in Figure 4. Figure 4 shows that art prices were below the pre-World War I level
until the very end of the 1960s. If we only consider total income measures, this is very suprising. Indeed,
total personal income had by then increased almost fourfold – would one not expect rises in income to
lead to upwards art price trends? The results presented here suggest that the changes in the income
distribution may have played an important role: the share of total income earned by the top 0.1%
decreased enormously in the first half of the twentieth century.



                                                                                                           16
                                         [Insert Figure 4 about here]

        In models (1) and (2) of Panel C, we check whether our inequality measure still has explanatory
power when controlling for same-year and lagged equity capital growth variables. We exclude the
dividend variable, because dividends are captured by the personal income inequality variable already. We
still control for total income, in the different ways that were presented before. Model (3) again looks at the
changes in top incomes.

        The results from the three models in Panel C confirm the previous findings that equity markets
strongly affect art prices. However, although the coefficient is somewhat smaller, our income inequality
measure is still a significant determinant of the art price level. We find less support for the hypothesis that
art returns can readily be associated with changes in top incomes. As with      GDP and      Income, this may
be due to low variation in the top income variable.

        In Table 2, we reported strong autocorrelation in our returns on art. To some degree, this may be
explained by speculative dynamics also relevant in other asset markets (Cutler et al., 1991). However, it
may also partially be attributable to a ‘Working effect’ (Working, 1960; Schwert, 1990): our index is
smoothed and will have autocorrelated returns by construction due to the implicit averaging of art prices
per period. Therefore, Table 5 repeats the analysis of Table 4, but adds the lagged art market return to
each model. Durbin-Watson test statistics (not reported) indicate that the error terms do now no longer
show significant autocorrelation, and therefore we report robust standard errors in Table 5 (instead of the
Newey-West standard errors in Panel 4).

                                         [Insert Table 5 about here]

        Even though the lagged art returns are highly significant in all specifications, we do not see much
change in the coefficients on the equity related variables (or their significance) in Panels A and C. In Panel
B of Table 5, the coefficients on   Inequality are somewhat smaller than in Table 4, but still very strongly
signifcant. The coefficient on   Top income keeps the expected sign, but loses statistical significance at an
appropriate level. The same happens for our income inequality variables in Panel C: the coefficients are
positive, and more than a standard deviation above zero, but not statistically significant (p-values around
0.15). Nevertheless, it is important to observe that including lagged art market returns does not lead to
different conclusions.




                                                                                                            17
5.2. Cointegration



The previous observations provide evidence of comovement between equity markets and income
inequality on the one hand and art markets on the other. However, these are relatively short-term effects.
Given our long-term data series, and since the time series in this research are integrated of order one, we
are also able to explore the factors that drive art prices over the long run. If it is really the wealthy or high-
income individuals that determine the price level in the art market, then one would expect Top income (but
not necessarily GDP or Income) to be cointegrated with art prices.

         Panel A of Table 6 shows the results of Johansen’s cointegration test applied to our time series
over the period since 1908, the first year for which we have income inequality data. We report both the
results of a test assuming a trend in the cointegrating equation, and of a test assuming no such a trend. We
include one lagged first difference in our set-up. Given that we are working with yearly data, this seems
reasonable. Also, in most cases lag selection criteria (not reported) suggest the inclusion of just one lag.
We find that the null hypothesis of no cointegration cannot be consistently rejected, except in the case of
Top income. This is in line with our simulation model as well as the earlier empirical evidence above.
Over the long run, the income of the wealthy seems a key factor in the price formation in the art market.

                                          [Insert Table 6 about here]

         Panel B of Table 6 shows the resulting cointegrating equations, in which the coefficients are
normalized, which is a standard procedure that allows better insight in the interaction between the
variables. Setting the coefficient on Art equal to one, we find significantly negative coefficients on Top
income, in line with expectations. However, note that the absolute value of these coefficients are also
significantly smaller than one, implying that there is no one-on-one relationship between top incomes and
art prices.



5.3. Before and after World War II



Profound changes have taken place in the art market since the middle of the previous century. Without
doubt, the art market has become more globalized. One may thus expect the relation between our art price
index on the one hand and the British equity market and income distribution on the other to be weaker
after the second World War. Another motivation to do an analysis per subperiod is that more transactions
from outside Great Britain are included for the later decades of our time frame. Therefore, Table 7 repeats



                                                                                                               18
some crucial comovement analyses, but now differentiates between the period prior to 1945 and the post-
war period. The different panels follow the structure of earlier tables, and in all cases models (1) and (2)
concern the period 1908-1945, while models (3) and (4) are estimated using post-war data.

                                          [Insert Table 7 about here]

        We now briefly discuss the results presented in Table 7. (An analysis splitting the dataset in 1961
gives qualitatively similar results.) Panel A shows that British equity capital growth has a statistically
significant impact on our art price index for both subperiods. This is reassuring: at least for our analysis of
the impact of equity markets, our results are not driven by one particular era. Panel B, however, suggests
that our findings on the role of income inequality in the determination of art prices are caused by trends in
the first decades of the twentieth century. Indeed, the coefficients on    Inequality are clearly positive for
the period up to 1945, despite the small sample size. In contrast, the coefficients are not significantly
different from zero for the second subperiod. As before, Panel C combines the information on income and
equities. Although for the first subperiod we do not find any statistical significance, all coefficients have
the expected sign and order of magnitude. The low power probably originates from the limited number of
yearly observations we consider. The results for the second subperiod, since World War II, confirm the
points made earlier in this paragraph: equity markets have a clear impact, while we do not find evidence of
a role for changes in the income distribution in settting art prices.

        The lack of support for our hypothesis that income inequality impacts art prices during the post-
war period should not be too surprising for the reasons mentioned above. To get an idea of whether
globalization may indeed work against finding significant results using British data series for the post-war
period, we do an analysis incorporating data on income and income inequality in the United States. As
before, the data come from Atkinson and Piketty (2010). The results are shown in Table 8.         Income and
  Inequality refer to the British data used earlier, while      Income US and      Inequality US refer to the
newly introduced U.S. data.

                                          [Insert Table 8 about here]

        From models (1) through (4), we learn that U.S. income inequality did not play a role in setting
British art prices prior to 1945. However, a striking conclusion one can draw from models (5) through (8)
is that U.S. inequality seems to matter in the post-war period. We get significantly positive coefficients on
  Inequality US for the time frame 1945-2007. This result holds even when taking British income and
inequality into account, as in model (8). When also controlling for GBP-denominated U.S. equity capital
returns, using NYSE data from Goetzmann et al. (2001) for the pre-1925 period and from CRSP for the
period after, the coefficient on   Inequality US is of the same order of magnitude (not reported), with p-



                                                                                                            19
values around 0.10. We see this as evidence that income inequality trends may still be relevant to art
prices, but that the relation is certainly not country-specific anymore.

        As a final analysis, we repeat the Johansen’s cointegration tests outlined before, which should be
able to identify long-run connections, on the post-war data. We find statistically significant evidence of a
long-run relationship between top incomes and art prices (not reported), both when starting from U.S. and
U.K. top income data. Again, this hints that top incomes may indeed be primitive to art prices, even after
World War II.



6. Conclusion



Andy Warhol once wrote: “I like money on the wall. Say you were going to buy a $200,000 painting. I
think you should take that money, tie it up, and hang it on the wall. Then when someone visited you, the
first thing they would see is the money on the wall”(Warhol, 1975). This article has investigated how
equity wealth and income – more generally, money – determines the price of art.

        Motivated by a growing literature on stock market wealth effects and the effects of income
dispersion on the prices of real assets, we do a simulation exercise that investigates how changes in the
income distribution may affect art prices. We find that art prices can be expected to rise not only when
income (or the size of the population) goes up, but also when income inequality rises.

        We then construct a new art price index that incorporates information since the beginning of the
eighteenth century, and utilizes econometric noise-reduction methods. Using this index, we are able to
confirm and strengthen previous evidence that equity market movements affect art prices. This result is
robust to many different specifications and holds even when we split the overall 1830-2007 time frame in
two subperiods.

        We find weaker evidence for the impact of income inequality. Although there is evidence that
changes in income inequality had an important effect in the first half of the twentieth century, and that this
effect is significant for the overall time frame, we do not find the result for the post-war period. However,
we do find some evidence that U.S. income inequality impacted art prices over the later period. This result
is consistent with the changing relative roles of the U.S. and U.K. in the global economy in the twentieth
century. Also, and arguably more important, we find a cointegrating relationship between top incomes and
art prices, both for the total 1908-2005 period and since 1945.




                                                                                                           20
        Taken together, we believe that these results demonstrate that it is indeed the wealth of the
wealthy that drives art prices. This implies that we can expect art booms whenever income inequality rises
quickly. This seems exactly what we have been witnessing during the last period of strong art price
appreciation, 2002-2007. Indeed, in many countries with large numbers of art buyers, income inequality
rose significantly in those years, mainly due to strong increases in managerial compensation. Warhol, for
one, would probably have applauded this evolution: “I don’t think everybody should have money. It
shouldn’t be for everybody – you wouldn’t know who was important” (Warhol, 1975).




                                                                                                       21
References


Acheson, Graeme G., Charles R. Hickson, John D. Turner, and Qing Je, 2009, Rule Britannia!: British stock market
   returns, 1825-1870, Journal of Economic History 69, 1106-1136.
Aït-Sahalia, Yacine, Jonathan A. Parker, and Motohiro Yogo, 2004, Luxury goods and the equity premium, Journal
   of Finance 59, 2959-3004.
Anderson, Robert C., 1974, Paintings as an investment, Economic Inquiry 12, 13-26.
Ashenfelter, Orley, and Kathryn Graddy, 2003, Auctions and the price of art, Journal of Economic Literature 41,
   763-786.
Atkinson, Anthony B., The distribution of top incomes in the United Kingdom, In: Anthony B. Atkinson, and
   Thomas Piketty, eds.: Top Incomes over the Twentieth Century (Oxford University Press, Oxford).
Atkinson, Anthony B., and Thomas Piketty, eds., 2007, Top Incomes over the Twentieth Century (Oxford University
   Press, Oxford).
Atkinson, Anthony B., and Thomas Piketty, eds., 2010, Top Incomes over the Twentieth Century. Volume 2 (Oxford
   University Press, Oxford), forthcoming.
Baumol, William J., 1986, Unnatural value: Or art investment as floating crap game, American Economic Review 76
   (AEA Papers and Proceedings), 10-14.
Beggs, Alan, and Kathryn Graddy, 2008, Failure to meet the reserve price: The impact on returns to art, Journal of
   Cultural Economics 32, 301-320.
Beggs, Alan, and Kathryn Graddy, 2009, Anchoring effects: Evidence from art auctions, American Economic Review
   99, 1027-1039.
Campbell, Rachel, 2008, Art as a financial investment, Journal of Alternative Investments 10, 64-81.
Cap Gemini, 2008, World Wealth Report [http://www.us.capgemini.com/worldwealthreport08].
Case, Karl E., and Robert J. Shiller, 2003, Is there a bubble in the housing market?, Brookings Paper on Economic
   Activity 2003, 299-342.
Chanel, Olivier, 1995, Is art market behaviour predictable? European Economic Review 39, 519-527.
Cutler, David M., James M. Poterba, and Lawrence H. Summers, 1991, Speculative dynamics, Review of Economic
   Studies 58, 529-546.
Dimson, Elroy, Paul Marsh, and Mike Staunton, 2002, Triumph of the Optimists (Princeton University Press,
   Princeton).
Dimson, Elroy, Paul Marsh, and Mike Staunton, 2009, Credit Suisse Global Investment Returns Yearbook (Credit
   Suisse, Zurich).
Ginsburgh, Victor, and Philippe Jeanfils, 1995, Long-term comovements in international markets for paintings,
   European Economic Review 39, 538-548.
Ginsburgh, Victor, Jianping Mei, and Michael Moses, 2006, On the computation of price indices, In: Victor A.
   Ginsburgh, and David Throsby, eds.: Handbook of the Economics of Art and Culture (Elsevier, Amsterdam).




                                                                                                                  22
Goetzmann, William N., 1992, The accuracy of real estate indices: Repeat sale estimators, Journal of Real Estate
   Finance and Economics 5, 5-53.
Goetzmann, William N., 1993, Accounting for taste: Art and financial markets over three centuries, American
   Economic Review 83, 1370-1376.
Goetzmann, William N., 1996, How costly is the fall from fashion? Survivorship bias in the painting market, In:
   Victor A. Ginsburgh, and Pierre-Michel Menger, eds.: Economics of the Arts – Selected Essays (Elsevier,
   Amsterdam).
Goetzmann, William N., Roger G. Ibbotson, and Lian Peng, 2001, A new historical database for the NYSE 1815 to
   1925: Performance and predictability, Journal of Financial Markets 4, 1-32.
Goetzmann, William N., and Matthew Spiegel, 1995, Private value components, and the winner’s curse in an art
   index, European Economic Review 39, 549-555.
Grossman, Richard S., 2002, New indices of British equity prices, Journal of Economic History 62, 121-146.
Guerzoni, Guido, 1995, Reflections on historical series of art prices: Reitlinger’s data revisited. Journal of Cultural
   Economics 19, 251-260.
Gyourko, Joseph, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai, 2006, Superstar cities, mimeo, NBER.
Hiraki, Takato, Akitoshi Ito, Darius A. Spieth, and Naoya Takezawa, 2009, How did Japanese investments influence
   international art prices?, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.
Mandel, Benjamin R., 2009, Art as an investment and conspicuous consumption good, American Economic Review
   99, 1653-1663.
McAndrew, Clare, and Rex Thompson, 2007, The collateral value of fine art, Journal of Banking and Finance 31,
   589-607.
Mei, Jianping, and Michael Moses, 2002, Art as an investment and the underperformance of masterpieces, American
   Economic Review 92, 1656-1668.
Mei, Jianping, and Michael Moses, 2005, Vested interest and biased price estimates, Journal of Finance 60, 2409-
   2435.
Nakajima, Makoto, 2005, Rising earnings instability, portfolio choice, and housing prices, mimeo, University of
   Illinois.
Officer, Lawrence H., 2009a, What was the UK GDP then? [http://www.measuringworth.com].
Officer, Lawrence H., 2009b, What were the UK earnings rate and retail price index then?
   [http://www.measuringworth.com].
Pesando, James E., 1993, Art as an investment: The market for modern prints, American Economic Review 83, 1075-
   1089.
Pesando, James E., and Pauline M. Shum, 2008, The auction market for modern prints: Confirmations,
   contradictions, and new puzzles, Economic Inquiry 46, 149-159.
Poterba, James M., 2000, Stock market wealth and consumption, Journal of Economic Perspectives 14, 99-118.
Reitlinger, Gerard, 1961, The Economics of Taste (Volume 1): The Rise and Fall of Picture Prices 1760-1960 (Barrie
   and Rockliff, London).




                                                                                                                      23
Renneboog, Luc, and Christophe Spaenjers, 2009, Buying beauty: On prices and returns in the art market, mimeo,
   Tilburg University.
Schwert, G. William, 1990, Indexes of U.S. stock prices from 1802 to 1987, Journal of Business 63, 399-426.
Stein, John P., 1977, The monetary appreciation of paintings, Journal of Political Economy 85, 1021-1036.
The Economist, 2006, The rich are different, 16 November.
Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn, and Pierre-Olivier Weill, 2009, Why has house price dispersion gone up?, mimeo, New
   York University and UCLA.
Warhol, Andy, 1975, The Philosophy of Andy Warhol (From A to B and Back Again) (Harcourt Books, Orlando).
Working, Holbrook, 1960, Note on the correlation of first differences of averages in a random chain, Econometrica
    28, 916-918.
Worthington, Andrew C., and Helen Higgs, 2003, Art as an investment: Short- and long-term comovements in major
   painting markets, Empirical Economics 28, 649-668.
Worthington, Andrew C., and Helen Higgs, 2004, Art as an investment: Risk, return and portfolio diversification in
   major painting markets, Accounting & Finance 44, 257-271.




                                                                                                                 24
Table 1: Tests for stationarity
                                  Period                    Original series                           First differences
                                                     DF                ADF(1)                  DF                  ADF(1)

Art                             1830-2007          -1.288               -1.918               -8.722     ***       -7.754     ***

Equities                        1830-2007          -2.720               -2.885              -13.134     ***      -10.124     ***

Equities (capital)              1830-2007          -2.671               -2.831              -13.175     ***      -10.172     ***

Equities (dividends)            1830-2007          -0.317               -0.995               -6.666     ***       -6.608     ***

GDP                             1830-2007          -1.148               -2.059               -9.294     ***       -8.264     ***

Income                          1908-2005          -1.460               -1.557               -4.830     ***       -3.982     ***

Inequality                      1908-2005          -1.913               -2.573               -6.089     ***       -5.607     ***

Top income                      1908-2005           0.362               -0.141               -5.328     ***       -4.063     ***

Notes. This table presents the Dickey-Fuller test statistics of the original series and their first differences. In both cases, we
show the results of a standard Dickey-Fuller test and of an augmented Dickey-Fuller test including one lag. For all original
series, we compare with the critical values with trend. We do not assume trends for the first differences. ***, **, and * indicate
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                                                                                     25
Table 2: Descriptive statistics
                                  Period          Mean         S.D.         Min          Max          L1               L2

  Art                           1830-2007        0.0297       0.1092      -0.3541      0.3080      0.4167    *** -0.0680
                                                                                                   0.0993             0.0879
    Equities                        1830-2007          0.0674     0.1557     -0.8189        0.6821 0.0055            -0.0897
                                                                                                   0.1671             0.1099
    Equities (capital)              1830-2007          0.0247     0.1573     -0.8948        0.6249 0.0023            -0.0927
                                                                                                   0.1665             0.1106
    Equities (dividends)            1830-2007          0.0205     0.0555     -0.1289        0.2745 0.6506    *** -0.1034
                                                                                                   0.1245             0.1113
    GDP                             1830-2007          0.0196     0.0288     -0.1031        0.0947 0.3700    *** -0.0935
                                                                                                   0.1227             0.0864
    Income                          1908-2005          0.0623     0.0581     -0.1415        0.2237 0.5655    ***      0.0689
                                                                                                   0.1569             0.1299
    Inequality                      1908-2005         -0.0006     0.0032     -0.0121        0.0099 0.2461            -0.1708
                                                                                                   0.1557             0.1845
    Top income                      1908-2005          0.0547     0.0846     -0.1353        0.3451 0.4645    ***      0.1081
                                                                                                   0.0888             0.1096
Notes. This table presents the descriptive statistics (mean, standard deviations, minimum, and maximum) of the first differences. L1
and L2 show the coefficients and robust standard errors of an AR(2) model that relates the first differences to the lagged first
differences. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                                                                                 26
Table 3: Correlations
                        Art             Eq.          Eq. (cap.)         Eq. (div.)          GDP       Inc.            Ineq.          Top

  Art                1.0000

  Equities           0.2253    ***   1.0000

  Equities (cap.)    0.2342    ***   0.9979    ***   1.0000

  Equities (div.)    0.1196          0.4419    ***   0.4406       ***   1.0000

  GDP                0.1685    **    0.0967          0.1068             -0.0452            1.0000

  Income             -0.0182         -0.1874   *     -0.1974      *     -0.8148      ***   0.1466   1.0000

  Inequality         0.3576    ***   0.3245    ***   0.3326       ***   0.3357       ***   0.1325   -0.2271   **    1.0000

  Top income         0.1980    *     0.0413          0.0384             -0.3850      ***   0.1655   0.5698    ***   -0.0496       1.0000

Notes. This table presents the pairwise correlations for the first differences. All correlations except those involving the first differences in
Income, Inequality, and Top income (1908-2005) are calculated over the time frame 1830-2007. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Table 4: Comovement analysis

Panel A
                              (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)
                               Art             Art             Art            Art             Art

  GDP                       0.6403                          0.2507                        0.2279
                            0.3888                          0.3896                        0.3842
  Equities                                0.1565      ***   0.1520   ***
                                          0.0562            0.0553
  (-1) Equities                           0.2391      ***   0.2272   ***
                                          0.0495            0.0524
  Equities (capital)                                                        0.1663 **     0.1591 **
                                                                            0.0662        0.0651
   (-1) Equities (capital)                                                  0.2387 *** 0.2274 ***
                                                                             0.0522       0.0556
    Equities (dividends)                                                    -0.0292      -0.0120
                                                                             0.2007       0.1982
 Number of obs.                 177            176            176             176           176
 F-value                        2.71          13.48 ***       8.94    ***     9.90  ***    7.44     ***
Notes. This table shows the results of comovement regressions. The returns on art are regressed on
a changing set of independent variables, listed in the first column. Below each coefficient is the
Newey-West standard error, taking into account first-order autocorrelation in the error structure. ***,
**, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.


Panel B
                              (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)
                               Art             Art             Art            Art             Art

  GDP                       0.8342                          0.6551
                            0.5219                          0.4582
  Income                                   -0.0404                          0.1471
                                            0.2888                          0.2629
  Inequality                                                13.6039 ***    15.0969 ***
                                                             3.5997         4.3498
  Top income                                                                              0.3013 *
                                                                                          0.1741
 Number of obs.                  99             97             97            97             97
 F-value                        2.56           0.02           8.42    ***   7.43   ***     3.00     *
Notes. This table shows the results of comovement regressions. The returns on art are regressed on
a changing set of independent variables, listed in the first column. Below each coefficient is the
Newey-West standard error, taking into account first-order autocorrelation in the error structure. ***,
**, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Panel C
                                (1)              (2)              (3)
                                 Art              Art              Art

  GDP                         0.3248
                              0.4970
  Income                                       0.2289
                                               0.2480
  Inequality                  8.1209    **     9.0119    **
                              3.9395           4.1230
  Top income                                                    0.1932
                                                                0.1628
   Equities (capital)         0.1423 **         0.1567 **       0.1887 ***
                              0.0634            0.0601          0.0636
  (-1) Equities (capital)     0.2236 *** 0.2371 *** 0.2520 ***
                              0.0582            0.0606          0.0544
 Number of obs.                  96               96              96
 F-value                        8.48    ***     10.28 ***        7.99     ***
Notes. This table shows the results of comovement regressions. The
returns on art are regressed on a changing set of independent
variables, listed in the first column. Below each coefficient is the
Newey-West standard error, taking into account first-order
autocorrelation in the error structure. ***, **, and * indicate significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                                29
Table 5: Comovement analysis including lagged art returns

Panel A
                               (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)
                                Art             Art             Art            Art             Art

  GDP                        0.3620                          0.0679                         0.0478
                             0.3415                          0.3514                         0.3482
  Equities                                   0.1456    ***   0.1444   ***
                                             0.0425          0.0428
  (-1) Equities                              0.1883    ***   0.1856   ***
                                             0.0477          0.0484
  Equities (cap.)                                                             0.1543 *** 0.1528 ***
                                                                              0.0514          0.0512
  (-1) Equities (cap.)                                                        0.1875 *** 0.1854 ***
                                                                              0.0494          0.0499
   Equities (div.)                                                           -0.0375         -0.0339
                                                                              0.1637          0.1597
  (-1) Art                      0.3727 *** 0.3211 *** 0.3185 *** 0.3162 *** 0.3144 ***
                                0.0836           0.0828         0.0813        0.0826          0.0811
 Number of obs.                  176              176            176            176             176
 R2                             0.1623           0.2643         0.2646        0.2661          0.2663
Notes. This table shows the results of comovement regressions. The returns on art are regressed on
a changing set of independent variables, listed in the first column. Below each coefficient is the robust
standard error. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.


Panel B
                               (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)
                                Art             Art             Art            Art             Art

  GDP                        0.4141                          0.3629
                             0.4807                          0.4429
  Income                                     -0.1083                         0.0352
                                             0.2210                          0.2300
  Inequality                                                 10.1295 ***    10.5001 **
                                                              3.5812         4.1297
  Top income                                                                                  0.1288
                                                                                              0.1528
  (-1) Art                      0.3833 *** 0.4154 *** 0.3097 *** 0.3305 *** 0.3865 ***
                                0.1053           0.1058         0.1108        0.1098          0.1087
 Number of obs.                   98               96             96            96               96
 R2                             0.1797           0.1716         0.2356        0.2282          0.1758
Notes. This table shows the results of comovement regressions. The returns on art are regressed on
a changing set of independent variables, listed in the first column. Below each coefficient is the robust
standard error. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                                                            30
Panel C
                               (1)            (2)             (3)
                                Art            Art             Art

  GDP                        0.1084
                             0.4796
  Income                                    0.1372
                                            0.2348
  Inequality                 5.3329         5.8686
                             3.8717         3.9805
  Top income                                                 0.0796
                                                             0.1494
    Equities (capital)         0.1504 *** 0.1576 *** 0.1788 ***
                               0.0516           0.0511       0.0499
   (-1) Equities (capital)     0.1919 *** 0.1976 *** 0.2053 ***
                               0.0563           0.0606       0.0555
   (-1) Art                    0.2673 **        0.2628 **    0.2914 ***
                               0.1079           0.1076       0.1063
 Number of obs.                   96              96           96
 R2                            0.3449           0.3477       0.3332
Notes. This table shows the results of comovement regressions. The
returns on art are regressed on a changing set of independent variables,
listed in the first column. Below each coefficient is the robust standard
error. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.




                                                                            31
Table 6: Testing for cointegrating relationships

Panel A
                                     Intercept, no trend                      Intercept, trend
                                 Trace         Max. Eigenval.         Trace           Max. Eigenval.

Equities                        5.7922             5.7922            16.193             10.8464

Equities (capital)              8.3220             8.2691            16.3305            11.4327

GDP                             7.3799             7.3131            18.2229            10.9144

Income                         10.8052            10.4074            22.5284            17.4250    *

 Top income                       19.9515     ***     16.4240   **   24.7334 *           17.3767 *
Notes. This table shows the results of Johansen's cointegration tests. The null hypothesis is that of no
cointegrating relation. The test statistics of both the trace and the maximum eigenvalue tests are
reported. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.


Panel B
                         Intercept, no trend                    Intercept, trend
                          Normalized coeff.                     Normalized coeff.

Art                             1.0000                               1.0000

Top income                      -0.3847    ***                       -0.4775     ***
                                0.0596                                0.1134
Trend                                                                 0.0075
                                                                      0.0066
Notes. This table shows the normalized coefficients in the cointegrating relationship
between art and top income. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level, respectively.




                                                                                                           32
Table 7: Comovement analysis for subperiods


Panel A
                                 (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)
                              1830-1945       1830-1945      1945-2007      1945-2007
                                  Art             Art            Art            Art

  GDP                           0.0009            -0.1092        0.8042           0.3135
                                0.4393             0.3922        0.9810           0.7746
   Equities (capital)           0.3197       **    0.3076 **     0.0844 *         0.1019 **
                                0.1366             0.1282        0.0498           0.0467
  (-1) Equities (capital)       0.2218       **    0.1462        0.1934 *** 0.1864 ***
                                0.1096             0.1038        0.0527           0.0499
   Equities (dividends)         -0.1304           -0.1633        0.0512          -0.0264
                                0.2629             0.2304        0.3870           0.2972
  (-1) Art                                         0.2656 **                      0.4051 ***
                                                   0.1034                         0.1346
 Number of obs.                      114             114            61              61
 F-value                             3.48    **     4.65   ***     6.77    ***     6.17  ***
 R2                                                0.2328                         0.4070
Notes. This table shows the results of comovement regressions for two different subperiods
(1830-1945 and 1945-2007). The returns on art are regressed on a changing set of
independent variables, listed in the first column. Below each coefficient in columns (1) and
(3) is the Newey-West standard error, taking into account first-order autocorrelation in the
error structure. Below each coefficient in columns (2) and (4) is the robust standard error.
***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Panel B
                                 (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)
                              1908-1945       1908-1945      1945-2005      1945-2005
                                  Art             Art            Art            Art

  Income                        0.3575             0.2997       -0.0062          -0.1245
                                0.5735             0.5251        0.3979          0.3172
   Inequality                  21.6651 **         18.9164 *      4.0891          -0.6958
                                9.2882             9.4392        5.8228          5.1625
  (-1) Art                                         0.2083                         0.4732 ***
                                                   0.1515                         0.1393
 Number of obs.                       37             36             60              59
 F-value                             7.45    ***    6.90   ***     1.68            4.47  ***
 R2                                                0.2632                         0.2192
Notes. This table shows the results of comovement regressions for two different subperiods
(1908-1945 and 1945-2005). The returns on art are regressed on a changing set of
independent variables, listed in the first column. Below each coefficient in columns (1) and
(3) is the Newey-West standard error, taking into account first-order autocorrelation in the
error structure. Below each coefficient in columns (2) and (4) is the robust standard error.
***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                                               33
Panel C
                                 (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)
                              1908-1945       1908-1945      1945-2005      1945-2005
                                  Art             Art            Art            Art

  Income                        0.2554             0.2482        0.2152          0.1049
                                0.5429             0.5033        0.2627          0.2362
   Inequality                   9.7421             9.0091       -0.9192          -5.4116
                               11.4706            10.6915        6.5141          5.7457
   Equities (capital)           0.3291             0.3305        0.1072 **       0.1180 ***
                                0.2025             0.1963        0.0448          0.0371
  (-1) Equities (capital)      0.2286              0.1754        0.2362 *** 0.2120 ***
                                0.1533             0.1733        0.0577          0.0555
  (-1) Art                                         0.1198                         0.4362 ***
                                                   0.1638                         0.1337
 Number of obs.                       36             36             59              59
 F-value                             6.00    ***    4.46           5.53    ***     7.16  ***
 R2                                                0.3651                         0.4221
Notes. This table shows the results of comovement regressions for two different subperiods
(1908-1945 and 1945-2005). The returns on art are regressed on a changing set of
independent variables, listed in the first column. Below each coefficient in columns (1) and
(3) is the Newey-West standard error, taking into account first-order autocorrelation in the
error structure. Below each coefficient in columns (2) and (4) is the robust standard error.
***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                                               34
Table 8: Comovement analysis for subperiods using U.S. income (inequality) data
                      (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)            (8)
                   1913-1945       1913-1945      1913-1945       1913-1945      1945-2007       1945-2007       1945-2005      1945-2005
                       Art             Art            Art             Art            Art             Art             Art            Art

  Income                                             0.0880            0.0720                                        0.0219        -0.1432
                                                     0.6844            0.6559                                        0.4143         0.3013
   Inequality                                      19.46531 *         16.5169                                       -0.7343        -6.0249
                                                     9.8924           10.6195                                        5.7485         6.0304
   Income US          0.4026           0.1890       0.3063             0.1971          0.1475          0.0857       0.1490         0.0622
                      0.3333           0.3187       0.3392             0.3394          0.2521          0.2674       0.2616         0.2746
   Inequality US      3.3282           3.5653       -2.5117           -1.5106          6.5171 *        5.5966 *     6.7399 *       7.2996 *
                      3.7739           4.0524       3.7964             4.3116          3.4108          3.1197       3.9561         4.0424
  (-1) Art                             0.3038 *                        0.1806                          0.4427 ***                   0.4793 ***
                                       0.1660                          0.1725                          0.1308                       0.1391
 Number of obs.         32               31            32                31              62              61            60             59
 F-value               1.41             2.62    *     3.36      **      2.90     **     1.95            4.70   ***    0.96           2.97     **
 R2                                    0.1523                          0.2579                          0.2586                       0.2752
Notes. This table shows the results of comovement regressions for two different subperiods (1908-1945 and 1945-2005). The returns on
art are regressed on a changing set of independent variables, listed in the first column. Below each coefficient in columns (1), (3), (5),
and (7) is the Newey-West standard error, taking into account first-order autocorrelation in the error structure. Below each coefficient in
columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) is the robust standard error. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                                                                                       35
Figure 1: Simulation results


Panel A                                                                 Panel B

                Income and art price index (scenario 1)                                Income and art price index (scenario 2)


  10                                                                     10




   1                                                                      1
         1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

                 Average income        Art (n = 2)   Art (n = 5)                        Average income        Art (n = 2)   Art (n = 5)



Panel C                                                                 Panel D

           Evolution of valuation winning bidder (scenario 1)                     Evolution of valuation winning bidder (scenario 2)


  1.25                                                                   1.25


  1.20                                                                   1.20


  1.15                                                                   1.15


  1.10                                                                   1.10


  1.05                                                                   1.05


  1.00                                                                   1.00
           1     2     3     4     5      6      7   8     9       10             1     2     3     4     5      6      7   8     9        10

                                  n=2         n=5                                                        n=2         n=5




                                                                                                                                      36
Panel E                                                                Panel F

          Evolution of price / valuation ratio (scenario 1)                      Evolution of price / valuation ratio (scenario 2)


  0.95                                                                  0.95
  0.93                                                                  0.93
  0.91                                                                  0.91

  0.89                                                                  0.89
  0.87                                                                  0.87
  0.85                                                                  0.85

  0.83                                                                  0.83
  0.81                                                                  0.81
  0.79                                                                  0.79
  0.77                                                                  0.77

  0.75                                                                  0.75
          1    2     3     4     5      6     7     8         9   10             1    2     3     4     5      6     7     8         9        10

                               n=2          n=5                                                       n=2          n=5




                                                                                                                                         37
            1
                10
                            100
                                                          1000
     1765
     1775
     1785
     1795
     1805
     1815
     1825

     1835
     1845
     1855
                                                                 Figure 2: Yearly art price index 1765-2007




     1865
     1875
     1885
     1895

     1905
     1915
                     1940




     1925
                                         1914




     1935
     1945
                                  1929




     1955
                                            1973




     1965
                                                   1990




     1975
     1985
     1995
     2005




38
                                 0
                                     1
                                         2
                                             3
                                                 4
                                                     5
                                                         6
                                                             7
                          1830
                          1835
                          1840
                          1845
                          1850
                          1855
                          1860
                          1865
                          1870
                          1875
                          1880
                          1885
                          1890
                          1895
                          1900
                                                                 Figure 3: Art and Equities (capital) 1830-2007




     Art
                          1905
                          1910
                          1915
                          1920
                          1925
                          1930
                          1935




     Equities (capital)
                          1940
                          1945
                          1950
                          1955
                          1960
                          1965
                          1970
                          1975
                          1980
                          1985
                          1990
                          1995
                          2000
                          2005




39
Figure 4: Art, Income, and Inequality 1908-2007

  8                                                                                                                                                   12


  7
                                                                                                                                                      10

  6

                                                                                                                                                      8
  5


  4                                                                                                                                                   6


  3
                                                                                                                                                      4

  2

                                                                                                                                                      2
  1


  0                                                                                                                                                   0
      1908

             1913

                    1918

                           1923

                                  1928

                                         1933

                                                1938

                                                         1943

                                                                  1948

                                                                         1953

                                                                                1958

                                                                                       1963

                                                                                              1968

                                                                                                     1973

                                                                                                            1978

                                                                                                                   1983

                                                                                                                          1988

                                                                                                                                 1993

                                                                                                                                        1998

                                                                                                                                               2003
                                                       Art (l.)          Income (l.)          Inequality (r.)




                                                                                                                                                          40
