                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      ON QUALITY BIAS AND INFLATION TARGETS

                                     Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe
                                          Martin Uribe

                                       Working Paper 15505
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15505


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2009




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe and Martin Uribe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
On Quality Bias and Inflation Targets
Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe and Martin Uribe
NBER Working Paper No. 15505
November 2009
JEL No. E52,E6

                                                 ABSTRACT

A policy issue central banks are confronted with is whether inflation targets should be adjusted to
account for the systematic upward bias in measured inflation due to quality improvements in consumption
goods. We show that in the context of a Ramsey equilibrium the answer to this question depends
on what prices are assumed to be sticky. If nonquality-adjusted prices are assumed to be sticky, then
the Ramsey plan predicts that the inflation target should not be corrected. If, on the other hand, quality-adjusted
(or hedonic) prices are assumed to be sticky, then the Ramsey plan calls for raising the inflation target
by the magnitude of the bias.


Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe
Department of Economics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
stephanie.schmittgrohe@columbia.edu

Martin Uribe
Department of Economics
Columbia University
International Affairs Building
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
martin.uribe@columbia.edu
1     Introduction
The existence of a positive quality bias in the consumer price index has led some to argue that
an inflation target equal in size to the bias would be appropriate if the ultimate objective
of the central bank is price stability. In this paper, we critically evaluate this argument.
Specifically, we study whether a central bank implementing Ramsey-optimal policy should
adjust its inflation target to account for the systematic upward bias in measured inflation due
to quality improvements in consumption goods. We show that the answer to this question
depends critically on what prices are assumed to be sticky. If nonquality-adjusted prices are
assumed to be sticky, then according to the Ramsey policy the inflation target should not
be corrected. If, on the other hand, quality-adjusted (or hedonic) prices are assumed to be
sticky, then the inflation target should be raised by the magnitude of the bias.
    In June 1995, the Senate Finance Committee appointed an advisory commission com-
posed of five prominent economists (Michael Boskin, Ellen Dulberger, Robert Gordon, Zvi
Griliches, and Dale Jorgenson) to study the magnitude of the measurement error in the
consumer price index. The commission concluded that over the period 1995-1996, the U.S.
CPI had an upward bias of 1.1 percent per year. Of the total bias, 0.6 percent was ascribed
to unmeasured quality improvements (see Boskin et al., 1996). To illustrate the nature of
the quality bias, consider the case of a personal computer. Suppose that between 1995 and
1996 the nominal price of a computer increased by 2 percent. Assume also that during this
period the quality of personal computers, measured by attributes such as memory, process-
ing speed, and video capabilities, increased significantly. If the statistical office in charge of
constructing the consumer price index did not adjust the price index for quality improve-
ment, then it would report two percent inflation in personal computers. However, because
a personal computer in 1996 provides more services than does a personal computer in 1995,
the quality-adjusted rate of inflation in personal computers should be recorded as lower than
two percent. The difference between the reported rate of inflation and the quality-adjusted
rate of inflation is called the quality bias in measured inflation.
    We analyze the relationship between a quality bias in measured inflation and the Ramsey-
optimal rate of inflation in the context of a neo-Keynesian model with Calvo (1983) and Yun
(1996) price staggering. The key modification we introduce to that framework is that the
quality of consumption goods is assumed to increase over time. This modification gives rise
to an inflation bias if the statistical agency in charge of constructing the consumer price
index fails to take quality improvements into account. The central question we entertain
in the present study is whether under Ramsey optimal policy the inflation target should be
adjusted by the presence of this bias.
    The remainder of the paper is organized in four sections. Section 2 presents a simple
neo-Keynesian model of quality bias in measured inflation. Section 3 characterizes Ramsey-
optimal monetary policy when nonquality-adjusted prices are assumed to be sticky. Section 4
characterizes Ramsey-optimal monetary policy when quality-adjusted (or hedonic) prices are
assumed to be sticky. Section 5 concludes.




                                                1
2     A Simple Model of Quality Bias
In this section, we build a model of price staggering à la Calvo-Yun augmented to allow for
quality improvement in consumption goods.

2.1     Households
The economy is populated by a large number of households with preferences defined over
a continuum of goods of measure one indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. Each unit of good i sells for
Pit dollars in period t. We denote the quantity of good i purchased by the representative
consumer in period t by cit . The quality of good i is denoted by xit and is assumed to evolve
exogenously and to satisfy xit > xit−1 . The household cares about a composite good given
by
                                 Z 1                     1/(1−1/η)
                                                 1−1/η
                                      (xit cit )       di            ,
                                            0

where η > 1 denotes the elasticity of substitution across different good varieties. Note that
the utility of the household increases with the quality content of each good. Let at denote
the amount of the composite good the household wishes to consume in period t. Then, the
demand for goods of variety i is the solution to the following cost-minimization problem
                                           Z 1
                                       min     Pit cit di
                                                  {cit }         0

subject to
                               Z       1                                 1/(1−1/η)
                                                         1−1/η
                                            (xit cit )               di                ≥ at .
                                    0

The demand for good i is then given by
                                                                        −η
                                                                 Qit           at
                                                cit =                              ,
                                                                 Qt            xit

where
                                                    Qit ≡ Pit /xit
denotes the quality-adjusted (or hedonic) price of good i, and Qt is a quality-adjusted (or
hedonic) price index given by
                                                  Z         1               1/(1−η)
                                    Qt =                         Q1−η
                                                                  it di                 .
                                                         0

The price index QRt has the property that the total cost of at units of composite good is given
                      1
by Qt at , that is, 0 Pit cit di = Qt at . Because at is the object from which households derive
utility, it follows from this property that Qt , the unit price of at , represents the appropriate
measure of the cost of living.



                                                                     2
    Households supply labor effort to the market for a nominal wage rate Wt and are assumed
to have access to a complete set of financial assets. Their budget constraint is given by

                          Qt at + Et rt,t+1 Dt+1 + Tt = Dt + Wt ht + Φt ,

where rt,t+j is a discount factor defined so that the dollar price in period t of any random
nominal payment Dt+j in period t + j is given by Et rt,t+j Dt+j . The variable Φt denotes
nominal profits received from the ownership of firms, and the variable Tt denotes lump-sum
taxes.
   The lifetime utility function of the representative household is given by
                                              X
                                              ∞
                                        E0          β t U (at , ht ),
                                              t=0

where the period utility function U is assumed to be strictly increasing and strictly con-
cave, and the subjective discount factor β lies in the interval (0, 1). The household chooses
processes {at , ht , Dt+1 } to maximize this utility function subject to the sequential budget con-
straint and a no-Ponzi-game restriction of the form limj→∞ Et rt,t+j Dt+j ≥ 0. The optimality
conditions associated with the household’s problem are the sequential budget constraint, the
no-Ponzi-game restriction holding with equality, and

                                             U2 (at , ht )   Wt
                                         −                 =
                                             U1 (at , ht )   Qt

and
                               U1 (at , ht )            U1 (at+1 , ht+1 )
                                             rt,t+1 = β                   .
                                   Qt                        Qt+1

2.2    Firms
Each intermediate consumption good i ∈ [0, 1] is produced by a monopolistically compet-
itive firm via a linear production function zt hit , where hit denotes labor input used in the
production of good i, and zt is an aggregate productivity shock. Profits of firm i in period t
are given by
                                    Pit cit − Wt hit (1 − τ ),
where τ denotes a subsidy per unit of labor received from the government. This subsidy is
introduced so that under flexible prices the monopolistic firm would produce the competitive
level of output. In this way, the only distortion remaining in the model is the one associated
with sluggish price adjustment. While this assumption, which is customary in the neo-
Keynesian literature, greatly facilitates the characterization of optimal monetary policy, it
is not crucial in deriving the main results of this paper.
    The firm must satisfy demand at posted prices. Formally, this requirement gives rise to
the restriction
                                           zt hit ≥ cit ,




                                                      3
                                                 −η
where, as derived earlier, cit is given by cit = QQitt at
                                                       xit
                                                           . Let MCit denote the Lagrange
multiplier on the above constraint. Then, the optimality condition of the firm’s problem
with respect to labor is given by

                                             (1 − τ )Wt = MCit zt .

It is clear from this first-order condition that MCit must be identical across firms. We
therefore drop the subscript i from this variable.
    Consider now the price setting problem of the monopolistically competitive firm. For
the purpose of determining the optimal inflation target, it is crucial to be precise in regard
to what prices are assumed to be costly to adjust. We distinguish two cases. In one case
we assume that nonquality-adjusted prices, Pit , are sticky. In the second case, we assume
that quality-adjusted (or hedonic) prices, Qit , are sticky. Using again the example of the
personal computer, the case of stickiness in nonquality-adjusted prices would correspond to
a situation in which the price of the personal computer is costly to adjust. The case of
stickiness in quality-adjusted prices results when the price of a computer per unit of quality
is sticky, where in our example quality would be measured by an index capturing attributes
such as memory, processing speed, video capabilities, etc.. We consider first the case in
which stickiness occurs at the level of nonquality-adjusted prices.


3    Stickiness in Nonquality-Adjusted Prices
Suppose that with probability α firm i ∈ [0, 1] cannot reoptimize its price, Pit , in a given
period. Consider the price-setting problem of a firm that has the chance to reoptimize its
price in period t. Let P̃it be the price chosen by such firm. The portion of the Lagrangian as-
sociated with the firm’s optimization problem that is relevant for the purpose of determining
P̃it is given by
                                                                     !−η
                             X∞           h             i     P̃         at+j
                                                                 it
                   L = Et        rt,t+j αj P̃it − MCt+j                        .
                             j=0
                                                          xit+j Qt+j     xit+j

The first-order condition with respect to P̃it is given by
                                                                             !−η
                  X
                  ∞
                                         η−1                            P̃it           at+j
             Et         rt,t+j αj              P̃it − MCt+j                                  = 0.
                  j=0
                                          η                         xit+j Qt+j         xit+j

    Although we believe that the case of greatest empirical interest is one in which quality
varies across goods, maintaining such assumption complicates the aggregation of the model,
as it adds another source of heterogeneity in addition to the familiar price dispersion stem-
ming from Calvo-Yun staggering. Consequently, to facilitate aggregation, we assume that all
goods are of the same quality, that is, we assume that xit = xt for all i. We further simplify
the exposition by assuming that xt grows at the constant rate κ > 0, that is,

                                               xt = (1 + κ)xt−1 .

                                                       4
In this case, the above first-order condition simplifies to
                                                                                                       !−η
                        X
                        ∞
                                               η−1                                                  P̃it
                   Et         rt,t+j αj            P̃it − MCt+j                                                  ct+j = 0,
                        j=0
                                                η                                                  Pt+j

where                                                Z                              1/(1−1/η)
                                                              1
                                                                   1−1/η
                                           ct ≡                   cit    di
                                                          0
and                                                  Z                              1/(1−η)
                                                                  1
                                            Pt ≡                      Pit1−η di                    .
                                                              0
It is clear from these expressions that all firms that have the chance to reoptimize their price
in a given period will choose the same price. We therefore drop the subscript    R1     i from the
variable P̃it . We also note that the definitions of Pt and ct imply that Pt ct = 0 Pit cit di. Thus
Pt can be interpreted as the consumer price index unadjusted for quality improvements.
    The aggregate price level Pt is related to the reoptimized price P̃t by the following familiar
expression in the Calvo-Yun framework:

                                          Pt1−η = αPt−1
                                                     1−η
                                                         + (1 − α)P̃t1−η .

Market clearing for good i requires that
                                                                                   −η
                                                                              Pit
                                                 zt hit =                                 ct .
                                                                              Pt
Integrating over i ∈ [0, 1] yields
                                                                  Z       1            −η
                                                                                  Pit
                                            zt ht = ct                                           di,
                                                                      0           Pt
             R1                                 R 1  Pit −η
where ht ≡    0
                  hit di. Letting st ≡           0        Pt
                                                                              di, we can write the aggregate resource con-
straint as
                                                          zt ht = st ct ,
where st ≥ 1 measures the degree of price dispersion in the economy and can be shown to
obey the law of motion
                              st = (1 − α)p̃−η      η
                                            t + απt st−1 ,

where p̃t ≡ P̃t /Pt denotes the relative price of goods whose price was reoptimized in period
t, and πt ≡ Pt /Pt−1 denotes the gross rate of inflation in period t not adjusted for quality
improvements.
    A competitive equilibrium is a set of processes ct , ht , mct , st , and p̃t satisfying
                                                U2 (xt ct , ht )   mct zt xt
                                            −                    =           ,                                               (1)
                                                U1 (xt ct , ht )    1−τ
                                                          zt ht = st ct ,                                                    (2)

                                                                          5
                                      st = (1 − α)p̃−η    η
                                                    t + απt st−1 ,                                               (3)
                                       1=     απtη−1     + (1 −   α)p̃1−η
                                                                      t   ,                                      (4)
and
                                                  !−η         "                                    !#
      X
      ∞
                U1 (xs cs , hs )   Y
                                   s
                                                                          η−1         Y
                                                                                      s
   Et     (αβ)s                            πk−1         xs cs mcs −             p̃t           πk−1        = 0,   (5)
      s=t
                U1 (xt ct , ht )   k=t+1
                                                                           η          k=t+1

given exogenous processes zt and xt , a policy regime πt , and the initial condition s−1 . We
assume that s−1 = 1, so that there is no inherited price dispersion in period 0. The variable
mct ≡ M Ct /Pt denotes the marginal cost of production in terms of the composite good ct .
    We next establish that the optimal monetary policy consists in constant nonquality-
adjusted prices. This policy coincides with the one that would be Ramsey optimal in the
absence of quality improvements. That is, we show that when nonquality-adjusted prices
are sticky, the Ramsey optimal monetary policy calls for not incorporating the quality bias
into the inflation target. To this end, set πt = 1 for all t and 1 − τ = (η − 1)/η. Then,
by equation (4) p̃t = 1 for all t and by (3) st = 1 for all t. Letting mct = (η − 1)/η, it is
easy to very that equation (4) is satisfied. Equilibrium conditions P(1) and     (2) then become
identical to those associated with the problem of maximizing E0 ∞     t=0 β t
                                                                              U (x t ct , ht ), subject
to zt ht = ct . We have therefore demonstrated that setting πt equal to unity is not only
Ramsey optimal but also Pareto efficient.
    Importantly, πt is the rate of inflation that results from measuring prices without ad-
justing for quality improvement. The inflation rate that takes into account improvements
in the quality of goods is given by Qt /Qt−1 , which equals πt /(1 + κ) and is less than πt by
our maintained assumption that quality improves over time at the rate κ > 0. Therefore,
although there is a quality bias in the measurement of inflation, given by the rate of quality
improvement κ, the central bank should not target a positive rate of inflation.
    This result runs contrary to the usual argument that in the presence of a quality bias in
the aggregate price level, the central bank should adjust its inflation target upwards by the
magnitude of the quality bias. For instance, suppose that, in line with the findings of the
Boskin Commission, the quality bias in the rate of inflation was 0.6 percent (or κ = 0.006).
Then, the conventional wisdom would suggest that the central bank target a rate of inflation
of about 0.6 percent. We have shown, however, that such policy would be suboptimal.
Rather, optimal policy calls for a zero inflation target. The key to understanding this result
is to identify exactly which prices are sticky. For optimal policy aims at keeping the price
of goods that are sticky constant over time to avoid inefficient price dispersion. Here we
are assuming that stickiness originates in non-quality adjusted prices. Therefore, optimal
policy consists in keeping these prices constant over time. At the same time, because quality-
adjusted (or hedonic) prices are flexible, the monetary authority lets them decline at the rate
κ without creating distortions.
    Suppose now that the statistical agency responsible for constructing the consumer price
index decided to correct the index to reflect quality improvements. For example, in response
to the publication of the Boskin Commission report, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
reinforced its use of hedonic prices in the construction of the CPI (Gordon, 2006). In
the ideal case in which all of the quality bias is eliminated from the CPI, the statistical

                                                          6
                Table 1: The Optimal Rate of Inflation under Quality Bias

                                                      Statistical Agency
                                                    Corrects Quality Bias
              Stickiness in                         No           Yes
              Nonquality-Adjusted Prices             0            −κ
              Quality-Adjusted (or Hedonic) Prices κ               0
           Note. The parameter κ > 0 denotes the rate of quality improvement.

agency would publish data on Qt rather than on Pt . How should the central bank adjust
its inflation target in response to this methodological advancement? The goal of the central
bank continues to be the complete stabilization of the nonquality-adjusted price, Pt , for this
is the price that suffers from stickiness. To achieve this goal, the published price index, Qt ,
would have to be falling at the rate of quality improvement, κ. This means that the central
bank would have to target deflation at the rate κ.
    To summarize, when nonquality-adjusted prices are sticky, the optimal inflation target
of the central bank is either zero (when the statistical agency does not correct the price
index for quality improvements) or negative at the rate of quality improvement (when the
statistical agency does correct the price index for quality improvements). See table 1.


4    Stickiness in Quality-Adjusted Prices
Assume now that quality-adjusted (or hedonic) prices, Qit , are costly to adjust. Consider
the price-setting problem of a firm, i say, that has the chance to reoptimize Qit in period t.
Let Q̃it be the quality-adjusted price chosen by such firm. The portion of the Lagrangian
associated with the firm’s profit maximization problem that is relevant for the purpose of
determining the optimal level of Q̃it is given by
                                                                  !−η
                           X∞           h                  i Q̃
                                                               it
                    L = Et     rt,t+j αj Q̃it xt+j − MCt+j            ct+j .
                           j=0
                                                             Qt+j


The first order condition with respect to Q̃it is given by
                                                                                 !−η
                   X
                   ∞
                                          η−1                                 Q̃it
              Et         rt,t+j αj                  Q̃it xt+j − MCt+j                      ct+j = 0.
                   j=0
                                           η                                  Qt+j

    A competitive equilibrium in the economy with stickiness in quality-adjusted prices is a
set of processes ct , ht , mct , st , and p̃t that satisfy

                                               U2 (xt ct , ht )   mct zt xt
                                           −                    =
                                               U1 (xt ct , ht )    1−τ

                                                     zt ht = st ct

                                                           7
                                                                                η
                                                         −η          xt−1
                                st = (1 − α)(p̃t )            + α πt                  st−1 ,
                                                                      xt
                                                         1−η
                                                    xt
                                1=   απtη−1                           + (1 − α)(p̃t )1−η ,
                                                   xt−1
and
                                                   !−η            "                                         !        #
       X
       ∞
                 U1 (xs cs , hs )    Y
                                     s
                                                                                 η−1           Y
                                                                                               s
                                                                                                                  xs
    Et     (αβ)s                            πk−1         xs cs mcs −                   p̃t             πk−1                = 0,
       s=t
                 U1 (xt ct , ht )   k=t+1
                                                                                  η            k=t+1
                                                                                                                  xt

given exogenous processes zt and xt , a policy regime πt , and the initial condition s−1 . As
before, we assume no initial dispersion of relative prices by setting s−1 = 1.
     We wish to demonstrate that when quality-adjusted prices are sticky, the optimal rate of
inflation is positive and equal to the rate of quality improvement, κ. Setting πt = xt /xt−1 , we
have that in the competitive equilibrium p̃t = 1 and st = 1 for all t. Assuming further that
the fiscal authority sets 1 − τ = (η − 1)/η, we have that the set of competitive equilibrium
conditions becomes identical to the P   set of optimality conditions associated with the social
planner’s problem of maximizing E0 ∞            t
                                          t=0 β U (xt ct , ht ), subject to zt ht = ct .
     We have therefore proven that when quality-adjusted prices are sticky, a positive inflation
target equal to the rate of quality improvement (πt = 1 + κ) is Ramsey optimal and Pareto
efficient. In this case, the optimal adjustment in the inflation target conforms to the con-
ventional wisdom, according to which the quality bias in inflation measurement justifies an
upward correction of the inflation target equal in size to the bias itself. The intuition behind
this result is that in order to avoid relative price dispersion, the monetary authority must
engineer a policy whereby firms have no incentives to change prices that are sticky. In the
case considered here the prices that are sticky happen to be the quality-adjusted prices. At
the same time, non-quality adjusted prices are fully flexible and therefore under the optimal
policy they are allowed to grow at the rate κ without creating inefficiencies.
     Finally, suppose that the statistical agency in charge of preparing the consumer price
index decided to correct the quality bias built into the price index. In this case, the central
bank should revise its inflation target downward to zero in order to accomplish its goal of
price stability in (sticky) quality-adjusted prices. The second row of table 1 summarizes the
results of this section.


5      Conclusion
We interpret the results derived in this paper as suggesting that if the case of greatest
empirical relevance is one in which nonquality-adjusted prices (the price of the personal
computer in the example we have been using throughout) is sticky, then the conventional
wisdom that quality bias justifies an upward adjustment in the inflation target is misplaced.
Applying this conclusion to the case of the United States, it would imply that no fraction of
the 2 percent inflation target implicit in Fed policy is justifiable on the basis of the quality bias
in the U.S. consumer price index. Moreover, the corrective actions taken by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics in response to the findings of the Boskin commission, including new hedonic


                                                              8
indexes for television sets and personal computers as well as an improved treatment-based
methodology for measuring medical care prices, would, according to the Ramsey plan, justify
setting negative inflation targets. If, on the other hand, the more empirically relevant case
is the one in which hedonic prices are sticky, then the conventional view that the optimal
inflation target should be adjusted upward by the size of the quality bias is indeed consistent
with the predictions of our model. The central empirical question raised by the theoretical
analysis presented in this paper is therefore whether regular or hedonic prices are more sticky.
The existing empirical literature on nominal price rigidities has yet to address this matter.


References
Boskin, Michael J., E. Dulberger, R. Gordon, Z. Griliches, and D. Jorgenson, “Toward a
   More Accurate Measure of the Cost of Living,” Final Report to the Senate Finance
   Committee, December 4, 1996.
Calvo, Guillermo, “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of Mon-
   etary Economics 12, September 1983, 383-98.
Gordon, Robert J., “The Boskin Commission Report: A Retrospect One Decade Later,”
   International Productivity Monitor 12, Spring 2006, 7-22.
Yun, Tack, “Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity, and Business Cycles,”
   Journal of Monetary Economics 37, July 1996, 345-70.




                                               9
