                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE LEVEL AND DISTRIBUTION OF GLOBAL HOUSEHOLD WEALTH

                                         James B. Davies
                                        Susanna Sandström
                                       Anthony B. Shorrocks
                                         Edward N. Wolff

                                       Working Paper 15508
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15508


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2009




We thank participants at the May 2006 UNU-WIDER project meeting on Personal Assets from a Global
Perspective, and the August 2006 International Association for Research in Income and Wealth 29th
General Conference in Joensuu, Finland, for their valuable comments and suggestions. Special thanks
are due to Tony Atkinson, Brian Bucks, Markus Jäntti, and Branko Milanovic. Responsibility for errors
and omissions is our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by James B. Davies, Susanna Sandström, Anthony B. Shorrocks, and Edward N. Wolff. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Level and Distribution of Global Household Wealth
James B. Davies, Susanna Sandström, Anthony B. Shorrocks, and Edward N. Wolff
NBER Working Paper No. 15508
November 2009
JEL No. D31,E01,E21,O10

                                             ABSTRACT

We estimate the level and distribution of global household wealth. The levels of assets and debts for
39 countries are measured using household balance sheet and survey data centred on the year 2000.
The determinants of mean financial assets, non-financial assets, and liabilities are studied empirically,
and the results used to estimate average wealth holdings for countries lacking direct evidence. Data
on the pattern of household distribution of wealth are assembled for 20 countries, which together account
for 59 per cent of the global population and 75 per cent of global wealth. The observed relation between
wealth and income distribution in these 20 countries allows estimates of wealth inequality to be produced
for many other nations. Combining the figures for individual countries reveals that net worth averaged
US$44,024 per adult in PPP terms across the globe. Wealth of US$8,635 was needed to be in the top
half of the global distribution, and US$518,364 to be in the top one per cent. The top 10 per cent owned
71 per cent of world wealth, and the Gini coefficient for the global distribution of wealth is estimated
to be 0.802, indicating greater inequality than that observed in the global distribution of consumption
or income.


James B. Davies                                     Anthony B. Shorrocks
The University of Western Ontario                   UNU/WIDER
Department of Economics                             Katajanokanlaituri 6 B
Social Science Centre, Room 4071                    00160 Helsinki, Finland
London, Ontario, Canada, N6A 5C2                    shorrocks@wider.unu.edu
jdavies@uwo.ca
                                                    Edward N. Wolff
Susanna Sandström                                   Department of Economics
UNU/WIDER                                           New York University
Katajanokanlaituri 6 B                              19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
00160 Helsinki, Finland                             New York, NY 10012
Susanna.Sandstrom@wfp.org                           and NBER
                                                    edward.wolff@nyu.edu
1        Introduction

The world distribution of income has recently been the subject of much attention. Available
evidence suggests that global income inequality is high and not trending down over time
(Bourguignon and Morrison 2002; Milanovic 2002, 2005). Indeed, in some regions both
poverty and income inequality appear to be on the increase. Given these findings, interest
naturally turns to global disparities in other dimensions of economic status, resources or
wellbeing, of which one of the most important is household wealth. In recent years the
number of countries with good wealth data has increased and it is now possible to try to
estimate the global distribution of household wealth, which is the goal of this paper.

The core data for this exercise are provided by national wealth distribution data that are
available for 20 countries. These countries include the largest and richest countries in the
world and together account for 59% of the world’s population and, we estimate, 75% of its
wealth. While it is interesting to look at the distribution of wealth just for these countries, and
we do provide those results, our main focus is on an estimate of the full global distribution of
wealth. This requires imputation of both wealth levels and distribution to the countries with
missing data. Much of the paper is occupied with the development and application of those
imputations. We find that the global distribution of wealth so estimated is quite close to that
for the 20 core countries—yielding a Gini coefficient of .802 for example in comparison with
.796 for the core group.

Estimating the global distribution of wealth involves two stages. First, the average wealth
level in each country is established. This is done by using national household balance sheet
(HBS) data, and survey data where there are no HBS numbers, and then extending the wealth
figures to nations with neither kind of data using regression based imputations. The second
stage requires the shape of the distribution to be computed for each country. Again there are
countries with direct data (the 20 referred to above), and others for which the pattern must be
estimated using the best available proxies. Our ultimate aim is to produce household wealth
distribution estimates on a per adult basis for the year 20001. This paper focuses almost




1 Although HBS data are available annually in many countries, wealth distribution data typically come from surveys
that are conducted at intervals of three or more years and whose results are available only with a significant lag. The
year 2000 provides us with a reasonably recent date and good data availability.




                                                          1
exclusively on figures based on purchasing power parity (PPP) exchange rates. Davies et al
(2008) reports results from earlier work using official exchange rates.2.

This paper establishes, first, that there are very large inter-country differences in the level of
household wealth. The USA is the richest country in aggregate terms, with wealth estimated
at PPP$ 201,319 per adult in the year 2000. At the opposite extreme among countries with
wealth data, India has per adult wealth of $12,201 in PPP terms. Other countries show a wide
range of values. Even among high income OECD countries the figures range from $70,461
for Finland, and $79,585 for New Zealand, to $172,461 for the UK. We also find that the
wealth to income ratio rises with income or wealth, meaning that in poor countries the relative
shortfall of wealth is greater than that of income. This is a noteworthy result since the risks,
capital market imperfections, and lack of social safety nets that people face in poor countries
mean that personal assets seem to be most lacking where they are most needed.

International differences in the composition of wealth are also examined. Some regularities
are evident, but also country-specific differences—such as the strong preference for liquid
savings in Japan and some other countries. Real assets, particularly land and farm assets, are
more important in less developed countries. This reflects not only the greater importance of
agriculture, but also an immature financial sector (that is currently being addressed in some of
the rapidly growing developing countries) and other factors such as inflation risk. Among rich
nations, there is significant variation in the importance of financial assets and share-holding.

Concentration of wealth within countries is high. Gini coefficients for wealth typically lie in
the range of about 0.6–0.8. In contrast, most Gini coefficients for disposable income fall in the
range 0.3-0.5. The mid value for the share of the top 10 per cent of wealth-holders in our core
country-level data is 51 per cent, again much higher than is common for income.

The paper finds that global wealth-holding is highly concentrated, much higher than in the
case of income. The share of the top 10 per cent of adults in 2000 is estimated to be 70.7 per
cent and the Gini coefficient to be 0.802. The share of the bottom half is just 3.7 per cent.
Although inter-country differences are greater than in the case of income, we find that intra-
country inequality is so much larger in the case of wealth that it accounts for a larger share of
global inequality than it does for income, according to the Gini coefficient. Thus the principal



2 The present paper differs from Davies et al (2008) not only in using PPP exchange rates, but in its empirical
framework for the estimation and imputation of wealth levels by country. This framework is set out in Section 3 of
the present paper. The estimate of global wealth distribution provided here supersedes that in our earlier work.




                                                        2
reason for the high global inequality of wealth may be the long-recognized high inequality of
wealth within countries.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes what can be
learned about household wealth levels and composition across countries using household
balance sheet and survey data. Section 3 presents our results on the determinants of wealth
levels, and assigns household wealth figures to the ‘missing countries’. Section 4 reviews the
available evidence on the pattern of wealth distribution, and then performs imputations for
other countries. In Section 5 the data on levels and distributions are combined to construct the
global distribution of household wealth. Conclusions are drawn in Section 6.




2        Wealth levels and composition in countries with data

This section assembles data on wealth levels and composition for as many countries as
possible. These data are of independent interest, but are also used in the next section to impute
per capita wealth to countries that lack wealth data. The exercise begins by taking inventories
of household balance sheet (HBS) and sample survey estimates of household wealth levels
and composition.3

2.1      Household balance sheet (HBS) data

As indicated in Table 1, ‘complete’ financial and non-financial balance sheet data are
available for 19 countries. These are all high-income countries, except for the Czech
Republic, Poland, and South Africa, which are classed as upper middle-income by the World
Bank.4 We term the data complete if they adequately cover each of financial assets, liabilities
and non-financial assets.5 Sixteen other countries have financial balance sheets, but no




3 The sources and methods for balance sheet and survey data are described in Appendices I and II.

4 The World Bank (WB) classification is used throughout the paper except that Brazil, Russia, and South Africa
were moved from the lower middle-income category to higher middle-income, and Equatorial Guinea from low to
lower middle-income. These changes were prompted by the fact that the WB classifications seems anomalous
compared to the Penn World Table GDP data that was used for the year 2000.
5 There are some national differences in asset coverage, particularly for non-financial assets. The figures for each
country with a complete balance sheet here include both owner-occupied housing and consumer durables. There is
some variation in coverage of other real estate. See Appendices I and II for more detail.




                                                         3
information on real assets. This group is less biased towards the rich world since it contains
six upper middle income countries and three lower middle income countries.

Regional coverage in HBS data is not representative of the world as a whole. Such data tend
to be produced at a relatively late stage of development. Europe and North America, and the
OECD in general, are well covered, but low-income and transition countries are not.6 In
geographic terms this means that coverage is sparse in Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the
Caribbean. Fortunately for this study, these gaps are offset to an important extent by the
availability of survey evidence for the largest developing countries, China, India and
Indonesia. Also note that while there are no HBS data for Russia, complete HBS data are
available for two European transition countries and financial data for eight others.

The asset composition of household balance sheets in different countries, shown in Table 2,
reflects influences such as market structure, regulation and cultural preferences (IMF 2005).
For most countries, non-financial assets account for between 40 and 60 per cent of total
assets, with higher shares in the Czech Republic, New Zealand, Poland, and Spain. Housing
assets constitute a considerable share of non-financial assets. These assets include both
owner-occupied housing and rental property.7 In a number of countries, for example Italy,
Spain and the UK, the large increase in real estate prices in the late 1990s helps to explain the
high share of housing. The high share of financial assets makes South Africa stand out.8 The
USA is also an outlier in the share of financial assets, which is related to the strength of its
financial markets and importance of private pensions but also to the strong stock market
performance in the period leading up to the year 2000.

The composition of financial assets can be examined not only for the 19 countries with
complete balance sheets but also the 16 countries with only financial balance sheets. Striking
differences across countries are evident when financial assets are disaggregated. Liquid assets



6 Goldsmith (1985) prepared ‘planetary’ balance sheets for 1950 and 1978 and found similar difficulties in obtaining
representative coverage. He was able to include 15 developed market economies, two developing countries (India
and Mexico), and the Soviet Union. This produces a total of 18 countries, one less than the number of countries for
which we have complete HBS data for the year 2000.
7 Only housing owned directly by households or unincorporated businesses is included here. Real estate may also be
owned by other sectors, including the corporate sector.
8 One would expect real assets to be important in a developing country, but the well developed financial markets in
South Africa, combined with negative rates of return on investment in fixed property and high mortgage interest rates
in the 1990s, resulted in an unusually low share of non-financial assets in the year 2000 (see Aron et al. 2008).




                                                          4
are a large part of the total in Japan and in most of the European transition countries. The
preference for liquidity in Japan has a long history, but also reflects the poor performance of
real estate and shares in the 1990s (Babeau and Sbano 2003). The share of other financial
assets is particularly high in Australia, Austria, the Netherlands, South Africa, and the UK,
which may be partly due to the importance of pension fund claims in these countries. Italy has
a very low share of liabilities, a well-known phenomenon that is confirmed by survey data
(see below). Poland and the Czech Republic also have low debt ratios, reflecting the under-
development of mortgage and consumer credit in these transition countries.

2.2      Survey data

In order to check the HBS data and to expand our sample, especially to non-OECD countries,
household wealth survey data were also consulted.9 Country coverage is broader than in HBS
data (see Table 3). Most importantly, wealth surveys are available for the three most populous
developing/emerging market countries: China, India and Indonesia. These three countries,
together with Mexico in the case of non-financial assets, are used in regressions in Section 3
that provide the basis for wealth level imputations for our ‘missing countries’.

Like all household surveys, those of wealth are affected by sampling and non-sampling errors.
The high skewness of wealth distributions makes sampling error important. Non-sampling
error is also a problem due to differential unit response — wealthier households are less likely
to respond — and under-reporting, especially of financial assets. Both sampling and non-
sampling error lead to difficulties in obtaining an accurate picture of the upper tail of the
wealth distribution (see Davies and Shorrocks 2000: 605-76, 2005). In order to offset these
effects an increasing number of surveys over-sample wealthier households. This is the
practice in the US Survey of Consumer Finances for example as well as in surveys in Canada,
Germany and Spain.10 Over-sampling at the upper end has not been adopted in the major



9 In the next section, where we must provide a single estimate for the wealth level in each country, we use HBS data,
where available, in preference to survey data. While HBS data are of course also subject to error, a country’s wealth
survey results can be, and normally are, used as an input in creating HBS estimates. Since the HBS estimates benefit
from additional inputs of information and data from other sources, they should, in principle, dominate wealth survey
estimates. The Survey of Consumer Finance (SCF) in the USA is of such high quality, however, that it is not clear
whether HBS or survey data should be preferred (see, for example, Bertaut and Starr-McCluer 2002: 181-218).
Fortunately for our purposes, HBS and SCF estimates of total household wealth in the USA in 2000 are very similar
(see below). Our results would differ little if the SCF had been used to establish the USA wealth level.
10 The SCF design explicitly excludes people in the Forbes 400 list of the wealthiest Americans, which again helps
to reduce the effects of sampling error; see Kennickell (2006: 19-88).




                                                          5
developing countries represented here, but these countries have much higher response rates
than are seen in the developed countries, and China and India have large samples, helping to
reduce sampling error.11

Aside from the USA — whose sophisticated Survey of Consumer Finance succeeds in
capturing most household wealth — surveys usually yield lower totals for financial assets
compared with HBS data, principally due to the lower response rate of wealthy households
and under-reporting by those who do respond.12 (See Appendix III for a comparison of wealth
estimates from household balance sheets vs. surveys.) In contrast, survey totals for the most
important non-financial asset, owner-occupied housing, are more accurate. (See Davies and
Shorrocks, 2000, p. 630.)

Table 3 reports asset composition in the survey data. It is clear that non-financial assets bulk
larger in surveys than in HBS data, reflecting both the relative accuracy of housing values in
survey data and the importance of non-sampling error in the case of financial assets. The table
also highlights the relative importance of reported financial and non-financial assets in
developed and developing countries. The two low-income countries in our sample, India and
Indonesia, stand out as having particularly high shares of non-financial wealth.13 This reflects
both the importance of land and agricultural assets and the lack of financial development. In
India, the only low or middle income country for which the composition of financial assets is
reported in Table 3, most of the financial assets owned by households are liquid. In Table 3,
China does not stand out as having a high share of non-financial assets. One reason is that the
value of housing is reported net of mortgage debt in China. Another is that there is no private




11 See Deaton (1995) on the high response rates to surveys in developing countries in general. As reported in Davies
and Shorrocks (2005), response rates in the 1991-92 Indian AIDIS were 95.7 per cent and 94.6 per cent in rural and
urban areas respectively. The sample size in the 2002 survey in China was 16,035, and in the 1991-92 survey in India
it was 57,031.
12 Statistical organizations fight these forms of non-sampling error through their survey technique and questionnaire
design. Once the results are in, it is also possible to try to correct for these errors. Particularly ambitious efforts have
been made in the Italian SHIW survey. Brandolini et al (2004) uses records of the number of contacts needed to win
a response to estimate the differential response relationship, which allows reweighting. He also uses results of a
validation study comparing survey responses and institutional records to correct for misreporting of selected financial
assets. Finally, this study also imputes non-reported dwellings owned by respondents (aside from their principal
dwelling).
13 This echoes the findings of Goldsmith (1985) who reported that India and Mexico had an average of 65 per cent
of national assets in tangible form in 1978, compared to 51 per cent for 14 developed market economies.




                                                             6
ownership of urban land. And of course there has been rapid accumulation of financial assets
by Chinese households in recent years. The ratio of liabilities to total assets is particularly low
in India and Indonesia (for China only non-housing liabilities are reported). Again poorly
developed financial markets help to explain this phenomenon. Italy also stands out as having
a very low share of liabilities. This low share echoes the finding in HBS data, and likely
reflects the relative lack of mortgage loans in Italy compared to other OECD countries.

Combining the balance sheet and survey data, it is evident that there are major international
differences in asset composition. Real property, particularly land and farm assets, are more
important in less developed countries, while financial assets are more important in rich
countries. There are also major international differences in the types of financial assets
owned. Savings accounts are favoured in transition economies and some rich Asian countries,
while share-holdings and other types of financial assets are more evident in rich Western
countries. Debt is also less important in developing and transition countries than in the more
developed countries (with the notable exception of Italy).

2.3     Wealth levels from household balance sheet and survey data

When wealth levels are compared across countries, one of the first issues to be confronted is
the appropriate rate of exchange between currencies. In comparisons of consumption or
income there is widespread agreement that international price differences should be taken into
account via the use of PPP exchange rates.14 This procedure seems appropriate for wealth
holdings also if the focus of attention is, say, the bottom 95 per cent of wealth-holders, for
whom domestic prices are the main determinant of the real value of their assets. However, a
large share of wealth is held by households in the top few percentiles of the distribution.
People in this category, and their financial assets, tend to be internationally mobile, making
exchange rates more relevant for international wealth comparisons among the rich and super-
rich.

This paper follows the convention of using PPP exchange rates to compare countries; unless
otherwise stated, all wealth figures are expressed in PPP US dollars for the year 2000.



14 There is, however, some disagreement about the type of PPP exchange rates that should be used. We follow
common practice and use the Penn World Table PPP rates, which are based on the Geary-Khamis method. This
method has many practical advantages, including desirable adding-up properties. The leading competitor is the
method proposed by Elteto, Koves and Szulc (EKS), which has been used by the OECD and Eurostat to compare
income across their member countries. See Neary (2004) for a discussion of the theoretical basis for the Geary-
Khamis method.




                                                      7
Selected comparable figures on an exchange rate basis are presented in footnotes and
appendices. They are also discussed in detail in Davies et al. (2008) which places more
emphasis on the upper tail of the distribution.

Table 4 summarizes information on the per capita wealth and income of countries with
complete household balance sheet or wealth survey data (data for individual countries are
given in Appendix III). Of the 19 countries that have complete HBS data, the USA ranks first
with per capita wealth of $143,727 in 2000, followed by the UK at $128,959, Japan at
$124,858, the Netherlands at $121,165, Italy at $120,897, and then Singapore at $113,631.
South Africa is in last place, at $16,266, preceded by Poland at $24,654, and the Czech
Republic at $32,431. The overall range is rather large, with per capita wealth in the USA 8.8
times as great as that of South Africa. The (unweighted) coefficient of variation (CV) among
the 19 countries is 0.440.

The next column shows GDP per capita. In the group of 19 countries with HBS data, the USA
again ranks first, at $35,619, and South Africa last, at $8,017. However, the range is much
smaller than for net worth per capita. The ratio of highest to lowest GDP per capita is only
4.4, and the coefficient of variation (again among the 19 countries) is 0.301. These results are
a first indication, which our full results confirm, that wealth is more unequally distributed
across countries than is income. Note that while it is well-known that wealth is more unequal
than income within countries, that common observation does not imply anything about
differences across countries. Column four shows personal disposable income per capita for
the same group of countries. The USA again ranks first, at $25,480, South Africa is again last,
at $4,691, and the ratio of highest to lowest is 5.4, slightly higher than for GDP per capita.
The coefficient of variation is 0.331, again slightly higher than that of GDP per capita. The
fifth column shows real consumption per capita, whose dispersion is intermediate between
that of GDP and disposable income. All in all, the per capita variation of net worth is much
greater than that of GDP, disposable income or consumption.

Differences across countries are even more pronounced in survey data due to the inclusion of
China, India, and Indonesia. Of the 13 countries with the pertinent data, the USA again ranks
first in net worth per capita, at $143,857, followed by Australia at $101,597, and Japan at
$91,856. In this group, India and Indonesia occupy the bottom two positions, at $6,513 and
$7,973, respectively. China appears to be about twice as wealthy as India, having per capita
net worth of $11,267. Note that the PPP adjustment has a proportionately greater impact on
the figures for developing countries. Using official exchange rates, all three countries have
much lower per capita wealth: India is at $1,112, Indonesia at $1,440, and China at $2,613.
Hence inequality in wealth between countries is greater using official exchange rates, as
reflected in the CV of 0.612 shown in the table versus 0.440 on a PPP basis. In the survey

                                               8
data, as in the HBS data, the range in per capita wealth is much larger than that of per capita
GDP, disposable income, or consumption. The ratio of highest to lowest is 22 for wealth per
capita, 13 for both GDP and disposable income, and 17 for consumption. The coefficients of
variation for the income and consumption variables are again smaller than for wealth, and
higher using official exchange rates than PPP rates.

How large are the differences in the picture that one gets from HBS vs. survey data? There are
10 countries that have both types of data. For these countries the (simple) average of mean per
capita PPP wealth is $98,364 in HBS data and $74,579 in survey data, a difference of 24 per
cent. (The difference is 25 per cent using official exchange rates.) The correlation between
HBS and survey means is just 0.62 on the PPP basis, although it rises to 0.83, using official
exchange rates. The difference in means and the imperfect correlation are, we believe, largely
a result of the uneven quality of survey evidence across countries. Given the latter, it seems
clear that an approach in which one simply aggregated national survey data to estimate the
world distribution of wealth would be inadequate. Since more consistent information is
available, in the form of HBS data, in establishing wealth levels by country the latter should
be used as far as possible. That is the approach followed in estimating the global distribution
of wealth later in this paper.




3      Estimates of wealth levels and composition for all countries

The next step is to generate per capita wealth values for the remaining countries of the world.
As explained below, regressions run on the 39 countries with HBS or survey data enable part
or all of wealth to be estimated for many countries. This yields a total of 148 countries with
observed or estimated wealth, covering 95.2 per cent of the world’s population in 2000.
Separate imputations are made for the 81 countries that make up the remaining 4.8%, as
explained later in this section.

The purpose of the empirical exercise reported in this section is to predict wealth levels in
countries where wealth data are missing. This imposes certain limitations. Most importantly,
the independent variables in our regressions need to be available not only for the countries
with wealth data, but also for most of those without such data—otherwise we would not be
able to impute wealth to the “missing countries”. Fortunately, this limitation does not prevent
us from estimating a sensible empirical model of personal wealth levels across countries.




                                              9
3.1 Empirical specification

The basic life-cycle model (LCM) under certainty and perfect capital markets, and without
government, provides a useful starting point for our empirical model.15 Suppose that
intertemporal preferences, and the ages of starting work and retiring were the same
everywhere, but that length of life, L, varied internationally. Assume also that the real interest
rate r was zero and that growth rates of both labour income and population, g and p
respectively, were constant but differed across countries. For simplicity assume that workers
are all employed full-time and have exogenous earnings. Then, mean wealth would be
determined by g, p, L, and mean earnings, y. In steady-state we would have:

(1)               W = f (g, p, L) y

(See Brumberg and Modigliani, 1980, or Modigliani 1988.) A strong prediction of the LCM is
that L will have a positive effect here. The growth rates g and p have a mild negative effect in
the simple LCM.16 The model can be extended to a world with government by redefining r
and y as net of taxes and transfers.

While (1) takes us some way, it does not provide the entire basis for an empirical
specification. Ideally one should take into account international differences in the age of
retirement, for example. This is unfortunately impractical since the data are not available on a
consistent basis for enough countries. But what of the role of the interest rate and that of
public pensions? The impact of r in the LCM is complex and ambiguous. Also, empirical
work finds conflicting, and often insignificant, impacts (Modigliani, 1988). Since we also do
not have good data on r for a large set of countries we do not attempt to include it in our


15 As far as we know, there have been no previous regression-based studies of the determinants of international
wealth differences. Part of the original motivation for the LCM was to explain international differences in saving and
wealth (see e.g. Deaton 2005). Results for international differences in saving have been mixed, but the life-cycle
framework has proven useful in studying saving at the micro level (see Browning and Crossley, 2001) and wealth
distribution in macroeconomics (see Cagetti and De Nardi, 2008). The LCM is fruitful in the present application in
part because one of its central predictions, that wealth should increase with longevity (assuming this translates into
longer retirements), holds here statistically.
16 Steady-state saving will increase with both g and p, but the wealth to income ratio (W/y) tends to decline mildly
with g and p. The reason is that there is, for the most part, a positive relationship between wealth and age in the LCM
(the working period of rising wealth is longer than retirement, and also early retirees have relatively high wealth).
Higher p increases the relative number of young people, reducing W/y. Higher g increases both the relative wealth
and labour income of the young, but the effect of this on average income tends to be stronger than that on mean
wealth, so again W/y tends to fall.




                                                         10
regressions. Pensions are a different matter. In the simplest version of the LCM, where
consumption is constant over the lifetime and r = g = p = 0, y can be replaced in (1) by y – b,
where y is net of pension contributions and b is the (constant) pension received in retirement.
Public pensions thus have a direct negative effect on private wealth. However, in more
complex versions of the LCM, and especially if impacts on age of retirement are taken into
account, the effect of public pensions becomes ambiguous. (See e.g. Gale, 1998.)
Nevertheless, although the evidence is mixed, several good empirical studies suggest a
significant effect of pensions on wealth within a country.17 We tested for a similar effect
internationally in the work reported below, but no significant impact was found.

It must also be recognized that the steady-state assumption is a poor approximation in some
cases, for example transition countries. Further, capital and other markets are not perfect.
Access to financial institutions and products varies across countries, as do housing market
institutions and the ease of mortgage finance. While (1) may provide a preliminary basis for
our work, these additional effects also need to be taken into account. We do this by
introducing a dummy variable for transition countries and introducing variables that may
reflect relevant capital market differences, as discussed below.

One approach here would be to simply regress log W on the “LCM variables” shown on the
right-hand side of (1), with some allowance for transition countries and capital market
imperfections. We can do that for the 23 countries that have data on both financial and real
wealth. However, there is one country (Mexico) with data on real assets alone and 15
countries with good data on financial assets and liabilities. It would be unfortunate to exclude
these countries, especially since they include a higher proportion of transition and middle-
income countries. This raises the possibility of running separate regressions for real vs.
financial wealth. How does that square with the framework we have been developing?

The simple LCM is silent on the division of wealth between different kinds of assets.18 A
naïve hypothesis would be that the various assets would be held in the same proportion in
different countries. In this world one could run separate regressions for different asset groups,
but there would be no benefit since each regression would estimate the same coefficients
except for scale. And there could be a cost if measurement error in the dependent variable


17 See Gale (1998) for a summary, as well as Bottazzi et al. (2006) and Gale et al. (2007) on more recent work.

18 If current income is low people may be net borrowers in the LCM, which implies holding some debt. This is the
only prediction from the LCM regarding wealth composition, and even this prediction does not say much, since those
with negative net worth could have assets as well as debts, so that their net borrowing may differ from their debt.




                                                        11
declines in importance with aggregation, as seems likely here. We ran separate regressions on
real assets, financial assets, and liabilities using the same variables and found that the
hypothesis of a common structure was, in fact, strongly rejected. Further, as we see below,
there are grounds for introducing non-common variables in these regressions and they
perform well empirically. In this situation, as shown by Kennan (1989), there would be
aggregation bias if a single equation were run for W. And since this cannot be done for the full
sample of 39 countries in any case, our preferred approach is to run three separate regressions.

To give a behavioural basis to the three equations approach one must move beyond the simple
LCM and think about differences in asset characteristics, including risk and return. There is a
literature on optimal portfolio selection in a life-cycle context. It finds that the intuitive idea
that people should hold a less risky portfolio as they age is correct, at least beyond the middle
working years, under plausible assumptions. (See Benzoni et al., 2007, and Gomes et al.,
2008.) Here that might suggest, e.g., that countries with higher population growth should have
a higher ratio of financial to non-financial assets, assuming that financial assets are riskier.19
The amount that people will save depends on the menu of risks and returns on different assets.
One cannot generally decompose savings decisions into an “LCM decision” of how much to
save and a portfolio allocation decision. This indicates that in a more general version of the
LCM risk elements would affect mean wealth.

One of the most important personal assets, housing, is held for consumption as well as
investment purposes. With perfect markets this need not affect mean wealth. Households can
rent, or borrow freely to keep housing equity in line with life-cycle saving plans. However, in
the real-world mortgage finance is not so flexible, and tax or other institutions may favour
owner-occupation. In this context, impacts on mean wealth can come from the housing
market. For example, if the consumption demand for housing is inelastic, mean wealth may
tend to be higher where housing is more expensive.

Because errors in our three equations are likely to be correlated, we use the seemingly
unrelated regressions (SUR) technique due to Zellner (1962) (see Greene 1993: 486-99). This
involves stacking equations and estimating via generalized least squares. While OLS
estimates are consistent, SUR provides greater efficiency, with the gain in efficiency
increasing with the correlation of the errors across the equations, and decreasing with the



19 Benzoni et al. (2007) emphasize that the optimal share of risky assets is hump-shaped over the life-cycle when
cointegration of labor and stock returns is recognized. Whether a fast growing country would have a higher overall
ratio of risky assets in their model therefore depends on the shape and peak age of this hump.




                                                       12
correlation of the regressors used in the different equations. Since we have an equal number
of observations for financial assets and liabilities, but fewer observations for non-financial
assets, and since we believe errors are more likely to be correlated between financial assets
and liabilities than between the latter variables and non-financial assets, we have applied SUR
here only for financial assets and liabilities.

3.2 Wealth Regressions

Table 5 shows our main regression results. For comparison we show single-equation
regressions for log W as well as our three equations for asset subgroups. In each case we show
the preliminary specification (a) and the final specification (b). The two specifications mainly
differ in that variables that were insignificant in (a) are not used in (b). However, in a few
cases variables that were insignificant in (a) become significant when other insignificant
variables are omitted, and are retained in the (b) regressions.

Our first four regressors try to capture the four LCM variables y, L, g and p.20 We initially
used personal disposable income per capita for y, and it performs well. However, this variable
is not available for many of our “missing countries”, and so cannot be used to perform the
intended imputations. In Table 5 we therefore report results using real per capita
consumption21 to play the role of y — it is highly correlated with y in-sample and its use has
only a small impact on the estimated coefficients. This variable is significant at the 1% level
in all our equations. Interestingly, while the estimated coefficients are insignificantly different
from unity in most cases, for non-financial assets the coefficient is significantly less than 1.
The coefficient is very close to 1 for financial assets, and equals 1.199 for liabilities. These
aspects are important, since in our imputations financial assets will increase roughly in
proportion to income, but non-financial assets will rise less, and liabilities slightly more than
in proportion to income.


20 Various specifications were tried for public pensions, including the replacement of y by y – b in line with the
simple LCM. The y – b variable performed distinctly worse than y alone. When pension variables were introduced
independently they were insignificant in all our equations. (This may be partly explained by the fact that the variable
was not available for many of the low and middle income countries in our sample.) Given these findings, we do not
report regressions including a public pension variable here.
21 Real consumption per capita is from Penn World Tables 6.1 and is based on National Accounts (NA) data. NA
consumption data measure most forms of consumption on the basis of current purchases. An important exception is
housing consumption, which is measured by the value of housing services consumed. This means that the item
includes rents or, in case of home owners, imputed rents. See Commission of the European Communities et al., Ch.
IX, section D.




                                                         13
For L we use life expectancy in 1980, attempting to capture conditions when the average adult
of 2000 was in the middle of working life and forming expectations about his/her likely
length of life and retirement.22 This variable is highly significant for total wealth and for non-
financial assets. It is also significant at the 5% level for both financial assets and liabilities.23

The growth rates g and p are each significant in just one of the (b) specification regressions in
Table 5. Per capita GDP growth is retained in the financial assets regression, but while
population growth is significant for total wealth, it is not retained in the (b) specification of
any of the three asset-specific equations. This general lack of significance may reflect the fact
that, as mentioned earlier, the impact of these variables on W/y is expected to be mild on the
basis of the LCM.

Turning to the additional variables, we used the (log of) population density as a proxy for
house prices, expecting a positive impact on non-financial assets, which is indeed found. (The
variable is also highly significant for total wealth.) Significant positive effects are found for
the market capitalization rate in the financial assets regression, and domestic credits available
to the private sector in the liabilities regression (both again in logs). These effects are
consistent with better functioning of capital markets leading to their greater use. The
urbanization (% urban) and phone participation (% with phones) variables were included as
they could affect ease of access to financial products. These variables were expected to have
positive effects on both financial assets and liabilities. This expectation was correct for
liabilities, but not for financial assets.

Finally, we have two dummies—one for cases where the data source is a survey rather than
HBS data, and the other for transition countries. The survey dummy is only significant in the
financial assets regression, but there it is highly significant and also has a large negative
coefficient. This means that if the data source is a survey, mean financial assets will tend to be
much lower than if the data are from national balance sheets. We use this result to adjust
upwards the estimates of mean financial assets in both the wealth levels and distributional
calculations reported below for China, India and Indonesia. The transition dummy has a
highly significant, but smaller, negative impact on non-financial wealth and total wealth. In
contrast to the survey dummy, we believe the transition dummy is telling us something about


22 Using 1980 rather than a more recent year for L also avoids the distortion in this variable caused in recent years by
the AIDS epidemic, particularly in sub-Saharan African countries.
23 Note the negative sign for liabilities, suggesting that higher mean wealth occurs partly through greater assets and
partly through lower debts.




                                                          14
the real-world—that the values of non-financial assets in transition countries are depressed,
perhaps due to incomplete housing markets and under-developed housing finance.

3.3      Estimated wealth levels

Table 6 summarizes the wealth levels obtained for the world and its regions. HBS data are
used where available (see Table 1); corrected survey data are used for China, India and
Indonesia. Financial assets and liabilities are imputed for 110 countries, and non-financial
assets for 125 countries, using the regressions described in the previous section. For the 81
countries that lack any data, the mean per capita wealth of the appropriate continental region
(6 categories) and income class (4 categories)24 were assigned. This imputation is admittedly
crude, but better than simply disregarding the excluded countries. It allows us, in the end, to
assign wealth levels to 229 countries.

Table 6 provides both per capita and per adult numbers, each weighted by their respective
population weight.25 For the world as whole in 2000, net worth was estimated to be $26,738
per capita and $44,024 per adult. North America accounted for 27 per cent of world
household wealth, much more than its 5 per cent share of world population and greater than
its 24 per cent share of world GDP. The ‘rich Asia-Pacific’ group and Europe show a similar
pattern, with wealth shares much greater than their population shares and larger than their
shares of world GDP.26 Given these results, it is not surprising to see that between-country
inequality, as shown by the Gini coefficient, is higher for wealth than GDP (0.583 vs. 0.503
respectively on a per capita basis). Note also that between-country wealth inequality is lower
using the per adult basis (which gives a Gini coefficient of 0.533), reflecting the fact that the
difference between wealth per capita and per adult is greater in poor countries, which have a
higher proportion of children in their populations.




24 Our regional calculations treat China and India separately due to the size of their populations. In the regional
breakdowns it was also convenient to distinguish the high income subset of countries in the Asia-Pacific region (a list
which includes Japan, Taiwan, South Korea, Australia, New Zealand, and several Middle Eastern states) from the
remaining (mainly low-income) nations.
25 While per capita magnitudes are more familiar, we argue in the next section that it is best to analyze the world
wealth distribution among adults rather than all individuals. It is therefore helpful to begin looking at per adult, as
well as per capita, figures at this point.
26 Note that the disproportion between wealth and population shares, although large, is less for Europe than the other
high wealth regions. This reflects in part the inclusion of the lower wealth countries of Eastern Europe.




                                                          15
The rich Asia-Pacific group includes Hong Kong, which has the highest mean wealth in the
world on per capita basis and the second highest on a per adult basis according to our
estimates—$175,191 per capita and $228,675 per adult, or 5.2 times the world average per
adult (see Appendix VI as well as Table 6). This group also includes Japan and Singapore,
both at 3.6 times the world average per adult. Europe contains both very high wealth
countries, such as Luxembourg (the first place country per adult, as Hong Kong also with
wealth 5.7 times the world average), the UK (3.9 times the world average), and the
Netherlands and Italy (3.6 and 3.4 times the world average respectively), as well as low
wealth countries such as Moldova (29 per cent of the world average), the Ukraine (43 per
cent), and Albania (47 per cent).

Lower down the scale, China and India collectively accounted for 37 per cent of world
population in the year 2000, but only 16 per cent of world GDP and 14 per cent of the global
wealth. China’s net worth per adult was $19,056 (43 per cent of the world average) and
India’s was $12,021 (27 per cent). Latin American and the Caribbean had 9 per cent of the
world’s population and GDP, but 6 per cent of world wealth. Among this group, the
wealthiest countries include Barbados (3.4 times the world average per adult), Puerto Rico
(2.8 times), and Trinidad and Tobago (2.1 times). The less affluent countries in this group
include Haiti (18 per cent of the world average), Bolivia (19 per cent) and Honduras (27 per
cent).

Africa and ‘other Asia-Pacific’ countries together accounted for 33 per cent of the world
population but only 14 per cent of world GDP and 9 per cent of global wealth. Almost all
countries in the other Asia-Pacific group have net worth per adult below the world average,
except for Lebanon positioning itself just above the mean. Yemen (5 per cent) and Cambodia
(10 per cent) are the least wealthy countries in this group. With the notable exception of
Mauritius and the Seychelles (2.4 and 1.1 times the world average per adult), the African
nations are all below average in per capita wealth and include South Africa (66 per cent of the
world average), Zimbabwe (39 per cent), Kenya (22 per cent), Uganda (13 per cent), Tanzania
(5 per cent), and Nigeria (3 per cent).




                                              16
4        Wealth distribution within countries

In order to estimate the global distribution of wealth we need estimates of the distribution
within countries. We start by assembling estimates for countries with hard data. We then
perform imputations for the remaining countries. The resulting estimates are intended mainly
as an input into our global calculations but also have some independent interest, as we bring
out in the discussion.27

As indicated in Table 7, information on the distribution of wealth across households or
individuals can be assembled for 20 countries. One set of figures was selected for each nation,
with a preference for the year 2000, ceteris paribus. In most countries there is only one
suitable data source. Where there was a choice we assessed sources in terms of how
comprehensive their population and asset coverage were, the unit used (adults being preferred
to families or households), and how well they dealt with sampling error, particularly as it
affects the upper tail.28 To assist comparability across countries, a common distribution
template was adopted, consisting of the decile shares reported in the form of cumulated
quantile shares (i.e. Lorenz curve ordinates) plus the shares of the top 10 per cent, 5 per cent,
2 per cent, 1 per cent, 0.5 per cent and 0.1 per cent.

The data differ in various respects. The economic unit of analysis is most often a household or
family, but in one case (China) the unit is individuals—of any age, and for France and the UK
it is an adult individual.29 Distribution information is usually reported for the share of wealth



27 Country-level wealth inequality statistics could potentially be used as regressors in studies e.g. of economic
growth or political stability. They may also be useful in the assessment of the success of financial systems and
public policies to encourage personal wealth. However, we would hope that researchers will show appropriate
restraint in their use of our country-level estimates where they are imputed rather than based on hard data.
28 In the USA for example, we have used the SCF, which is purpose-designed to estimate the distribution of wealth.
It has comprehensive asset and population coverage and a sophisticated strategy for dealing with the upper tail.
Estate-tax based estimates are also good in the upper tail, but are subject to a range of possible biases and do not
cover the middle or bottom of the distribution (Kopczuk and Saez, 2004). The PSID collects wealth data, but it
cannot compete with the SCF in estimating the overall distribution of wealth especially since there is no
oversampling of the upper tail (Juster and Smith, 1999). The situation in the U.K. and Germany is somewhat similar,
both having panel studies (BHPS and SOEP respectively—see Sierminska et al., 2006) with similar limitations to the
PSID. For the U.K. we use estate-multiplier data, which is good in the upper tail and is on a per-adult basis. For
Germany we have used the EVS survey conducted by the federal statistical office. The EVS has a large sample,
strong weighting procedures, and detailed asset coverage (Hauser and Stein, 2006)
29New Zealand uses the “economic unit”, defined as an unpartnered adult or a couple. This is effectively a narrowly
defined family. A “family” includes a group of people living together who are related by blood or marriage. A




                                                        17
owned by each decile, together with the share of the top 5 per cent and the top 1 per cent of
wealth-holders. But this pattern is far from universal. In some instances information on
quantile shares is very sparse. On other occasions, wealth shares are reported for the top 0.5
per cent or even the top 0.1 per cent in the cases of Denmark, France, Spain, and Switzerland.

The most important respect in which the data vary across countries is the manner by which
the information is collected. Household sample surveys are employed in 15 of the 20
countries.30 Survey results are affected by sampling and non-sampling error, as discussed
earlier. Non-sampling error tends to reduce estimates of inequality and the shares of the top
groups because wealthy households are less likely to respond, and because under-reporting is
particularly severe for the kinds of financial assets that are especially important for the
wealthy—for example, equities and bonds.

Other wealth distribution estimates derive from tax records. The French and UK data are
based on estate tax returns, while the data for Denmark, Norway, and Switzerland originate
from wealth tax records. These data sources have the advantage that ‘response’ is involuntary,
and under-reporting is illegal. However, under-reporting may occur nonetheless, and there are
valuation problems that produce analogous results.

Wealth tax regulations may assign to some assets a fraction of their market value, and omit
other assets altogether. There are also evident differences in the way that debts are
investigated and recorded. For most countries the bottom decile of wealth-holders is reported
as having positive net wealth, but in Sweden the bottom three deciles each have negative net
worth and in Denmark this is true for the bottom four deciles.31




“household” is a broader concept, including a group of people sharing a common dwelling unit. Definitions differ
slightly across countries and may be operationalized in different ways.
30 The list of countries differs a little from that used in Sections 2 and 3. Here the desire is to exploit distributional
information for as many countries as possible, so countries with data considerably earlier than 2000 were added:
Ireland (for 1987) and Korea (for 1988). In the absence of any better alternatives for these two countries, we take the
shape of the wealth distribution from the late 1980s to be a guide for the wealth distribution in year 2000. Sweden
was also added since its distributional detail is of interest, although the mean from this source was not judged
sufficiently reliable to be used in our estimates of wealth levels. The Netherlands was dropped due to insufficient
distributional detail.
31 Klevmarken (2006: 276-94) identifies a number of factors that helped to account for negative wealth shares of
Swedish households in the tax register data in the 1990s, and may still have been operative in 2002. These include
student loan debt, the inclusion of debt incurred to buy assets that are not covered in the data (mainly consumer




                                                           18
Table 7 shows that estimated wealth concentration varies significantly across countries but is
generally very high. Comparisons of wealth inequality often focus attention on the share of
the top 1 per cent. That statistic is reported for 11 countries, a list that excludes China,
Germany, and the Nordic countries apart from Denmark. Estimated shares of the top 1 per
cent range from 10.4 per cent in Ireland to 34.8 per cent in Switzerland, with the USA
towards the top end of this range at 32.7 per cent.32 The share of the top 10 per cent, which is
available for all 20 countries, ranges from 39.3 per cent in Japan to 76.4 per cent in Denmark.

The differences in wealth concentration across countries in Table 7 are attributable in part to
differences in data quality. In the case of survey data it is important to over-sample in the
upper tail to get the best possible estimates of top wealth shares. However, this is done in a
minority of cases - -just Canada, Germany, Spain and the USA in the data used here. In the
absence of oversampling in the upper tail, Davies (1993) concludes on the basis of evidence
for Canada and the USA that the share of the top 1 per cent may be under-estimated by about
5 - 10 percentage points. (See Davies, 1993, pp. 168-171 and p.176.) The surprisingly low top
shares seen here in some countries, for example Ireland, may reflect this phenomenon.33




durables) and a household definition in which young adults living at home with their parents, as well as unmarried
cohabiting adults, were counted as separate households.
32 The sampling frame for the USA survey excludes the Forbes 400 richest families; adding them would raise the
share of the top 1 per cent by about two percentage points; see Kennickell (2006: 20). Note also that this estimated
share is higher than that found in estate-multiplier data for the USA. See Kopczuk and Saez (2004) who report a
share of the top 1% of adults in the USA in the year 2000 of 20.8% using estate-tax data. There are differences in
asset coverage between the SCF and the estate-multiplier estimates, as well as problems of tax evasion and avoidance
in the estate-tax data. In addition the SCF uses a family rather than adult unit. As discussed by Kopczuk and Saez, it
is widely believed that the SCF provides a better snapshot of the distribution of wealth than the estate-multiplier data
at a point in time. However, the estate-multiplier data, which go back to 1916, have no rival in attempts to trace the
evolution of the USA wealth distribution over long spans of time.
33 Low top shares are also seen in some of the data we have rejected for countries with multiple sources. Shares of
the top 10% of 45% and 64% are seen in the UK’s BHPS for 2000 and the PSID (USA) for 2001 respectively
(Sierminska et al., 2006, Table 9), figures that are both lower than the estimates seen in our Table 7. Neither the
BHPS nor the PSID over-samples the upper tail, whereas Table 7 shows estate-tax based data for the UK, which do
not have a sampling problem in the upper tail, and SCF data for the USA, which over-sample the upper tail carefully.
The German SOEP for 2002 shows higher top shares than the EVS used in our Table 7 but the SOEP results are
distorted by the fact that most financial assets and non-housing debt are only recorded for values exceeding 2,500
euros, which exaggerates inequality (see Sierminska et al., 2006 again).




                                                          19
As evident from Table 7, the available sources provide a patchwork of quantile shares. In
order to move towards an estimate of the world distribution of wealth, more complete and
comparable information is needed on the distribution in each country. To achieve this,
missing cell values were imputed using a programme developed at UNU-WIDER which
constructs a synthetic sample of 1000 observations that conforms exactly with any valid set of
quantile shares derived from a distribution of positive values (e.g., incomes) (see Shorrocks
and Wan 2008.)34 To apply this ‘ungrouping’ programme, the negative wealth shares reported
for Denmark, Finland, Germany, and Sweden were discarded, together with the zero shares
reported elsewhere, thus treating the cell values as missing observations.

The 20 countries for which wealth distribution data are available include China and India, and
hence cover a good proportion of the world population. They also include most of the large
rich countries, and therefore cover most global wealth. However, the fact that the list is
dominated by OECD members cautions against extrapolating immediately to the rest of the
world.

For most countries lacking direct wealth distribution data, the pattern of wealth distribution
was estimated using income distribution data recorded in the WIID dataset, on the grounds
that wealth inequality is likely to be correlated—possibly highly correlated—with income
inequality across countries. The WIID dataset covers 144 countries and has multiple
observations for most of them. Where possible, data was chosen for household income per
capita across individuals for a year close to 2000, with first priority given to figures on
disposable income, then consumption or expenditure. Eighty-five per cent of the income
distributions conform to these criteria. Figures for gross incomes added a further seven per
cent, leaving a residual eight per cent of countries for which the choices were very limited.
The ‘ungrouping’ programme was then used to generate quantile shares for income (reported
in Lorenz curve form) according to the same template employed for wealth distribution.

The common template applied to the wealth and income distributions allows Lorenz curve
comparisons for each of the 20 reference countries listed in Table 7. In every instance, wealth



34 The first stage of the procedure fits a Lognormal distribution to the reported data and generates an equal-
weighted synthetic sample of 1000 observations which is approximately consistent with the recorded quantile shares.
The second stage adjusts the values of the observations within each quantile until the quantile shares for the synthetic
sample exactly match the true figures. Although other theoretical functional forms tend to provide a better initial fit to
wealth distributions, particularly in the upper tail, the second stage ‘stretching’ procedure improves the accuracy of
the Lognormal-based sample so much that the outcome is as good as, if not better than, the usual alternatives.




                                                           20
shares are lower than income shares at each point of the Lorenz curve: in other words, wealth
is unambiguously more unequally distributed than income. Furthermore, the ratios of wealth
shares to income shares at a given percentile are roughly similar across countries, suggesting
that income inequality can be used to generate an imputation for wealth inequality when
wealth distribution data are not available. Thus, in our imputations, the ratio of the Lorenz
ordinates for wealth compared to income is taken to be constant across countries. These
constant ratios (14 in total) correspond to the average value recorded for the 20 reference
countries.35 This generates estimates of wealth distribution for 124 countries to add to the 20
original countries which have direct evidence of wealth inequality.

The group of 144 countries with actual or estimated wealth distribution data differs slightly
from the group of 150 nations which have figures for mean wealth derived from actual data or
the regressions of Section 3. Distributional evidence is more common for populous countries,
so the group of 144 now includes Cuba, Iraq, Myanmar, Nepal, Serbia, Sudan, and
Uzbekistan, and covers 96.6 per cent of the global population. For the rest of the world not
covered by WIID data, the default of disregarding the remaining countries was again
eschewed in favour of imputing a wealth distribution pattern equal to the (population
weighted) average for the corresponding region and income class.



5        World distribution

In this section we present our estimate of the global distribution of wealth on a PPP basis.
Subsequently we test the sensitivity of this estimate to the use of PPP rather than official
exchange rates, and to the use of imputed data. The latter exercise allows us to present an
estimate of the distribution of wealth for just the 20 countries, with 59% of the world’s adult
population, that have hard data. First, however, we consider the choice of unit to be used in
these exercises.

The interpretation of data on personal wealth distribution depends on the underlying
population deemed to be relevant. Are we interested in the distribution of wealth across all
individuals, adult persons, or households or families?36 When examining the analogous issue



35 To circumvent aggregation problems, the adjustment ratio was applied to the cumulated income shares (i.e.
Lorenz values) rather than separate quantile income shares.
36 Note that each of these bases was used by at least one country listed in Table 6.




                                                          21
of global income distribution, it is common practice to assume (as a first approximation) that
the benefits of household expenditure are shared equally among household members, and that
each person should be weighted equally in the overall distribution. However, the situation
with wealth is rather different. Personal assets and debts are typically owned by named
individuals, and may well be retained by those individuals if they leave the family.
Furthermore, while some household assets, especially housing, provide a stream of communal
benefits, it is highly unlikely that control of assets is shared equally by household members or
that household members will share equally in the proceeds if the asset is sold. Membership of
households can be quite fluid (for example, with respect to children living away from home)
and the pattern of household structure varies markedly across countries. These aspects all
argue for the use of an individual unit rather than the household or family. There is an
additional, practical, reason for not using households, which is that the number of households
is unknown for most countries, whereas adult population data are readily available. Finally,
those under about 20 years of age have little formal or actual wealth ownership, and should
therefore likely be set aside. Thus, despite the fact that most of the datasets listed in Table 7
are constructed on a family or household basis, our goal is to estimate the distribution of
global wealth on a per-adult basis.

In estimating the global distribution we assume, in effect, that the shape of the adult
distribution of wealth at country level is the same as that of a family- or household-based
distribution. Adult and household distributions would indeed have the same shape if children
held insignificant assets, the number of adults per household did not vary systematically with
wealth, and wealth were equally divided among adults in a household. Children do have little
wealth. However, wealthier households on average have more adults, and although there has
been a trend towards more equal division of assets within marriage, equal division is not
universal. Studies have looked at what happens when, starting with adult data, one “pairs up”
a portion of adults into couples and measures inequality on a family basis. This reduces
inequality among married people, but increases measured inequality between singles and
couples. The effects are to an extent offsetting, but the net effect is to reduce measured
inequality somewhat.37 This impact should be borne in mind in interpreting our estimate of
global wealth inequality.




37 Wolff and Marley (1989) compared the share of wealth held by the top one percent of adults in USA estate-
multiplier data with a lower-bound estimate of the share held by the top one percent of families, derived from the
estate-multiplier data via assortative mating assumptions. As reported by Wolff (2002, p. 82), they found a share for
the top 1% of adults of 19.1% vs. 12.7% for families in 1976. Atkinson and Harrison (1978, p. 248) found a smaller




                                                        22
5.1 Global Distribution

In order to get an estimate of the global distribution of wealth the national wealth levels
derived in Section 3 were combined with the wealth distribution data derived in Section 4.
Specifically, the ungrouping programme was applied to each country to generate a sample of
1,000 synthetic individual observations consistent with the (actual, estimated or imputed)
wealth distribution. These were scaled up by mean wealth, weighted by the adult population
size of the respective country, and merged into a single dataset comprising over 200,000
observations.38 The complete sample was then processed to obtain the minimum wealth and
the wealth share of each percentile in the global distribution of wealth. The procedure also
provides estimates of the composition by country of each wealth percentile, although these are
rough estimates given that the population of each country is condensed into a sample of
1,000, so that a single sample observation for China or India represents more than half a
million adults.

Tables 8 and 9 summarize our estimates of the distribution of wealth across the global
population of 3.7 billion adults. Only $8,635 was needed in order to belong to the top half of
the world wealth distribution in the year 2000; but to be a member of the top 10 per cent
required at least $89,569 and membership of the top 1 per cent required more than $518,364
per adult. This latter figure is surprisingly high, given that the top 1 per cent group contains
37 million adults and is therefore far from an exclusive club. The entrance fee has no doubt
grown higher still in the period since the year 2000. The figures for wealth shares show that
the top 10 per cent of adults owned 70.7 per cent of global household wealth, so that the
typical member of this group had 7.1 times the average global holding. The corresponding
figures for the top 5 per cent and top 1 per cent are 56.7 per cent (11.4 times the average) and
31.6 per cent (31.9 times the average), respectively. This contrasts with the bottom 30 per cent
of the distribution, which collectively owned just one per cent of global wealth. Thus the top
one per cent owned about 32 times as much as the bottom three deciles.



effect using U.K. data —a maximum decline from 30.8% to 25.6% in the share of the top 1% in going from an adult
to family basis. Frick et al. (2007) compare individual and household distributions of wealth using the 2002 German
SOEP survey. (It is very unusual for wealth survey data to allow such a comparison). Gini coefficients are .787 for
individuals and .734 for households, but this again gives an upper bound on the difference that interests us. The Frick
et al. calculation is on a per capita basis, which gives lower inequality for households than would be obtained with
the conventional equal weighting of households.
38 There are 229 countries in total, but a number of small countries with identical imputed wealth levels and
distributions were merged at this point.




                                                         23
Table 9 gives wealth Gini coefficients for the larger countries and for the world as a whole.
As mentioned earlier, wealth distribution is unambiguously more unequal than income
distribution in all countries which allow comparison. The wealth Gini coefficient estimates for
individual countries in Table 9 range from a low of 0.547 for Japan to the high values
reported for Brazil (0.784) and the USA (0.801). Appendix IV indicates that Switzerland,
whose distribution is based on hard data with good detail in the upper tail, has a Gini
coefficient of 0.803.39 The USA and Switzerland have Gini coefficients close to the global
wealth Gini of 0.802. Note that as is true within countries, the global figure is considerably
higher than the values computed for the global income distribution. Milanovic (2005: 108)
reports a Gini coefficient of 0.642, for example, for the world distribution of income in 1998
on a PPP basis.

Table 8 provides the regional representation in the various wealth quantiles. The top end of
the global wealth distribution is dominated by North America, Europe and the rich Asia-
Pacific countries, with Europe having 35 per cent of the members of the top decile, and North
America and rich Asia-Pacific each contributing just above 20 per cent. The North American
share rises rapidly in the upper tail, to 39 per cent in the top percentile, overtaking Europe
whose share declines to 31 per cent.

The middle half of the distribution is the domain of China, which supplies a third of the
membership of deciles 4-8. In contrast, India is concentrated at the lower end of the global
wealth distribution; the membership share is almost a quarter (21.9 per cent, in fact) for the
bottom three deciles, and then declines monotonically with wealth right up to the top tail. The
membership pattern of India is roughly similar to that of Africa.

Residents of Latin America and the Caribbean are spread across the entire global distribution,
reflecting the great inequality of wealth-holding in that region. Taken as a whole, Asia-Pacific
countries apart from China and India are also quite evenly spread, although there is high
polarization, with rich Asia-Pacific countries occupying the top end and the lower income
countries (especially, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Vietnam) being found in the lower
tail.

Table 9 provides more details for those countries that have either high wealth (more than one
per cent of global wealth or more than one per cent of members of the world top wealth



39 We saw earlier that Switzerland had the highest share of the top 1% for the countries with hard data on that share,
shown in Table 7. Dell et al. (2005) discuss the causes of Switzerland’s high wealth inequality.




                                                         24
decile) or else adult populations exceeding 45 million. A country’s ranking in the global top
wealth decile depends on a combination of three factors: population size, mean wealth, and
wealth inequality. The USA heads the list, with 19.4 per cent of the world’s top decile and
36.8 per cent of the top percentile. Large population, high mean wealth, and high wealth
inequality all reinforce each other in the USA case to produce this result. Japan comes a
strong second to the USA, with 14.1 per cent of the top decile and 12.0 per cent of the top
percentile. This strong performance reflects not only Japan’s population size, but also its high
personal saving rate and resulting high household asset levels. Germany, the UK, and Italy
follow Japan with 7.0, 5.9 and 5.8 per cent of the top decile respectively, accounting for more
than half of the 35.2 per cent population share of Europe in the top global decile. Note also
that Italy, like Japan, has very low representation in the bottom half of the world distribution,
and in particular relatively fewer members than the USA, Germany or the UK. This reflects,
in part, the remarkably low level of household debt in Italy.

Table 9 also reports figures for median wealth across countries, which reflect variations in
both mean wealth and inequality. One interesting observation is that median wealth rarely
exceeds 50 per cent of mean wealth. In addition, the rank order of countries changes
significantly when medians are used instead of mean values. Of the countries listed in the
table, the USA ranked first in mean wealth per adult, followed by the UK, Japan, and then
Italy. However, of this group, Japan ranks first in terms of median wealth per adult, followed
by Italy, the UK, and then the USA. Indeed, Japan’s median wealth was more than double the
figure for the USA although its mean wealth was 22 per cent lower.

Missing from Table 9, of course, are the world’s smaller countries, some of which are of
special interest. (See Appendix IV for details on all countries.) For example, some of the
countries with very high wealth rankings have much less spectacular income rankings. Hong
Kong and Ireland are examples of this. Also, some countries rank very high in per capita
income but are not close to the top of the wealth rankings. This is perhaps most notable for
the Nordic countries: Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Finland and Iceland. A possible
explanation is that strong public infrastructure and social programmes in these countries make
it less necessary for people to build up personal assets than in countries where there is less
public wealth and social insurance.

5.2 Sensitivity of Global Estimate to Assumptions and Imputations

We need to check the sensitivity of the global estimate to some key assumptions and to the
use of imputed data. In checking the latter aspect we will examine the distribution of wealth
for just the 20 core countries for which we have hard data.



                                               25
We begin by checking the sensitivity of our results to the use of PPP rather than official
exchange rates. The first two rows of Table 10 show global estimates prepared on these
alternative bases. By lowering the wealth levels of poorer countries, the shift from PPP to
official exchange rates leads to a significant rise in measured inequality. The share of the top
decile increases from 70.7 to 85.1 per cent, and the share of the top percentile from 31.6 to
40.1 per cent. The world Gini coefficient jumps from 0.802 to 0.892, now far exceeding the
figure recorded for any individual country.40 The use of official exchange rates may thus be
viewed as magnifying wealth level differences across countries and ensuring that inter-
country variations make a greater contribution to global wealth inequality.41

In contrast, Table 10 shows that the assumptions used during the course of our analysis have
very little impact on global wealth distribution. Rows 3–5 report the PPP figures
corresponding to row 1 after omitting countries for which data has been imputed from region-
income group averages. Row 3 discards those with imputed wealth levels; row 4 those
without income distribution data (and hence no way of estimating wealth inequality); and row
5 those with either form of imputation. The results show that the regional-income group
imputations affect less than 6 per cent of the global adult population and less than 3 per cent
of global wealth, so it is perhaps not surprising to discover no discernible impact on the global
wealth distribution.

The last two rows take an even more extreme position, excluding all countries except the 20
nations listed in Table 6 which have wealth distribution data. Restricting attention to these 20
countries loses 25 per cent of the world’s wealth and 41 per cent of the world’s adults.
Nevertheless, the figures in row 6 for our core group of 20 countries are little different from
the row 1 benchmark, with a top 1 per cent share of 31.7 per cent compared to 31.6 per cent,
for example, and a Gini coefficient of 0.796 compared to 0.802.




40 This parallels the result in Milanovic (2005) for the global income distribution. Milanovic has a world income
Gini coefficient in 1998 of 0.642 on a PPP basis but 0.795 using official exchange rates.
41 The particular approach to estimating PPPs used in the Penn World Tables, the Geary-Khamis method, may also
have an effect on our results. While it is widely used in the study of international differences in income this method
produces smaller estimated differences in living standards between rich and poor countries than some other popular
methods, for example the EKS method used by the World Bank (see, for example, United Nations 2007.) Using
PPPs based on the Geary-Khamis method likely leads to lower estimates of world wealth inequality than would be
obtained using the EKS method.




                                                         26
The final row 7 keeps the same 20 core countries but discards the ‘true’ wealth distribution
figures, replacing them instead with the estimate derived from income distribution data that
was applied to most countries. Comparing rows 6 and 7 suggests that the estimation
procedure reduces wealth inequality at the very top of the distribution, with the share of the
top 1 per cent falling from 31.7 per cent to 27.4 per cent. However, the share of the top two
quintiles rises and the share of the bottom three quintiles falls, suggesting a shift towards
greater inequality. The combined impact is evidently small, with the world Gini coefficient
changing from 0.796 to 0.801. Overall, it seems that our method of estimating wealth
distributions from income distributions, and the other estimation and imputation procedures
used during the course of our study, have little impact on the global wealth inequality figures.
The impact is certainly less than the change induced by switching from PPP figures to official
exchange rate valuations, which is a conceptual distinction rather than an assumption adopted
for computational convenience.

Other respects also lead us to believe that our estimates of the top wealth shares are
reasonable. The survey data on which most of our estimates are based under-represent the rich
and do not reflect the holdings of the super-rich. This suggests that our estimated shares of the
top percentile and top decile, for example, may err on the low side. A rough idea of the
possible size of the error is given by the total wealth of the world’s billionaires reported by
Forbes magazine for the year 2000, which was $2.16 trillion. This represents 1.7 per cent of
our figure of $125.6 trillion (at official exchange rates) for total world household wealth. Thus
if our estimates erred so badly as to exclude all the world’s billionaires, the shares of the top
percentile and top decile would be depressed by less than two percentage points.

As discussed in Davies et al. (2008), a further check was accomplished by fitting a Pareto
distribution to the upper tail of our estimated global wealth distribution (based on official
exchange rates). The Pareto distribution well approximates the upper tail of both income and
wealth distribution data at the national level, and is a remarkably close fit to our global
distribution in the range from $250,000 to $5 million. While the fit deteriorates at $10 million,
it gives us added confidence in the quality of our estimated distribution up to this point, which
covers all but a very small percentage of the world’s population.



6      Conclusion

This paper has found that the global distribution of household wealth is highly concentrated.
Using PPP valuations, we estimate that the top 10 per cent of adults in the world owned 71
per cent of household wealth in the year 2000 and that the Gini coefficient for global wealth
holdings was 0.802. Measured wealth inequality is higher still if international comparisons are

                                               27
based on official exchange rates, which is appropriate if attention is focused on the rich and
super rich: the share of the top decile rises to 85 per cent and the Gini coefficient becomes
0.892. These statistics indicate that the world’s wealth distribution is considerably more
unequal than its income distribution, for which Milanovic (2005) reports Gini coefficients of
0.642 and 0.795 on PPP and exchange rate bases, respectively. The estimated distribution is
little altered if we restrict attention to the 20 core countries with hard data that have 59% of
the world’s adult population. For this core group the Gini coefficient of wealth is 0.796 on a
PPP basis.

This study began by assembling information on household wealth levels and portfolio
composition for as many countries as possible. Wealth levels vary widely and we find that the
wealth/income ratio for countries rises with income or wealth, so that international wealth
differences are greater, relatively speaking, than those for income. Also, we find that the
correlation of national income and wealth, while strong, is not perfect. The wealthiest
countries include some, like Ireland and Hong Kong, that rank significantly lower according
to per capita income. Similarly, some countries with very high incomes, such as the Nordic
group, rank much lower according to wealth. This finding calls attention to the fact that while
greater wealth is desirable ceteris paribus, it may not be a blessing if higher personal wealth is
due to pure asset price inflation (e.g. house prices) or if the higher wealth is needed to
compensate for deficiencies in public infrastructure, pensions or social insurance
programmes. The relatively low ranking of the Nordic countries may therefore be viewed as a
positive reflection of high quality public services and programmes.

Wealth composition was seen to vary, not only with the stage of development, but across
countries at similar income levels. These variations may be explained in terms of institutional
and traditional differences, varying importance of public pensions, and other factors. The
importance of both financial assets and borrowing rises sharply with per capita income and
with financial market development. Conversely, household balance sheets in poor countries
remain dominated by land and other tangible assets.

Using regression analysis and other imputation methods, mean wealth levels were assigned to
countries lacking adequate wealth data. This generates estimated wealth levels for 229
countries and a snapshot of what Milanovic (2005) and others refer to as ‘international
inequality’, that is inequality between countries. On a PPP basis, wealth per adult for most
countries fell between the figure of $12,021 for India and $201,319 for the United States in
the year 2000. The between-country Gini coefficient for wealth per adult was 0.533 compared
to 0.448 for GDP per adult.




                                               28
Having obtained estimates of wealth level by country, details of the shape of the wealth
distribution were assembled for as many countries as possible. The data covered 20 countries,
which together account for 59 per cent of the world population in 2000 and, we estimate, 84
per cent of global wealth. Wealth inequality varies widely across these countries but is always
greater than income inequality. The group includes all the populous rich countries along with
the largest developing nations, China, India and Indonesia. It allows us to study the relation
between wealth distribution and income distribution, and to generate rough estimates of
wealth inequality for 124 countries that have income distribution data but no wealth
distribution data. Simple imputations of wealth inequality were applied to the remaining
countries, which comprised less than four per cent of the world population. Combining the
wealth distribution estimates with the wealth level numbers, and weighting by population,
then yielded our estimates of the world distribution of wealth.

Our estimate of 0.802 for the world wealth Gini coefficient is high, both compared to the Gini
values for many countries, and compared to Gini values that have been estimated for the
world distribution of income. However, it is interesting to note that some countries have
similarly high values of wealth Gini coefficients. Among countries with hard data these
include the USA at 0.801 and Switzerland at 0.803. According to the Gini coefficient,
therefore, such countries contain within their borders about the same level of wealth
inequality as is seen in the world as a whole.

Our results also allow us to comment on the relative importance of between- vs. within-
country wealth inequality. As reported earlier, between-country differences in wealth per
adult yield a Gini coefficient of 0.533 on a PPP basis. Adding within-country differences
pushes the Gini coefficient to 0.802, suggesting that within-country differences are a very
important component of world wealth inequality. This impression is confirmed by comparison
with the world income distribution results of Milanovic (2005), which show a between-
country Gini coefficient of 0.531 and a full Gini coefficient of 0.641 in 1998 (for a common
sample of countries over the years 1988-98). The Milanovic results thus show between-
country income inequality equal to 83 per cent of total inequality, which is much greater than
the 71 per cent obtained here for wealth.

We have discussed the regional aspect of global wealth distribution as well, pointing out the
dominance of North America, Europe and the rich Asia-Pacific countries in the top global
percentiles. The popular press sometimes suggests that high wealth individuals from emerging
market economies—especially China, India and Russia—are already strongly represented
among the world’s rich. Our figures indicate that at least as of the year 2000 the emerging
market economies did not supply a significant share of the top 1% of global wealthholders.
With the possible exception of China they appear unlikely to do so for some time.

                                                 29
While this paper makes a start in estimating the world distribution of wealth, it is clear that
there are gaps in the data and significant concerns about data quality in some countries.
Globally, there is great room for improvement in the study of household wealth. Household
balance sheets and wealth surveys need to be generated in many more countries. These are
completely lacking in Latin America, and almost totally absent in Africa. The development of
financial institutions and property rights are key aspects of economic growth and human
development. Without the relevant data it is impossible to see what progress is being made.
Improvements in data quality, particularly in survey data, must also occur. The task is far
from hopeless, however, and great strides have been taken in several countries. The fact that
regular wealth surveys are conducted in the two largest developing countries, China and India,
is encouraging. As balance sheet studies spread, and as more and better surveys are
conducted, a better picture will emerge of the level, composition and distribution of household
wealth around the globe.




                                              30
References
Alvaredo, F., and E. Saez (2006). ‘Income and Wealth Concentration in Spain in a Historical
  and Fiscal Perspective’, CEPR Discussion Paper 5836, Centre for Economic Policy
  Research: London.
Ammermüller, A., A. Weber, and P. Westerheide (2005). Abschlussbericht zum
  Forschungsauftrag des Bundesministeriums für Gesundheit und Soziale Sicherung: Die
  Entwicklung und Verteilung des Vermögens privater Haulshalte unter besonderer
  Berücksichtigung de Produktivvermögens. Zentum für Europäische Wirtscaftsforschung.
Aron J., and J. Muellbauer (2004). ‘Revised Estimates of Personal Sector Wealth for South
  Africa’, CSAE WPS 2004-24.
Aron, J., J. Muellbauer, and J. Prinsloo (2008). ‘Estimating the Balance Sheet of the Personal
  Sector in an Emerging Market Country, South Africa 1975-2005’, in Davies (2008), 196-
  223.
Atkinson, A.B. (2008). ‘Concentration among the Rich’, in Davies (2008), 64-89.
Atkinson, A.B. and A.J. Harrison (1978), Distribution of Personal Wealth in Britain,
  Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2005). ‘Household Income and Income Distribution’,
  available from: www.abs.gov.au
Babeau, A., and T. Sbano (2003). ‘Household Wealth in the National Accounts of Europe, the
  United States and Japan’, OECD Statistics Working Papers 2003/2, OECD: Paris.
Banco de Espana (2005) ‘Survey of Household Finances (EFF): Description, Methods and
  Preliminary Results’, Economic Bulletin January.
Benzoni, L., P. Collin-Dufresne and R.S. Goldstein (2007), ‘Portfolio Choice over the Life-
  Cycle when the Stock and Labor Markets Are Cointegrated’, Journal of Finance 62: 2123-
  2167.
Bertaut, C.C., and M. Starr-McCluer (2002), ‘Household Portfolios in the United States’, in
  L. Guiso, M. Haliassos, and T. Jappelli (eds), Household Portfolios, MIT Press:
  Cambridge MA.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2003). Guide to Flow of Funds Accounts,
  Volume 1, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System: Washington DC.
Bottazzi, R., T. Jappelli and M. Padula (2006). ‘Retirement expectations, pension reforms,
  and their impact on private wealth accumulation’, Journal of Public Economics 90: 2187-
  2212.
Bourguignon, F., and C. Morrison (2002). ‘Inequality Among World Citizens: 1820-1992’,
  American Economic Review 92: 727-44.


                                             31
Brandolini, A., L. Cannari, G. D’Alession, and I. Faiella (2004). ‘Household Wealth
  Distribution in Italy in the 1990s’, Termi di discussione 530, Bank of Italy: Rome.
Browning, M., and T. Crossley (2001), “The Life-Cycle Model of Consumption and Saving”,
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 15: 3-22.
Cagetti, M. And M. De Nardi (2008), ‘Wealth Inequality: Data and Models’, Macroeconomic
  Dynamics 12 (Supplement 2): 285-313.
Cardoso F., and V.G. da Cunha (2005). ‘Household Wealth in Portugal 1998-2004’, Bank of
  Portugal Working Paper 4-05, Bank of Portugal: Lisbon.
Commission of the European Communities, International Monetary Fund, Organisation for
  Economic Co-operation and Development, United Nations, and World Bank, System of
  National Accounts 1993, http://unstats.un.org/unsd/sna1993/toctop.asp.
Davies, J.B. (1993). ‘The Distribution of Wealth in Canada’, Research in Economic
  Inequality 4: 159-80.
Davies, J.B. (ed.) (2008), Personal Wealth from a Global Perspective, Oxford University
  Press: Oxford.
Davies, J.B., and A.F. Shorrocks (2000). ‘The Distribution of Wealth’, in A.B. Atkinson and
  F. Bourguignon, Handbook of Income Distribution, Volume I, Elsevier: Amsterdam.
Davies, J.B., and A. Shorrocks (2005). ‘Wealth Holdings in Developing and Transition
  Countries’, paper presented at the workshop on Construction and Usage of Comparable
  Microdata on Wealth organized by the Luxembourg Wealth Study and the Bank of Italy,
  27-29 January, Perugia.
Davies, J.B., S. Sandström, A. Shorrocks, and E.N. Wolff (2008). ‘The World Distribution of
  Household Wealth’, in Davies (2008), 395-418.
Deaton, A. (1995), ‘Data and Econometric Tools for Development Analysis’, in Jere Behrman
  and T.N. Srinivasan, Handbook of Development Economics, Vol. IIIA, Washington, D.C.:
  1785-1882.
Deaton, A. (2005), ‘Franco Modigliani and the life-cycle theory of consumption’, Banca
  Nazionale del Lavoro Quarterly Review 58: 91-107.
Dell, F., T. Piketty, and E. Saez (2005). ‘Income and Wealth Concentration in Switzerland
  over the 20th Century’, CEPR Discussion Paper 5090, Centre for Economic Policy
  Research: London.
Deutsches Bundesbank (2004). ‘Financial Accounts for Germany 1991 to 2003’, Special
  Statistical Publication 4, Deutsches Bundesbank: Berlin.
Frick, J.R., M.M. Grabka, and E.M. Sierminska (2007), “Representative wealth data for
   Germany from the German SOEP: The impact of methodological decisions around
   imputation and the choice of the aggregation unit”, SOEP Papers, DIW Berlin.

                                            32
Gale, W.G. (1998). ‘The Efects of Pensions on Household Wealth: A Reevaluation of Theory
  and Evidence’, Journal of Political Economy 106: 706-23.
Gale, W.G., L. Muller, J.W.R. Phillips and M. Dworsky (2007). ‘Effects of After-Tax Pension
  and Social Security Benefits on Household Wealth: Evidence from a Sample of Retirees’,
  Brookings Institution, processed.
Goldsmith, R.W. (1985). Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty
  Countries, 1688-1978, University of Chicago Press: Chicago.
Gomes, F.J., L.J. Kotlikoff and L.M. Viceira (2008). ‘Optimal Life-Cycle Investing With
  Flexible Labor Supply: A Welfare Analysis of Life-Cycle Funds’, NBER Working Paper
  No. 13966, April.
Greene, W.H. (1993). Econometric Analysis, Second Edition, Macmillan: New York.
Hauser, R., and H. Stein (2006), “Inequality of the distribution of personal wealth in
  Germany, 1973-98”, in Wolff (2006): 195-224.
Headey, B., G. Marks, and M. Wooden (2005). ‘The Structure and Distribution of Household
  Wealth in Australia’, Australian Economic Review 38: 159-75.
Inland Revenue Statistics (2005). ‘Distribution of Personal Wealth’, available from:
   www.hmrc.gov.uk/stats/personal_wealth/menu.htm
IMF (2005). ‘Global Financial Stability Report, Market Developments and Issues:
  International    Capital      Markets      Department’,    available   from:
  www.imf.org/External/Pubs/FT/GFSR/2005/01/index.htm
Japan Statistics Bureau (2005). ‘National Survey of Family Income and Expenditure 1999’,
   available from www.stat.go.jp/english/data/zensho/index.htm
Jäntti, M., and E. Sierminska (2008). Survey Estimates of Wealth Holdings in OECD
   Countries: Evidence on the Level and Distribution across Selected Countries’, in Davies
   (2008), 27-41.
Juster, T., and J. Smith (1999), “The Measurement and Structure of Household Wealth”,
   Labour Economics 6: 253-75.
Kennan, J. (1989). ‘Simultaneous Equations Bias in Disaggregated Econometric Models’,
  Review of Economic Studies 56: 151-56.
Kennickell, A. (2006). ‘A Rolling Tide: Changes in the Distribution of Wealth in the US,
  1989-2001’, in E.N. Wolff (2006).
Klevmarken, A. (2006). ‘On household wealth trends in Sweden over the 1990s’, in E.N.
  Wolff (2006).
Kopczuk, W. and E. Saez (2004), “Top Wealth Shares in the United States, 1916-2000:
  Evidence from Estate Tax Returns”, National Tax Journal 57: 445-87.


                                            33
Leipziger, D.M., D. Dollar, A.F. Shorrocks, and S.Y. Song (1992). The Distribution of
   Income and Wealth in Korea, World Bank: Washington DC.
Li, S., and R. Zhao (2008), “Changes in the Distribution of Wealth in China, 1995-2002”, in
   Davies (2008), 93-111.
Milanovic, B. (2002). ‘True World Income Distribution, 1988 and 1993: First Calculation
  Based on Household Surveys Alone’, Economic Journal 112: 51-92.
Milanovic, B. (2005). Worlds Apart, Measuring International and Global Inequality,
  Princeton University Press: Princeton NJ and Oxford.
Modigliani, M. (1988). ‘Life Cycle, Individual Thrift and the Wealth of Nations. American
  Economic Review 76:297-313.
Modigliani, M. and B. Brumberg (1954). ‘Utility Analysis and Aggregate Consumption
  Functions: An Attempt at Integration’ in A. Abel ed., The Collected Papers of Franco
  Modigliani, Vol. 2. MIT Press: Cambridge, 128-97.
Neary, J.P. (2004). ‘Rationalizing the Penn World Table: True Multilateral Indices for
  International Comparisons of Real Income’, American Economic Review 94: 1411-28.
Nolan, B. (1991). The Wealth of Irish Households: What Can We Learn from Survey Data?
  Combat Poverty Agency: Dublin.
OECD (2005). OECD National Accounts Statistics, National Accounts of OECD Countries,
  Volume IIIb, Financial Balance Sheets, Stocks Vol. 2005 release 02, OECD: Paris.
Piketty, T., G. Postel-Vinay, and J.-L. Rosenthal (2004). ‘Wealth Concentration in a
   Developing Economy: Paris and France, 1807-1994’, CEPR Discussion Paper 4631,
   Centre for Economic Policy Research: London.
Shorrocks, A., and G. Wan (2008), ‘Ungrouping Income Distributions: Synthesising Samples
  for Inequality and Poverty Analysis’, in K. Basu and R. Kanbur (eds.), Arguments for a
  Better World: Essays in Honor of Amartya Sen. Volume I: Ethics, Welfare and
  Measurement, Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Sierminska, E., A Brandolini and T. Smeeding (2006), ‘Comparing Wealth Distribution
   Across Rich Countries: First Results from the Luxembourg Wealth Study’, Working Paper
   No. 1, Luxembourg Wealth Study.
Singapore Department of Statistics (2003). ‘Wealth and Liabilities of Singapore Households’,
   Occasional Paper on Economic Statistics March, Singapore Department of Statistics:
   Singapore.
Statistics Canada (2001). The Assets and Debts of Canadians: An overview of the results of
   the Survey of Financial Security, Statistics Canada: Ottawa.
Statistics Denmark (1998). Indkomster og formuer 1996, Statistics Denmark: Copenhagen.


                                            34
Statistics Finland (2000). ‘Kotitalouksien varallisuus 1998’, Income and Consumption 2000:
   26, Statistics Finland: Helsinki.
Statistics New Zealand (2002). The Wealth of New Zealanders: A Report on Their Assets and
   Debts, Household Economic Statistics Division Statistics: Wellington.
Statistics Norway (2005). Income and Property Statistics for Households, available from:
   www.ssb.no/english/subjects/05/01/ifhus_en/
Statistics Sweden (2004). Wealth Statistics 2004, Statistics Sweden: Örebro.
Subramanian, S., and D. Jayaraj (2008). ‘The Distribution of Household Wealth in India’, in
  Davies (2008), 112-33.
UniCredit Group (2005). ‘New Europe Household Wealth Monitor’, November.
United Nations (2007). Handbook of the International Comparison Programme, Processing of
  the Basic Data, United Nations Statistics Division: New York.
van Els, P., W. van den End, and M. van Rooij (2005). ‘Financial Behaviour of Dutch
   Households: Analysis of DNB Household Survey Data 2003’, BIS Papers 22, Bank for
   International Settlements: Basel.
Wolff, E.N. (2002), Top Heavy: A Study of Increasing Inequality of Wealth in America, newly
  updated and expanded edition, The New Press: New York.
Wolff, E.N. (2006). International Perspectives on Household Wealth, Edward Elgar
  Publishing: Cheltenham and Northampton MA.
Wolff, E.N. and M. Marley (1989), “Long-Term Trends in U.S. Wealth Inequality:
  Methodological Issues and Results”, in R.E. Lipsey and H.S. Tice (eds.) The Measurement
  of Saving, Investment and Wealth, University of Chicago Press: Chicago, pp. 765-839.
Yemtsov, R. (2007). ‘Housing Privatization and Household Wealth in Transition’, in Davies
  (2008), 312-33.
Zellner, A. (1962) ‘An Efficient Method of Estimating Seemingly Unrelated Regressions and
   Tests of Aggregation Bias’, Journal of the American Statistical Association 57: 500-09.




                                             35
Table 1 Coverage of wealth levels data, year 2000
                                                                                                    Upper middle    Lower middle                Cumulative % of
                                                                High income                                                        Low income
                                                                                                       income         income                    world population
                                                 Complete financial and non-financial data
      Household Balance Sheets              North America         Europe            Asia-Pacific
                                              Canada             Denmark              Australia    Czech Republic
                                                USA               Finland             Taiwan          Poland
                                                                  France               Japan        South Africa
                                                                 Germany            New Zealand
                                                                                                                                                  15.3
                                                                    Italy            Singapore
                                                                Netherlands
                                                                 Portugal
                                                                   Spain
                                                                               UK
                                                                                                                      China          India
              Survey data                                                                                                                         56.0
                                                                                                                                   Indonesia
                                                                              Incomplete data
       Financial Balance Sheets                                   Austria              Korea          Croatia        Bulgaria
                                                                  Belgium                             Estonia        Romania
                                                                  Greece                              Hungary         Turkey
                                                                                                                                                  59.5
                                                                 Slovenia                              Latvia
                                                                  Sweden                             Lithuania
                                                                Switzerland                           Slovakia
   Survey data: non-financial assets                                                                  Mexico                                      61.1
Number of countries with wealth partly or
                                                                  18                                  28              36            46            95.2
  fully estimated by regression method
Number of countries with wealth imputed
                                                                  33                                  17              22             9            100.0
        by mean value of group
Source: see Appendix II.



                                                                                     36
Table 2: Percentage composition of household wealth in household balance sheets, year 2000
                                        Share of total gross assets                                 Share of financial assets
                           financial   non-financial                                                                      other financial
                                                          housing          Liabilities   liquid assets      equities
                            assets       assets                                                                              assetsa
Household balance sheets
Australia                      41            59              20                 17             22              20                58
Canada                         57            43              20                 18             25              32                43
Czech Republic                 34            66              Na                  9             60              24                16
Denmark                        55            45              24                 30             21              31                48
Finland                        41            59              48                 13             33              45                22
France                         40            60              29                 11             33              32                35
Germany                        40            60              42                 16             34              37                29
Italy                          42            58              50                  3             23              55                21
Japan                          50            50              Na                 14             53              16                31
Netherlands                    54            46              38                 16             19              24                57
New Zealand                    32            68              59                 20             35              40                25
Poland                         20            80              62                  3             59              25                17
Portugal                       49            51              39                 19             47              38                15
Singapore                      45            55              47                 18             44              21                35
South Africa                   65            35              16                 15             21              19                60
Spain                          31            69              60                 10             40              43                17
Taiwan                         59            41              20                 10             39              32                29
UK                             53            47              35                 13             20              24                55
USA                            67            33              26                 15             13              51                36




                                                                      37
                                          Share of total gross assets                                           Share of financial assets
                                             non-                                                                                             other
                            financial                                                                  liquid
                                          financial         housing          Liabilities                                equities            financial
                             assets                                                                   assets
                                           assets                                                                                            assets
Financial balance sheets
Austria                                                                                                    55                26                   19
Belgium                                                                                                    25                59                   16
Bulgariab                                                                                                  88                  5                   7
             b
Croatia                                                                                                    85                  6                   9
Estonia                                                                                                    26                54                   20
Greece                                                                                                     44                51                    4
Hungary                                                                                                    43                43                   14
Latvia                                                                                                     53                44                    3
Lithuania                                                                                                  33                40                   27
                 b
Romania                                                                                                    76                21                    3
Slovakiab                                                                                                  74                12                   14
Slovenia                                                                                                   52                31                   17
South Korea                                                                                                61                18                   21
Sweden                                                                                                     14                45                   40
Switzerland                                                                                                21                38                   41
Turkeyb                                                                                                    62                32                    6
         a                                                                                       b
Note: Other financial assets include insurance and pension reserves and other accounts receivable. Composition from year 2004.

Source: see Appendix IIB.




                                                                        38
Table 3: Percentage composition of household wealth in survey data, year 2000
                                                  Share of total assets                                                            Share of financial assets
                            financial        non-financial                                                                                                 other financial
                             assets            assets              housing             liabilities                 liquid assets         equities             assetsa
Australia                       32                  68                 54                   14                           14                  21                     64
Canada                          29                  71                 38                   16                           19                  23                     58
        b
China                           22                  78                 57                      1                         na                  na                     na
Finland                         17                  83                 75                   12                           51                  36                     14
Germany                         24                  76                 na                   15                           46                  24                     30
India                             5                 95                 28                      3                         92                   5                       3
Indonesia                         3                 97                 46                      2                         na                  na                     na
Italy                           18                  78                 69                      2                         40                  39                     na
Japan                           30                  70                 54                   10                           59                  34                     29
Netherlands                     21                  80                 70                   27                           37                  43                     20
New Zealand                     28                  72                 37                   16                           21                  21                     58
Spain                           13                  87                 58                      9                         40                  38                     22
USA                             42                  58                 32                   12                           15                  39                     46
        a                                                                                            b
Note: Other financial assets include insurance and pension plans and other accounts receivable. Housing assets are net of associated debts; liabilities exclude housing debt.


                                                                            Source: see Appendix II.




                                                                                          39
Table 4: Wealth per capita from household balance sheet and survey data, year 2000

                                               US$ per capita at PPP exchange rates                             US$ per capita at official exchange rates

                                                                 Personal                                                             Personal
                                                    Real        disposable         Real                                              disposable
                                   Wealtha          GDPb         incomec       Consumptionb           Wealtha          GDPb           incomec        Consumptionb
Household balance sheet data
Mean                                  84955         22519           13482             14240            74890           19434              11530             12239
Median                               90906          23917           12798             15197            70916           21425              11915             12708
Coefficient of variation              0.440          0.301           0.331            0.319             0.612           0.527              0.524            0.521


Highest wealth: USA                 143727          35619           25480             24313           143727           35619              25480             24313
Lowest wealth: South Africa          16266           8017            4691              5210              5977            2946              1724              1914



Survey data
Mean                                  59349         20311           12338             13072            53251           17983              10911             11588
Median                               61218          23917           12798             15197            45176           20338              11557             12708
Coefficient of variation              0.667          0.512           0.551            0.530             0.836           0.669              0.707            0.671


Highest wealth: USA                 143857          35619           25480             24313           143857           35619              25480             24313
Lowest wealth: India                   6513          2684            1916             1406               1112             458               327               240


Ratio high/low: HBS                      8.8           4.4             5.4              4.7              24.1            12.1               14.8             12.7
Ratio high/low: survey data            22.1           13.3            13.3             17.3             129.4            77.8               77.9            101.4
China/USA: survey data                 12.8            9.3            13.2             13.0              55.1            40.0               56.8             56.1

Note: aSee Appendix II for sources of HBS and survey data. Figures have been adjusted to year 2000 values using the real growth rate per capita. bSource: Penn
World Table Version 6.1. cSource: The Economist Intelligence Unit.


                                                                               40
 Table 5 Regressions of wealth components
         Independent variables                 Log wealth         Log non-financial wealth       Log financial wealth            Log liabilities
                                         (1a)           (1b)          (2a)          (2b)           (3a)          (3b)          (4a)           (4b)

Constant                               -3.031*       -2.408***     -2.919**       -1.765**      -4.237**      -4.547***      -5.726**       -3.131*
                                       (1.508)         (0.680)      (1.130)        (0.634)       (1.718)       (1.133)        (2.197)       (1.693)
Log real consumption per              0.907***        0.886***     0.580***       0.681***      0.940***      1.040***       1.241***      1.199***
capita                                 (0.182)         (0.067)      (0.159)        (0.083)       (0.201)       (0.138)        (0.273)       (0.222)
Life expectancy in 1980 (L)            0.073**        0.063***     0.103***       0.075***        0.043        0.044**       -0.058*       -0.069**
                                       (0.028)         (0.015)      (0.028)        (0.017)       (0.027)       (0.021)        (0.035)       (0.028)
Average GDP per capita growth           -0.010                       -0.048                      0.114**      0.143***        -0.086
1990-2000 (g)                          (0.050)                      (0.047)                      (0.046)       (0.036)        (0.061)
Average population growth               0.192         0.174**        0.117                        0.073                       0.343*
1990-2000 (p)                          (0.161)         (0.075)      (0.097)                      (0.166)                      (0.207)
Log population density                0.134***        0.117***     0.134***       0.117***
                                       (0.035)         (0.023)      (0.034)        (0.029)
Log market capitalization rate          0.013                                                   0.403***      0.405***
                                       (0.103)                                                   (0.096)       (0.084)
Log domestic credits                                                                                                         0.831***      0.702***
available to private sector                                                                                                   (0.179)       (0.147)
Urban population (% of total)           -0.003                                                    0.002                      0.017**        0.017**
                                       (0.007)                                                   (0.006)                      (0.008)       (0.008)
Fixed line and mobile phone             -0.002                                                    0.006                      0.021***       0.015**
subscribers (per 100 people)           (0.004)                                                   (0.005)                      (0.006)       (0.006)
Survey dummy                            -0.093                       0.061                      -1.331**      -1.639***        1.061
                                       (0.415)                      (0.251)                      (0.542)       (0.431)        (0.681)
Transition dummy                        -0.470        -0.430**     -0.537**      -0.533***        0.135                       0.719*
                                       (0.320)         (0.156)      (0.245)        (0.179)       (0.325)                      (0.402)
 2
R                                       0.990          0.989         0.981         0.978
    2
‘R ’                                                                                              0.968         0.966          0.960         0.953
RMSE                                    0.212          0.182         0.233         0.227          0.377         0.385          0.483         0.519

Sample size                               22                22         23            23            38             38            38            38
Note: The non-financial regressions use Ordinary Least Squares and a sample consisting of 19 countries with HBS data and 4 with survey data. The
financial assets and liabilities regressions use the Seemingly Unrelated Regression (SUR) method and a sample consisting of 35 countries with HBS
or financial balance sheet data and 3 with survey data. Standard errors are given in parentheses. Significance: * 10% level; ** 5% level; *** 1%
level. R2 is not a well-defined concept in generalized least squares, so as is customary the fraction of the variance in the dependent variable that is
‘explained’ in each regression is referred to as ‘R2’ here.
Sources: (a) Life expectancy in 1980, gdp growth gdp per capita growth, population growth, market capitalization rate, availability of domestic
credit, urban population and fixed line and mobile phone subscribers are from World Development Indicators 2005-2008. (b) Real consumption is
from PWT 6.1. See Alan Heston, Robert Summers and Bettina Aten, Penn World Table Version 6.1, Center for International Comparisons at the
University of Pennsylvania (CICUP), October 2002. (c) Data for Taiwan is from the National Statistical Office’s website.




                                                                            41
Table 6: Average wealth and income by region, year 2000 (PPP$)
                                         Share of world        Wealth per         Wealth per        Share of world                                            Share of world
                                          population            capita              adult              wealth          GDP per capita      GDP per adult          GDP
Region (number of countries)                  (%)                                                        (%)                                                       (%)

North America (5)                               5.2            138417              193147                 26.8             34947               48765                23.6
Latin America and Caribbean (46)                8.6              19713              34031                  6.4              7683               13262                  8.6
Europe (48)                                    12.0              62918              83336                 28.2             16444               21780                25.7
Africa (56)                                    13.4               4324               9336                  2.2              2242                 4842                 3.9
China                                          20.6              12819              19056                  9.8              3844                 5713               10.3
India                                          16.8               6718              12021                  4.2              2684                 4802                 5.9
Rich Asia-Pacific (17)                          4.0            101924              135572                 15.3             23247               30912                12.1
Other Asia-Pacific (55)                        19.5               9808             18054.                  7.2              3911                 7206               10.0
World (229)                                     100              26738              44024                 100               7675               12633                 100
World between-country Gini coeff.                                0.583               0.533                                  0.503               0.448
Note: The world between-country Gini coefficient is the Gini inequality value computed using the per capita (or adult) wealth (or income) figures for 229 countries weighted by
population size.

Source: Authors’ calculations.




                                                                                      42
 Table 7: Wealth shares for countries with wealth distribution data

                                                                              Share of lowest                                                  Share of top

Country           Year        Unit           10%      20%    25%     30%     40%    50%     60%     70%    75%     80%    90%    10%    5%     2%     1%      0.5% 0.1%

Australia         2002        household        -0.1    0.2             1.6    4.4     8.9   15.4    24.4           36.9   55.2   44.9   31.0
Canada            1999        family                                   1.0    3.0     6.0   11.0    19.0           30.0   47.0   53.0
China             2002        individual       0.7     2.8             5.8    9.6    14.4   20.6    28.9           40.7   58.6   41.4
Denmark           1996        family         -14.4 -17.3             -18.1 -18.1 -17.6 -15.8 -10.5                  1.3   23.6   76.4   56.0          28.8    22.2   11.6
Finland           1998        household        -0.9   -0.9            -0.3    2.2     7.4   15.0    25.0           38.6   57.7   42.3
France            1994        adult                                                                                       39.0   61.0                 21.3            6.3
Germany           1998        household        -0.3   -0.2             0.3    1.5     3.9     9.0   18.9           34.0   55.7   44.4
India             2002-03     household        0.2     1.0             2.5    4.8     8.1   12.9    19.8           30.1   47.1   52.9   38.3          15.7
Indonesia         1997        household        0.0     0.4             1.3    2.8     5.1     8.5   13.5           21.1   34.6   65.4   56.0          28.7
Ireland           1987        household        0.0     0.2             2.5    6.6    12.2   18.9    28.5           40.4   57.7   42.3   28.7          10.4
Italy             2000        household                                       7.0                                  36.2   51.5   48.5   36.4          17.2
Japan             1999        household        0.5     2.1             4.8    8.7    13.9   20.7    29.8           42.3   60.7   39.3
South Korea       1988        household        0.5     1.8             4.0    7.4    12.3   18.9    27.9           39.9   56.9   43.1   31.0          14.0
New Zealand       2001        econ. unit                                                                                  48.3   51.7
Norway            2000        household        0.1     0.7             2.6    5.8    10.4   16.4    24.2           34.6   49.6   50.5
Spain             2002        household                        2.1                   13.2                   34.7          58.1   41.9                 18.3    13.1    5.6
Sweden            2002        household        -5.7   -6.8            -6.9   -6.6    -4.8    -0.6    7.1           19.9   41.4   58.6
Switzerland       1997        family                                                                                      28.7   71.3   58.0          34.8    27.6   16.0
UK                2000        adult                                                   5.0                   25.0          44.0   56.0   44.0   31.0   23.0
USA               2001        family           -0.2   -0.1             0.2    1.1     2.8     5.6   10.1           17.4   30.2   69.8   57.7          32.7
Note: The data is reported as in the original sources and may contain rounding errors Source: See Appendix IIC.


                                                                                       43
Table 8: Global wealth distribution per adult in 2000, regional details based on PPP exchange rates
                                                                  Decile                                            Top              Adult        Adult
                                                                                                                                   population   population
                                   1         2      3      4        5      6           7      8      9      10%     5%      1%      (million)   share (%)
World wealth shares (%)             0.1       0.3    0.6    1.1      1.6    2.4         3.8    6.3   13.1    70.7    56.7   31.6
Minimum wealth (PPP$)               0.5      735    1837   3658    5802    8635 13022 20884 36944           89569 172236 518364



Adult population proportions by region (%)
North America                       1.5       2.8    3.9    3.5      3.9    3.8         4.8    6.0    9.1   21.7    25.5    39.1      225.7           6.1
Latin America and Caribbean       10.8        9.1    8.7    7.2      6.8    7.0         8.2    8.7    8.8    6.5     5.9     5.9      302.9           8.2
Europe                              9.1       9.2    9.7    9.8      9.7   11.9        14.3   17.8   22.2   35.2    36.5    31.4      550.6         14.9
Africa                            33.1       19.0   14.4    9.0      6.3    5.6         5.2    4.3    3.4    1.6     1.2     1.0      376.3         10.2
China                               4.3      13.0   11.8   30.5     36.9   36.9        33.5   31.5   24.1    5.3     2.3     0.0      842.1         22.8
India                             18.4       21.9   25.3   19.6     17.0   15.9        14.3   11.6    7.9    2.5     1.2     0.0      570.6         15.4
Rich Asia-Pacific                   0.2       0.6    1.2    1.4      1.9    2.2         2.7    5.4   12.8   21.1    22.7    18.9      183.3           5.0
Other Asia-Pacific                22.6       24.4   24.8   19.0     17.5   16.8        17.0   14.8   11.7    6.1     4.6     3.8      646.1         17.5
World                              100       100     100    100     100    100         100    100    100     100     100    100      3697.5          100

Source: Authors’ calculations.




                                                                                  44
Table 9: Global wealth distribution in 2000: country details based on PPP exchange rates
                                  Quintiles                        Top                                Population
                                                                                      Adult             share          Mean wealth                            Median wealth
                                                                                                                                         Wealth share
                                                                                    population                          per adult                               per adult     Gini
                     Q1      Q2     Q3        Q4   Q5      10%      5%     1%                                                                (%)
                                                                                     (million)                           (PPP$)                                  (PPP$)
                                                                                                          (%)
USA                    3.7 6.8 7.1 9.8 27.5                 19.4 23.3 36.8             202.9                5.5            201319                25.1             41682       0.801
Japan                 0.1 0.9 1.5 3.6 21.3                  14.1 15.8 12.0             100.9                2.7            157146                 9.7             93152       0.547
Germany                3.5 1.0 1.6 2.6 8.9                   7.0 8.9 3.9                64.8                1.8            115325                 4.6              39709      0.667
UK                    0.4 1.2 1.7 2.0 6.7                    5.9 5.8 6.4                43.9                1.2            172461                 4.6             77439       0.697
Italy                 0.0 0.3 0.8 2.6 8.9                    5.8 5.5 5.4                46.4                1.3            150327                 4.3              80043      0.609
China                17.3 42.3 73.8 64.9 29.4                5.3 2.3                   842.1               22.8             19056                 9.9             10411       0.550
Spain                 0.1 0.6 0.8 1.0 6.1                    3.6 3.5 1.4                32.2                0.9            117837                 2.3             72483       0.570
France                0.3 1.1 1.6 3.0 6.0                    3.5 3.9 5.9                44.4                1.2            126360                 3.4             36975       0.730
India                40.3 44.9 32.9 25.9 10.3                2.5 1.2                   570.6               15.4             12021                 4.2               4809      0.669
Canada                 0.6 0.7 0.5 1.0 3.3                   2.3 2.2 2.3                22.8                0.6            120326                 1.7             45850       0.688
Brazil                8.0 5.9 4.8 5.3 4.3                    1.8 1.6 1.4               104.2                 2.8            27559                 1.8               6046      0.784
Taiwan                0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 2.7                    1.7 1.8 1.9                15.5                0.4            143405                 1.4             62867       0.655
South Korea           0.2 0.8 1.3 2.5 4.2                    1.6 0.9 0.8                33.2                 0.9            58314                 1.2             33038       0.579
Australia             0.4 0.3 0.3 0.2 2.4                    1.6 1.7 1.3                13.7                0.4            126635                 1.1             75027       0.622
Netherlands           0.0 0.2 0.3 0.6 2.2                    1.4 1.7 1.6                12.0                0.3            159910                 1.2             71441       0.650
Mexico                3.1 2.8 2.6 3.6 3.1                    1.2 1.1 1.1                56.1                 1.5            34879                 1.2               9731      0.749
Argentina             0.8 0.9 0.9 1.4 2.4                    1.2 1.1 1.2                23.3                 0.6            71115                 1.0             20264       0.740
Russia                6.7 6.3 5.7 6.9 3.5                    1.0 0.8 0.6               107.5                 2.9            20005                 1.3               7438      0.699
Indonesia            11.1 9.5 6.3 5.1 1.7                    0.9 0.7 0.7               124.4                 3.4            13642                 1.0               3838      0.764
Turkey                2.2 2.2 2.1 2.5 2.0                    0.7 0.5 0.4                40.4                 1.1            27657                 0.7               9100      0.718
Thailand              2.0 2.1 2.0 2.6 2.2                    0.7 0.6 0.4                40.2                 1.1            30344                 0.7             10101       0.710
Pakistan              5.0 5.3 4.4 2.4 1.2                    0.4 0.3 0.2                68.0                 1.8            12390                 0.5               4643      0.698
Viet Nam              3.0 3.0 2.6 2.4 1.0                    0.3 0.2 0.1                44.0                 1.2            14613                 0.4               5684      0.682
Bangladesh            6.2 5.7 3.6 1.9 0.5                    0.1 0.1                    66.5                 1.8             7734                 0.3               3304      0.660
Nigeria              11.6 1.6 0.5 0.2 0.0                                               51.4                 1.4             1423                 0.0                434      0.736
World                 100 100 100 100 100                   100     100    100        3697.5                100             44024                100                8635      0.802
Note: Countries are listed according to the number of members of the global top wealth decile. Estimated figures in italics. Source: Authors’ calculations.


                                                                                          45
Table 10: Global wealth distribution under alternative assumptions

                                              Number of     Adult      Share of adult Wealth per   Share of                   World wealth shares
                                              countries   population    population      adult       wealth                                                       Gini
                                                                                                                          Quintile                    Top
                                                           (million)       (%)            ($)        (%)      Q1    Q2      Q3       Q4   Q5    10%   5%    1%
(1) All countries, PPP valuations                 229      3697.5             100        44024        100     0.4   1.7     4.0 10.1 83.9       70.7 56.7 31.6   0.802

(2) All countries, official exchange rates        229      3697.5             100        33995        100     0.1   0.5     1.4      4.2 93.8   85.1 70.6 40.1   0.892

   Excluding regional average imputations for:

(3) average wealth level                          148      3540.8            95.8        45047       98.0     0.4   1.7     4.0 10.1 83.8       70.7 56.5 31.6   0.801

(4) wealth distribution                           144      3596.8            97.3        44623       98.6     0.4   1.7     4.1 10.1 83.7       70.6 56.6 31.6   0.801

(5) average wealth level and distribution         129      3491.1            94.4        45494       97.6     0.4   1.7     4.1 10.1 83.7       70.6 56.5 31.5   0.801

   Countries with wealth distribution data:

(6) using reported wealth distributions            20      2171.1            58.7        56450       75.3     0.5   1.9     4.0 10.0 83.6       69.9 55.7 31.7   0.796

(7) imputing from income distributions             20      2171.1            58.7        56450       75.3     0.3   1.3     3.7 10.6 84.1       69.4 54.0 27.4   0.801
Source: Authors’ calculations.




                                                                                    46
Appendix I: Household balance sheet (HBS) data: methods

There is considerable variation between countries in how household balance sheets are constructed,
who puts them together, sectoral definition, and asset coverage. In some countries, for example
Australia, the UK, and France the balance sheets, or at least their major elements, are compiled as part
of the system of national accounts (SNA). Elsewhere, for example the USA, Canada, and Japan, they
are assembled together with flow of funds (FOF) data. In other cases central banks or national
statistical agencies issue HBS data independent of the SNA or FOF. The OECD publishes the financial
balance sheet of the household sector for its member countries (OECD 2005).1 As reflected in our
Table 1, however, fully comparable household balance sheets including non-financial assets are
available for only a subset of OECD countries.

What is important is not who delivers the HBS data, but who and what are covered, and how the data
are constructed. The objective is to estimate the balance sheet of the household sector as of a certain
date—often but not always the year-end. This can be done by trying to measure the relevant stocks, or
by updating previous stock figures by adding estimates of subsequent flows. Both stocks and flows
can be measured by direct or indirect means (Aron et al. 2008). In the direct approach data are
collected from household members through sample surveys, censuses or administrative records. In the
indirect approach the values for the household sector by asset type are calculated as residuals from
independent totals by deducting the estimated holdings of other sectors. Often the independent totals
are counterpart data, for example the liabilities of the banking sector in the form of deposits. In most
countries a mix of direct and indirect approaches is used.

In the USA, for example, most categories of financial assets and liabilities are calculated using the
indirect approach (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 2003). That is, amounts held or
owed by the other sectors are subtracted from known totals and the remainders are assumed to be the
amounts held by the household sector. For consumer credit no deductions are necessary. When micro-
data are available, assets and liability totals for the household sector are reviewed in light of that data
and sometimes adjusted accordingly. The Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), which is conducted
every three years by the Federal Reserve Board, is used for this purpose. House values and equity in
unincorporated business are estimated using the perpetual inventory method. Land values are updated
based on an index of land prices.

In the UK, financial assets are measured mostly using the residual approach based on data from banks
and other financial intermediaries. Ordinary shares are estimated with the help of a sample survey, the
Share Registers Survey, whereas unlisted company shares are estimated using the estate multiplier
method. Data on life assurance and pensions funds are obtained from returns made by insurance
companies and pension funds. The value of fixed assets is derived using a number of sources. Some of
the net capital stock estimates included in non-financial assets are calculated using the perpetual
inventory method (Aron et al. 2008). Residential housing stock estimates are compiled using property
tax records of local authorities, and farm land and buildings are estimated from data on farm sizes and
prices from the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.




                                                    47
As a final example, in Italy financial assets are also measured using the residual approach and are
based on data from banks, credit institutions, insurance companies etc. (Brandolini et al. 2004). Debts
comprise all short and long term liabilities and are estimated using the same approach. The stock of
dwellings is based on a series provided by the Italian Statistics Office given at constant rather than
market prices. The series is corrected to be expressed in market prices using a housing price series
based on information assembled in a semi-annual survey of real estate agents. Benchmark values of
the stock of dwellings and the share owned by households are obtained using census data. Apart from
housing assets, only durables are included in fixed assets. The stock of durables is computed using the
perpetual inventory method.

Non-financial coverage in the HBS data is not completely uniform. While the data for all countries
considered here include owner-occupied housing there are variations in the coverage of other real
estate and consumer durables, as reflected in Appendix IIB. It is difficult to devise a satisfactory
estimation procedure for land or investment real estate,2 so these items have not been imputed. Since
only four countries lack these items entirely, and eight countries, including the USA, have complete
data, the impact would not be substantial, although the omissions will have some effect on our results,
In contrast, it is reasonably easy to construct estimates of consumer durables, and since this improves
the non-financial asset coverage for thirteen countries, these imputations were included.3

Appendix IIB also reveals differences in sectoral definition across countries. We aimed for a
household sector which covered the assets and debts of households and unincorporated business.
However, non-profit organizations (NPOs) are sometimes grouped with households. Data for the UK
and USA allowed us to exclude NPOs. This correction is especially important for the USA, where
NPOs account for about 6 per cent of the financial assets of the household sector (Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System 2003). The USA appears to be something of an outlier in terms of the
importance of NPOs.




__________________________________
1
   Financial balance sheets for the household sector have also been published for eight countries in ‘New Europe’ by a
financial group based in Italy. See UniCredit Group (2005). The countries covered are Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, and Turkey. We were only able to obtain non-financial data for the Czech Republic,
and so it is the only one of these countries for which complete balance sheet numbers are reported in this paper.

2
  While balance sheet figures for dwellings also capture the value of land on which they stand, other land is missing for
Denmark, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, and Singapore. Investment or commercial real estate is missing for the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Portugal and Singapore, and for Italy (which covers all housing, whether owner occupied
or not, but not other real estate). To the best of our knowledge, all real estate and land owned by households is
included in the data in all other cases.
3
  Durables figures are available for Canada, the USA, Germany, Italy and South Africa. The mean ratio of durables to GDP in
Canada and the USA was used to impute durables to Australia, New Zealand, and the UK. For European countries other than
the UK, the mean ratio for Germany and Italy was used. Finally, the mean ratio for Canada, the USA, Germany, and Italy
was used for imputations for Japan and Singapore.




                                                           48
Appendix IIA: Balance sheet data sources
     Country                        Financial data                                 Non-financial data                Financial and Non-Financial Data     Link to open-access official data
                                                                                                                             combined by…
     Australia       Australian Bureau of Statistics (2005). 5204.0            Same as for financial data             Australian Bureau of Statistics            www.abs.gov.au/
                   Australian System of National Accounts Table 51
     Austria                         OECD (2005)                                           n.a.                                     n.a.
     Belgium                         OECD (2005)                                           n.a.                                     n.a.
     Bulgaria                  UniCredit Group (2005).                                     n.a.                                     n.a.
     Canada           Statistics Canada, National Balance Sheet                Same as for financial data                   Statistics Canada
                         Accounts 2000; CanSim Matrix 0751
     Croatia                   UniCredit Group (2005).                                       n.a                                   n.a.
  Czech Republic    Czech Statistical Office. Sector Accounts Times            Same as for financial data                Czech Statistical Office                http://dw.czso.cz/
                             Series. Table ST01415, 2006
    Denmark           Statistics Denmark. National Accounts and       Statistics Denmark. National Accounts and                  Authors                         www.statbank.dk/
                   Balance of Payments, Annual National Accounts        Balance of Payments, Annual National
                   ESA95, Balance Sheets for Financial Assets and     Accounts ESA95, Fixed Capital Table Nat14
                                Liabilities Table NAT10
     Estonia              Eurostat Financial Balance Sheets                                n.a.                                    n.a.                    http://epp.eurostat.cec.eu.int/
     Finland         Statistics Finland. Financial Assets, Balance       Housing stock from financial accounts                   Authors                            www.stat.fi
                     Sheets. Financial Liabilities, Balance Sheets           provided by Statistics Finland.
     France        INSEE. Comptes Nationaux Annuels - Base 2000.               Same as for financial data                         INSEE                            www.insee.fr/
                                      Table 4515
    Germany            Deutsches Bundesbank (2004). Financial          Real assets data provided by Deutsches                    Authors
                     Accounts for Germany 1991 to 2003. Special                       Bundesbank.
                         Statistical Publication. Table XI p. 86
     Greece               Eurostat Financial Balance Sheets                                n.a.                                    n.a.                    http://epp.eurostat.cec.eu.int/
     Hungary                        OECD (2005).                                           n.a.                                    n.a.
       Italy            Financial Accounts by the Bank of Italy.         Adjusted Italian Statistical Office data.   Brandolini et al. (2004), Table 2,
                                                                                                                                   p.18.




                                                                                        49
Japan          Economic Planning Agency, Government of            Same as for financial data                 Economic Planning Agency,
               Japan. Annual Report on National Accounts.                                                    Government of Japan
               Table 4
Korea          OECD (2005).                                       n.a.                                       n.a.
Latvia         Eurostat Financial Balance Sheets                  n.a.                                       n.a.                           http://epp.eurostat.cec.eu.int/
Lithuania      Eurostat Financial Balance Sheets                  n.a.                                       n.a.                           http://epp.eurostat.cec.eu.int/
Netherlands    van Els et al. (2005: Table 1 p.23)                Statistics Netherlands. Sector Accounts:   Authors                        www.cbs.nl/
                                                                  Financial Balance Sheets Table 4b.
New Zealand    Reserve Bank of New Zealand. Household             Same as for financial data                 Reserve Bank of New Zealand    www.rbnz.govt.nz/
               Financial Assets and Liabilities.
Poland         OECD (2005).                                       Yemtsov (2007).                            Authors
Portugal       Financial Accounts by the Bank of Portugal.        Housing stock estimates calculated based on Cardoso and da Cunha (2005:
                                                                  data from the Central Statistical Office and Table A1.1 p.41)
                                                                  the Bank of Portugal.
Romania        UniCredit Group (2005).                            n.a.                                       n.a.
Singapore      Singapore Department of Statistics (2003).         Same as for financial data                 Singapore Department of
                                                                                                             Statistics
Slovakia       UniCredit Group (2005).                            n.a.                                       n.a.
Slovenia       Eurostat Financial Balance Sheets                                                             n.a.
South Africa   Aron and Muellbauer (2004: Table 2 p.50)           Same as for financial data                 Aron and Muellbauer (2004)
Spain          Banco de Espana (2005). Financial Accounts of Banco de Espana. Summary indicators:            Authors                        www.bde.es/
               the Spanish Economy. Table II.5.e.            Household market indicators.
Sweden         OECD (2005).                                       n.a.                                       n.a.
Switzerland    Swiss National Bank. Swiss Financial Accounts. n.a.                                           n.a.                           www.snb.ch
               Table T11.
Taiwan         National Wealth Statistics. Statistical Tables.    Same as for financial data                 National Statistical Office    http://eng.stat.gov.tw/
               Table 7 (quoted from Central Bank Flow of
               Funds Statistics)
Turkey         UniCredit Group (2005).                            n.a.                                       n.a.
UK             National Statistics Online. Financial Statistics   United Kingdom National Accounts. Blue     Authors                        www.statistics.gov.uk/
               Time Series Data Table 12.1N.                      Book Time Series Data Table 10.10.
USA            Federal Reserve Statistical Release. Flow of       Same as for financial data                 Federal Reserve                www.federalreserve.gov/
               Funds Accounts of the United States. Release
               Z. I, June 9, 2005. Table B.100.




                                                                                    50
Appendix IIB: Comparison of full household balance sheets

                                                                                       Consumer
Country              Sector definition                       Non-housing real assets   durables

Australia            households                              yes                       imputed

Canada               households + NPOs                       yes                       yes

Czech Republic       households                              yes                       imputed

Denmark              households + NPOs                       yes                       imputed

Finland              households                              no                        imputed

France               households + NPOs                       yes                       imputed

Germany              households                              yes                       yes

Italy                households                              yes (only durables)       yes

Japan                households                              yes                       imputed

Netherlands          households + NPOs                       no                        imputed

New Zealand          households                              yes (only land)           imputed

Poland               households                              no                        imputed

Portugal             households + NPOs                       yes (only land)           imputed

Singapore            households                              no                        imputed

South Africa         households + NPOs                       yes                       yes

Spain                households + NPOs                       yes (only real estate)    imputed

Taiwan               households                              yes                       yes

UK                   households (corrected for NPOs)         yes                       imputed

USA                  households (corrected for NPOs)         yes                       yes

Note: NPOs are non-profit institutions serving households.




                                                        51
       Australia    2002                Household Income, and Labour Dynamics; See Headey, et al (2005).

       Canada       1999                     Survey of Financial Security; see Statistics Canada (2001).

        China       2002                 China Academy of Social Science Survey; see Li and Zhao (2008).

       Denmark      1996   Wealth tax records; see Statistics Denmark (1998) and Ohlson et al. (2006). Supplemented with
                                               private communication with Statistics Denmark in 2007.

        Finland     1998                      Household Wealth Survey; see Statistics Finland (2000).

        France      1994                             Estate tax returns; see Piketty et al (2004).

       Germany      1998               Einkommens und verbrauchstichprobe; see Ammermüller et al. (2005).

         India      2002        All-India Debt and Investment Survey (NSS 59th round); see National Sample Survey
                                             Organization (2005), and Subramanian and Jayaraj (2008).

      Indonesia     1997           Indonesia Family Life Survey (own calculations); www.rand.org/labor/FLS/IFLS/

        Ireland     1987     The survey of Income Distribution, Poverty and Usage of State Services; see Nolan (1991).

         Italy      2000               Survey of Household Income and Wealth; see Brandolini et al. (2004).

        Japan       1999       National Survey of Family Income and Expenditure; see Japan Statistics Bureau (2005).

        Korea       1988                  Korea Development Institute Survey; see Leipziger et al. (1992).

        Mexico      2002    Encuesta Nacional sobre Niveles de Vida de los Hogares; see Jäntti and Sierminska (2007).

     New Zealand    2001                   Household Saving Survey; see Statistics New Zealand (2002).

       Norway       2000               Income and Property Distribution Survey; see Statistics Norway (2005).

        Spain       2002    Survey of Household Finances; see Banco de Espana (2005) and Alvaredo and Saez (2006).

       Sweden       2002        Wealth statistics based on registers of total population; see Statistics Sweden (2004).

      Switzerland   1997                 Survey based on county wealth tax statistics; see Dell et al. (2005).

          UK        2000                  Inland Revenue Statistics; see Inland Revenue Statistics (2005).

         USA        2001                     Survey of Consumer Finances 2001; see Kennickel (2006).


Appendix IIC: Survey sources




                                                    52
Appendix III: Wealth per capita from household balance sheet and survey data, 2000
                               a                  a
                       Wealth,             Wealth, survey                 b         Personal
                                                                    GDP                         c   Real consumption
       Country          HBS                     data                           disposable income

                                   US$ per capita at PPP exchange rates

       Australia       90906                 101597                27193           15983                18913
       Canada          89252                  72384                28731           17661                15994
        China                                 11267                3844             1934                1870
    Czech Republic     32431                                       14844            8205                10008
      Denmark          66191                                       28539           12348                17951
       Finland         53154                  38754                24416           11285                15197
       France          94557                                       23614           14732                15672
      Germany          90768                  55431                23917           15486                16603
        India                                 6513                 2684             1916                1406
      Indonesia                               7973                 4035             2603                2614
         Italy        120897                  74956                22876           15169                14195
        Japan         124858                  91856                25924           15496                15975
     Netherlands      121165                  43866                25759           12798                16159
     New Zealand       55823                  61872                20008           12034                13534
       Poland          24654                                       9661             7083                6493
       Portugal        53811                                       17089           11700                10380
      Singapore       113631                                       28644           14885                9965
     South Africa      16266                                       8017             4691                5210
        Spain          93086                  61218                19037           12544                13160
       Taiwan         100009                                       19714           11471                12603
         UK           128959                                       24252           17102                18238
         USA          143727                 143857                35619           25480                24313

                                   US$ per capita at official exchange rates

       Australia       67990                  75986                20338           11954                14145
       Canada          70916                  57513                22828           14032                12708
        China                                 2613                  891              448                 434
    Czech Republic     10797                                       4942             2732                3332
      Denmark          70751                                       30505           13198                19188
       Finland         50984                  37171                23419           10824                14576
       France          85794                                       21425           13367                14220
      Germany          86369                  52744                22758           14735                15799
        India                                 1112                  458              327                 240
      Indonesia                               1440                  729              470                 472
         Italy         98317                  60957                18604           12336                11544
        Japan         180837                 133038                37547           22443                23137
     Netherlands      109418                  39613                23261           11557                14592
     New Zealand       37026                  41038                13271            7982                8976
       Poland          10438                                       4090             2999                2749
       Portugal        33421                                       10614            7267                6447
      Singapore        90960                                       22929           11915                7977
     South Africa      5977                                        2946             1724                1914
        Spain          68693                  45176                14048            9257                9711
       Taiwan          73654                                       14519            8448                9282
         UK           126832                                       23852           16820                17937
         USA          143727                 143857                35619           25480                24313




                                                         53
Notes and source: aSource for HBS data: flow of funds data, national balance sheets and financial balance sheets
augmented with estimates of housing assets. The original survey data are close to year 2000. Figures have been
                                                                    b                               c
adjusted to year 2000 values using the real growth rate per capita. Source: Penn World Table 6.1. Source: The
Economist Intelligence Unit.




                                                        54
Appendix IV: Regressions of wealth components

                                                                     Log non-financial
Independent variables                      Log wealth                                           Log financial wealth           Log liabilities
                                                                          wealth

                                        (1a)            (1b)         (2a)         (2b)          (3a)           (3b)          (4a)          (4b)
                                                                                                                              -
Constant                               -1.620       -1.496***     -2.349**     -1.845***      -4.173**      -5.003***                   -4.713***
                                                                                                                          6.318***
                                       (1.159)        (0.395)      (0.998)       (0.519)       (1.681)       (1.081)       (1.964)       (1.506)
Log personal disposable               0.910***       0.946***     0.679***      0.733***      1.073***      1.163***      1.305***      1.358***
income per capita                      (0.134)        (0.054)      (0.141)       (0.072)       (0.204)       (0.145)       (0.251)       (0.208)
Life expectancy in 1980 (L)            0.049*        0.047***     0.085***      0.072***       0.035         0.036*         -0.047      -0.072***
                                       (0.023)        (0.010)      (0.025)       (0.014)       (0.027)       (0.021)       (0.032)       (0.024)
Average GDP per capita                  0.004                      -0.033                    0.135***       0.136***        -0.072
growth 1990-2000 (g)                   (0.040)                     (0.040)                    (0.047)        (0.038)       (0.057)
Average population growth               0.007                       0.018                      -0.045                       0.250
1990-2000 (p)                          (0.131)                     (0.090)                     (0.175)                     (0.199)
Log population density                0.089**        0.087***     0.107***      0.093***
                                       (0.029)        (0.018)      (0.031)       (0.024)
Log market capitalization rate          0.052                                                0.377***       0.399***
                                       (0.082)                                                (0.098)        (0.087)
Log domestic credits                                                                                                      0.884***      0.897***
available to private sector                                                                                                (0.161)       (0.139)
Urban population (% of total)           0.001                                                  0.000                       0.015*        0.016**
                                       (0.005)                                                (0.008)                      (0.008)       (0.007)
Fixed line and mobile phone            -0.001                                                  0.001                       0.015**       0.011**
subscribers (per 100 people)           (0.003)                                                 (0.005)                     (0.005)       (0.005)
Survey dummy                           -0.067                       0.096                    -1.617***      -1.465***       0.576
                                       (0.328)                     (0.214)                    (0.517)        (0.415)       (0.596)
Transition dummy                       -0.458*      -0.486***     -0.498**     -0.464***       -0.203                       0.152
                                       (0.251)        (0.113)      (0.207)       (0.151)       (0.359)                     (0.411)
R2                                      0.994         0.993         0.986        0.978
‘R2’                                                                                           0.973          0.972         0.971         0.968
RMSE                                    0.168         0.141         0.200        0.227         0.360          0.363         0.424         0.440
Sample size                              22             22           23            23            33            33             33            33
Note: The non-financial regressions use Ordinary Least Squares and a sample consisting of 19 countries with HBS data and 4 with survey data.
The financial assets and liabilities regressions use the Seemingly Unrelated Regression (SUR) method and a sample consisting of 35 countries with
HBS or financial balance sheet data and 3 with survey data. Standard errors are given in parentheses. Significance: * 10% level; ** 5% level; ***
1% level. R2 is not a well-defined concept in generalized least squares, so as is customary the fraction of the variance in the dependent variable
that is ‘explained’ in each regression is referred to as ‘R2’ here.
Sources: (a) Life expectancy in 1980, gdp growth gdp per capita growth, population growth, market capitalization rate, availability of domestic
credit, urban population and fixed line and mobile phone subscribers are from World Development Indicators 2005-2008. b) Personal disposable
income is from the EIU. See The Economist Intelligence Unit (2005). (c) Data for Taiwan is from the National Statistical Office’s website.




                                                                       55
Appendix V: Population, wealth and GDP by country, 2000
                                                                                   PPP$                                      US$ at official exchange rates
                                           Share of   Share of                       Share of                                        Share of
                                            world      adult                          world          Share of                         world          Share of
                   population   adults    population population Wealth      Wealth    wealth GDP per  world      Wealth     Wealth    wealth GDP per  world     Wealth
                     (000s)     (000s)       (%)        (%)     per capita per adult   (%)    capita GDP (%)    per capita per adult   (%)    capita GDP (%)     Gini
North America
Canada                30689      22764      0.50       0.62     89252    120326     1.68      28731   1.89      70916   95606       1.73     22828     2.18     0.688
USA                  284154     202865      4.67       5.49    143727    201319    25.10      35619   21.67     143727 201319       32.51    35619     31.47    0.801
Europe
Albania                3062        1851     0.05       0.05     12444  20591           0.02    3658   0.02        3737     6184     0.01      1099      0.01    0.642
Austria                8096        6271     0.13       0.17     76234  98418           0.38   24836   0.43       71408    92189     0.46     23264      0.59    0.646
Belarus               10029        7335     0.17       0.20     21507  29408           0.13    8738   0.19        2503     3422     0.02     1017       0.03    0.628
Belgium               10304        7896     0.17       0.21    120977 157868           0.77   25008   0.55      107950   140868     0.89     22315      0.72    0.662
Bulgaria               7997        6192     0.13       0.17     18805  24286           0.09    6356   0.11        4340     5605     0.03     1467       0.04    0.652
Croatia                4505        3430     0.07       0.09     18925  24859           0.05    9547   0.09        8620    11323     0.03     4349       0.06    0.654
Czech Rep.            10267        7889     0.17       0.21     32431  42205           0.21   14844   0.33       10797    14051     0.09      4942      0.16    0.626
Denmark                5340        4072     0.09       0.11     66191  86807           0.22   28539   0.33       70751    92787     0.30     30505      0.51    0.808
Estonia                1367        1016     0.02       0.03     22859  30740           0.02   10873   0.03        7301     9819     0.01      3473      0.02    0.675
Finland                5177        3905     0.09       0.11     53154  70461           0.17   24416   0.27       50984    67584     0.21     23419      0.38    0.615
France                59278       44358     0.97       1.20     94557 126360           3.45   23614   3.00       85794   114650     4.05     21425      3.95    0.730
Germany               82344       64810     1.35       1.75     90768 115325           4.59   23917   4.22       86369   109735     5.66     22758      5.83    0.667
Greece                10975        8568     0.18       0.23     78161 100117           0.53   15558   0.37       53921    69068     0.47     10733      0.37    0.654
Hungary               10226        7834     0.17       0.21     24751  32308           0.16   11063   0.24       10343    13500     0.08      4623      0.15    0.651
Iceland                 281         194     0.01       0.01     50784  73400           0.01   26929   0.02       57447    83030     0.01     30461      0.03    0.664
Ireland                3801        2646     0.06       0.07    136680 196376           0.32   27197   0.22      126318   181489     0.38     25135      0.30    0.581
Italy                 57715       46416     0.95       1.26    120897 150327           4.29   22876   2.83       98317   122250     4.52     18604      3.34    0.609
Latvia                 2373        1770     0.04       0.05     15935  21369           0.02    8305   0.04        5780     7751     0.01      3013      0.02    0.670
Lithuania              3500        2548     0.06       0.07     19703  27067           0.04    8397   0.06        7192     9879     0.02      3065      0.03    0.666
Luxembourg              435         328     0.01       0.01    173137 229451           0.05   48968   0.05      151765   201127     0.05     42923      0.06    0.650
Macedonia              2010        1398     0.03       0.04     14484  20819           0.02    5506   0.02        4613     6631     0.01      1754      0.01    0.661
Malta                   392         284     0.01       0.01    105038 145031           0.03   18256   0.02       56161    77544     0.02      9761      0.01    0.664
Moldova                4275        2894     0.07       0.08      8704  12858           0.02    2212   0.02        1183     1748     0.00       301      0.00    0.691


                                                                                  56
Netherlands            15898    12046   0.26    0.33    121165 159910          1.18   25759   0.88    109418   144406   1.38    23261   1.15    0.650
Norway                  4502     3337   0.07    0.09     90843 122553          0.25   32057   0.31    102074   137704   0.37    36021   0.50    0.633
Poland                 38649    27858   0.64    0.75     24654  34204          0.59    9661   0.80     10438    14481   0.32     4090   0.49    0.657
Portugal               10225     7878   0.17    0.21     53811  69840          0.34   17089   0.37     33421    43377   0.27    10614   0.34    0.667
Romania                22117    16431   0.36    0.44     13642  18362          0.19    5024   0.24      4436     5971   0.08     1634   0.11    0.651
Russia                146560   107493   2.41    2.91     14672  20005          1.32    9996   3.14      2530     3449   0.30    1723    0.79    0.699
Slovakia                5400     3900   0.09    0.11     27201  37662          0.09   12619   0.15      7693    10652   0.03     3569   0.06    0.629
Slovenia                1967     1521   0.03    0.04     31127  40248          0.04   16983   0.07     16733    21636   0.03    9130    0.06    0.626
Spain                  40717    32165   0.67    0.87     93086 117837          2.33   19037   1.66     68693    86958   2.23    14048   1.78    0.570
Sweden                  8877     6735   0.15    0.18     73570  96961          0.40   24628   0.47     77085   101594   0.55    25805   0.71    0.742
Switzerland             7167     5497   0.12    0.15    140346 182992          0.62   28209   0.43    166208   216712   0.95    33407   0.74    0.803
Ukraine                49116    36573   0.81    0.99     14010  18815          0.42    5147   0.54      1751     2352   0.07      643   0.10    0.667
UK                     58670    43871   0.96    1.19    128959 172461          4.65   24252   3.05    126832   169617   5.92    23852   4.35    0.697
Rich Asia Pacific
Australia              19071    13690   0.31    0.37     90906   126635        1.07   27193   1.11     67990    94712    1.03   20338    1.21   0.622
Hong Kong               6637     5085   0.11    0.14    175191   228675        0.72   27893   0.40    150206   196062   0.79    23915   0.49    0.740
Israel                  6084     3836   0.10    0.10     72009   114210        0.27   19148   0.25     66581   105601   0.32    17705   0.34    0.677
Japan                 127034   100933   2.09    2.73    124858   157146        9.75   25924   7.05    180837   227600   18.28   37547   14.83   0.547
Korea                  46779    33242   0.77    0.90     41439    58314        1.19   14937   1.50     26832    37758    1.00    9671    1.41   0.579
Macao                    444      310   0.01    0.01     86672   124280        0.02   23118   0.02     53131    76186    0.02   14172    0.02   0.580
New Zealand             3818     2678   0.06    0.07     55823    79585        0.13   20008   0.16     37026    52786    0.11   13271    0.16   0.651
Singapore               4017     2890   0.07    0.08    113632   157942        0.28   28644   0.25     90960   126429    0.29   22929    0.29   0.689
Taiwan                 22191    15476   0.37    0.42    100009   143405        1.36   19714   0.94     73654   105613    1.30   14519    1.00   0.655
China and India
China                1251788   842063   20.57   22.77   12819    19056         9.86   3844    10.30    2973     4420    2.96     891    3.47    0.550
India                1021084   570595   16.78   15.43   6718     12021         4.22   2684    5.87     1146     2052    0.93     458    1.45    0.669
Other Asia Pacific
Armenia                3082      1986   0.05    0.05    14921    23155         0.03   3068    0.02     2420     3755    0.01     498    0.01    0.684
Azerbaijan             8143      4816   0.13    0.13    9109     15402         0.05   3555    0.06     1677     2836    0.01     654    0.02    0.678
Bangladesh           128916     66483   2.12    1.80     3988     7734         0.32   1772    0.49      780     1513    0.08     347    0.14    0.660
Cambodia              12744      5847   0.21    0.16     2089     4553         0.02   1859    0.05      322      703    0.00     287    0.01    0.714
Fiji                    811       453   0.01    0.01    12110    21669         0.01   4950    0.01     4988     8924    0.00    2039    0.01    0.709
Georgia                4720      3326   0.08    0.09    30286    42976         0.09   5315    0.05     3372     4784    0.01     592    0.01    0.725
Indonesia            209174    124446   3.44    3.37    8116     13642         1.04   4035    1.81     1466     2464    0.24    729     0.47    0.764

                                                                          57
Iran                      66365    34053    1.09   0.92   12051    23486         0.49    7202   1.02    7971   15534   0.42   4764    0.98   0.707
Jordan                      4972    2474    0.08   0.07   12020    24154         0.04    4282   0.05    4747    9539   0.02   1691    0.03   0.678
Kazakhstan                15033     9507    0.25   0.26   13256    20961         0.12    8331   0.27    1967    3110   0.02   1236    0.06   0.655
Kyrgyzstan                  4952    2706    0.08   0.07    7984    14612         0.02    3205   0.03     668    1222   0.00    268    0.00   0.680
Lebanon                     3398    2024    0.06   0.06   27438    46070         0.06    6089   0.04   17148   28793   0.05   3806    0.04   0.762
Malaysia                  22997    12944    0.38   0.35   23239    41288         0.33    9422   0.46    9479   16841   0.17   3843    0.28   0.733
Pakistan                 142648    67968    2.34   1.84    5904    12390         0.52    2158   0.66    1176   2469    0.13    430    0.19   0.698
Papua N. Guinea             5299    2544    0.09   0.07    2477    5159          0.01    2326   0.03     687    1432   0.00    645    0.01   0.738
Philippines               75766    39206    1.25   1.06   14780    28562         0.69    4065   0.66    3682    7116   0.22   1013    0.24   0.717
Saudi Arabia              21484    10992    0.35   0.30   14355    28056         0.19   12374   0.57   10175   19887   0.17   8771    0.59   0.737
Sri Lanka                 19848    12689    0.33   0.34   21634    33839         0.26    3841   0.16    4745    7422   0.08    842    0.05   0.665
Syria                     16813     7920    0.28   0.21    7337    15576         0.08    4338   0.16    8386   17803   0.11   4958    0.26   0.704
Tajikistan                  6159    2866    0.10   0.08    4106     8823         0.02    1380   0.02     415     892   0.00    140    0.00   0.664
Thailand                  61438    40160    1.01   1.09   19835    30344         0.75    6715   0.88    5875    8987   0.29   1989    0.38   0.710
Turkey                    68234    40391    1.12   1.09   16372    27657         0.69    7414   1.08    6605   11158   0.36   2991    0.64   0.718
Viet Nam                  78671    44025    1.29   1.19    8178    14613         0.40    2012   0.34    1614    2884   0.10    397    0.10   0.682
Yemen                     17937     7209    0.30   0.20    892     2219          0.01    1293   0.05     336    836    0.01    487    0.03   0.613
Latin America and Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda           77       52   0.00   0.00   30683    45291         0.00   18007   0.00   17274   25497   0.00   10137   0.00   0.747
Argentina                 36896     23307   0.61   0.63    44923    71115        1.02   11729   0.93   29664   46959   0.87   7745    0.89   0.740
Barbados                     266      190   0.00   0.01   107153   150298        0.02   17526   0.01   60006   84167   0.01    9815   0.01   0.706
Belize                       242      119   0.00   0.00    20327    41213        0.00    7170   0.00    9655   19576   0.00   3406    0.00   0.763
Bolivia                     8317     4171   0.14   0.11     4110    8196         0.02    2934   0.05    1396    2784   0.01     996   0.03   0.762
Brazil                   173858    104213   2.86   2.82    16519    27559        1.77    7745   2.88    7492   12498   1.04   3512    1.90   0.784
Chile                     15412      9809   0.25   0.27    45329    71221        0.43   10389   0.34   20222   31773   0.25    4635   0.22   0.777
Colombia                  42120     24197   0.69   0.65    18000    31334        0.47    5796   0.52    5957   10370   0.20   1918    0.25   0.765
Costa Rica                  3929     2284   0.07   0.06    26554    45681        0.06    5873   0.05   18825   32386   0.06    4164   0.05   0.732
Dominica                      78       46   0.00   0.00    23372    39513        0.00    8284   0.00   10474   17708   0.00    3712   0.00   0.763
Dominican Rep.              8265     4462   0.14   0.12    14223    26344        0.07    5654   0.10    5918   10961   0.04    2352   0.06   0.723
Ecuador                   12306      6770   0.20   0.18     9411    17108        0.07    3720   0.10    2717    4940   0.03    1074   0.04   0.760
El Salvador                 6280     3389   0.10   0.09    12150    22517        0.05    4622   0.06    5551   10288   0.03   2112    0.04   0.746
Guatemala                 11166      4986   0.18   0.14     8911    19957        0.06    4335   0.10    3444    7712   0.03    1675   0.06   0.779
Guyana                       744      433   0.01   0.01     6995    12021        0.00    4072   0.01    1645    2828   0.00     958   0.00   0.707
Haiti                       7939     3745   0.13   0.10     3800     8056        0.02    1798   0.03     984    2086   0.01     466   0.01   0.755

                                                                            58
Honduras                  6424    3025   0.11   0.08    5572    11833        0.02    2164   0.03    2377    5048   0.01    923    0.02   0.743
Jamaica                   2585    1478   0.04   0.04   16457    28775        0.03    3464   0.02   13528   23653   0.03   2848    0.02   0.686
Mexico                  100088   56132   1.65   1.52   19561    34879        1.20    9711   2.08   11895   21210   0.95   5905    1.84   0.749
Nicaragua                 4959    2279   0.08   0.06    5781    12577        0.02    1947   0.02    1404    3054   0.01     473   0.01   0.755
Panama                    2950    1731   0.05   0.05   25776    43935        0.05    6650   0.04   13404   22846   0.03    3458   0.03   0.766
Paraguay                  5470    2703   0.09   0.07   16335    33058        0.06    4801   0.06    4654    9418   0.02    1368   0.02   0.766
Peru                     25952   14348   0.43   0.39   10245    18531        0.16    4799   0.27    4462    8071   0.09    2090   0.17   0.738
Puerto Rico               3835    2609   0.06   0.07   85219   125269        0.20   22242   0.18   61293   90098   0.19   15998   0.19   0.753
St Kitts and Nevis          40      24   0.00   0.00   18919    31985        0.00   14627   0.00    9880   16703   0.00   7639    0.00   0.763
St Lucia                   154      89   0.00   0.00   23519    40644        0.00    6823   0.00   15593   26945   0.00   4523    0.00   0.763
St Vincent-Grenadines      116      64   0.00   0.00   17556   31620         0.00   7847    0.00   6502    11711   0.00   2906    0.00   0.741
Trinidad and Tobago       1285     817   0.02   0.02   59612    93754        0.05   13721   0.04   26116   41075   0.03   6011    0.02   0.689
Uruguay                   3342    2259   0.06   0.06   26344    38973        0.05   10285   0.07   15393   22773   0.04   6009    0.06   0.708
Venezuela                24418   13707   0.40   0.37   17155    30560        0.26    7232   0.38   11845   21100   0.23   4994    0.38   0.712
Africa
Algeria                 30463    16353   0.50   0.44    7308   13613         0.14    6107   0.40   2098     3909   0.05   1754    0.17   0.670
Benin                    7197     3112   0.12   0.08    2216    5124         0.01    1225   0.02    624     1444   0.00    345    0.01   0.713
Botswana                 1754      851   0.03   0.02   14266   29407         0.02    7703   0.03   5545    11429   0.01   2994    0.02   0.751
Burkina Faso            11292     4591   0.19   0.12   1479    3637          0.01     986   0.02    292     718    0.00    195    0.01   0.728
Burundi                  6486     2607   0.11   0.07    1437    3575         0.01     619   0.01    251      624   0.00    108    0.00   0.699
Cameroon                14856     6819   0.24   0.18    3400   7407          0.03    2301   0.07    814     1773   0.01    551    0.03   0.711
Cape Verde                451      202   0.01   0.01   11001   24589         0.00    4299   0.00   3239    7240    0.00   1266    0.00   0.688
Central African Rep.     3777     1738   0.06   0.05    1276   2774          0.00    1148   0.01   280      609    0.00    252    0.00   0.782
Chad                     8216     3501   0.14   0.10    1337    3138         0.01     959   0.02    255     598    0.00    183    0.01   0.681
Comoros                   699      315   0.01   0.01    3474   7702          0.00    1823   0.00    689    1529    0.00    362    0.00   0.711
Congo Dem. Rep.         50052    21050   0.82   0.57   1288    3062          0.04     669   0.07    166     394    0.01     86    0.01   0.711
Congo Rep.               3438     1468   0.06   0.04    2570   6021          0.01    2533   0.02   1037    2428    0.00   1022    0.01   0.711
Côte d'Ivoire           16735     7529   0.28   0.20    3936   8749          0.04    2028   0.07   1137     2527   0.02    586    0.03   0.712
Egypt                   67285    35550   1.11   0.96   10146   19203         0.42    4406   0.64   3507     6637   0.19   1523    0.32   0.689
Equatorial Guinea         449      206   0.01   0.01   3026    6584          0.00   10302   0.01    863     1877   0.00   2938    0.00   0.688
Ethiopia                68525    30020   1.13   0.81   1053    2404          0.04    720    0.11   144      328    0.01     98    0.02   0.652
Gabon                    1272      603   0.02   0.02    6315   13318         0.01    7780   0.02   3254    6861    0.00   4008    0.02   0.784
Gambia                   1316      643   0.02   0.02   1650    3374          0.00   1329    0.00   401      821    0.00   323     0.00   0.723
Ghana                   19867     9418   0.33   0.26    3776   7965          0.05    1376   0.06    709     1495   0.01    258    0.02   0.692

                                                                        59
Guinea               8434      3876    0.14     0.11     2626    5715      0.01     2961    0.05      361    785     0.00     407    0.01    0.693
Guinea-Bissau        1366       588    0.02     0.02     603     1400      0.00      738    0.00     147     342     0.00    180     0.00    0.710
Kenya               30689     13409    0.50     0.36     4203     9619     0.08     1316    0.09     1106    2532    0.03     346    0.03    0.699
Lesotho              1788       825    0.03     0.02     2606    5649      0.00     1492    0.01     770    1669     0.00    441     0.00    0.767
Madagascar          16195      7260    0.27     0.20     1397    3116      0.01      877    0.03     398     887     0.01    249     0.01    0.722
Malawi              11512      4970    0.19     0.13     1537    3561      0.01      808    0.02      313     725    0.00     165    0.01    0.736
Mali                11647      4691    0.19     0.13      874    2170      0.01      996    0.03      186    462     0.00     212    0.01    0.750
Mauritania           2645      1225    0.04     0.03     3370    7279      0.01     1729    0.01     796    1720     0.00     409    0.00    0.686
Mauritius            1186       779    0.02     0.02    70234   106929     0.05    14406    0.04    18007   27415    0.02    3693    0.01    0.661
Morocco             29231     16167    0.48     0.44    10805    19535     0.19     4299    0.27     2929    5295    0.07    1165    0.11    0.690
Mozambique          17911      8088    0.29     0.22     1224    2711      0.01     1113    0.04      237    524     0.00     215    0.01    0.689
Namibia              1894       874    0.03     0.02     7384    15998     0.01     6058    0.03     2196    4759    0.00    1802    0.01    0.847
Niger               11782      4758    0.19     0.13      849     2101     0.01      902    0.02      159    393     0.00     169    0.01    0.729
Nigeria            117608     51431    1.93     1.39     622     1423      0.05     826     0.21     244     559     0.02    325     0.12    0.736
Rwanda               8025      3250    0.13     0.09     1686     4163     0.01      976    0.02      364     900    0.00     211    0.01    0.714
Senegal             10343      4547    0.17     0.12     2795     6357     0.02     1681    0.04      762    1734    0.01     459    0.02    0.697
Seychelles             77        43    0.00     0.00    28111    50598     0.00    11644    0.00    18252   32853    0.00    7561    0.00    0.760
Sierra Leone         4509      2136    0.07     0.06      738     1558     0.00      734    0.01      128    269     0.00     127    0.00    0.687
South Africa        45610     25480    0.75     0.69    16266    29118     0.46     8017    0.78     5977   10699    0.22    2946    0.42    0.763
Swaziland            1023       444    0.02     0.01     6789    15636     0.00     5047    0.01     1732    3988    0.00    1287    0.00    0.780
Tanzania            34763     15569    0.57     0.42      932    2080      0.02      490    0.04      509    1137    0.01     268    0.03    0.676
Togo                 5364      2379    0.09     0.06     2314     5219     0.01      926    0.01      674    1519    0.00     270    0.00    0.711
Tunisia              9563      5638    0.16     0.15    21716    36836     0.13     7130    0.15     6179   10481    0.05    2029    0.06    0.693
Uganda              24309      9370    0.40     0.25     2207     5726     0.03     1030    0.05      551    1429    0.01     257    0.02    0.723
Zambia              10702      4517    0.18     0.12     1550     3672     0.01      841    0.02      577    1366    0.01     313    0.01    0.766
Zimbabwe            12595      5631    0.21     0.15     7695    17212     0.06     2607    0.07     1642   3674     0.02     556    0.02    0.845
Other countries    294154    156876    4.83     4.24                       1.98             2.09                     1.39            1.47
World             6085576   3697511   100.00   100.00   26738   44024     100.00   7675    100.00   20646   33981   100.00   5285   100.00   0.804




                                                                         60
