                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE AGGLOMERATION OF US ETHNIC INVENTORS

                                           William Kerr

                                       Working Paper 15501
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15501


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2009




Comments are appreciated and can be sent to wkerr@hbs.edu. I am grateful to William Lincoln and
Debbie Strumsky for data assistance. I thank Ed Glaeser, Jeff Furman, and participants in the NBER
Economics of Agglomeration conferences for helpful comments and research ideas. This research
is supported by Harvard Business School, the National Science Foundation, the Innovation Policy
and the Economy Group, and the MIT George Schultz Fund. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by William Kerr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Agglomeration of US Ethnic Inventors
William Kerr
NBER Working Paper No. 15501
November 2009
JEL No. F15,F22,J44,J61,O31

                                            ABSTRACT

The ethnic composition of US inventors is undergoing a significant transformation, with deep impacts
for the overall agglomeration of US innovation. This study applies an ethnic-name database to individual
US patent records to explore these trends with greater detail. The contributions of Chinese and Indian
scientists and engineers to US technology formation increase dramatically in the 1990s. At the same
time, these ethnic inventors became more spatially concentrated across US cities. The combination
of these two factors helps stop and reverse long-term declines in overall inventor agglomeration evident
in the 1970s and 1980s. The heightened ethnic agglomeration is particularly evident in industry patents
for high-tech sectors, and similar trends are not found in institutions constrained from agglomerating
(e.g., universities, government).


William Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu
1     Introduction

Economists have long been interested in agglomeration and innovation. In his seminal outline of
the core rationales for industrial clusters, Marshall (1920) emphasized the theory of intellectual
spillovers by arguing that in agglomerations, "the mysteries of the trade become no mystery,
but are, as it were, in the air." Workers can learn skills quickly from each other in an industrial
cluster, and this proximity can speed the adoption of new technologies or best practices. Glaeser
and Kahn (2001) argue that the urbanization of high human-capital industries, like …nance, is
evidence for the role that density plays in the transfer of ideas, and studies of patent citations
highlight the importance of local proximity for scienti…c exchanges (e.g., Ja¤e et al. 1992,
Thompson and Fox-Kean 2006). Moreover, evidence suggests that agglomeration increases the
rate of innovation itself. Saxenian (1994) describes how entrepreneurial …rms locate near one
another in Silicon Valley to foster new technology development. Carlino et al. (2006) show that
higher urban employment density is correlated with greater patenting per capita within cities.

    Strong quantitative assessments of the magnitudes and characteristics of intellectual spillovers
and agglomeration are essential. Such studies inform business managers of the advantages and
costs for locating in areas that are rich in ideas but most likely come with higher rents and
wages as well. Moreover, these studies are important for understanding short-run and long-run
urban growth and development. They help inform whether industrial specialization or diversity
better foster regional development (e.g., Jacobs 1970, Glaeser et al. 1992, Henderson et al.
1995, Duranton and Puga 2001, Duranton 2007) and the role of local knowledge development
and externalities in generating sustained growth (e.g., Romer 1986, 1990, Furman et al. 2002).
Rosenthal and Strange (2003) note that intellectual spillovers are strongest at the very local
levels of proximity.1

   This study contributes to our empirical understanding of agglomeration and innovation by
documenting patterns in the city-level agglomeration of ethnic inventors (e.g., Chinese, Indian)
within the US from 1975 through 2007. The contributions of these immigrant groups to US
technology formation are staggering: while foreign-born account for just over 10% of the US
working population, they represent 25% of the US science and engineering (SE) workforce and
nearly 50% of those with doctorates. Even looking within the Ph.D. level, ethnic researchers
make exceptional contributions to science as measured by Nobel Prizes, elections to the National
Academy of Sciences, patent citation counts, and so on.2 Recent work relates immigration and
growth in US invention (e.g., Peri 2007, Hunt 2008, Kerr and Lincoln 2008). Moreover, ethnic
   1
     Several studies assess the relative importance of intellectual spillovers versus other rationales for industrial
agglomeration (e.g., lower transportation costs, labor market pooling). Representative papers include Audretsch
and Feldman (1996), Rosenthal and Strange (2001), Henderson (2003), Ellison et al. (2007), and Glaeser and
Kerr (2008). Porter (1990) emphasizes how vertically related industries may co-locate for knowledge sharing.
   2
     For example, Stephan and Levin (2001), Burton and Wang (1999), Johnson (1998, 2001), and Streeter (1997).

                                                         1
entrepreneurs are very active in commercializing new technologies, especially in high-tech sectors
(e.g., Saxenian 2002a, Wadhwa et al. 2007).

    The spatial distribution of ethnic inventors across US cities, however, is not uniform or
random. This agglomeration re‡ects the general tendency of both high-skilled and low-skilled
immigrants to concentrate in certain US cities. Larger cities are often favored for their greater
opportunities for assimilation. Geographical distances of cities to home countries and past
immigration networks are also important for location decisions. Edin et al. (2003) and Pedace
and Rohn (2008) provide recent evidence on the employment e¤ects of enclaves at both the
city and sub-city levels. A number of studies in labor economics use spatial di¤erences across
cities and occupations in immigrant shares to estimate the impact of higher immigration rates
on native workers (e.g., Card 1990, 2001).3

    The study of how US ethnic inventors agglomerate is thus very important given 1) the dispro-
portionate contributions of immigrant researchers and 2) their non-random spatial distribution
across the US. Such a characterization is necessary for understanding the geography of US in-
novation and economic growth. Moreover, the spatial variation of immigrant researchers across
cities allows for stronger quantitative assessments of the role of innovation in city growth. This
paper is a …rst step in this direction.

    Econometric studies quantifying the role of ethnic scientists and engineers for technology
formation and di¤usion are often hampered, however, by data constraints. It is very di¢ cult
to assemble su¢ cient cross-sectional and longitudinal variation for large-scale panel exercises.4
This paper describes a new approach for quantifying the ethnic composition of US inventors
with previously unavailable detail. The technique exploits the inventor names contained on
the micro-records for all patents granted by the United States Patent and Trademark O¢ ce
(USPTO) from January 1975 to May 2008.5 Each patent record lists one or more inventors,
with 8 million inventor names associated with the 4.5 million patents. The USPTO grants
patents to inventors living within and outside of the US, with each group accounting for about
half of patents over the 1975-2008 period.

   This study maps into these inventor names an ethnic-name database typically used for com-
mercial applications. This approach exploits the idea that inventors with the surnames Chang
or Wang are likely of Chinese ethnicity, those with surnames Rodriguez or Martinez of Hispanic
   3
     General surveys of immigration include Borjas (1994), Friedberg and Hunt (1995), Freeman (2006), and Kerr
and Kerr (2008).
   4
     While the decennial Census provides detailed cross-sectional descriptions, its longitudinal variation is neces-
sarily limited. The annual Current Population Survey, however, provides poor cross-sectional detail and does not
ask immigrant status until 1994. The SESTAT database o¤ers a better trade-o¤ between the two dimensions,
but su¤ers important sampling biases with respect to immigrants (Kannankutty and Wilkinson 1999).
   5
     The project initially employed the NBER Patent Data File, compiled by Hall et al. (2001), that includes
patents granted by the USPTO from January 1975 to December 1999. The current version now employs an
extended version developed by HBS Research that includes patents granted through May 2008.

                                                         2
ethnicity, and so on. The match rates are 92%-98% for US domestic inventor records, depend-
ing upon the procedure employed, and the process a¤ords the distinction of nine ethnicities:
Chinese, English, European, Hispanic/Filipino, Indian/Hindi, Japanese, Korean, Russian, and
Vietnamese. Moreover, because the matching is done at the micro-level, greater detail on the
ethnic composition of inventors is available annually on multiple dimensions: technologies, cities,
companies, and so on. Section 2 describes this data development in greater detail.

    Section 3 then documents the growing contribution of ethnic inventors to US technology
formation. The rapid increase during the 1990s in the share of high-tech patents granted to
Chinese and Indian inventors is particularly striking. This section also uses the patenting data to
calculate concentration indices for US innovation. Ethnic inventors have higher levels of spatial
concentration than English inventors throughout the thirty-year period studied. Moreover, the
spatial concentration of ethnic inventors increases signi…cantly from 1995 to 2004, especially in
high-tech sectors like computer-related patenting. The combination of greater ethnic shares
and increasing agglomeration of ethnic inventors helps stop and reverse the 1975-1994 declines
in the overall concentration of US invention. These trends are con…ned to industrial patents;
universities and government bodies — that are constrained from agglomerating — do not show
recent increases in spatial clustering.

    The …nal section concludes. The higher agglomeration of immigrants in cities and occu-
pations has long been noted. For example, Mandor¤ (2007) highlights how immigrant en-
trepreneurs tend to agglomerate in selected industries, a process that increases their business
impact for speci…c sectors. Examples within the US are Korean entrepreneurs in dry cleaning,
Vietnamese in nail salons, Gujarati Indians in traveler accommodations, Punjabi Indians in gas
stations, Greeks in restaurants, and so on. The higher natural social interactions among these
ethnic groups aid in the acquisition and transfer of sector-speci…c skills; scale economies lead to
occupational clustering by minority ethnic groups.

   To date, there has been very little work, theoretically or empirically, on the agglomeration
of US ethnic scientists and engineers with the notable exception of Agrawal et al. (2007).6
This scarcity of research is disappointing given the scale of these ethnic contributions and the
importance of innovation to regional economic growth. Moreover, the large shifts in ethnic
inventor populations, often driven in part by US immigration restrictions, may provide empirical
footholds for testing agglomeration theories in a natural experiment framework. It is hoped that
the empirical platform developed in this study provides a foothold for furthering such analyses.

   6
     Agrawal et al. (2007) jointly examine knowledge di¤usion through co-location and co-ethnicity using domestic
patent citations made by Indian inventors living in the US. While being in the same city or the same ethnicity
both encourage knowledge di¤usion, their estimations suggest that the marginal bene…t of co-location is four
times larger for inventors of di¤erent ethnicities. This substitutability between social and geographic proximity
can create di¤erences between a social planner’s optimal distribution of ethnic members and what the inventors
themselves would choose.

                                                       3
2     Ethnic-Name Matching Technique

This section describes the ethnic-name matching strategy, outlines the strengths and weaknesses
of the name database selected, and o¤ers some validation exercises using patent records …led by
foreign inventors with the USPTO. Kerr (2007) further describes the name-matching process,
the international name distribution technique, and the apportionment of non-unique matches
that are highlighted below.


2.1     Melissa Ethnic-Name Database and Name-Matching Technique

The ethnic-name database employed in this study was originally developed by the Melissa Data
Corporation for use in direct-mail advertisements. Ethnic-name databases su¤er from two inher-
ent limitations — not all ethnicities are covered and included ethnicities usually receive unequal
treatment. The strength of the Melissa database is in the identi…cation of Asian ethnicities,
especially Chinese, Indian/Hindi, Japanese, Korean, Russian, and Vietnamese names. The
database is comparatively weaker for looking within continental Europe. For example, Dutch
surnames are collected without …rst names, while the opposite is true for French names. The
Asian comparative advantage and overall cost e¤ectiveness led to the selection of the Melissa
database, as well as the European amalgamation employed in the matching technique. In total,
nine ethnicities are distinguished: Chinese, English, European, Hispanic/Filipino, Indian/Hindi,
Japanese, Korean, Russian, and Vietnamese.7

    The second limitation is that commercial databases vary in the number of names they contain
for each ethnicity. These di¤erences re‡ect both uneven coverage and that some ethnicities are
more homogeneous in their naming conventions. For example, the 1975 to 1999 Her…ndahl
indices of foreign inventor surnames for Korean (0.047) and Vietnamese (0.112) are signi…cantly
higher than Japanese (0.013) and English (0.016) due to frequent Korean surnames like Kim
(16%) and Park (12%) and Vietnamese surnames like Nguyen (29%) and Tran (12%).

   Two polar matching strategies are employed to ensure coverage di¤erences do not overly
in‡uence ethnicity assignments.


      Full Matching: This procedure utilizes all of the name assignments in the Melissa
      database and manually codes any unmatched surname or …rst name associated with
      100 or more inventor records. This technique further exploits the international
      distribution of inventor names within the patent database to provide superior results.
   7
     The largest ethnicity in the US SE workforce absent from the ethnic-name database is Iranian, which ac-
counted for 0.7% of bachelor-level SEs in the 1990 Census.

                                                     4
      The match rate for this restricted procedure is 98% (98% US, 98% foreign). This
      rate should be less than 100% with the Melissa database as not all ethnicities are
      included.

      Restricted Matching: A second strategy employs a uniform name database using
      only the 3000 and 200 most common surnames and …rst names, respectively, for each
      ethnicity. These numerical bars are the lowest common denominators across the
      major ethnicities studied. The match rate for this restricted procedure is 89% (92%
      US, 86% foreign).


For matching, names in both the patent and ethnic-name databases are capitalized and truncated
to ten characters. Approximately 88% of the patent name records have a unique surname, …rst
name, or middle name match in the Full Matching procedure (77% in the Restricted Matching),
a¤ording a single ethnicity determination with priority given to surname matches. For inventors
residing in the US, representative probabilities are assigned to non-unique matches using the
masters-level SE communities in Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs). Ethnic probabilities
for the remaining 3% of records (mostly foreign) are calculated as equal shares.


2.2    Inventors Residing in Foreign Countries and Regions

Visual con…rmation of the top 1000 surnames and …rst names in the USPTO records con…rms the
name-matching technique works well. The appendix documents the 100 most common surnames
of US-based inventors for each ethnicity, along with their relative contributions. These counts
sum the ethnic contribution from inventors with each surname. These counts include partial
or split assignments. Moreover, they are not necessarily direct or exclusive matches (e.g., the
ethnic match may have occurred through the …rst name). While some inventors are certainly
misclassi…ed, the measurement error in aggregate trends building from the micro-data is minor.
The Full Matching procedure is the preferred technique and underlies the trends presented in
the next section, but most applications …nd negligible di¤erences when the Restricted Matching
dataset is employed instead.

   The application of the ethnic-name database to the inventors residing outside of the US
provides a natural quality-assurance exercise for the technique. Inventions originating outside
the US account for just under half of USPTO patents, with applications from Japan comprising
about half of this foreign total. The appendix documents the results of applying the ethnic-
matching procedures for countries and regions grouped to the ethnicities identi…able with the
database. The results are very encouraging. First, the Full Matching procedure assigns
ethnicities to a large percentage of foreign records, with the match rates greater than 93% for

                                              5
all countries. In the Restricted Matching procedure, a matching rate of greater than 74% holds
for all regions.

   Second, the estimated inventor compositions are reasonable. The own-ethnicity shares are
summarized in the fourth and …fth columns. The weighted average is 86% in the Full Matching
procedure, and own-ethnicity contributions are greater than 80% in the UK, China, India, Japan,
Korea, and Russia regardless of the matching procedure employed. Like the US, own-ethnicity
contributions should be less than 100% due to foreign researchers. The high success rate
using the Restricted Matching procedure indicates that the ethnic-name database performs well
without exploiting the international distribution of names, although power is lost with Europe.
Likewise, uneven coverage in the Melissa database is not driving the ethnic composition trends.


2.3       Advantages and Disadvantages of Name-Matching Technique

The matched records describe the ethnic composition of US scientists and engineers with previ-
ously unavailable detail: incorporating the major ethnicities working in the US SE community;
separating out detailed technologies and manufacturing industries; providing city-level statistics;
and providing annual metrics. Moreover, the assignment of patents to corporations and insti-
tutions a¤ords …rm-level and university-level characterizations that are not otherwise possible
(e.g., the ethnic composition of IBM’s inventors …ling computer patents from San Francisco in
1985). The next section studies the agglomeration of invention along these various dimensions.8

    The ethnic-name procedure does, however, have two potential limitations for empirical work
on agglomeration that should be highlighted. First, the approach does not distinguish foreign-
born ethnic researchers in the US from later generations working as SEs. The procedure can
only estimate total ethnic SE populations, and concentration levels are to some extent measured
with time-invariant error due to the name-matching approach. The resulting data are very
powerful, however, for panel econometrics that employ changes in these ethnic SE populations
for identi…cation. Moreover, Census and INS records con…rm Asian changes are primarily due
to new SE immigration for this period, substantially weakening this concern when examining
these groups.

   The name-matching technique also does not distinguish …ner divisions within the nine major
ethnic groupings. For some analyses (e.g., network ties), it would be advantageous to separate
Mexican from Chilean scientists within the Hispanic ethnicity, to distinguish Chinese engineers
with ethnic ties to Taipei versus Beijing versus Shanghai, and so on. These distinctions are not
possible with the Melissa database, and researchers should understand that measurement error
  8
      Sample applications are Kerr (2008a,b), Kerr and Lincoln (2008), and Foley and Kerr (2008).


                                                       6
from the broader ethnic divisions may bias their estimated coe¢ cients downward depending
upon the application. Nevertheless, the upcoming sections demonstrate how the deep variation
available with the ethnic patenting data provides a rich description of US ethnic invention.


3     The Agglomeration of US Ethnic Invention

This section starts by describing the broad trends in ethnic contributions to US technology
formation. The spatial concentration of ethnic invention is then closely analyzed, including
variations by technology categories and institutions.


3.1     Ethnic Composition of US Inventors

Table 1 describes the ethnic composition of US inventors for 1975-2004, with granted patents
grouped by application years. The trends demonstrate a growing ethnic contribution to US
technology development, especially among Chinese and Indian scientists. Ethnic inventors are
more concentrated in high-tech industries like computers and pharmaceuticals and in gateway
cities relatively closer to their home countries (e.g., Chinese in San Francisco, Europeans in New
York, and Hispanics in Miami). The …nal three rows demonstrate a close correspondence of
the estimated ethnic composition to the country-of-birth composition of the US SE workforce in
the 1990 Census. The estimated European contribution in Table 1 is naturally higher than the
immigrant contribution measured by foreign born.

    Figure 1 illustrates the evolving ethnic composition of US inventors from 1975-2004. The
omitted English share declines from 83% to 70% during this period. Looking across all technol-
ogy categories, the European ethnicity is initially the largest foreign contributor to US technology
development. Like the English ethnicity, however, the European share of US domestic inventors
declines steadily from 8% in 1975 to 6% in 2004. This declining share is partly due to the
exceptional growth over the thirty years of the Chinese and Indian ethnicities, which increase
from under 2% to 8% and 5%, respectively. As shown below, this Chinese and Indian growth is
concentrated in high-tech sectors, where Chinese inventors supplant European researchers as the
largest ethnic contributor to US technology formation. The Indian ethnic contribution declines
somewhat after 2000.9

   Among the other ethnicities, the Hispanic contribution grows from 3% to 4% from 1975 to
2004. The level of this series is likely mismeasured due to the extensive overlap of Hispanic and
   9
     This decline is mostly due to changes within the computer technology sector as seen below. Recent applica-
tions to the USPTO suggest the Indian trend may not have declined as much as the granted patents through early
2008 portray. Kerr and Lincoln (2008) investigate the role of H-1B visa reforms for explaining these patterns.

                                                      7
European names, but the positive growth is consistent with stronger Latino and Filipino scienti…c
contributions in Florida, Texas, and California. The Korean share increases dramatically from
0.3% to 1.1% over the thirty years, while the Russian climbs from 1.2% to 2.2%. Although
di¢ cult to see with Figure 1’s scaling, much of the Russian increase occurs in the 1990s following
the dissolution of the Soviet Union. The Japanese share steadily increases from 0.6% to 1.0%.
Finally, while the Vietnamese contribution is the lowest throughout the sample, it does exhibit
the strongest relative growth from 0.1% to 0.6%.

    The 1975-2004 statistics employ patents granted by the USPTO through May 2008. Due
to the long and uneven USPTO review process, statistics are grouped by application year to
construct the most accurate indicators of when inventive activity occurs. The unfortunate
consequence of using application years, however, is substantial attrition in years immediately
before 2008. As many patents are in the review process but have yet to be granted, the granted
patent series is truncated at the 2004 application year. The USPTO began publishing patent
applications in 2001. These applications data also show comparable ethnic contributions.


3.2     Spatial Locations of US Ethnic Inventors

Table 2 examines the 1975-2004 ethnic inventor contributions by major MSAs. A total of
283 MSAs are identi…ed from inventors’city names using city lists collected from the O¢ ce of
Social and Economic Data Analysis at the University of Missouri, with a matching rate of 99%.
Manual coding further ensures all patents with more than 100 citations and all city names with
more than 100 patents are identi…ed. The …rst four columns document each MSA’s share of US
patenting. Not surprisingly, these shares are highly correlated with MSA size, with the three
largest patenting centers for 1995-2004 found in San Francisco (12%), New York (7%), and Los
Angeles (6%), where the percentages indicate US domestic patent shares.

    Comparing these total patenting percentages with the ethnic patenting shares, listed in the
second set of four columns, reveals the more interesting fact that ethnic patenting is more
concentrated than general innovation. The 1995-2004 ethnic patent shares of San Francisco,
New York, and Los Angeles are 19%, 10%, and 8%, respectively. Similarly, 81% of ethnic
research occurs in the major MSAs listed in Table 2, compared to 73% of total patenting.
The …nal three columns list the Chinese and Indian patenting share by MSA, highlighting the
exceptional growth of San Francisco from 8% of 1975-1984 patenting to 25% in 1995-2004. These
concentration levels and trends are further examined below.10
  10
    Each of these trends appears to have strengthened in the recent applications data (i.e., the columns marked
with A in Table 2). While suggestive, these statistics should be treated with caution. Some technology …elds
and …rm types are more likely to publish their patent applications than others. Likewise, probabilities of patent
grants conditional on application vary by …eld. Lemley and Sampat (2007) discuss these limitations further.



                                                       8
   Table 3 presents simple least squares estimations of ethnic inventor locations and MSA char-
acteristics. The variables of interest are MSA shares of US ethnic inventors during 1985-2004,
with column headers indicating ethnicities. These shares are calculated over the 244 MSAs for
which full covariate information are assembled. The dropped observations are small cities not
separately identi…ed in 1990 Census of Population. For ease of interpretation, variables are
transformed to have unit standard deviation in these cross-sectional estimations. Estimations
are weighted by MSA populations.

    To establish a baseline, the …rst two columns consider MSA inventor shares of the English
ethnicity. In Column 1, MSA size and urban density strongly predict higher English inventor
shares. A one standard-deviation increase in the population share of the MSA correlates with
a 0.57 standard-deviation increase in the share of English ethnic invention. Coastal access does
not predict greater inventor concentration in multi-variate frameworks, although a univariate
correlation exists. On the other hand, MSA demographics have a statistically and economically
signi…cant relationship with inventor concentrations. The MSA traits are calculated from the
1990 Census of Population. MSAs with more-educated workforces are associated with greater
inventor concentrations. Higher shares of English invention are also found in MSAs with rela-
tively more people between the ages of 30 and 60 (the omitted group) and more men. All told,
this parsimonious set of covariates explains 84% of the variation in English invention shares.

    Table 2 suggests that inventor shares are relatively persistent over time for MSAs. Column 2
of Table 3 con…rms this observation for English inventors. The estimation incorporates the share
of English ethnic patenting in the MSA for 1975-1984. This ten-year period pre-dates the major
growth in ethnic inventors highlighted in Figure 1. The spatial distribution of English invention
over 1975-1984 is a very strong predictor for 1985-2004 concentration with an elasticity of 0.84.
MSA populations and density levels do not exhibit a well-measured relationship with 1985-
2004 English inventor concentrations after controlling for these past levels. Partial correlations
with MSA demographics, however, are more robust. Incorporating the past concentration lag
explains 88% of the MSA-level variation in inventor shares (83% by itself).11

    The subsequent eight columns of Table 3 consider major non-English inventor shares. The
estimation framework remains the same excepting the 1975-1984 MSA inventor shares in the
even-numbered columns that are adjusted to match the dependent variable. Most explana-
tory variables (e.g., MSA demographics) demonstrate similar elasticities across ethnic groups.
Coastal access tends to be more important, although of borderline statistical signi…cance. This
re‡ects the well-known tendency for immigrants to locate in port cities closer to their home
countries.
  11
     Unreported speci…cations further incorporate mean wages in manufacturing, mean family income levels,
and mean housing prices by MSA. Positive correlations between inventor shares and manufacturing wages are
generally found; family income levels and housing prices do not exhibit robust relationships in multi-variate
settings. The inclusion of these three covariates has very limited in‡uence on the reported outcomes.

                                                     9
   Several interesting di¤erences, however, emerge. First, the overall explanatory power of these
regressors varies across ethnic groups. The R2 values for the Chinese and Indian ethnicities are
substantially lower than those for the European and Hispanic ethnicities. These Asian ethnicities
thus have more idiosyncratic spatial patterns than this limited set of covariates modelled. This is
con…rmed when the even-numbered columns incorporate the lagged ethnic inventor shares. The
gain in the variation explained through past MSA-speci…c placements is strongest for Chinese
and Indian inventors. This strength suggests that lagged spatial patterns for Asian inventors
may o¤er an empirical foothold for predicting future MSA-level innovation even conditional on
other MSA-level traits.

    These even-numbered columns also show that lagged ethnic inventor shares tend to have
weaker predictive power for subsequent MSA-level concentration compared to the English eth-
nicity in Column 2. The elasticities range from 0.87 for Chinese patents to 0.53 for Hispanic
patents (which is lowest among the nine ethnic inventor groups). This lower explanatory power
has at least two explanations. First, spatial distributions for ethnic inventors over 1975-1984
may have greater measurement error than English inventor distributions due to smaller counts
of relevant patents. Such measurement error would downward bias estimated elasticities.

   Nonetheless, it is also true that ethnic inventors facilitate shifts in invention locations across
US MSAs. For example, immigrant SE students graduating from elite US universities enter a
national labor market. Hispanic inventors have supported broader growth in Florida and the
southwestern states. While past immigration cities are favored, ethnic inventors also have an
inherent capacity to facilitate regional adjustments. Unreported estimations further test this
conclusion by controlling simultaneously for each MSA’s 1975-1984 English inventor share and
ethnic-speci…c inventor share. With the exception of the European and Russian ethnicities,
lagged ethnic spatial distributions have stronger predictive power for subsequent agglomeration
than lagged English spatial distributions.

    Table 4 repeats the estimations without the MSA population weights. The measured partial
correlations decline in magnitude somewhat, re‡ective of the greater attention paid to smaller
MSA shares, but the patterns of coe¢ cients and explanatory power are comparable to the
weighted outcomes. Several additional speci…cation checks are also undertaken. Incorporating
regional …xed e¤ects …nds anticipated spatial patterns — Midwestern US MSAs tend to have
higher invention rates conditional on the covariates modelled, while southern MSAs have lower
rates. The east and west coasts are often not statistically distinguishable from each other
conditionally. Performing the share estimations on an annual basis, which circumvents growth in
recent patent application rates, yields similar outcomes to the cross-sectional results. Likewise,
log speci…cations produce outcomes similar to the share speci…cation framework.

   Finally, the appendix documents speci…cations that model lagged ethnic population shares

                                                 10
across MSAs as the historical regressor rather than the distribution of lagged ethnic patenting.
These shares are calculated over working-age populations for 203 cities through the 1980 Census
of Population by country of birth. In general, the spatial distribution of lagged ethnic patent-
ing in Tables 3 and 4 is a stronger predictor than general ethnic population distributions; R2
values also decline. The one exception is for the Chinese ethnicity, where the general Chinese
population distribution is an exceptionally strong predictor of recent patenting. These patterns
also hold when jointly modelling the lagged regressors together.

    These comparisons are interesting in that they begin to quantify the relative roles of pro-
duction versus consumption bene…ts for the agglomeration of ethnic inventors. The productive
bene…ts of being near other inventors of one’s ethnicity appear stronger that the general con-
sumption bene…ts of being in ethnic enclaves, but the latter are surprisingly strong. To address
properly this issue, future work hopes to examine the sub-city level to the extent possible with
the patenting data. The high correlation between lagged Chinese inventor and population dis-
tributions depends, for example, on the decision to model the San Francisco Bay area as a single
MSA. Splitting San Jose and Silicon Valley from San Francisco and/or Oakland would reduce
the correlation. Undertaking such an analysis would be informative for the speci…c question of
location decisions by ethnic inventors; it would also contribute to recent work on ethnic enclaves
at the sub-city level (e.g., Pedace and Rohn 2008).

    Of course, these estimations must be interpreted as partial correlations rather than causal
assessments. Clearly, ethnic inventors directly in‡uence many of the determinants modelled
(e.g., education shares) and may also have local spillover e¤ects through their work (e.g., local
technology gains that generate city population growth). Omitted factors may also be correlated
with past immigrant placements. Future work hopes to further re…ne these determinants in a
causal assessment.

    Ongoing research is further evaluating how shifts in the geographic concentration of ethnic
inventors facilitate changes in the geographic composition of US innovation. Not only are ethnic
scientists disproportionately concentrated in major MSAs, but growth in a MSA’s share of ethnic
patenting is highly correlated with growth in its share of total US patenting. Annual regressions
across the full 1975-2004 MSA sample …nd that an increase of 1% in an MSA’s ethnic patenting
share correlates with a 0.6% increase in the MSA’s total invention share. This coe¢ cient is
remarkably high, as the mean ethnic share of total invention during this period is around 20%.
Of course, additional study is required before causal assessments are possible. The ethnic-name
approach will also need to be complemented with external data to distinguish ethnic inventor
shifts due to new immigration, domestic migration, or occupational changes.




                                               11
3.3     Spatial Concentration of US Ethnic Inventors

To re…ne the earlier visual observations made regarding agglomeration levels in Table 2, Table
5 presents three concentration indices for US domestic patenting. The …rst concentration
                                                                    P
metric studied is the Her…ndahl-Hirschman Index de…ned by HHIt = M               2
                                                                       m=1 Sharemt , where M
indexes 283 MSAs and Sharemt is the share of patenting in MSA m in period t. Of course,
patenting is undertaken outside of MSAs, too. The share of patenting outside of these 283
MSAs declines from 9% in 1975-1984 to 7% in 1995-2004. In 2001-2006 applications, this share
further declines to 6%. This portion of US invention is excluded from the remainder of this
paper, with concentration metrics being calculated over MSA patenting only.

    The top panel of Table 5 and Figure 2 highlight several important levels di¤erences. First,
US invention is more concentrated than the general population across these MSAs.12 Moreover,
ethnic inventors are substantially more agglomerated than English-ethnicity inventors through-
out the thirty years considered. The mean population HHI is 0.024 over the period, compared
with 0.037 for invention and 0.059 for all non-English inventors. The agglomeration of Chinese
inventors further stands out at 0.081. This higher ethnic concentration certainly re‡ects the
well-known concentration of immigrant groups, but is not due to simply the smaller sizes of
some ethnicities. Chinese, Japanese, and Vietnamese are consistently the most agglomerated
of ethnic inventor groups. European and Hispanic inventors are the least concentrated, but all
ethnic groups are more agglomerated than the English ethnicity.13

   Moving from the levels to the trends evident in Table 5 and Figure 2, the HHI for all US
inventors consistently declines from 1975-1979 to 1990-1994. This trend is reversed, however,
with greater levels of invention agglomeration in 1995-1999 and 2000-2004. This reversal to-
wards greater patenting concentration is not re‡ected in the overall population shares. Ethnic
inventors, however, show a sharp increase in these latter ten years. This upturn is strongest
among Asian ethnic groups, with European and Hispanic inventors showing limited change in
agglomeration.

    A second agglomeration metric is calculated as the share of total US patenting in the Top
5 MSAs for 1975-1984: New York City (12%), Los Angeles (7%), Chicago (6%), Philadelphia
(5%), and San Francisco (5%). Boston (4%) and Detroit (3%) have the next two largest shares
in 1975-1984. These …ve MSAs account for about 37% of MSA patenting during this initial
period and 34% of total US patenting that includes rural areas. The share accounted for by
  12
     MSA populations are calculated through county populations collected in 1977, 1982, 1987, 1992, and 1997.
These are mid-points of the …ve-year increments studied. The 2000-2004 period uses the 1997 MSA population.
  13
     Calculations from the 1990 and 2000 Census of Populations …nd that the aggregate concentration of immigrant
SEs is slightly less than the agglomeration of all immigrants. Substantial di¤erences in immigrant shares are
evident in larger cities. New York City, Los Angeles, and Miami have larger overall immigration pools relative
to SE, while San Francisco, Washington, Boston, and Seattle have greater SE shares.


                                                      12
these …ve MSAs behaves similarly to the HHI metric, declining until 1990-1994 before growing
during 1995-2004. While less formal, this second technique highlights how ethnic agglomeration
shifts across the major US MSAs. By 1995-2004, San Francisco (12%) leads New York City
(7%) and Los Angeles (6%). Boston and Chicago would complete a new Top 5 MSAs list for
1995-2004.

   Our …nal agglomeration metric is taken from Ellison and Glaeser (1997),
                                        PM
                                 Agg       m=1 (sm;e   xm )2
                                 e    =        PM            ;
                                           1           2
                                                  m=1 xm

where M indexes MSAs. s1;e ; s2;e ; : : : ; sM;e are the shares of ethnicity e’s patenting contained
in each of these geographic areas. x1 ; x2 ; : : : ; xM are each area’s share of population.14 This
metric estimates the agglomeration of invention relative to the baseline established by the MSA
populations. If invention is randomly distributed among the population, the Ellison and Glaeser
metric will not show concentration. The bottom panel of Table 5 and Figure 3 report these
indices. When judged relative to the overall population’s distribution, the trends in the ag-
glomeration of invention look a little di¤erent. The 1975-1994 periods are found to have fairly
consistent levels of concentration, with a strong upturn in the 1995-2004 years. This pattern is
predicted by the growing deviations with time in the HHI trends in Panel A.

    Following Ellison et al. (2007), the pairwise coagglomeration of invention between ethnicity
e1 and e2 is analyzed with the simple formula
                                       PM
                              Coagg      m=1 (sm;e1  xm )(sm;e2 xm )
                              e1 ;e2 =              PM     2
                                                                     :
                                               1     m=1 xm

This index measures the covariance of ethnic invention across MSAs, with the denominator
rescaling the covariance to eliminate a sensitivity to the …neness of the geographic breakdown.
The coagglomeration indices are contained in the appendix. Coagglomeration among non-
English ethnic inventors is substantially higher than between English inventors and these groups.
This is especially true among the Asian ethnicities. These coagglomeration measures rise in
recent years, behaving similarly to the agglomeration measures when relative to the total pop-
ulation.


3.4     Technology Concentration of US Ethnic Inventors

Figure 4 documents the total ethnic contribution by the six broad technology groups into which
patents are often classi…ed: Chemicals, Computers and Communications, Drugs and Medical,
  14
     The full Ellison and Glaeser (1997) formula also controls for the HHI index of plant size. This feature is
ignored in this examination of individual inventors. The ethnic patenting data do not easily support continuous
estimators like Duranton and Overman (2005), although future research hopes to approximate these metrics too.

                                                      13
Electrical and Electronic, Mechanical, and Miscellaneous/Others. The Miscellaneous group
includes patents for agriculture, textiles, furniture, and the like. Growth in ethnic patenting is
noticeably stronger in high-tech sectors than in more traditional industries. Figures 5 and 6
provide more detailed glimpses within the Chinese and Indian ethnicities, respectively. These
two ethnic groups are clearly important contributors to the stronger growth in ethnic contribu-
tions among high-tech sectors, where Chinese inventors supplant European researchers as the
largest ethnic contributor to US technology formation.15

    One possible explanation for Table 5’s aggregate gains in concentration is compositional shifts
in the volume and nature of granted patents, rather than a shift in underlying innovation per
se. There has been a substantial increase in the number of patents granted by the USPTO
over the last two decades. While this increase is partly due to population growth and higher
levels of US innovation, institutional factors also play an important role.16 The heightened
agglomeration may be driven by greater patenting rates by certain technology groups, re‡ecting
either true changes in the underlying innovation rates or simply a greater propensity to seek
patent protection. The latter is especially relevant for the recent rise of software patents (e.g.,
Graham and Mowery 2004). Microsoft, Oracle, and other software companies are among the
US’s largest …rms today in terms of patent applications, but historically this industry did not
seek patent protection.

    Table 6 considers the geographic concentration of invention that exists within each of the
six broad technology groupings. Panel A presents HHI measures calculated over all patents
within each technology. The exceptional rebounds for 1995-2004 are strongest within the Com-
puters and Communications and Electrical and Electronic groupings. Drugs and Medical and
Mechanical categories also demonstrate weaker gains, while Chemicals and Miscellaneous show
steady trends for less spatial agglomeration throughout the 1975-2004 period.

    The dual responses within the Computers and Communications and Electrical and Electronic
groupings suggest that the greater agglomeration is more of a high-tech phenomena than software
in particular. This conclusion is further con…rmed in the appendix. In these estimations,
agglomeration is calculated for each sub-category within the six broad technology divisions;
there are four to nine sub-categories within each division. In both weighted and unweighted
estimations, the concentration metrics at the sub-category level behave similarly to Table 6. This
robustness highlights that a few isolated technology categories, either pre-existing or entering
with recent USPTO additions, are not solely responsible for the patterns evident.
  15
     The USPTO issues patents by technology categories rather than by industries. Combining the work of
Johnson (1999), Silverman (1999), and Kerr (2008), concordances can be developed to map the USPTO classi-
…cation scheme to the three-digit industries in which new inventions are manufactured or used. Scherer (1984)
and Keller (2002) further discuss the importance of inter-industry R&D ‡ows.
  16
     For example, Griliches (1990), Kortum and Lerner (2000), Kim and Marschke (2004), Hall (2005), Ja¤e and
Lerner (2005).


                                                     14
    Panels B and C report similar indices for English and non-English ethnicity inventors. Some
of the sharp concentration gains within the Computers and Communications and Electrical and
Electronic groupings can be traced to higher agglomeration of the English inventors. The
exceptional growth in concentration among non-English ethnic inventors, however, is even more
striking. Figure 7 presents the HHI of Computers and Communications patents for selected
ethnic groups. The Chinese HHI reaches just less than 0.200 by 2000-2004, while the Indian
concentration also grows to 0.141. Note that this concentration growth occurs during a period
of growing patent counts.

    Ethnic inventors thus pull up the overall patenting concentration in at least three ways. First,
ethnic inventors have higher levels of existing concentration and are becoming a larger share of
US patenting (Figure 4). Even if their own concentration holds constant, this should lead to
an increase in the agglomeration of US patenting. Second, ethnic inventors are themselves
becoming more spatially concentrated in high-tech …elds. This force also leads to an increase
in overall agglomeration levels. Ethnic inventors are also more concentrated in …elds that have
experienced greater rates of recent patenting, yielding a mechanical link as well.17


3.5     Institutional Concentration of US Ethnic Inventors

Patents are granted to several types of institutions. Industrial …rms account for about 70%
of patents granted from 1980-1997, while government and university institutions are assigned
about 4% of patents. Unassigned patents (e.g., individual inventors) represent about 26% of
US invention. Public companies account for 59% of the industry patents during this period.
With the exception of unassigned patents, institutions are primarily identi…ed through assignee
names on patents.

    Figure 8 demonstrates that intriguing di¤erences in ethnic scienti…c contributions also exist
by institution type. Over the 1975-2004 period, ethnic inventors are more concentrated in gov-
ernment and university research labs and in publicly-listed companies than in private companies
or as una¢ liated inventors. Part of this levels di¤erence is certainly due to immigration visa
sponsorships by larger institutions. Growth in ethnic shares are initially stronger in the govern-
ment and university labs, but publicly-listed companies appear to close the gap by 2004. The
other interesting trend in Figure 8 is for private companies, where the ethnic contribution sharply
increases in the 1990s. This rise coincides with the strong growth in ethnic entrepreneurship in
high-tech sectors.18
  17
      These e¤ects appear to continue in the 2001-2006 applications data catalogued in Table 2.
  18
      Publicly-listed companies are identi…ed from a 1989 mapping developed by Hall et al. (2001). This company
list is not updated for delistings or new public o¤erings. This approach maintains a constant public grouping for
reference, but it also weakens the representativeness of the public and private company groupings at the sample
extremes for current companies.

                                                       15
    Panels A and B of Table 7 document the evolution of the HHI concentration for industry
and university/government patenting, respectively. The column headers again indicate di¤erent
technology groups. Despite having fairly similar levels of spatial concentration, the di¤erences
between institutions in the agglomeration trends for patenting are striking. The concentration
of invention within universities and governments has either weakened or remained constant in
every technology group. The recent gains in industry concentration, on the other hand, are
stronger than the aggregate statistics from Table 6. Whereas the recent growth in industry
concentration is strongest for Computers and Communications and Electrical and Electronic,
the two technology groups show above-average declines for universities and government bodies.

    The bottom two panels of Table 7 show the deeper impact of these institutional di¤erences
for non-English invention. Ethnic inventors are again very strong drivers for the recent agglom-
eration increases in industry patenting within high-tech sectors. On the other hand, ethnic
inventors are not becoming more geographically agglomerated within universities and govern-
ment institutions. This even holds true for Chinese and Indian groups within the Computers
and Communications and Electrical and Electronic technology sectors. Figures 9 and 10 sum-
marize these di¤erences. As universities and government bodies are more constrained from
agglomerating than industrial …rms, these di¤erences provide a nice falsi…cation check on the
earlier trends and the role of ethnic inventors.19


4     Conclusions

Ethnic scientists and engineers are an important and growing contributor to US technology
development. The Chinese and Indian ethnicities, in particular, are now an integral part of US
invention in high-tech sectors. The magnitude of these ethnic contributions raises many research
and policy questions: debates regarding the appropriate quota for H-1B temporary visas, the
possible crowding out of native students from SE …elds, the brain drain or brain circulation
e¤ect on sending countries, and the future prospects for US technology leadership are just four
examples.20 While the answers to these questions must draw from many …elds within and outside
of economics, valuable insights can be developed through agglomeration theory and empirical
studies.

   This paper builds a new empirical platform for these research questions by assigning probable
ethnicities for US inventors through the inventor names available with USPTO patent records.
  19
     Trends in concentration ratios of unassigned inventors fall in between industry and university/government,
behaving more closely like the latter. While there is some recent growth in ethnic inventor concentration within
this class, the upturn is much weaker than in industrial …rms. Figure 8 also highlights that ethnic inventors are
a smaller fraction of unassigned patents, leading to a smaller impact on aggregate statistics.
  20
     Representative papers are Lowell (2000), Borjas (2005), Saxenian (2002b), and Freeman (2005), respectively.


                                                       16
The resulting data document with greater detail than previously available the powerful growth
in US Chinese and Indian inventors during the 1990s. At the same time, these ethnic inventors
became more spatially concentrated across US cities. The combination of these two factors
helps stop and reverse long-term declines in overall inventor agglomeration evident in the 1970s
and 1980s. The heightened ethnic agglomeration is particularly evident in industry patents for
high-tech sectors, and similar trends are not found in institutions constrained from agglomerating
(e.g., universities, government).


References
 [1] Agrawal, Ajay, Devesh Kapur, and John McHale, "Birds of a Feather – Better Together?
     Exploring the Optimal Spatial Distribution of Ethnic Inventors", NBER Working Paper
     12823 (2007).
 [2] Audretsch, David, and Maryann Feldman, "R&D Spillovers and the Geography of Innova-
     tion and Production", American Economic Review 86:3 (1996), 630-640.
 [3] Borjas, George, "Do Foreign Students Crowd Out Native Students from Graduate Pro-
     grams?", NBER Working Paper 10349 (2004).
 [4] Borjas, George, "Economics of Immigration", Journal of Economic Literature 32 (1994),
     1667-1717.
 [5] Burton, Lawrence, and Jack Wang, "How Much Does the U.S. Rely on Immigrant Engi-
     neers?", NSF SRS Issue Brief (1999).
 [6] Card, David, "The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market", Industrial
     and Labor Relations Review 43:2 (1990), 245-257.
 [7] Card, David, "Immigrant In‡ows, Native Out‡ows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts
     of Higher Immigration", Journal of Labor Economics 19:1 (2001), 22-64.
 [8] Duranton, Gilles, "Urban Evolutions: The Fast, the Slow, and the Still", American Eco-
     nomic Review 97:1 (2007), 197-221.
 [9] Duranton, Gilles, and Henry Overman, "Testing for Localization Using Micro-Geographic
     Data", Review of Economic Studies 72 (2005), 1077-1106.
[10] Duranton, Gilles, and Diego Puga, "Nursery Cities: Urban Diversity, Process Innovation,
     and the Life Cycle of Products", American Economic Review 91:5 (2001), 1454-1477.

[11] Edin, Per-Anders, Peter Fredriksson, and Olof Åslund, "Ethnic Enclaves and the Economic
     Success of Immigrants— Evidence from a Natural Experiment", The Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 118:1 (2003), 329-357.
[12] Ellison, Glenn, and Edward Glaeser, "Geographic Concentration in U.S. Manufacturing
     Industries: A Dartboard Approach", Journal of Political Economy 105:5 (1997), 889-927.
[13] Ellison, Glenn, Edward Glaeser, and William Kerr, "What Causes Industry Agglomeration?
     Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns", NBER Working Paper 13068 (2007).

                                               17
[14] Foley, C. Fritz, and William Kerr, "US Ethnic Scientists and Foreign Direct Investment
     Placement", HBS Working Paper (2008).
[15] Freeman, Richard, "Does Globalization of the Scienti…c/Engineering Workforce Threaten
     U.S. Economic Leadership?", NBER Working Paper 11457 (2005).
[16] Freeman, Richard, "People Flows in Globalization", Journal of Economic Perspectives 20:2
     (2006), 145-170.
[17] Friedberg, Rachel, and Jennifer Hunt, "The Impact of Immigrants on Host Country Wages,
     Employment and Growth", Journal of Economic Perspectives 9:2 (1995), 23-44.
[18] Furman, Je¤rey, Michael Porter, and Scott Stern, "The Determinants of National Innovative
     Capacity", Research Policy 31 (2002), 899-933.
[19] Glaeser, Edward, Hedi Kallal, Jose Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer, "Growth in Cities",
     Journal of Political Economy 100:6 (1992), 1126-1152.
[20] Glaeser, Edward, and Matthew Kahn, "Decentralized Employment and the Transformation
     of the American City", NBER Working Paper 8117 (2001).
[21] Glaeser, Edward, and William Kerr, "Local Industrial Conditions and Entrepreneurship:
     How Much of the Spatial Distribution Can We Explain?" forthcoming in Journal of Eco-
     nomics and Management Strategy (2008).
[22] Graham, Stuart, and David Mowery, "Software Patents: Good News or Bad News?", Work-
     ing Paper (2004).
[23] Griliches, Zvi, "Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey", Journal of Economic
     Literature 28:4 (1990), 1661-1707.
[24] Hall, Bronwyn, "Exploring the Patent Explosion", Journal of Technology Transfer 30
     (2005), 35-48.
[25] Hall, Bronwyn, Adam Ja¤e, and Manuel Trajtenberg, "The NBER Patent Citation Data
     File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools", NBER Working Paper 8498 (2001).
[26] Henderson, J. Vernon, "Marshall’s Scale Economies", Journal of Urban Economics 53
     (2003), 1–28.
[27] Hunt, Jennifer, "How Much Does Immigration Boost Innovation?", Working Paper (2008).
[28] Jacobs, Jane, The Economy of Cities (New York, NY: Vintage Books, 1970).
[29] Ja¤e, Adam, and Joshua Lerner, Innovation and Its Discontents (Boston, MA: Harvard
     Business School Press, 2005).
[30] Ja¤e, Adam, Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson, "Geographic Localization of
     Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations", Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     108:3 (1993), 577-598.
[31] Johnson, Daniel, "150 Years of American Invention: Methodology and a First Geographic
     Application", Wellesley College Economics Working Paper 99-01 (1999).



                                             18
[32] Johnson, Jean, "Statistical Pro…les of Foreign Doctoral Recipients in Science and Engineer-
     ing: Plans to Stay in the United States", NSF SRS Report (1998).
[33] Johnson, Jean, "Human Resource Contribution to U.S. Science and Engineering From
     China", NSF SRS Issue Brief (2001).
[34] Kannankutty, Nirmala, and R. Keith Wilkinson, "SESTAT: A Tool for Studying Scientists
     and Engineers in the United States", NSF SRS Report (1999).
[35] Keller, Wolfgang, "Trade and the Transmission of Technology", Journal of Economic
     Growth 7 (2002), 5-24.
[36] Kerr, Sari Pekkala, and William Kerr, "Economic Impacts of Immigration: A Survey", HBS
     Working Paper 09-013 (2008).
[37] Kerr, William, "The Ethnic Composition of US Inventors", HBS Working Paper 08-006
     (2007).
[38] Kerr, William, "Ethnic Scienti…c Communities and International Technology Di¤usion",
     Review of Economics and Statistics 90:3 (2008a), 518-537.
[39] Kerr, William, "Heterogeneous Technology Di¤usion and Ricardian Trade Patterns", HBS
     Working Paper (2008b).
[40] Kerr, William, and William Lincoln, "The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa Reforms
     and US Ethnic Invention", HBS Working Paper 09-005 (2008).
[41] Kim, Jinyoung, and Gerald Marschke, "Accounting for the Recent Surge in U.S. Patenting:
     Changes in R&D Expenditures, Patent Yields, and the High Tech Sector", Economics of
     Innovation and New Technologies 13:6 (2004), 543-558.
[42] Kortum, Samuel, and Joshua Lerner, "Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital to
     Innovation", RAND Journal of Economics 31:4 (2000), 674-692.
[43] Lemley, Mark, and Bhaven Sampat, "Is the Patent O¢ ce a Rubber Stamp?", Stanford Law
     School Working Paper 999098 (2007).
[44] Lowell, B. Lindsay, "H1-B Temporary Workers: Estimating the Population", The Center
     for Comparative Immigration Studies Working Paper 12 (2000).
[45] Mandor¤, Martin, "Social Networks, Ethnicity, and Occupation", Working Paper (2007).
[46] Marshall, Alfred, Principles of Economics (London, U.K.: MacMillan and Co., 1920).
[47] Pedace, Roberto, and Stephanie Rohn, "A Warm Embrace or the Cold Shoulder: Wage and
     Employment Outcomes in Ethnic Enclaves", CES Working Paper 08-09 (2008).
[48] Peri, Giovanni, "Higher Education, Innovation and Growth", in Giorgio Brunello, Pietro
     Garibaldi and Etienne Wasmer (eds.) Education and Training in Europe (Oxford: Oxford
     University Press, 2007).
[49] Porter, Michael, The Competitive Advantage of Nations (New York, NY: The Free Press,
     1990).



                                              19
[50] Romer, Paul, "Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth", Journal of Political Economy
     94:5 (1986), 1002-1037.
[51] Romer, Paul, "Endogenous Technological Change", Journal of Political Economy 98:5
     (1990), S71-S102.
[52] Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, "Geography, Industrial Organization, and Agglom-
     eration", Review of Economics and Statistics 85:2 (2003), 377-393.
[53] Rosenthal, Stuart and William Strange, "The Determinants of Agglomeration", Journal of
     Urban Economics 50 (2001), 191-229.
[54] Saxenian, AnnaLee, Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and
     Route 128 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994).
[55] Saxenian, AnnaLee, with Yasuyuki Motoyama and Xiaohong Quan, Local and Global Net-
     works of Immigrant Professionals in Silicon Valley (San Francisco, CA: Public Policy In-
     stitute of California, 2002a).
[56] Saxenian, AnnaLee, "Silicon Valley’s New Immigrant High-Growth Entrepreneurs", Eco-
     nomic Development Quarterly 16:1 (2002b), 20-31.
[57] Scherer, Frederic, "Using Linked Patent Data and R&D Data to Measure Technology
     Flows", in Griliches, Zvi (ed.) R & D, Patents and Productivity (Chicago, IL: University of
     Chicago Press, 1984).
[58] Silverman, Brian, "Technological Resources and the Direction of Corporate Diversi…cation:
     Toward an Integration of the Resource-Based View and Transaction Cost Economics", Man-
     agement Science 45:8 (1999), 1109-1124.
[59] Stephan, Paula, and Sharon Levin, "Exceptional Contributions to US Science by the
     Foreign-Born and Foreign-Educated", Population Research and Policy Review 20:1 (2001),
     59-79.
[60] Streeter, Joanne, "Major Declines in Admissions of Immigrant Scientists and Engineers in
     Fiscal Year 1994", NSF SRS Issue Brief (1997).
[61] Thompson, Peter, and Melanie Fox-Kean, "Patent Citations and the Geography of Knowl-
     edge Spillovers: A Reassessment", American Economic Review 95:1 (2005), 450-460.
[62] Wadhwa, Vivek, AnnaLee Saxenian, Ben Rissing, and Gary Gere¢ , "America’s New Immi-
     grant Entrepreneurs I", Working Paper (2007).




                                              20
                                                 Fig. 1: Ethnic Share of US Domestic Patents
                                       10%
  Share of US Domestic Patent Grants


                                       8%




                                       6%




                                       4%




                                       2%




                                       0%
                                              1975           1980           1985              1990              1995              2000

                                                                Chinese            European           Hispanic               Indian
                                                                Japanese           Korean             Russian                Vietnam.



                                                      Fig. 2: HHI Concentration of US Patents
                                       0.15
HHI of US Domestic Patent Grants




                                       0.10




                                       0.05




                                       0.00
                                                 1975-1979      1980-1984      1985-1989         1990-1994         1995-1999            2000-2004

                                                         Pop        Total      English         Non-English             Chinese          Indian
                                                                        Fig. 3: EG Concentration of US Patents
                                                       0.10
  Ellison-Glaeser Index of US Domestic Patent Grants



                                                       0.08




                                                       0.06




                                                       0.04




                                                       0.02




                                                       0.00
                                                                 1975-1979         1980-1984         1985-1989        1990-1994            1995-1999            2000-2004

                                                                                 Total         English       Non-English            Chinese            Indian



                                                                 Fig. 4: Total US Ethnic Share by Technology
                                                       39%
Share of US Domestic Patent Grants




                                                       34%




                                                       29%




                                                       24%




                                                       19%




                                                       14%
                                                              1975           1980                1985              1990                 1995             2000

                                                                     Chemicals           Computers         Drugs           Electrical          Mechanical            Other
                                              Fig. 5: Chinese Contribution by Technology
                                     14%



                                     12%
Share of US Domestic Patent Grants




                                     10%



                                     8%



                                     6%



                                     4%



                                     2%



                                     0%
                                           1975           1980          1985           1990                1995           2000

                                                  Chemicals      Computers     Drugs          Electrical          Mechanical     Other



                                                  Fig. 6: Indian Contribution by Technology
                                     10%
Share of US Domestic Patent Grants




                                     8%




                                     6%




                                     4%




                                     2%




                                     0%
                                           1975           1980          1985           1990                1995           2000

                                                  Chemicals      Computers     Drugs          Electrical          Mechanical     Other
                                                            Fig. 7: Ethnic Concentration in Computers
                                              0.25
  HHI of US Computer Domestic Patent Grants



                                              0.20




                                              0.15




                                              0.10




                                              0.05




                                              0.00
                                                        1975-1979       1980-1984          1985-1989          1990-1994       1995-1999       2000-2004

                                                                                Total          English          Chinese        Indian



                                                            Fig. 8: Total US Ethnic Share by Institution
                                              40%
Share of US Domestic Patent Grants




                                              30%




                                              20%




                                              10%
                                                     1975           1980                1985             1990             1995             2000

                                                            Total   Public Industry        Private Industry        Government/University      Unassigned
                                                  Fig. 9: Ethnic HHI, All Inventors
                                   0.15
HHI of US Domestic Patent Grants




                                   0.10




                                   0.05




                                   0.00
                                          1975-1979      1980-1984       1985-1989    1990-1994       1995-1999       2000-2004

                                             Chemicals       Computers        Drugs      Electrical      Mechanical        Other



                                          Fig. 10: Ethnic HHI, University & Government
                                   0.15
HHI of US Domestic Patent Grants




                                   0.10




                                   0.05




                                   0.00
                                          1975-1979      1980-1984       1985-1989    1990-1994       1995-1999       2000-2004

                                             Chemicals       Computers        Drugs      Electrical      Mechanical        Other
                                        Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Inventors Residing in US
                                                                                     Ethnicity of Inventor
                        English         Chinese         European        Hispanic        Indian         Japanese         Korean          Russian         Vietnam.

                                                       A. Ethnic Inventor Shares Estimated from US Inventor Records, 1975-2004
1975-1979               82.5%           2.2%            8.3%            2.9%            1.9%            0.6%            0.3%            1.2%            0.1%
1980-1984               81.1%           2.9%            7.9%            3.0%            2.4%            0.7%            0.5%            1.3%            0.1%
1985-1989               79.8%           3.6%            7.5%            3.2%            2.9%            0.8%            0.6%            1.4%            0.2%
1990-1994               77.6%           4.6%            7.2%            3.5%            3.6%            0.9%            0.7%            1.5%            0.4%
1995-1999               73.9%           6.5%            6.8%            3.9%            4.8%            0.9%            0.8%            1.8%            0.5%
2000-2004               70.4%           8.5%            6.4%            4.2%            5.4%            1.0%            1.1%            2.2%            0.6%
Chemicals               73.4%           7.2%            7.5%            3.6%            4.5%            1.0%            0.8%            1.7%            0.3%
Computers               70.1%           8.2%            6.3%            3.8%            6.9%            1.1%            0.9%            2.1%            0.7%
Pharmaceuticals         72.9%           7.1%            7.4%            4.3%            4.2%            1.1%            0.9%            1.8%            0.4%
Electrical              71.6%           8.0%            6.8%            3.7%            4.9%            1.1%            1.1%            2.1%            0.7%
Mechanical              80.4%           3.2%            7.1%            3.5%            2.6%            0.7%            0.6%            1.6%            0.2%
Miscellaneous           81.3%           2.9%            7.0%            3.8%            2.1%            0.6%            0.6%            1.4%            0.3%
Top MSAs as a           KC (89)         SF (13)         NOR (12)        MIA (16)        SF (7)          SD (2)          BAL (2)         BOS (3)         AUS (2)
Percentage of           WS (88)         LA (8)          STL (11)        SA (9)          AUS (7)         SF (2)          LA (2)          NYC (3)         SF (1)
MSA’s Patents           NAS (88)        AUS (6)         NYC (11)        WPB (7)         PRT (6)         LA (2)          SF (1)          SF (3)          LA (1)
                                                    B. Ethnic Scientist and Engineer Shares Estimated from 1990 US Census Records
Bachelors Share         87.6%           2.7%            2.3%            2.4%            2.3%            0.6%            0.5%            0.4%            1.2%
Masters Share           78.9%           6.7%            3.4%            2.2%            5.4%            0.9%            0.7%            0.8%            1.0%
Doctorate Share         71.2%           13.2%           4.0%            1.7%            6.5%            0.9%            1.5%            0.5%            0.4%
Notes: Panel A presents descriptive statistics for inventors residing in the US at the time of patent application. Inventor ethnicities are estimated through inventors'
names using techniques described in the text. Patents are grouped by application years and major technology fields. Metropolitan Statistical Areas include AUS (Austin),
BAL (Baltimore), BOS (Boston), KC (Kansas City), LA (Los Angeles), MIA (Miami), NAS (Nashville), NOR (New Orleans), NYC (New York City), PRT (Portland),
SA (San Antonio), SD (San Diego), SF (San Francisco), STL (St. Louis), WPB (West Palm Beach), and WS (Winston-Salem). MSAs are identified from inventors' city
names using city lists collected from the Office of Social and Economic Data Analysis at the University of Missouri, with a matching rate of 99%. Manual recoding
further ensures all patents with more than 100 citations and all city names with more than 100 patents are identified. Panel B presents comparable statistics calculated
from the 1990 Census using country of birth for scientists and engineers. Country groupings follow Table A3; English provides a residual in the Census statistics.
                                          Table 2: Ethnic Inventor Contributions by MSA
                                Total Patenting Share               non-English Ethnic Patenting Share      Chinese and Indian Patenting Share

                        1975-     1985-      1995-       2001-     1975-     1985-     1995-     2001-     1975-     1985-     1995-     2001-
                        1984      1994       2004       2006 (A)   1984      1994      2004     2006 (A)   1984      1994      2004     2006 (A)

Atlanta, GA             0.6%      1.0%       1.3%        1.5%      0.3%      0.7%      1.0%       1.1%     0.3%      0.7%      1.0%       1.2%
Austin, TX              0.4%      0.9%       1.8%        2.0%      0.5%      1.2%      1.9%       2.0%     0.4%      1.6%      2.3%       2.3%
Baltimore, MD           0.8%      0.8%       0.7%        0.7%      0.7%      0.7%      0.6%       0.5%     0.4%      0.5%      0.6%       0.5%
Boston, MA              3.6%      3.8%       3.9%        4.6%      3.9%      4.2%      4.1%       4.8%     4.0%      4.0%      3.6%       4.3%
Buffalo, NY             0.6%      0.5%       0.4%        0.3%      0.8%      0.6%      0.4%       0.3%     1.1%      0.7%      0.4%       0.3%
Charlotte, NC           0.3%      0.3%       0.3%        0.3%      0.2%      0.2%      0.2%       0.2%     0.1%      0.2%      0.1%       0.2%
Chicago, IL             6.0%      4.6%       3.5%        3.2%      6.9%      5.0%      3.5%       3.0%     5.6%      3.9%      2.9%       2.8%
Cincinnati, OH          1.0%      1.1%       1.0%        1.0%      0.9%      0.9%      0.7%       0.7%     0.7%      1.0%      0.6%       0.6%
Cleveland, OH           2.3%      1.7%       1.3%        1.1%      2.5%      1.5%      1.0%       0.8%     2.5%      1.4%      0.9%       0.6%
Columbus, OH            0.7%      0.5%       0.5%        0.4%      0.6%      0.6%      0.4%       0.3%     0.8%      0.7%      0.3%       0.3%
Dallas-Fort Worth, TX   1.6%      2.0%       2.3%        2.1%      1.1%      1.9%      2.3%       2.2%     1.5%      2.4%      2.9%       2.8%
Denver, CO              1.0%      1.2%       1.3%        1.3%      0.8%      1.0%      0.9%       0.8%     0.8%      1.0%      0.6%       0.5%
Detroit, MI             3.1%      3.3%       2.9%        2.8%      3.1%      3.1%      2.6%       2.6%     3.2%      2.8%      2.5%       2.5%
Greensboro-W.S., NC     0.2%      0.3%       0.3%        0.2%      0.1%      0.2%      0.2%       0.1%     0.2%      0.2%      0.1%       0.1%
Hartford, CT            0.9%      0.9%       0.6%        0.6%      1.0%      0.8%      0.5%       0.5%     0.8%      0.6%      0.3%       0.4%
Houston, TX             2.3%      2.5%       1.9%        2.0%      1.8%      2.3%      1.8%       1.9%     2.2%      2.8%      1.8%       1.9%
Indianapolis, IN        0.8%      0.7%       0.7%        0.5%      0.6%      0.4%      0.4%       0.3%     0.7%      0.5%      0.4%       0.3%
Jacksonville, NC        0.1%      0.1%       0.1%        0.1%      0.1%      0.1%      0.1%       0.1%     0.1%      0.1%      0.1%       0.1%
Kansas City, MO         0.4%      0.3%       0.4%        0.3%      0.2%      0.2%      0.2%       0.2%     0.2%      0.1%      0.2%       0.2%
Las Vegas, NV           0.1%      0.1%       0.2%        0.3%      0.1%      0.1%      0.2%       0.2%     0.0%      0.1%      0.1%       0.1%
Los Angeles, CA         6.6%      6.1%       6.0%        5.7%      7.2%      7.2%      7.9%       7.3%     6.7%      6.9%      7.5%       7.0%
Memphis, TN             0.1%      0.2%       0.2%        0.3%      0.1%      0.1%      0.1%       0.2%     0.1%      0.1%      0.1%       0.1%
Miami, FL               0.8%      0.9%       0.7%        0.7%      1.0%      1.3%      1.0%       0.9%     0.5%      0.6%      0.5%       0.4%
Milwaukee, WI           1.0%      0.9%       0.8%        0.7%      0.8%      0.8%      0.6%       0.5%     0.5%      0.4%      0.5%       0.4%
Minneap.-St. Paul, MN   1.9%      2.4%       2.7%        2.8%      1.6%      2.0%      2.0%       2.0%     1.5%      1.7%      1.7%       1.8%
                                            Table 2: Ethnic Inventor Contributions by MSA, continued
                                          Total Patenting Share                     non-English Ethnic Patenting Share                 Chinese and Indian Patenting Share

                                 1975-       1985-       1995-      2001-          1975-       1985-       1995-      2001-          1975-       1985-       1995-    2001-
                                 1984        1994        2004      2006 (A)        1984        1994        2004      2006 (A)        1984        1994        2004    2006 (A)

Nashville, TN                    0.1%        0.2%        0.2%        0.2%           0.0%        0.1%       0.1%        0.1%           0.1%        0.1%        0.1%     0.1%
New Orleans, LA                  0.3%        0.2%       0.2%        0.1%            0.3%        0.3%       0.1%       0.1%            0.2%        0.2%       0.0%     0.0%
New York, NY                    11.5%        8.9%       7.3%        6.9%           16.6%       13.1%      10.1%       8.9%           16.6%       13.3%       9.7%     9.0%
Norfolk-VA Beach, VA             0.2%        0.2%       0.2%        0.1%            0.1%        0.1%       0.1%       0.1%            0.1%        0.1%       0.1%     0.1%
Orlando, FL                      0.2%        0.3%        0.3%        0.3%           0.1%        0.2%       0.3%        0.3%           0.1%        0.2%        0.3%     0.3%
Philadelphia, PA                 4.6%        4.0%        2.7%        2.8%           5.6%        4.9%       2.8%        2.9%           6.2%        5.8%        2.8%     3.0%
Phoenix, AZ                      1.0%        1.2%        1.4%        1.3%           0.6%        1.1%       1.3%        1.2%           0.4%        1.0%        1.4%     1.3%
Pittsburgh, PA                   2.0%        1.3%       0.8%        0.7%            2.2%        1.4%       0.6%       0.5%            2.2%        1.3%       0.5%     0.5%
Portland, OR                     0.5%        0.8%        1.4%        1.6%           0.3%        0.6%       1.4%        1.6%           0.2%        0.6%        1.7%     2.0%
Providence, RI                   0.3%        0.3%        0.3%        0.2%           0.3%        0.4%       0.3%        0.2%           0.2%        0.3%        0.2%     0.2%
Raleigh-Durham, NC               0.3%        0.6%        1.1%        1.5%           0.3%        0.6%       1.0%        1.3%           0.3%        0.8%        1.0%     1.2%
Richmond, VA                     0.3%        0.3%        0.2%        0.2%           0.3%        0.3%       0.2%        0.2%           0.3%        0.4%        0.2%     0.2%
Sacramento, CA                   0.2%        0.4%        0.5%        0.5%           0.2%        0.4%       0.5%        0.5%           0.2%        0.3%        0.5%     0.5%
Salt Lake City, UT               0.4%        0.5%        0.6%        0.6%           0.2%        0.4%       0.3%        0.3%           0.2%        0.3%        0.3%     0.3%
San Antonio, TX                  0.1%        0.2%        0.2%        0.2%           0.1%        0.2%       0.2%        0.2%           0.2%        0.1%        0.1%     0.1%
San Diego, CA                    1.1%        1.6%       2.2%        2.8%            1.1%        1.6%       2.6%       3.6%            0.8%        1.4%       2.4%     3.9%
San Francisco, CA                4.8%        6.6%       12.1%       13.2%           6.2%        9.3%      19.3%       19.9%           8.4%       13.0%       25.4%    24.0%
Seattle, WA                      0.9%        1.3%        1.9%        3.4%           0.8%        1.1%       1.8%        3.5%           0.6%        1.0%        1.8%     3.7%
St. Louis, MO                    1.0%        0.9%       0.8%        0.8%            0.9%        0.8%       0.8%       0.7%            1.0%        0.8%       0.4%     0.4%
Tallahassee, FL                  0.4%        0.5%        0.4%        0.4%           0.3%        0.4%       0.3%        0.3%           0.2%        0.2%        0.2%     0.2%
Washington, DC                   1.5%        1.5%        1.4%        1.6%           1.6%        1.6%       1.5%        1.7%           1.6%        1.7%        1.5%     1.7%
West Palm Beach, FL              0.3%        0.5%        0.4%        0.4%           0.3%        0.5%       0.4%        0.4%           0.3%        0.3%        0.2%     0.2%
Other 234 MSAs                  21.8%       22.3%       20.7%       18.4%          18.1%       18.1%      15.6%       13.6%          19.7%       18.2%       14.6%    12.7%
Not in an MSA                    9.0%        8.2%        6.6%        6.2%           6.3%        5.4%       3.7%        4.1%           5.2%        3.8%        2.5%     2.7%
Notes: See Table 1. The first three columns of each grouping are for granted patents. The fourth column, marked with (A), is for published patent applications.
                            Table 3: Ethnic Inventors and MSA Characteristics, Weighted Estimations
                                       English                     Chinese                       Indian                   European                        Hispanic
                                 (1)             (2)         (3)             (4)          (5)             (6)          (7)          (8)             (9)          (10)
                                                           Dependent Variable is Share of 1985-2004 Ethnic Patenting in the MSA
1975-1984 Share of                           0.842                       0.865                         0.796                       0.646                         0.526
Ethnic Patents in MSA                       (0.284)                     (0.501)                       (0.186)                     (0.053)                       (0.185)
Log Population                 0.573         -0.132         0.475        -0.273          0.457         -0.176         0.650        0.117           0.812         0.268
of MSA                        (0.076)       (0.260)        (0.099)      (0.495)         (0.199)       (0.186)        (0.191)      (0.066)         (0.071)       (0.200)
Log Population                 0.251         -0.063         -0.140       -0.253          0.143         -0.223         0.329        -0.004          -0.080        -0.100
Density of MSA                (0.105)       (0.134)        (0.129)      (0.166)         (0.238)       (0.146)        (0.211)      (0.084)         (0.106)       (0.078)
Coastal Access                 0.029         0.177          0.378        0.294           0.240         0.327          0.063        0.190           0.331         0.269
of MSA                        (0.137)       (0.161)        (0.266)      (0.160)         (0.237)       (0.221)        (0.146)      (0.132)         (0.135)       (0.106)
Share of Population            0.429         0.268          0.505        0.184           0.602         0.353          0.498        0.301           0.303         0.220
with Bachelors Ed.            (0.257)       (0.163)        (0.399)      (0.163)         (0.378)       (0.253)        (0.270)      (0.201)         (0.216)       (0.174)
Share of Population            -0.779        -0.711         -1.320       -1.031          -1.291        -1.161         -0.641       -0.667          -0.558        -0.581
under 30 in Age               (0.566)       (0.456)        (1.150)      (0.684)         (0.980)       (0.824)        (0.569)      (0.519)         (0.535)       (0.493)
Share of Population            -0.452        -0.567         -0.757       -0.804          -0.703        -0.844         -0.175       -0.432          -0.275        -0.400
over 60 in Age                (0.347)       (0.325)        (0.704)      (0.535)         (0.598)       (0.549)        (0.362)      (0.326)         (0.334)       (0.327)
Share of Population            -0.313        -0.451         -0.576       -0.968          -0.090        -0.632         0.155        -0.295          -0.128        -0.375
Female                        (0.256)       (0.268)        (0.516)      (0.592)         (0.485)       (0.489)        (0.340)      (0.251)         (0.247)       (0.285)

R-Squared                       0.84             0.88        0.54         0.69            0.61            0.74        0.82          0.91           0.90          0.92
Notes: Estimations provide partial correlations for ethnic patenting undertaken in 244 MSAs over the 1985-2004 period. The dependent variable is the MSA's share of
indicated ethnic invention relative to the MSA sample. Explanatory regressors are from the 1990 Census of Populations, excepting coastal access and the lagged ethnic
patenting share. The latter is ethnic specific and is calculated for the 1975-1984 pre-period from the ethnic patenting database. Estimations are weighted by MSA
populations. Variables are transformed to unit standard deviation for interpretation. Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis.
                          Table 4: Ethnic Inventors and MSA Characteristics, Unweighted Estimations
                                      English                  Chinese                  Indian               European                 Hispanic
                                (1)             (2)      (3)             (4)      (5)            (6)       (7)        (8)       (9)          (10)
                                                       Dependent Variable is Share of 1985-2004 Ethnic Patenting in the MSA
1975-1984 Share of                          0.884                    0.968                    0.726                  0.643                   0.655
Ethnic Patents in MSA                      (0.255)                  (0.586)                  (0.262)                (0.107)                 (0.271)
Log Population                0.810         -0.029      0.647        -0.230      0.684        0.037       0.845      0.261     0.901         0.250
of MSA                       (0.106)       (0.171)     (0.145)      (0.431)     (0.185)      (0.134)     (0.166)    (0.102)   (0.075)       (0.189)
Log Population                0.053         0.026       -0.047       -0.019      -0.002       -0.018      0.020      0.016     -0.043        -0.003
Density of MSA               (0.034)       (0.026)     (0.029)      (0.039)     (0.051)      (0.030)     (0.050)    (0.020)   (0.023)       (0.015)
Coastal Access                -0.027        0.022       0.052        0.067       0.012        0.046       -0.009     0.020     0.054         0.043
of MSA                       (0.035)       (0.039)     (0.057)      (0.047)     (0.050)      (0.055)     (0.033)    (0.030)   (0.033)       (0.026)
Share of Population           0.123         0.091       0.084        0.041       0.113        0.087       0.094      0.080     0.070         0.067
with Bachelors Ed.           (0.034)       (0.023)     (0.050)      (0.025)     (0.048)      (0.035)     (0.034)    (0.026)   (0.029)       (0.025)
Share of Population           -0.151        -0.145      -0.115       -0.152      -0.139       -0.150      -0.078     -0.110    -0.045        -0.090
under 30 in Age              (0.064)       (0.056)     (0.111)      (0.104)     (0.100)      (0.091)     (0.065)    (0.055)   (0.056)       (0.061)
Share of Population           -0.102        -0.135      -0.078       -0.151      -0.086       -0.140      -0.015     -0.081    -0.012        -0.076
over 60 in Age               (0.051)       (0.053)     (0.086)      (0.103)     (0.078)      (0.084)     (0.053)    (0.045)   (0.047)       (0.056)
Share of Population           -0.056        -0.050      -0.055       -0.058      -0.055       -0.057      -0.032     -0.039    -0.033        -0.042
Female                       (0.023)       (0.021)     (0.037)      (0.033)     (0.033)      (0.033)     (0.021)    (0.019)   (0.021)       (0.021)

R-Squared                      0.79             0.85    0.45         0.65        0.54            0.64     0.78       0.86      0.83          0.87
Notes: See Table 3. Estimations are unweighted.
                            Table 5: Concentration Ratios of Invention
                   Total             Total           English         Non-Eng.           Chinese           Indian
                 Population        Invention        Invention        Invention         Invention        Invention

                                                A. Herfindahl-Hirschman Index
1975-1979           0.025            0.040            0.037             0.061            0.062            0.059
1980-1984           0.024            0.037            0.034             0.055            0.066            0.051
1985-1989           0.024            0.034            0.030             0.051            0.063            0.052
1990-1994           0.024            0.032            0.028             0.048            0.068            0.046
1995-1999           0.023            0.038            0.031             0.065            0.106            0.072
2000-2004           0.023            0.040            0.030             0.075            0.119            0.075
Mean                0.024            0.037            0.032             0.059            0.081            0.059

                                           B. Share in Top 5 MSAs from 1975-1984
1975-1979          28.2%            37.8%             35.9%            46.7%            48.0%             43.4%
1980-1984          27.5%            35.7%             33.8%            44.0%            49.5%             40.1%
1985-1989          27.4%            33.7%             31.4%            43.0%            49.2%             41.2%
1990-1994          27.1%            32.2%             29.6%            41.2%            48.6%             38.5%
1995-1999          26.5%            33.7%             29.8%            44.6%            53.3%             43.3%
2000-2004          26.5%            33.1%             28.0%            45.1%            53.8%             41.6%
Mean               27.2%            34.4%             31.4%            44.1%            50.4%             41.4%

                                    C. Ellison-Glaeser Index Relative to MSA Populations
1975-1979            n.a.            0.003            0.002             0.011            0.014            0.011
1980-1984                            0.003            0.002             0.010            0.019            0.011
1985-1989                            0.003            0.003             0.009            0.018            0.011
1990-1994                            0.004            0.004             0.010            0.027            0.012
1995-1999                            0.012            0.009             0.029            0.067            0.038
2000-2004                            0.016            0.010             0.041            0.082            0.047
Mean                                 0.007            0.005             0.018            0.038            0.022
Notes: Metrics consider agglomeration of US domestic invention across 283 MSAs, with invention in rural areas
excluded. Top 5 MSAs are kept constant from 1975-1984 rankings: New York City, Los Angeles, Chicago,
Philadelphia, and San Francisco. Ellison and Glaeser metrics consider agglomeration of invention relative to MSA
populations. These latter metrics abstract from plant Herfindahl corrections. General population counts from 1995-
1999 are used for 2000-2004.
          Table 6: Concentration Ratios of Invention by Technology Group
                 Chemicals        Computers          Drugs          Electrical       Mechanical      Miscellaneous
                                  & Comm.          & Medical       & Electronic

                         A. Herfindahl-Hirschman Index for All Patents Within Technology Group
1975-1979          0.053             0.055            0.070            0.043            0.032               0.039
1980-1984          0.048             0.050            0.061            0.039            0.030               0.035
1985-1989          0.043             0.048            0.055            0.036            0.029               0.031
1990-1994          0.038             0.054            0.047            0.037            0.028               0.028
1995-1999          0.033             0.075            0.050            0.052            0.029               0.027
2000-2004          0.034             0.078            0.053            0.059            0.032               0.026
Mean               0.041             0.060            0.056            0.044            0.030               0.031

                                    B. HHI for English Patents Within Technology Group
1975-1979          0.049             0.051            0.063            0.040            0.030               0.036
1980-1984          0.043             0.046            0.056            0.035            0.028               0.032
1985-1989          0.038             0.043            0.050            0.033            0.027               0.028
1990-1994          0.033             0.046            0.044            0.032            0.026               0.025
1995-1999          0.029             0.059            0.046            0.038            0.026               0.023
2000-2004          0.028             0.055            0.048            0.040            0.028               0.022
Mean               0.037             0.050            0.051            0.036            0.028               0.028

                                 C. HHI for non-English Patents Within Technology Group
1975-1979          0.073             0.079            0.103            0.061            0.048               0.062
1980-1984          0.067             0.069            0.087            0.057            0.041               0.053
1985-1989          0.062             0.074            0.078            0.053            0.042               0.047
1990-1994          0.053             0.084            0.060            0.057            0.039               0.043
1995-1999          0.047             0.126            0.065            0.095            0.042               0.044
2000-2004          0.051             0.141            0.067            0.109            0.050               0.043
Mean               0.059             0.095            0.077            0.072            0.044               0.049
Notes: See Table 5. Patents are grouped into the major technology categories given in the column headers.
                  Table 7: Concentration Ratios of Invention by Institution
                  Chemicals       Computers          Drugs          Electrical       Mechanical      Miscellaneous
                                  & Comm.          & Medical       & Electronic

                                   A. Herfindahl-Hirschman Index for All Industry Patents
              \
1975-1979           0.058            0.056            0.086            0.044            0.033               0.040
1980-1984           0.053            0.050            0.076            0.040            0.031               0.037
1985-1989           0.047            0.050            0.064            0.036            0.030               0.030
1990-1994           0.042            0.056            0.054            0.038            0.031               0.027
1995-1999           0.035            0.080            0.058            0.055            0.031               0.025
2000-2004           0.037            0.082            0.061            0.064            0.037               0.025
Mean                0.045            0.062            0.066            0.046            0.032               0.031

                                      B. HHI for All University and Government Patents
1975-1979           0.043            0.088            0.043            0.054            0.041               0.040
1980-1984           0.039            0.068            0.046            0.050            0.039               0.040
1985-1989           0.036            0.059            0.044            0.046            0.041               0.029
1990-1994           0.033            0.049            0.047            0.052            0.040               0.031
1995-1999           0.035            0.048            0.041            0.045            0.040               0.027
2000-2004           0.033            0.044            0.038            0.042            0.039               0.029
Mean                0.036            0.059            0.043            0.048            0.040               0.033

                                             C. HHI for non-English Industry Patents
1975-1979           0.078            0.079            0.118            0.061            0.046               0.061
1980-1984           0.072            0.068            0.110            0.057            0.042               0.052
1985-1989           0.067            0.078            0.091            0.053            0.042               0.045
1990-1994           0.058            0.089            0.071            0.060            0.041               0.038
1995-1999           0.050            0.133            0.076            0.103            0.044               0.038
2000-2004           0.056            0.148            0.077            0.118            0.055               0.038
Mean                0.064            0.099            0.091            0.075            0.045               0.045

                                 D. HHI for non-English University and Government Patents
1975-1979           0.052            0.123            0.055            0.075            0.048               0.063
1980-1984           0.046            0.108            0.057            0.067            0.041               0.060
1985-1989           0.047            0.066            0.049            0.060            0.048               0.040
1990-1994           0.039            0.058            0.055            0.059            0.055               0.037
1995-1999           0.039            0.057            0.051            0.048            0.050               0.033
2000-2004           0.031            0.049            0.043            0.049            0.046               0.034
Mean                0.042            0.077            0.052            0.060            0.048               0.044
Notes: See Table 5. Patents are grouped into the major technology categories given in the column headers.
                           Table A1: Coagglomeration of US Ethnic Invention
              Chinese      English      European     Hispanic     Indian       Japanese    Korean    Russian   Vietnam.

                                             A. 1975-1979 Coagglomeration of Ethnic Invention
Chinese          0.014
English          0.004        0.002
European         0.011        0.004        0.014
Hispanic         0.010        0.003        0.009        0.011
Indian           0.011        0.004        0.012        0.009        0.011
Japanese         0.010        0.005        0.005        0.011        0.005        0.034
Korean           0.009        0.004        0.009        0.008        0.008        0.012      0.012
Russian          0.011        0.005        0.012        0.011        0.011        0.012      0.010     0.015
Vietnam.         0.011        0.004        0.009        0.012        0.008        0.020      0.010     0.013     0.024
                                             B. 2000-2004 Coagglomeration of Ethnic Invention
Chinese          0.082
English          0.024        0.010
European         0.033        0.011        0.016
Hispanic         0.034        0.010        0.014        0.016
Indian           0.059        0.019        0.025        0.025        0.047
Japanese         0.082        0.024        0.032        0.034        0.058        0.084
Korean           0.075        0.020        0.030        0.031        0.053        0.075      0.071
Russian          0.051        0.015        0.022        0.022        0.037        0.051      0.048     0.034
Vietnam.         0.086        0.026        0.033        0.035        0.062        0.087      0.078     0.051     0.097
Notes: Metrics consider coagglomeration of ethnic invention relative to MSA populations.
                Table A2: Concentration Ratios at Sub-Category Levels
                Chemicals          Computers       Drugs       Electrical    Mechanical   Miscellaneous
                                   & Comm.       & Medical    & Electronic

                          A. Herfindahl-Hirschman Index for All Patents Within Technology Group
1975-1979             0.053           0.055         0.070        0.043         0.032            0.039
1980-1984             0.048           0.050         0.061        0.039         0.030            0.035
1985-1989             0.043           0.048         0.055        0.036         0.029            0.031
1990-1994             0.038           0.054         0.047        0.037         0.028            0.028
1995-1999             0.033           0.075         0.050        0.052         0.029            0.027
2000-2004             0.034           0.078         0.053        0.059         0.032            0.026
Mean                  0.041           0.060         0.056        0.044         0.030            0.031

                              B. Unweighted HHI Average Across Sub-Category Technology Groups
1975-1979             0.057           0.059         0.072        0.051         0.044            0.052
1980-1984             0.053           0.059         0.069        0.048         0.040            0.050
1985-1989             0.050           0.064         0.063        0.046         0.042            0.042
1990-1994             0.041           0.073         0.054        0.046         0.049            0.040
1995-1999             0.039           0.095         0.057        0.057         0.048            0.041
2000-2004             0.040           0.102         0.062        0.060         0.049            0.051
Mean                  0.047           0.075         0.063        0.051         0.045            0.046

                               C. Weighted HHI Average Across Sub-Category Technology Groups
1975-1979             0.060           0.059         0.083        0.047         0.038            0.047
1980-1984             0.053           0.055         0.071        0.044         0.035            0.044
1985-1989             0.047           0.055         0.066        0.043         0.036            0.038
1990-1994             0.041           0.062         0.054        0.045         0.040            0.035
1995-1999             0.037           0.085         0.058        0.064         0.041            0.035
2000-2004             0.038           0.088         0.062        0.072         0.047            0.042
Mean                  0.046           0.068         0.066        0.052         0.040            0.040
Notes: See Table 6.
Table A3: Descriptive Statistics for Inventors Residing in Foreign Countries and Regions
                                         Summary Statistics for Full and Restricted Matching Procedures
                                      Percentage of                       Percentage of                         Percentage of
                                    Region's Inventors                  Region's Inventors                   Region's Inventors
                                      Matched with                      Assigned Ethnicity                   Assigned Ethnicity
                                     Ethnic Database                     of Their Region                     of Region (Partial)
                         Obs.        Full      Restrict.                  Full      Restrict.                  Full      Restrict.

United Kingdom         187,266       99%         95%                      85%         83%                      92%         91%
China, Singapore       167,370      100%         98%                      88%         89%                      91%         91%
Western Europe        1,210,231      98%         79%                      66%         46%                      73%         58%
Hispanic Nations        27,298       99%         74%                      74%         69%                      93%         93%
India                   13,582       93%         76%                      88%         88%                      90%         89%
Japan                 1,822,253     100%         89%                     100%         96%                     100%         96%
South Korea            127,975      100%         100%                     84%         83%                      89%         88%
Russia                  33,237       94%         78%                      81%         84%                      93%         94%
Vietnam                   41        100%         98%                      36%         43%                      44%         43%

                                       Complete Ethnic Composition of Region's Inventors (Full Matching)
                       English     Chinese European Hispanic             Indian     Japanese     Korean      Russian    Vietnam.

United Kingdom           85%          2%          5%          3%           2%          0%          0%          2%           0%
China, Singapore          3%         88%          1%          1%           1%          1%          4%          1%           1%
Western Europe           21%          1%         66%          8%           1%          0%          0%          3%           0%
Hispanic Nations         11%          1%         10%         74%           0%          1%          0%          2%           0%
India                     3%          1%          1%          5%          88%          0%          0%          2%           0%
Japan                     0%          0%          0%          0%           0%        100%          0%          0%           0%
South Korea               2%         11%          0%          1%           0%          1%         84%          1%           0%
Russia                    5%          1%          3%          9%           0%          0%          0%          81%          0%
Vietnam                  17%         21%         12%          0%           0%         10%          2%          2%          36%
Notes: Matching is undertaken at inventor level using the Full and Restricted Matching procedures outlined in the text. The middle
columns of the top panel summarize the share of each region's inventors assigned the ethnicity of that region; the complete
composition for the Full Matching procedure is detailed in the bottom panel. The right-hand columns in the top panel document the
percentage of the region's inventors assigned at least partially to their region's ethnicity.
Greater China includes Mainland China, Hong Kong, Macao, and Taiwan. Western Europe includes Austria, Belgium, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Sweden, and Switzerland. Hispanic Nations includes
Argentina, Belize, Brazil, Chile, Columbia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras,
Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Spain, Uruguay, and Venezuela. Russia includes former Soviet
Union countries.
           Table A4: Most Common Ethnic Surnames for Inventors Residing in the US
Chinese            English             European               Hispanic / Filipino           Indian / Hindi
CAI          585   ADAMS       4,490   ABEL             269   ACOSTA                  171   ACHARYA            338
CAO          657   ALLEN       5,074   ALBRECHT         564   AGUILAR                 138   AGARWAL            580
CHAN       3,096   ANDERSON   10,719   ANTOS            230   ALVAREZ                 446   AGGARWAL           282
CHANG      3,842   BAILEY      2,431   AUERBACH         193   ANDREAS                 128   AGRAWAL            797
CHAO         796   BAKER       4,671   BAER             422   AYER                    166   AHMAD              355
CHAU         486   BELL        2,738   BAERLOCHER       252   AYRES                   180   AHMED              652
CHEN      12,860   BENNETT     2,734   BAUER          1,470   BALES                   240   AKRAM              640
CHENG      2,648   BROOKS      2,015   BECHTEL          179   BLANCO                  141   ALI                559
CHEUNG       950   BROWN      11,662   BECK           1,712   BOLANOS                 130   ARIMILLI           432
CHIANG     1,112   BURNS       2,098   BENDER           650   BOLES                   118   ARORA              214
CHIEN        429   CAMPBELL    3,959   BERG           1,465   CABRAL                  154   ASH                290
CHIN         423   CARLSON     2,745   BERGER         1,304   CABRERA                 163   BALAKRISHNAN       228
CHIU         924   CARTER      2,658   BOEHM            256   CALDERON                124   BANERJEE           371
CHOU       1,144   CHANG       2,032   BOUTAGHOU        266   CASTANEDA               116   BASU               233
CHOW       1,139   CLARK       5,493   CARON            290   CASTILLO                124   BHAT               224
CHU        2,353   COHEN       2,626   CERAMI           172   CASTRO                  119   BHATIA             411
DENG         439   COLE        2,143   CHANDRARATNA     229   CHAVEZ                  194   BHATT              242
DING         589   COLLINS     2,992   CHEVALLIER       204   CONTRERAS               137   BHATTACHARYA       216
DONG         492   COOK        3,556   DIETRICH         312   CRUZ                    319   BHATTACHARYYA      265
FAN        1,036   COOPER      3,045   DIETZ            496   CUEVAS                  123   BOSE               238
FANG         846   COX         2,407   EBERHARDT        192   DAS                     213   CHANDRA            221
FENG         658   DAVIS       8,848   EHRLICH          311   DELGADO                 216   CHATTERJEE         647
FONG         727   EDWARDS     3,375   ERRICO           190   DIAS                    174   DAOUD              305
FU           767   EVANS       4,082   FARKAS           169   DIAZ                    584   DAS                522
FUNG         455   FISCHER     2,081   FERRARI          177   DOMINGUEZ               195   DATTA              424
GAO          785   FISHER      2,748   FISCHELL         280   DURAN                   142   DE                 234
GUO          921   FOSTER      2,616   FUCHS            394   ELIAS                   230   DESAI              974
HAN          777   FOX         1,990   GAISER           193   ESTRADA                 142   DIXIT              256
HE         1,159   GARDNER     2,412   GELARDI          176   FERNANDES               152   DUTTA              338
HO         1,282   GORDON      2,315   GRILLIOT         201   FERNANDEZ               546   GANDHI             228
HSIEH        980   GRAHAM      2,042   GUEGLER          179   FIGUEROA                146   GARG               345
HSU        3,034   GRAY        2,626   GUNTER           177   FLORES                  191   GHOSH              661
HU         1,695   GREEN       3,540   GUNTHER          247   FREITAS                 132   GOEL               279
HUANG      4,605   HALL        4,907   HAAS             843   GAGNON                  265   GUPTA            1,935
HUI          451   HAMILTON    1,991   HAMPEL           187   GARCIA                1,310   HASSAN             217
HUNG         562   HANSON      2,148   HANSEN         2,947   GARZA                   167   HUSSAIN            233
HWANG        800   HARRIS      4,793   HARTMAN        1,214   GOMES                   199   HUSSAINI           299
JIANG      1,399   HAYES       2,031   HARTMANN         385   GOMEZ                   413   ISLAM              266
KAO          714   HILL        3,590   HAUSE            266   GONSALVES               141   IYER               601
KUO        1,157   HOFFMAN     2,387   HECHT            245   GONZALES                281   JAIN               912
LAI        1,134   HOWARD      2,160   HEINZ            168   GONZALEZ              1,055   JOSHI              886
LAM        1,336   HUGHES      2,198   HORODYSKY        230   GUTIERREZ               601   KAMATH             219
LAU        1,320   JACKSON     3,980   HORVATH          387   GUZMAN                  139   KAPOOR             222
LEE        4,006   JENSEN      2,361   IACOVELLI        287   HALASA                  202   KHANNA             378
LEUNG      1,165   JOHNSON    17,960   JACOBS         1,962   HERNANDEZ               703   KRISHNAMURTHY      369
LEW          460   JONES      10,630   KARR             196   HERRERA                 171   KRISHNAN           512
LI         6,863   KELLER      2,041   KASPER           227   HERRON                  450   KULKARNI           299
LIANG      1,173   KELLY       2,775   KEMPF            228   HIDALGO                 186   KUMAR            2,005
LIAO         553   KENNEDY     2,208   KNAPP            833   JIMENEZ                 246   LAL                366
LIM          485   KING        4,686   KNIFTON          206   LEE                     237   MALIK              532
LIN        5,770   KLEIN       2,347   KOENIG           521   LOPEZ                   738   MATHUR             306
LING         521   LARSON      2,537   KRESGE           179   MACHADO                 135   MEHROTRA           265
                       Table A4: Most Common US Ethnic Surnames (continued)
Chinese            English         European               Hispanic / Filipino           Indian / Hindi
LIU        6,406   LEE         9,490 LANGE          757   MARIN                   177   MEHTA              925
LO         1,053   LEWIS       4,732 LASKARIS       192   MARQUEZ                 117   MENON              325
LU         2,289   LONG        2,392 LEMELSON       324   MARTIN                  183   MISHRA             348
LUO          815   MARSHALL    2,088 LIOTTA         171   MARTINEZ              1,112   MISRA              282
MA         1,708   MARTIN      6,773 LORENZ         341   MATIS                   249   MOOKHERJEE         272
MAO          545   MILLER     14,942 LUDWIG         500   MEDINA                  192   MUKHERJEE          327
NG         1,132   MITCHELL    3,075 LUTZ           679   MENARD                  149   MURTHY             236
ONG          473   MOORE       6,459 MAIER          492   MENDOZA                 173   NAGARAJAN          270
PAN        1,435   MORGAN      2,824 MARTIN         223   MIRANDA                 140   NAIR               560
PENG         530   MORRIS      3,223 MAYER        1,097   MOLINA                  129   NARASIMHAN         225
SHEN       1,480   MURPHY      3,609 MEYER        3,004   MORALES                 146   NARAYAN            312
SHI          964   MURRAY      2,207 MOLNAR         335   MORENO                  128   NARAYANAN          419
SHIH         938   MYERS       2,625 MORIN          320   MUNOZ                   177   NATARAJAN          301
SONG         636   NELSON      6,444 MUELLER      2,242   NUNEZ                   207   PAREKH             301
SU         1,025   OLSON       3,140 MULLER         985   ORTEGA                  206   PARIKH             286
SUN        2,521   PARKER      3,181 NAGEL          383   ORTIZ                   362   PATEL            3,879
TAI          463   PETERSON    4,912 NATHAN         171   PADILLA                 116   PATIL              352
TAM          589   PHILLIPS    3,875 NILSSEN        234   PAZ DE ARAUJO           148   PRAKASH            326
TAN        1,105   PRICE       2,062 NOVAK          788   PEREIRA                 280   PRASAD             549
TANG       2,277   REED        2,645 PAGANO         177   PEREZ                   675   PURI               233
TENG         437   RICHARDSON 2,114 PALERMO         177   QUINTANA                126   RAGHAVAN           378
TONG         677   ROBERTS     4,352 PASTOR         238   RAMIREZ                 345   RAHMAN             367
TSAI       1,244   ROBINSON    3,741 POPP           202   RAMOS                   226   RAJAGOPALAN        396
TSANG        499   ROGERS      2,974 RAO            343   REGNIER                 137   RAMACHANDRAN       388
TSENG        538   ROSS        2,377 REITZ          248   REIS                    168   RAMAKRISHNAN       270
TUNG         565   RUSSELL     2,611 ROHRBACH       246   REYES                   150   RAMAN              222
WANG      11,905   RYAN        2,404 ROMAN          362   RIVERA                  489   RAMASWAMY          244
WEI        1,317   SCOTT       3,583 ROSTOKER       245   RODRIGUES               188   RAMESH             364
WEN          455   SHAW        2,369 SCHMIDT      3,753   RODRIGUEZ             1,314   RANGARAJAN         244
WONG       4,811   SIMPSON     2,014 SCHNEIDER    2,246   ROMERO                  292   RAO              1,196
WOO          710   SMITH      24,173 SCHULTZ      2,273   RUIZ                    297   REDDY              459
WU         5,521   SNYDER      2,335 SCHULZ         921   SALAZAR                 179   ROY                279
XIE          609   STEVENS     2,221 SCHWARTZ     2,394   SANCHEZ                 717   SANDHU             878
XU         2,249   STEWART     2,924 SCHWARZ        633   SANTIAGO                158   SAXENA             213
YAN          826   SULLIVAN    2,933 SPERANZA       215   SERRANO                 172   SHAH             2,467
YANG       4,584   TAYLOR      6,659 SPIEGEL        177   SILVA                   457   SHARMA           1,249
YAO          699   THOMAS      5,312 STRAETER       454   SOTO                    158   SINGH            2,412
YE           525   THOMPSON    6,424 THEEUWES       247   SOUZA                   145   SINGHAL            245
YEE          729   TURNER      2,855 TROKHAN        167   SUAREZ                  150   SINHA              463
YEH          928   WALKER      4,887 VOCK           423   TORRES                  352   SIRCAR             225
YEN          467   WALLACE     1,963 WACHTER        199   VALDEZ                  127   SRINIVASAN         876
YIN          617   WARD        2,913 WAGNER       2,499   VARGA                   130   SRIVASTAVA         498
YU         2,293   WATSON      2,139 WEBER        3,003   VASQUEZ                 153   SUBRAMANIAN        702
YUAN         825   WHITE       6,190 WEDER        1,067   VAZQUEZ                 260   THAKUR             381
ZHANG      4,532   WILLIAMS   10,442 WEISS        1,533   VELAZQUEZ               134   TRIVEDI            383
ZHAO       1,337   WILSON      7,677 WOLF         1,604   VINALS                  220   VENKATESAN         281
ZHENG      1,037   WOOD        4,525 WRISTERS       185   YU                      140   VERMA              262
ZHOU       1,517   WRIGHT      4,521 ZIMMERMAN    1,542   ZAMORA                  120   VISWANATHAN        218
ZHU        1,749   YOUNG       5,957 ZIMMERMANN     226   ZUNIGA                  128   VORA               223
           Table A4: Most Common US Ethnic Surnames (continued)
Japanese              Korean             Russian             Vietnamese
AOKI            141   AHN          610   AGHAJANIAN     77   ABOU-GHARBIA      22
AOYAMA           66   BAE          122   ALPEROVICH     64   BAHN              15
ASATO            73   BAEK          77   ALTSHULER      71   BANH              21
CHEN             88   BAK           68   ANDREEV        94   BI               158
DOI              90   BANG          91   ANSCHER        95   BICH              18
FUJII            92   BARK          39   BABICH         79   BIEN              91
FUJIMOTO         98   BYUN          87   BABLER         73   BUI              309
FUKUDA           84   CHA           45   BARINAGA       72   CAN               19
FURUKAWA        218   CHAE          33   BARNA          96   CONG              41
HANAWA           69   CHANG        289   BELOPOLSKY     71   DANG              23
HARADA           90   CHIN          33   BERCHENKO      94   DIEM              24
HASEGAWA        171   CHO          977   BLASKO         79   DIEP              52
HASHIMOTO       110   CHOE         193   BLONDER        82   DINH             232
HAYASHI         148   CHOI       1,081   BONIN          97   DIP               11
HEY              75   CHON          33   CODILIAN       90   DO                13
HIGASHI          98   CHOO          94   COMISKEY       74   DOAN             616
HIGUCHI          81   CHUN         330   DAMADIAN      118   DOMINH            33
HONDA           102   CHUNG      1,499   DANKO          69   DONLAN            21
IDE             136   DROZD         45   DAYAN         143   DOVAN             26
IKEDA            98   EYUBOGLU      36   DERDERIAN     169   DUAN             241
IMAI            129   GANG          34   DOMBROSKI      66   DUE               20
INOUE            90   GU           533   ELKO           81   DUONG            153
IRICK            86   HAHM          42   FETCENKO       62   DUONG-VAN         13
ISHIDA           93   HAHN       1,016   FISHKIN        82   ESKEW             12
ISHII            82   HAM           45   FOMENKOV       73   GRAN              20
ISHIKAWA        208   HAN          145   FRENKEL        71   HAC               20
ITO             260   HANSELL       39   FRIDMAN        67   HAUGAN            16
IWAMOTO          78   HOGLE         43   FROLOV         68   HO                35
KANEKO          157   HONE          78   GARABEDIAN    104   HOANG            277
KATO            113   HONG         907   GELFAND       139   HOPPING           15
KAUTZ            87   HOSKING       63   GINZBURG       73   HUYNH            317
KAWAMURA         87   HUH           32   GITLIN         73   HUYNH-BA          19
KAWASAKI        104   HWANG        108   GLUSCHENKOV    73   KHA               13
KAYA             78   HYUN          54   GORALSKI       69   KHAW              20
KIMURA          108   IM            80   GORDIN         65   KHIEU             35
KINO             74   JANG          46   GORIN          99   KHU               13
KINOSHITA        93   JEON         134   GRINBERG      104   KHUC              15
KIRIHATA        107   JEONG        122   GROCHOWSKI     77   LAHUE             17
KISHI            65   JI           268   GUREVICH      107   LAURSEN           72
KIWALA          132   JIN          673   GURSKY         89   LAVAN             18
KOBAYASHI       296   JO            41   GUZIK          79   LE             1,263
LI               75   JOO           68   HABA           96   LE ROY            29
LIU              84   JU            55   HYNECEK        82   LEEN              75
MAKI            167   JUNG         582   IBRAHIM       229   LEMINH            17
MATSUMOTO       147   KANG         809   IVANOV        165   LUONG            107
MIYANO           70   KIANI         74   IVERS          66   LY               118
MIZUHARA         87   KIM        5,455   JOVANOVIC      65   MINH              41
MORI            128   KO           595   JU            126   NELLUMS           17
MORITA           64   KOO          214   JUHASZ         71   NGO              735
MOSLEHI         165   KUN           63   KAHLE         173   NGUY              12
MOTOYAMA        130   KWAK          96   KAMINSKI      393   NGUYEN         4,720
MURAKAMI         67   KWON         298   KAMINSKY      150   NHO               12
           Table A4: Most Common US Ethnic Surnames (continued)
Japanese              Korean             Russian              Vietnamese
NAJJAR           81   LEE        1,032   KANEVSKY       114   NIEH            69
NAKAGAWA        125   LIM          135   KAPLINSKY       69   NIM             14
NAKAJIMA         99   MENNIE        96   KAPOSI          72   PHAM           901
NAKAMURA        187   MIN          242   KHAN           104   PHAN            27
NAKANISHI        64   NA            34   KHANDROS       161   PHANG           11
NAKANO          104   NAM           68   KHOVAYLO        69   PHY             19
NEMOTO           70   NEVINS        42   KOLMANOVSKY     70   POSTMAN         12
NISHIBORI        88   NYCE          56   KORSUNSKY      153   QUACH           95
NISHIMURA       131   OH           461   KOWAL           74   QUI             11
NODA            107   PAEK          41   LAPIDUS         63   QUY             13
OGAWA            74   PAIK         144   LEE            113   ROCH            26
OGURA           209   PAK          116   LOPATA         113   TA              91
OHARA           269   PARK       2,145   MESSING         74   TAKACH          30
OHKAWA           89   QUAY         107   METLITSKY       95   TAU             23
OKADA            87   RHEE         191   MIKHAIL        115   THACH           33
OKAMOTO         103   RIM           57   MIRKIN          66   THAI            86
ONO             148   RYANG         38   MOGHADAM        72   THAO            21
OVSHINSKY       314   RYU           99   NADELSON        65   THI             13
SAITO           136   SAHM          45   NAZARIAN        75   THIEN           15
SAKAI            79   SAHOO         58   NEMIROVSKY      73   THUT            28
SASAKI          209   SEO           47   NIE             72   TIEDT           14
SATO            231   SHIM         162   OGG            125   TIEP            12
SETO             73   SHIN         399   PAPADOPOULOS   132   TIETJEN         59
SHIMIZU         103   SHINN         96   PAPATHOMAS      67   TO              76
SUZUKI          306   SIN           62   PETROV         102   TON-THAT        16
TAKAHASHI       245   SJOSTROM      39   PINARBASI      131   TRAN         2,050
TAKEUCHI        242   SO           332   PINCHUK        123   TRANDAI         14
TAMURA           83   SOHN          78   POPOV           81   TRANG           34
TANAKA          328   SON          147   PROKOP          86   TRANK           11
THOR             66   SONG         105   RABER           78   TRIEU           49
TSUJI            92   SUE           64   RABINOVICH     123   TRONG           12
TSUKAMOTO        89   SUH          311   ROBICHAUX       65   TRUC            27
UCHIDA           72   SUK           75   RUBSAMEN        69   TU             545
UEDA             72   SUNG          41   SAHATJIAN       66   TUTEN           23
WADA            153   SUR           38   SARKISIAN       65   TUY             16
WANG             81   TOOHEY        33   SARRAF          82   TY              27
WATANABE        416   UM            36   SCHREIER        62   VAN             58
WU               67   WHANG        175   SCHWAN          81   VAN CLEVE       40
YAMADA          180   WON          108   SIMKO           77   VAN DAM         20
YAMAGUCHI       102   YI           237   SMETANA         69   VAN LE          17
YAMAMOTO        432   YIM          145   SOFRANKO        66   VAN NGUYEN      29
YAMASAKI         67   YOHN          32   SOKOLOV         91   VAN PHAN        26
YAMASHITA       105   YOO          290   SORKIN         111   VAN TRAN        15
YAMAZAKI         91   YOON         614   TABAK           85   VIET            11
YANG             65   YOUN          38   TEPMAN          80   VO             269
YASUDA           75   YU           198   TERZIAN         87   VO-DINH         32
YOSHIDA         178   YUH           96   VASHCHENKO      96   VOVAN           20
YUAN            112   YUM           78   WASILEWSKI      80   VU             502
ZHAO             81   YUN          222   ZEMEL          126   VUONG          107
                    Table A5: Ethnic Inventors and MSA Characteristics Including Overall Ethnic Shares
                                      English                      Chinese                     Indian                     European                Hispanic
                                (1)             (2)          (3)             (4)         (5)            (6)            (7)        (8)       (9)          (10)
                                                          Dependent Variable is Share of 1985-2004 Ethnic Patenting in the MSA
1980 Share of Ethnic           0.336        0.464          1.126         1.137          0.373        0.498          0.324        0.390     0.105         -0.042
Population in MSA             (0.350)      (0.188)        (0.375)       (0.336)        (0.220)      (0.124)        (0.140)      (0.066)   (0.144)       (0.213)
Log Population                 0.473        0.162          -0.374        -0.692         0.315        0.003          0.540        0.266     0.790         0.860
of MSA                        (0.380)      (0.167)        (0.297)       (0.363)        (0.270)      (0.196)        (0.226)      (0.102)   (0.192)       (0.254)
Log Population                 0.040        0.108          0.108         0.366          0.016        -0.057         0.041        0.193     -0.024        -0.097
Density of MSA                (0.028)      (0.099)        (0.052)       (0.210)        (0.047)      (0.185)        (0.039)      (0.094)   (0.033)       (0.151)
Coastal Access                 -0.018       0.098          -0.036        -0.144         0.023        0.335          -0.002       0.105     0.048         0.334
of MSA                        (0.035)      (0.131)        (0.023)       (0.115)        (0.054)      (0.251)        (0.033)      (0.126)   (0.043)       (0.194)
Share of Population            0.141        0.372          0.082         0.121          0.129        0.428          0.111        0.376     0.089         0.263
with Bachelors Ed.            (0.042)      (0.241)        (0.028)       (0.141)        (0.058)      (0.347)        (0.039)      (0.235)   (0.028)       (0.184)
Share of Population            -0.138       -0.650         -0.142        -0.518         -0.156       -1.132         -0.110       -0.641    -0.060        -0.509
under 30 in Age               (0.072)      (0.537)        (0.066)       (0.247)        (0.116)      (0.913)        (0.068)      (0.555)   (0.045)       (0.430)
Share of Population            -0.086       -0.399         -0.110        -0.339         -0.100       -0.693         -0.051       -0.318    -0.016        -0.251
over 60 in Age                (0.057)      (0.344)        (0.061)       (0.203)        (0.090)      (0.594)        (0.054)      (0.352)   (0.039)       (0.284)
Share of Population            -0.062       -0.386         -0.038        -0.709         -0.058       -0.328         -0.039       -0.238    -0.038        -0.118
Female                        (0.026)      (0.265)        (0.026)       (0.333)        (0.039)      (0.472)        (0.023)      (0.236)   (0.021)       (0.199)

Weights                         No              Yes          No          Yes             No             Yes             No       Yes        No           Yes
R-Squared                      0.79             0.84        0.82         0.84           0.56            0.66           0.81      0.88      0.83          0.90
Notes: See Tables 3 and 4. Estimations incorporate the overall share of each ethnicity in MSAs from the 1990 Census.
