NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE WELFARE EFFECTS OF A CAPITAL
INCOME TAX IN AN OPEN ECONOMY

David

G. Hartinan

Working Paper No. 1551

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1985

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation and project in Productivity and Industrial change in
the World Econonrf. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper I1551
January 1985

The Welfare Effects of a Capital
Income Tax in an Open Economy

ABS TRACT

International capital mobility has typically been ignored in
discussions of the welfare effects of the capital income tax. In the atypical
analysis which does consider the open economy it is recognized that highly-.
elastic capital flows could significantly alter the usual conclusions.

While there have been strenuous debates about the elasticity of
international capital flows, there can be little disagreement that international ownership of capital is an important and growing phenomenon. In this
paper, we explore the welfare effects of changes in the capital income tax from
a different perspective: that of a country in which foreign ownership of a portion of the capital stock and foreign owners' payment of taxes is a reality.
With this modification in emphasis, a simple graphical analysis is
sufficient to indicate that international capital ownership could easily dominate other welfare effects of tax changes. At least, the arguments presented
in this paper raise a caution about ignoring the openness of the economy simply
because elasticities are believed small.

David G. Hartman
Vice President and Chief
Interna tional Economist
Data Resources, Inc.
24 Rartwell, Avenue

Lexington, MA 02173

The Welfare Effects of a Capital Income Tax in an Open Economy
David G. Hartman*

In analyzing the impacts of capital income taxation, researchers have

typically ignored the possibility of international capital movements. One
major exception is the work of Goulder, Shoven, and Whalley (1983), in which
U.S. investment abroad is explicitly incorporated in a large general

equilibrium model. Goulder, et al. demonstrate that the welfare effects of a
variety of possible tax changes can be strongly influenced b,r the presence of

highly—elastic capital outflows. The few other discussions of capital taxation
in an open economy take the same general approach: international capital mobi-

lity is viewed as merely a potential constraint on domestic policymaking. The
constraint is seen as important only if the degree of capital mobility assumed
in the analysis is relatively (some would say unrealistically) high.l
The elasticity of international capital flows has thus been taken as
the determinant of whether our

usual

analysis of capital taxation must he

altered in recognition of the openness of the U.S. economy.2 As a consequence,
public finance researchers have taken some comfort from the (admittedly controversial) findings of Feldstein and Horioka (1980) and Feldstèin (1983) that

capital apparently does not move readily across national boundaries. Providing
further ammunition for those who prefer the traditional closed—economy analysis
is the literature on multinational firms which generally concludes that taxes
play at most a minor role in international investment decisions.3

*Vjce President and Chief International Economist, DEl and Research Affiliate
and former Executive Director, 1BER.

—2—

Since the U.S. econorrr appears destined for increased inter-

nationalization, and international capital inflows are at an unprecedented
level, the effort to understand capital mobility and its implications for

policy will almost certainly intensify. Rather than enter the debate on the
extent of capital mobility, we seek here to confront directly the important
issue of the welfare effects of capital income taxation when the capital stock

to which the tax applies is partly foreign owned. Since the extent of foreign
ownership is well—documented we will take that phenomenon as given and consider

the implications of different degrees of capital mobility. Surprising in light
of the conventional wisdom is our conclusion that international capital

ownership could plausibly have implications for economic welfare that dwarf
other considerations related to capital taxation, even if the perceived inelasticity of international capital flows turns out to be an accurate charac-

terization. Specifically, a simple calculation demonstrates that even if
capital is totally unresponsive to rates of return, the mere presence of a
stock of foreign—owned capital is sufficient to reverse the direction of
welfare effects arising from relatively major tax changes widely perceived as
having important welfare consequences.

I. Welfare Effects of the Capital Income Tax
A. It happens to be most convenient for our purposes if we focus on the
welfare implications of the presence of a foreign—owned capital supply, taking

the domestic distortions caused by taxes on capital income as given. In other
words, we will

be

focusing on the welfare effects that would be left out of a

—3—

closed—economy analysis. To demonstrate the basic approach, Figure 1 illustrates a closed economy capital market equilibrium consisting of a capital stock

of S = K, earning a rate of return rc. Since our focus is on the grafting of a
foreign sector onto the traditional model, little attention will be given to
the specific assumptions and behavioral relations underlying the supply of

savings, 3(r), and demand for capital, K(r) schedules. An economy in which
foreign investors supply K'—S' of capital when the world and open domestic eco-

nomy rates of return are r0, finds domestic savers supplying S' and domestic
investment totaling K'.

Comparing the open economy equilibrium to that of the closed economy,

we determine that the foreign capital made available to the domestic economy
leads to extra domestic production, which can be measured as the area ACK'K.

Using some rather loose but quite common terminolor (as we will discuss in
more detail below), we will describe AKS'B as the "value of the domestic
savings" (s—s') made available for other uses by the foreign capital inflow.

Foreign investors are paid only BCK'S' for the use of their capital, so the
domestic economy is better off by an amount measured by ABC as a consequence of
foreign investment.

Those who are familiar with the literature on the welfare effects of
capital income taxation (especially Feldstein (1918) and the work which has

built on its important insights) will recognize the difficulty in measuring

welfare effects by the area under the savings supply function. To analyze
welfare effects of distortions to savings, it is important to recognize that
the actual economic distortion of a capital income tax on which one should

-4-

s(r)

rc

4—
tz

i
k(r)
SI

S:k

F IGURE

k'

1

—5—

focus is that which alters the level of future consumption. After all, future
consumption is the "good" for which demand is being distorted by the tax.
There are several reasons for not paying a great deal of attention to this

complication in the present context. First, and not of minor importance, is
that the analysis is simplified considerably and clarified enormously by the

use of graphs, as is common in discussions of open economies. It is not
obvious how graphical analysis of international capital movements could be
integrated with explicit consiaeration of the impact on iuture consumption.

Furthermore, it does not seem necessary. Recall that we are not interested in
the welfare effects of changes in the tax rate on capital income, but only on
the portion of the welfare effects of tax changes arising because of the inter-

national ownership and mobility of capital. It is only under "special assumptions" that we will arrive at highly specific conclusions anyway and in those
cases the results turn out not to be sensitive to our shorthand method of

describing welfare changes in terms of the "savings elasticity." In any event,
the implications for future consumption are generally ciuite clear; those

instances in which conclusions drawn from a focus on the savings elasticity

could be misleading will be highlighted. Otherwise, we will simply proceed as
if the graphs were illustrating the curves with the conceptually—correct
elasticities.

Suppose that, in addition to not being able to extract the total production we would attribute to the presence of their capital in the domestic
economy, foreign investors are required to pay taxes to the host country's

government on their returns. Then, the welfare differential is given by the

—6—

area ABC plus the tax revenue extracted from the foreigners' returns.

B. The Full Market Model
The extension of this analysis to incorporate the full workings of
the market in the presence of taxes requires the complications included in

Figure 2. The left—hand panel in Figure 2 begins with Figure 1 and adds schedules indicating the relationships of capital supply to gross rates of return

when capital returns are taxed at an initial rate t, as well as a reduced rate

t'. Obviously, the S(r(l—t)) schedule is simply the S(r) schedule displaced
upward by rt in order that the given net rate of return produces the same level

of saving under different tax schemes. The right—hand portion of the figure
shows the net demand schedules for capital imports, D ,
n

derived

from the rela—

tionships shown in the left—hand panel at the initial tax rate and at the

reduced tax rate. The net foreign capital supply schedules, S*(),
corresponding to different tax rates are drawn with moderate upward slope in
Figure 2, but since their shape is obviously controversial, a range of alternatives will be examined.

Equilibrium obtains under the original tax regime with S (= K—S) of
foreign capital supplied and capital earning gross return rG. The presence of
foreign investment provides an increment to national welfare of the area ABC
(which, by construction, can be measured in either panel), plus the revenue

collected from foreign investors BCJI. At the reduced tax rate t', the

corresponding welfare effect is given by the sum of areas DEF and EFHG) An
analysis of the welfare change which ignores foreign investment will, thus, err

S S'

Ik
k'

E

r

FIGURE 2

G

B

D

A

r

S(r)

S(r(1 —t'))

S(r(1—t))

S*(r)

D(r(1 -t))

(1 —t'))

D(r(1-t'))

S*(r(1_t))

—8—

by an amount (DEF —

ABC) + (EFHG -

BCJI).

It should again by emphasized that

we are describing only the extra welfare effect arising from the economy's
openness to foreign investment, not the total welfare effect of the tax.

In

other words, we are examining "how incorrect" the closed economy analysis would
be.

Because of the particular way in which Figure 2 has been drawn, the
tax's extra welfare effect due to the foreign investor is clearly negative,
arising largely because the tax cut radically reduces the tax revenue obtained

from foreign owners of the capital stock. The revenue impact is our crucial
point of departure from the conventional model of the welfare effects of the
corporate income tax: unlike a redistribution between parties within the
system, which need not be considered in a context of total welfare, a tax cut
on the foreign investor's return redistributes income toward those outside the

system and is accompanied by a potentially large welfare ioss. Some notion of
the possible order to magnitude of this factor will be obtained below; but,
first,

some special cases will be

workings

C.

examined to shed further light on the

of the model.

"Small"

Foreign Investment

As an extreme case, suppose that foreign investment is "small" rela-

tive to the size of the total domestic capital market. In the context of our
model,

this situation is defined as

one in which the level of foreign invest-

ment has a negligible impact on the domestic rate of return. The net domestic
demand and foreign supply schedules are altered as shown in Figure 3. Clearly,

-9

*

r

D

B
E

G

s*

F IGURE 3

—10—

the domestic capital market conditions alone dictate the extent to which the
net rate of return paid to foreign investors increases in response to a tax
cut.

More importantly, the welfare implications of adding the foreign sector to the standard model can be described by examining only the change in tax
revenue received from foreign investors (EFHG —

BCJI).5 The incremental

welfare effect could obviously be positive or negative depending on the elasticity of the international capital supply. Surprisingly, the case of a coraple—
tely inelastic supply, which has been dismissed as uninteresting in prior
studies, produces the highest net welfare loss, with the error produced by
ignoring foreign investment being equal to the change in the tax rate times the

level of the foreign capital invested. Of course, the effect may not be of
great significance if foreign investment is literally "small" in the sense of

having negligible effects on capital returns. However, what the example shows
is that there could be implications worthy of analysis even (or especially) in
cases in which capital flows are perfectly inelastic.

D. Perfectly Inelastic Capital Flows
We therefore turn to the more general situation of a non—negligible

level of foreign capital which is perfectly inelastic in supply. This case is
of obvious interest, since it is the extreme version of the situation cited to
justify the use of closed economy models of capital income taxation.
As Figure )4

demonstrates, and as the reader has undoubtedly inferred

from the discussion in Section C, such a conclusion could quite possibly be

r

r3

I!
ss/
k k'

II

S

FIGURE 4

G

E

D

A

s*

I.

—12—

erroneous. A fixed foreign capital supply, SLS', produces a fixed differential, K—S = K'—S', between domestic supply and demand, as the tax changes shift
the supply schedule. First, it is important to recognize that the welfare
impact of a tax cut in this special case is influenced by the presence of
foreign capital in a manner not fundamentally different from the general

situation shown in Figure 2. Specifically, it consists of both a "surplus"
term (DEF — ABC) and a "revenue" term (EFGH —

BCJI).

That is, contrary to the

intuition of most researchers, the nature of the domestic demand and supply

relations determine the extent of

additional welfare effect, even in this

limiting case of a completely inelastic supply of capital from abroad.
The revenue term is naturally very simple when S* is completely ine-

lastic, equaling the decline in the tax rate times the previous total return to
foreign capital. The surplus term, however, cannot be signed without further
investigation.6
Take, for example, the case of domestic capital being perfectly

elastic in demand. The level of domestic savings (and future consumption) is

unaffected by the presence of foreign capital.7 As a consequence, there is no
extra welfare effect except that measured by the decline in tax revenue
collected from foreign investors.
On the other hand, if the domestic demand is completely inelastic,
the level of domestic savings is unaffected by the tax, as is the net return to

savers, regardless of the presence or absence of foreign investment. So, not
only is the level of future consumption unaltered by the tax change, as is well
known from the previous literature, but also it is unaffected by the presence

—13—

of foreign investment. Again, therefore, the only welfare implications of
foreign investment arise from changes in tax revenue.

For intermediate cases, a variety of results could conceivably be
obtained, but it seems plausible that any "extra't welfare terms will be relati-

vely minor, as we will describe below.
To carry this exercise only one step further, we will make no extreme
demand assumption but note that the argument is often made for a completely

inelastic domestic savings schedule. Under such circumstances, domestic
savings is, of course, unaffected by the tax. Thus, future consumption is
reduced by the capital tax, which means that the tax is distortionary.
However, the percentage reduction in future consumption being unrelated to the
presence of foreign investment implies that, once again, the "extra surplus

term" is zero. Hence, the welfare change attributable to the economy's openness is simply the tax revenue change. The same conclusion holds for the case
of perfectly elastic domestic savings, this time because the level of future
consumption is unaffected by the tax, regardless of the presence of foreign
investment.

For intermediate cases, the results could vary qualitatively
depending upon the exact nature of the behavioral relations, but it seems
plausible that any welfare effects attributable to foreign investment (other

than the loss in tax revenue) will be relatively minor. From the standpoint of
economic welfare, the presence of a fixed level of foreign investment is identical to a leftward parallel shift in the domestic capital demand schedule.
Such a shift will, in general, affect the

welfare

calculation, as one can

-l4-

intuitively see from Figure .

The reason, clearly, is that the elasticities

of the domestic supply and demand schedules could be different in the presence

of foreign capital than those in its absence. Nevertheless, it is difficult to
imagine in "normal" circumstances the effect being sufficiently large to divert
major attention away from the tax: revenue effect. In fact, the usual
discussion of welfare effects of the capital income tax would rely on obser-

vation of a market equilibrium in the presence of foreign investment and would
already be capturing the "extra surplus term."
In conclusion, we have considered the case of perfectly inelastic
international capital flows under a variety of (extreme) domestic circumstan-

ces. This case is the one widely believed to leave intact our closed economy
welfare calculations. In each instance, the net welfare gain to the economy
from lowering the tax on capital income was shown to be overestimated
exactly- the fall in tax revenue collected from foreign investors when that

foreign ownership is ignored. In a later section, an argument will be made for
this effect being large, but first the case of perfectly elastic international
capital flows will be considered, to indicate the manner in which alternative

assumptions change our story.

E. Perfectly Elastic Capital Flows
Consider, then, the other extreme of international capital flows

being perfectly elastic, as many international economists would argue is the

most realistic assumption. A proportional tax cut can do nothing but reduce
the gross rate of return to capital to exactly offset the tax change. Domestic

—15—

savings, thus, remain constant, while the capital stock and the capital
supplied from abroad increase by an amount determined by the elasticity of the

domestic investment demand schedule. The constancy of the after—tax rate of
return implies that future domestic consumption is, likewise, undistorted. As
Figure 5 and this verbal argument indicate, the presence of perfectly elastic
flows of foreign investment implies that the welfare gains to savers from

lowering the tax, which would have been predicted from a closed econor model,

are not realized. At the same time, lowering the tax induces a higher level of
foreign investment and foreign investors are paid less than the total product
of the additional capital, even ignoring, for the moment, the tax burden borne

by the foreign investor. This extra gain tends to offset the mistake a closed—
economy model would make on the savings side. Since the part of the actual
welfare effect of the tax change which is attributable to the phenomenon of
foreign investment is measured by netting two welfare terms, each depending on
elasticities of demand and supply schedules at different points, it is not
surprising that it depends on the particular parameters of behavioral rela-

tionships. That is, the surplus term (11SF — ABC), or, more accurately, its

equivalent in terms of future consumption, is of indeterminate sign. Clearly,
as the domestic demand for capital elasticity declines, the surplus term must

at some point become negative. Similarly, as savings becomes less elastic, the
surplus term must turn positive at some point, since the "phantom" welfare gain
calculated by the closed economy model would have disappeared even in the

closed economy model. In summary, the non—revenue welfare effect due to
foreign investment is difficult to assess in general.

-16—
S

U)

U)

w—

a

LU

2
LL.
I

.

'CO

I,

Co

—17-

Furthermore, unlike the case of perfectly inelastic international
flows, the revenue change can also be either positive or negative, depending on
the elasticity of the net domestic demand for capital.
As a result of this examination of the perfectly elastic case, then,
we must conclude that one might need to know a great deal about the domestic
capital market in order to determine even the direction of the bias produced by
ignoring the openness of the economy.

F. General Conclusions
Some idea of the potential magnitude of some of these welfare effects
will be the subject of a concluding section, but, before addressing that

question, we review the general results. First, the size of the foreign
investment inflow is crucial. If it is small relative to the total of domestic
investment, its degree of influence on the welfare effect of a tax can be

measured by the tax revenue foregone by the domestic government. If the amount
of foreign capital supplied to the domestic economy is large, but the supply is
relatively inelastic, the welfare loss can probably still be approximated by
the revenue loss, which can be estimated as the tax reduction times the level

of foreign investment. However, from the standpoint of capturing all of the
welfare effects of a tax change, it is important to recognize that the presence
of even a perfectly inelastic supply of foreign capital has further implications for the welfare effects of tax changes, as we have shown.
While the revenue effect can be established conclusively as the major
component of the additional welfare loss only in one of several "special cir—

—18—

cumstances" we have examined, the situations normally described in the public
finance literature are ones in which the change in the foreign investors' tax
liability could well provide a reasonable first approximation.
At the same time, a highly elastic supply of foreign capital does
open a much wider range of possibilities including, of course, the "foreign tax

revenue effect" of a tax rate cut being positive. In general, the domestic and
foreign capital market conditions will determine whether the openness of the

econour is an important factor in welfare analysis. Of particular interest is
the result that an inelasticity of international capital flows is not sufficient to determine the conclusion.

—19—

II. Some Evidence of Magnitudes
After having detailed the complications introduced in a variety of
cases, let us return to where we began this paper: with the situation which

many would view as consistent with the "conventional wisdom." That is, suppose
that foreign investment is quite inelastic. Suppose, further that the net
domestic demand for capital, compared to foreign investment, is either relati—

vely elastic, because foreign investment is "small" or because of the nature of

the domestic capital market conditions themselves. Whether one needs to be
cautious about ignoring foreign investment when examining welfare effects of a
capital income tax change then depends, for all practical purposes, on whether
the tax rate change produces a change in the revenue derived from foreign
investors which is large relative to the other welfare effects being considered.

Table 1 shows estimates of the revenue collected from foreign direct
investors under the U.S. corporate income tax for several recent years.
Comparing these figures with recent estimates of the welfare cost of the corporate income tax, should give pause to those who emphasize the welfare cost

numbers in calling for major reforms. For example, Fullerton, et al. (1983)
estimates the welfare cost of the corporation tax at 2.8 percent of revenue
under the 1980 law or about 2.)4 billion 1980 dollars. In 1980, corporate
income taxes raised over $7 billion from foreign investors, and through the
period for which data are available, revenues were growing rapidly as was the

level of foreign investment. Under our assumptions, the welfare effect of eliminating the corporate income tax in 1980 could have been, not a gain of $2.8

—20—

Table 1
Taxes Paid and Income Received by Foreign Investors

Year

1977

U.S. Income
Tax*

Data
Source

Net
Income

$2.339 b

$2.182 b

U.S. Commerce Department,
Survey of Current Business,
5/16

$3.290 b

$2.876 b

U.S. Commerce Department,
Survey of Current Business,

5/81
1918

$3.530 b

$1.731

b

U.S. Commerce Department,
Survey of Current Business,
5/81

1979

$5.111 b

7.271 b

U.S. Commerce Department,
Survey of Current Business,
5/81

1980

$7.066 b

$8.917 b

U.S. Commerce Department,
Foreign Direct Investment
in the United States, 1980,
10/83

*Includes state and local corporate income taxes.

Notes
Does not
include
Middle East

—21—

billion, but a loss of $1.6 billion. This calculation is, naturally, intended
to be only illustrative of how important the treatment of foreign investment

earnings could be in a welfare calculation. Our assumptions do not provide an
upper bound in any sense since we are simply neglecting a portion of the

welfare effect. On the other hand, higher estimates of the welfare cost of the
system have been made: Auerbach (1983), for example, obtains an estimate of
about $5 billion for 1981 for the cost of distortions produced by the rnisallo—

cation of the capital stock alone. Nevertheless, the treatment of foreign
investment under any reform designed to reduce the welfare cost of the system

could be an important determinant of the reform's overall welfare effect. From
the perspective of this paper, an important insight is that the importance of
foreign investment is not dependent on that investment being highly elastic.

—22—

Footnotes

1. For a discussion of the degree of capital mobility implict in the GSW
analysis, see Hartman (1983).
2. See, for example, Boadway (1979), Shoven (198)4), and Kotlikoff (l98)-).

3. Vernon (1971).
)4. At this point, we drop the unnecessary "sum of the areas" DEF and EFGH
and refer simply to "DEF + EFGH."

5. Of course, since neither domestic savings nor the rate of return
received by savers is affected by the behavior of foreign investors, this is a
degenerate case with respect to the concerns about using the "savings elasticity" rather than the "elasticity of future consumption" raised in Section I.E
above.
6. It is obviously important at this point to recall the caution of
Section I.E above that DEF and ABC are not actually the appropriate representations. However, since we cannot sign (DEF—ABC) anyway, we will discuss the
matter only in the context of special cases.
7. Obviously, the tax change will affect future consumption, with the
gross rate of return fixed. So, the analysis of the tax cut itself would provide an extreme example in which the distinction between a distortion to
savings and to future consumption is crucial. However, the presence of a fixed
level of foreign investment in the context of a perfectly elastic domestic
capital demand has no separate influence on either domestic savings or future
consumption.

—23—

Ref erences

Auerbach, Alan, "Corporate Taxation in the United States," Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, No. 2, 1983, pp. 451—505.
Boadway, Robin W., Public Sector Economics, Cambridge, MA: Winthrop, 1919.
Feldstein, Martin S. "The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation," Journal
of Political Economy, April 1918, 86 (2, Part 2), pp. S29—5l.
Feldstein, Martin S., "Domestic Savings and International Capital Movements
in the Long Run and the Short Run," European Economic Review, March/April
1983, 21, pp. 129—l51.

Feldstein, Martin S., and Charles Horioka, "Domestic Savings and International
Capital Flows," Economic Journal, June 1980, )40, pp. 31I329.
Fullerton, Don, Andrew B. Lyon, and Richard J. Rosen, "Uncertainty, Welfare
Cost, and the 'Adaptability' of U.S. Corporate Taxes," NBER Working Paper
No. 1239, November 1983.

Goulder, Lawrence H., John B. Shoven, and John Whalley, "Domestic Tax Policy
and the Foreign Sector," in Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy
Analysis, ed, Martin S. Feldstein, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1983, pp. 333_361
Hartman, David G., "Domestic Tax Policy and the Foreign Sector: A Comment on
Goulder, Shoven, and Whalley," in Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax
Policy Analysis, ed, Martin S. Feldstein, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1983, pp. 36I-36T.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., "Taxation and Savings: A Neoclassical Perspective,"
Journal of Economic Literature, December 198)4, 22), pp. 1576—1629.
Shoven, John B., "Saving in the U.S. Economy," in Removing Obstacles to Economic
Growth, eds, Michael L. Wachter and Susan M. Wachter, Philadelphia,
University of Pennsylvania Press, 198)4, pp. 187—223.
Vernon, Raymond, Storm Over the Multinationals: The Real Issues, Cambridge, MA,
Harvard University Press, 1977.

