                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        GLOBAL CLIMATE POLICY ARCHITECTURE AND POLITICAL FEASIBILITY:
SPECIFIC FORMULAS AND EMISSION TARGETS TO ATTAIN 460 PPM CO2 CONCENTRATIONS

                                             Valentina Bosetti
                                             Jeffrey A. Frankel

                                           Working Paper 15516
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w15516


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       November 2009




   The authors would like to thank for support the Sustainability Science Program, funded by Italy’s
   Ministry for Environment, Land and Sea, at the Center for International Development at Harvard University
   and the Climate Impacts and Policy Division of the EuroMediterranean Center on Climate Change
   (CMCC). The paper was written while Valentina Bosetti was visiting at the Princeton Environmental
   Institute (PEI) in the framework of cooperation between CMCC and PEI. The views expressed herein
   are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
   Research.

   NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
   reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
   NBER publications.

   © 2009 by Valentina Bosetti and Jeffrey A. Frankel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
   to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
   © notice, is given to the source.
Global Climate Policy Architecture and Political Feasibility: Specific Formulas and Emission
Targets to Attain 460 ppm CO2 Concentrations
Valentina Bosetti and Jeffrey A. Frankel
NBER Working Paper No. 15516
November 2009
JEL No. Q50

                                              ABSTRACT

Many analysts have identified three important gaps in the Kyoto Protocol: the absence of emission
targets extending far into the future, the absence of participation by the United States, China, and other
developing countries, and the absence of reason to think that members will abide by commitments.
It appears that political constraints on the country-by-country distribution of economic costs are a
key stumbling block to filling these gaps. This paper investigates formulas that assign quantitative
allocations of emissions, across countries, one budget period at a time, to see if it is possible to satisfy
the constraints. The two-part plan: (i) China and other developing countries accept targets at BAU
in the coming budget period, the same period in which the US first agrees to cuts below BAU; and
(ii) all countries are asked in the future to make further cuts in accordance with a formula which sums
up a Progressive Reductions Factor, a Latecomer Catch-up Factor, and a Gradual Equalization Factor.
An earlier plan for specific parameter values in the formulas – Frankel (2009), as analyzed by Bosetti,
et al (2009) – achieved the environmental goal that concentrations of CO2 plateau at 500 ppm by 2100.
It succeeded in obeying our political constraints, such as keeping the economic cost for every country
below the thresholds of Y=1% of income in Present Discounted Value, and X=5% of income in the
worst period.

In pursuit of more aggressive environmental goals, we now advance the dates at which some countries
are asked to begin cutting below BAU, within our framework. We also tinker with the values for the
parameters in the formulas. The resulting target paths for emissions are run through the WITCH model
to find their economic and environmental effects.

We find that it is not possible to attain a 380 ppm CO2 goal (roughly in line with the 2°C target) without
violating our political constraints. We were however, able to attain a concentration goal of 460 ppm
CO2 with looser political constraints. The most important result is that we had to raise the threshold
of costs above which a country drops out, to as high as Y =3.4% of income in PDV terms, or X =12
% in the worst budget period.

Whether one concludes from these results that the more aggressive environmental goals are, or are
not, attainable at reasonable economic costs, the approach developed here provides a framework for
exploring maximization of the tradeoff between the benefits of cutting global emissions and the political
feasibility of getting individual countries to share the burden.

Valentina Bosetti                                          Jeffrey A. Frankel
Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei                               Kennedy School of Government
valentina.bosetti@feem.it                                  Harvard University
                                                           79 JFK Street
                                                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                           and NBER
                                                           jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu
Summary
        This paper offers a framework of formulas that produce precise numerical targets
for emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) in all regions of the world in all decades of this
century. The formulas are based on pragmatic judgments about what is possible
politically. The reason for this approach is the authors’ belief that many of the usual
science-based, ethics-based, and economics-based paths are not politically viable. It is
not credible that successor governments will be able politically to abide by the
commitments that today’s leaders make, if those commitments would be costly.
        Three political constraints seem inescapable if key countries are to join a new
treaty and abide subsequently by their commitments: (1) Developing countries are not
asked to bear any cost in the early years. (2) Thereafter, they are not asked to make any
sacrifice that is different in kind or degree from what was made by those countries that
went before them, with due allowance for differences in incomes. (3) No country is
asked to accept an ex ante target that costs it more than Y% of income in present
discounted value (PDV), or more than X% of income in any single budget period. The
logic is that no country will agree to ex ante targets that have very high costs, nor abide
by them ex post.
        Further, one major country or region dropping out is fatal. The reason is that
others will become discouraged and may also fail to meet their own targets; the entire
framework may unravel. If such unraveling in a future decade is foreseeable at the time
that long-run commitments are made, then those commitments will not be credible from
the start.   Firms, consumers, and researchers base their current decisions to invest in
plant and equipment, consumer durables, or new technological possibilities on the
expected future price of carbon: If government commitments are not credible from the
start, then they will not raise the expected future carbon price.
        The targets for emissions are formulated assuming the following framework.
Between now and 2050, the European Union follows the path laid out in the 2008
European Commission Directive; the United States follows the path in the version of the
Waxman-Markey bill passed by the House in June 2009; and Japan, Australia and Korea
follow statements that their own leaders have recently made. China, India and other
countries agree immediately to quantitative emission targets, which in the first decades


                                                                                         2
merely copy their business-as-usual (BAU) paths, thereby precluding leakage. These
countries are not initially expected to cut emissions below their BAU trajectory.
        When the time comes for developing countries to join mitigation efforts their
emission targets are determined using a formula that incorporates three elements: a
Progressive Reductions Factor, a Latecomer Catch-up Factor, and a Gradual Equalization
Factor. These three factors are designed to persuade the joining countries that they are
only being asked to do what is fair in light of actions already taken by others.         In the
second half of the century, the formula that determines the emissions path for
industrialized countries is dominated by the Gradual Equalization Factor.                  But
developing countries, which will still be in earlier stages of participation and thus will
have departed from their BAU paths only relatively recently, will still follow in the
footsteps of those who have gone before. This means that their emission targets will be
set using the Progressive Reductions Factor and the Latecomer Catch-up Factor, in
addition to the Gradual Equalization Factor. The glue that holds the agreement together
is that every country has reason to feel that it is only doing its fair share.
        We use the WITCH model to analyze the results of this approach in terms of
projected paths for emissions targets, permit trading, the price of carbon, lost income, and
environmental effects. Overall economic costs, discounted (at 5 percent), average 1.39
percent of Gross Product. The largest discounted economic loss suffered by any country
from the agreement overall is 3.4 percent of income.         The largest loss suffered by any
country in any one period is 12.6 percent of income. Atmospheric CO2 concentrations
level off at 460 parts per million (ppm) in the latter part of the century.      We were unable
to attain CO2 concentrations of 380 ppm (the equivalent of 450 ppm for all greenhouse
gases), without more serious violations of our political constraints. The latter
concentrations would be required, approximately, to achieve the more aggressive
collective goal set by the G-7 leaders meeting in Italy in July 2009: limiting the global
temperature increase to 2°C.




                                                                                             3
Introduction
The political context of Copenhagen


       The clock is running out on negotiations under the UN Framework Convention on
Climate Change for a successor agreement to the Kyoto Protocol. But the road has been
blocked by a seeming insurmountable obstacle.      The United States, which until recently
was the world’s largest emitter of Greenhouse Gases (GHGs), is at loggerheads with
China, the world’s new largest emitter, and with India and other developing countries.
Fortunately, there just might be a way to break through the roadblock.


       On the one hand, the US Congress is clear: it will not impose quantitative limits
on US GHG emissions if it fears that emissions from China, India, and other developing
countries will continue to grow unabated. Indeed, that is why the Senate was unwilling
to ratify the Kyoto Protocol ten years ago. Why, it asks, should US firms bear the
economic cost of cutting emissions if energy-intensive activities such as aluminum
smelters and steel mills would just migrate to countries that have no caps and therefore
have cheaper energy -- the problem known as leakage -- and global emissions would
continue their rapid rise?
       On the other hand, the leaders of India and China are just as clear:       they are
unalterably opposed to cutting emissions until after the United States and other rich
countries have gone first.   After all, the industrialized countries created the problem of
global climate change. And they got rich in the process. The poor countries should not
be denied their turn at economic development, they say.         As the Indians point out,
Americans emit more than ten times as much carbon dioxide per person as they do.




       In June 2009, the US House of Representatives passed the American
Conservation and Energy Security Act, known as the Waxman-Markey bill, which
(among many other things) would set targets for American GHG emissions. But largely




                                                                                         4
due to fears of leakage, the bill is unlikely to pass the Senate as long as major developing
countries have not accepted quantitative targets of their own.


           What is missing is a specific framework for setting the actual numbers that future
signers of a Kyoto-successor treaty are realistically expected to adopt as their emission
targets.     There is one practical solution to the apparently irreconcilable differences
between the US and the developing countries regarding binding quantitative targets. The
United States would indeed agree to join Europe in adopting emission targets, something
along the lines of the big cuts specified in the Waxman-Markey bill.       Simultaneously, in
the same agreement, China, India, and other developing countries would agree to a path
that immediately imposes on them binding emission targets as well—but targets that in
the first phase simply follow the so-called Business-as-Usual (BAU) path.            BAU is
defined as the path of increasing emissions that these countries would experience in the
absence of an international agreement, as determined by experts’ projections.
           An environmental solution also requires that China and the other developing
countries subsequently make cuts below their Business as Usual path in future years, and
eventually make cuts in absolute terms as well. This negotiation can become easier over
time, as everyone gains confidence in the framework. But the developing countries can
be asked to make cuts that do not differ in nature from those made by Europe, the United
States, and others who have gone before them, taking due account of differences in
income. Emission targets can be determined by formulas
(i) that give lower-income countries more time before they start to cut emissions, and
(ii) that lead to gradual convergence across countries of emissions per capita over the
course of the century, while
(iii) taking care not to reward any country for joining the system late.


           Speaking realistically, no country – rich or poor – will abide by targets in any
given period that entail extremely large economic sacrifice, relative to the alternative of
simply not participating in the system.       We take that reality as given, and pursue the
narrow thread of the politically possible.




                                                                                           5
The problem to be solved


        There are by now many proposals for a post-Kyoto climate change regime, even if
one considers only proposals that accept the basic Kyoto approach of quantitative,
national-level limits on GHG emissions accompanied by international trade in emissions
permits. The Kyoto targets applied only to the budget period 2008–2012, which we are
now in, and only to industrialized countries.              The big task is to extend quantitative
emissions targets through the remainder of the century and to other countries—especially
the United States, China, and other developing countries.
        Virtually all the existing plans for a post-Kyoto agreement are based on scientific
environmental objectives (e.g., stabilizing atmospheric CO2 concentrations at 380 ppm in
2100), or ethical/philosophical considerations (e.g., the principle that every individual on
earth has equal emission rights), or economic cost-benefit analyses (weighing the
economic costs of abatement against the long-term environmental benefits).1 This paper
explores a way to allocate emission targets for all countries and for the remainder of the
century that is intended to be more practical in that it is also based on political
considerations, rather than on science or ethics or economics alone.2


        The industrialized countries did, in 1997, agree to quantitative emissions targets
for the Kyoto Protocol’s first budget period, so in some sense we know that it can be
done. But the obstacles are enormous. For starters, most of the Kyoto signers will
probably miss their 2008–2012 targets, and of course the United States never even
ratified. At multilateral venues such as the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) meeting in Bali (2007) and the Group of Eight (G8) meeting
in Hokkaido (July 2008), world leaders agreed on a broad long-term goal of cutting total
global emissions in half by 2050. At a meeting in L’Aquila, Italy, in July 2009, the G8



1
  Important examples of the science-based approach, the cost-benefit-based approach, and the rights-based
approach, respectively, are Wigley (2007), Nordhaus (1994, 2006), and Baer et al. (2008).
2
  Aldy, Barrett, and Stavins (2003) and Victor (2004) review a number of existing proposals. Numerous
others have offered their own thoughts on post-Kyoto plans, at varying levels of detail, including Aldy,
Orszag, and Stiglitz (2001); Barrett (2006); Nordhaus (2006); Olmstead and Stavins (2006); Karp and Zhao
(2009) and Birdsall and Subramanian (2009).


                                                                                                       6
leaders agreed to an environmental goal of limiting the temperature increase 2°C,3 which
corresponds roughly to a GHG concentration level of 450 ppm (or approximately 380
ppm CO2 only).
        But these meetings did not come close to producing agreement on who will cut
how much, nor agreement on multilateral targets within a near-enough time horizon that
the same national leaders are likely to still be alive when the abatement commitment
comes due. To quote Al Gore (1993, p.353), “politicians are often tempted to make a
promise that is not binding and hope for some unexpectedly easy way to keep the
promise.” For this reason, the aggregate targets endorsed so far cannot be viewed as
anything more than aspirational.
        Moreover, nobody has ever come up with an enforcement mechanism that
simultaneously has sufficient teeth and is acceptable to member countries. Given the
importance countries place on national sovereignty it is unlikely that this will change.
Hopes must instead rest on weak enforcement mechanisms such as the power of moral
suasion and international opprobrium. It is safe to say that in the event of a clash
between such weak enforcement mechanisms and the prospect of a large economic loss
to a particular country, aversion to the latter would win out.




Necessary elements of a workable successor to Kyoto


        Five attributes are considered key for any successor-agreement to the Kyoto
Protocol:4
•   More comprehensive participation—specifically, getting the United States, China,
    and other developing counties to join the system of quantitative emission targets.
•   Efficiency—incorporating market-flexibility mechanisms such as international permit
    trading and providing advance signals to allow the private sector to plan ahead, to the
    extent compatible with the credibility of the signals.


3
 Financial Times, July 9, 2009, p. 5.
4
  Bowles and Sandalow (2001), Stewart and Weiner (2003), Frankel (2007), and others. (A sixth attribute,
robustness under uncertainty is equally important to these five and also motivates out approach. But it is
not explicitly addressed in this paper.)


                                                                                                         7
•   Dynamic consistency—addressing the problem that announcements about steep cuts
    in 2050 are not credible.
•   Equity—taking account of the point made by developing countries that industrialized
    countries created the problem of global climate change, while poor countries are
    responsible for only about 20 percent of the CO2 that has accumulated in the
    atmosphere from industrial activity over the past 150 years.          From an equity
    standpoint, developing countries argue they should not be asked to limit their
    economic development to pay for a climate-change solution; moreover, they do not
    have the capacity to pay for emissions abatement that richer countries do. Finally,
    many developing countries place greater priority on raising their people’s current
    standard of living.    These countries might reasonably demand quantitative targets
    that reflect an equal per capita allotment of emissions, on equity grounds.
•   Compliance —recognizing that no country will join a treaty if it entails tremendous
    economic sacrifice and that therefore compliance cannot be reasonably expected if
    costs are too high.     Similarly, no country, if it has already joined the treaty, will
    continue to stay in during any given period if staying in means huge economic
    sacrifice, relative to dropping out, in that period.




    Unlike the Kyoto Protocol, our plan seeks to bring all countries into an international
policy regime on a realistic basis and to look far into the future. But we cannot pretend
to see with as fine a degree of resolution at a century-long horizon as we can at a five- or
ten-year horizon.     Fixing precise numerical targets a century ahead is impractical.
Rather, we need a century-long sequence of negotiations, fitting within a common
institutional framework that builds confidence as it goes along.      The framework must
have enough continuity so that success in the early phases builds members’ confidence in
each other’s compliance commitments and in the fairness, viability, and credibility of the
process.    Yet the framework must be flexible enough that it can accommodate the
unpredictable fluctuations in economic growth, technology development, climate, and
political sentiment that will inevitably occur. Only by striking the right balance between




                                                                                          8
continuity and flexibility can we expect that a framework for addressing climate change
might last a century or more.


Political constraints
          To get more specific, we assume five political constraints:
1. The United States will not commit to quantitative targets if China and other major
      developing countries do not commit to quantitative targets at the same time. (This
      leaves completely open the initial level and future path of the targets.) Any plan will
      be found unacceptable if it leaves the less developed countries free to exploit their
      lack of GHG regulation for “competitive” advantage at the expense of the
      participating countries’ economies and leads to emissions leakage at the expense of
      the environmental goal.
2. China, India, and other developing countries will not make sacrifices they view as
          a. fully contemporaneous with rich countries,
          b. different in character from those made by richer countries who have gone
              before them,
          c. preventing them from industrializing,
          d. failing to recognize that richer countries should be prepared to make greater
              economic sacrifices than poor countries to address the problem (all the more
              so because rich countries’ past emissions have created the problem), or
          e. failing to recognize that the rich countries have benefited from an “unfair
              advantage” in being allowed to achieve levels of per capita emissions that are
              far above those of the poor countries.
3. In the short run, emission targets for developing countries must be computed relative
      to current levels or BAU paths; otherwise the economic costs will be too great for the
      countries in question to accept. 5 But in the longer run, no country can be rewarded
      for having "ramped up” emissions far above 1990 levels, the reference year agreed to
      at Rio and Kyoto.          Fairness considerations aside, if post-1990 increases are
      permanently “grandfathered,” then countries that have not yet agreed to cuts will have
      a strong incentive to ramp up emissions in the interval before they join. There was

5
    Cuts expressed relative to BAU have been called “Action Targets” (Baumert and Goldberg, 2006).


                                                                                                     9
      nothing magic about 1990 but, for better or worse, it is the year on which Annex I
      countries have long based planning.6
4. No country will accept a path of targets that is expected to cost it more than Y percent
      of income throughout the 21st century (in present discounted value). Frankel (2009)
      set Y at 1 percent.
5. No country will accept targets in any period that are expected to cost more than X
      percent of income to achieve during that period; alternatively, even if targets were
      already in place, no country would in the future actually abide by them if it found the
      cost to doing so would exceed X percent of income. In this paper, income losses are
      defined relative to what would happen if the country in question had never joined.
      Frankel (2009) set X at 5 percent.


Squaring the circle


          Of the above propositions, even just the first and second alone seem to add up to a
hopeless stalemate: Nothing much can happen without the United States, the United
States will not proceed unless China and other developing countries start at the same
time, and China will not start until after the rich countries have gone first.
          There is only one possible solution, only one knife-edge position that satisfies the
constraints. At the same time that the United States agrees to binding emission cuts in
the manner of Kyoto, China and other developing countries agree to a path that
immediately imposes on them binding emission targets—but these targets in their early
years simply follow the BAU path. The idea of committing to only BAU targets in the
early decades will provoke strong objections from environmentalists and business
interests in advanced countries. But they might come to realize that such a commitment
by developing countries would be more important than it sounds: It would preclude the
carbon leakage which, absent such an agreement, would undermine the environmental
goal and it moderates the competitiveness concerns of carbon-intensive industries in the
rich countries. The developing countries can’t exploit the opportunity to go above their
BAU paths as they would in the absence of this commitment.

6
    If the international consensus base year shifts from 1990 to 2005, our proposal will do the same.


                                                                                                        10
        This approach recognizes that it would be irrational for China to agree to
substantial actual cuts in the short term.           Indeed China might well register strong
objections to being asked to take on binding targets of any kind at the same time as the
United States. But the Chinese may also come to realize that they would actually gain
from such an agreement, by acquiring the ability to sell emission permits at the same
world market price as developed countries. (China currently receives lower prices for
lower-quality project credits under the Kyoto Protocol’s Clean Development
Mechanism.)
        How do we know they would come out ahead?                    China is currently building
roughly 100 power plants per year, to accommodate its rapidly growing demand.                   The
cost of shutting down an already-functioning coal-fired power plant in the United States
is far higher than the cost of building a new clean low-carbon plant in China in place of
what otherwise might be a new dirty coal-fired plant. For this reason, when an American
firm pays China to cut its emissions voluntarily, thereby obtaining a permit that the
American firm can use to meet its emission obligations, both parties benefit, even in
strictly economic terms.          The environmental benefit is that China’s emissions would
(voluntarily) fall below its BAU commitment from the beginning. From a dynamic
perspective, the incentive to shift towards a less carbon intensive capital stock will
provide substantial additional benefits in ten or twenty years time, when China will face a
constraining target, given the long-lived nature of these plants.


        In later decades, the formulas that we analyze do ask substantially more of the
developing countries. But these formulas also obey basic notions of fairness: they ask
only for cuts that are analogous in magnitude to the cuts made by others who began
abatement earlier and making due allowance for developing countries’ low per capita
income and emissions and for their baseline of rapid growth.                    These ideas were
                              7
developed in earlier papers which suggested that the formulas used to develop emissions
targets incorporate four or five variables: 1990 emissions, emissions in the year of the
negotiation, population, and income.           One might also include a few other special


7
 Frankel (1999, 2005, 2007) and Aldy and Frankel (2004). Some other authors have made similar
proposals.


                                                                                                 11
variables such as whether the country in question has coal or hydroelectric power --
though the 1990 level of emissions conditional on per capita income can largely capture
these special variables -- and perhaps a dummy variable for the transition economies.


       We narrow down the broad family of formulas to a more manageable set, by the
development of the three factors: a short-term Progressive Reductions Factor, a medium-
term Latecomer Catch-up Factor, and a long-run Gradual Equalization Factor. We then
put them into operation to produce specific numerical targets for all countries, for all
remaining five-year budget periods of the 21st century (presented in Table 2). These are
then fed into the WITCH model to see the economic and environmental consequences.
International trading plays an important role. The framework is flexible enough that one
can tinker with a parameter here or there—for example if the economic cost borne by a
particular country is deemed too high or the environmental progress deemed too low—
without having to abandon the entire formulas framework.


Emission targets for all countries: rules to guide the formulas


       All developing countries that have any ability to measure emissions would be
asked to agree immediately to emission targets that do not exceed their projected BAU
baseline trajectory going forward.       The objective of getting developing countries
committed to these targets would be to forestall emissions leakage and to limit the extent
to which their firms enjoy a competitive advantage over carbon-constrained competitors
in the countries that have already agreed to targets below BAU under the Kyoto Protocol.
We expect that the developing countries would, in most cases, receive payments for
permits and thus emit less than their BAU baseline.        Most countries in Africa would
probably be exempted for some years from any kind of commitment, even to BAU
targets, until they had better capacity to monitor emissions.


       One must acknowledge that BAU paths are neither easily ascertained nor
immutable.    Countries may “high-ball” their BAU estimates in order to get more
generous targets (though this may be difficult for those who have hitherto “low-balled”


                                                                                        12
their claimed emissions path). Even assuming that estimates are unbiased, important
unforeseen economic and technological developments could occur between 2010 and
2020 that will shift the BAU trajectory for the 2020s, for example.         Any number of
unpredictable events have already occurred in the years since 1990; they include German
reunification, the 1997–1998 East Asia crisis, the boom in the BRIC countries (Brazil,
Russia, India, and China), the sharp rise in world oil prices up to 2008, and the world
financial crisis of 2007–2009.
       A first measure to deal with the practical difficulty of setting the BAU path is to
specify in the Kyoto-successor treaty that estimates must be generated by an independent
international expert body, not by national authorities. A second measure, once the first
has been assured, is to provide for updates of the BAU paths every decade. To omit such
a provision—that is, to hold countries for the rest of the century to the paths that had been
estimated in 2010—would in practice virtually guarantee that any country that achieves
very high economic growth rates in the future will eventually drop out of the agreement,
because staying in would mean incurring costs far in excess of X percent of income.
Allowing for periodic adjustments to the BAU baseline does risk undermining the
incentive for carbon-saving investments, on the logic that such investments would reduce
future BAU paths and thus reduce future target allocations. This risk is the same as the
risk of encouraging countries to ramp up their emissions, which we specified above to be
axiomatically ruled out by any viable framework.          That is why the formula gives
decreasing weight to BAU in later budget periods and why we introduce a Latecomer
Catch-up Factor (explained below), which tethers countries to their 1990 emission levels
in the medium run.


       Countries are expected to agree to the second step, quantitative targets that entail
specific cuts below BAU, at a time determined by their circumstances. In our initial
simulations, the choice of year for introducing an obligation actually to cut emissions was
generally guided by two thresholds: when a country’s average per capita income exceeds
$3000 per year and/or when its per capita annual emissions approach 1 ton or more.
But we found that starting dates had to be further modified in order to satisfy our
constraints regarding the distribution of economic losses.



                                                                                          13
        As already noted, this approach assigns emission targets in a way that is more
sensitive to political realities than is typical of other proposed target paths, which are
constructed either on the basis of a cost-benefit optimization or to deliver a particular
environmental and/or ethical goal.       Specifically, numerical targets are based (a) on
commitments that political leaders in various key countries have already proposed or
adopted, as of early 2009, and (b) on formulas designed to assure latecomer countries that
the emission cuts they are being asked to make represent no more than their fair share, in
that they correspond to the sacrifices that other countries before them have already made.
        Finally comes the other important concession to practical political realities: If the
simulation in any period turns out to impose on any country an economic cost of more
than X% of income, we assume that this country drops out. Dropping out could involve
either explicit renunciation of the treaty or massive failure to meet the quantitative
targets. For now, our assumption is that in any such scenario, other countries would
follow by dropping out one by one, and the whole scheme would eventually unravel.
This unraveling would occur much earlier if private actors rationally perceived that at
some point in the future major players will face such high economic costs that
compliance will break down. In this case, the future carbon prices that are built into most
models’ compliance trajectories will lack credibility, private actors today will not make
investment decisions that reflect those projected future prices, and the effort will fail in
the first period. Therefore, our approach to any scenario in which any major player
suffers economic losses greater than X% has been to go back and adjust some of the
starting dates or other parameters of the emission formulas, so that costs are lower and
this is no longer the case.
        We investigate whether these mechanisms are able to achieve political viability:
non-negative economic gains in the early years for developing countries, average costs
over the course of the century below Y percent of income per annum, and protection for
every country against losses in any period as large, or larger than, X percent of income.
Only if they achieve political viability are announcements of future cuts credible. And
only credible announcements of future cuts will send firms the long-term price signals
and incentives needed to guide investment decisions today.



                                                                                          14
Guidelines from policies and goals already announced by national leaders


          Our model produces country-specific numeric emission targets for every fifth
year: 2010, 2015, 2020, etc. For each five-year budget period, such as the Kyoto period
2008–2012, computations are based on the midpoint.


          The European Union. The EU emissions target for 2008–2012 was agreed at
Kyoto: 8 percent below 1990 levels. Regarding the second budget period, 2015–2020,
Brussels announced in January 2008 and confirmed in December 20088 a target of 20
percent below 1990 levels.           As with other targets publicly supported by politicians in
Europe and elsewhere, skepticism is appropriate regarding EU member countries’
willingness to make the sacrifices necessary to achieve this target.9 However, conditional
on other countries joining in, the European Union has said it would cut emissions 30
percent below 1990 levels if other countries joined in.                    For the year 2020, given
assumptions on other countries commitment, we chose a target of 30% below 1990
levels.


          For the third period (2020–2025), and thereafter up to the eighth period (2045–
2050), the EU targets progress in equal increments to a 50 percent cut below 1990 levels:
In other words, targets relative to 1990 emissions start at 35 percent below, and then
progress to 50 percent below.




8
  Financial Times, Jan. 2, 2009, p.5.
9
  It is not entirely clear to Americans that even Europe will meet its Kyoto targets. Perhaps the European
Union will need to cover its shortfall with purchases of emission permits from other countries. European
emissions were reduced in the early 1990s by coincidental events: Britain moved away from coal under
Margaret Thatcher and Germany with reunification in 1990 acquired dirty power plants that were easy to
clean up. But Americans who claim on this basis that the European Union has not yet taken any serious
steps go too far. Ellerman and Buchner (2007, 26-29) show that the difference between allocations and
emissions in 2005 and 2006 was probably in part attributable to abatement measures implemented in
response to the positive price of carbon.


                                                                                                         15
         Japan, Canada, and New Zealand. These three Pacific countries are assigned
the Kyoto goal of a 6 percent reduction below 1990 levels. Of all ratifiers, Canada is
probably the farthest from achieving its Kyoto goal.10 But Japan dominates this country
grouping in size. We assume that by 2010 the United States has taken genuine measures,
which helps motivate these three countries to get more serious than they have been to
date. In a small concession to realism, we assume that they do not hit the numerical
target until 2012 (versus hitting it on average over the 2008–2012 budget period).11
         Japan’s then-Prime Minister, Yasuo Fukuda, on June 9, 2008, announced a
decision to cut Japanese emissions 60–80 percent by mid-century and successor Taro Aso
on June 10, 2009, announced a plan to cut 15 per cent by 2020.12 On September 7, the
incoming Prime Minister, Yukio Hatoyama, declared a goal of cutting emissions to 25
per cent below 1990 levels over the next 10 years, provided other countries were
similarly ambitious.13 We interpret Japan’s targets as cuts of 10 percent every five years
between 2010 and 2050, computed logarithmically. The cumulative cuts are 80 percent
in logarithmic terms, or 51 percent in absolute terms (i.e., to 49 percent of the year–2010
emissions level).


         The United States. The Lieberman–Warner bill of 200714 would have begun by
reducing emissions in 2012 to below 2005 levels and would have tightened the emissions
cap gradually each year thereafter, such that by the year 2050, total emissions would be
held to 30 percent of 2012 levels.15               A slightly revised “manager’s” version of the
Lieberman–Warner bill earned significant congressional support in June 2008, though it
did not garner a large enough majority to become law. During the 2008 US presidential


10
    The current government’s plan calls for reducing Canadian emissions in 2020 by 20 percent below 2006
levels (which translates to 2.7 percent below 1990 levels) and in 2050 by 60–70 percent below 2006 levels.
(“FACTBOX – Greenhouse gas curbs from Australia to India,” Sept.5, 2008, Reuters.
www.alertnet.org/thenews/newsdesk/L5649578.htm.)
11
    In 2007, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe supported an initiative to half global emissions by 2050.
(Financial Times, May 25). But ahead of the 2008 G8 Summit, Japan declined to match the EU’s
commitment to cut its emissions 20 per cent by 2020 (FT, April 24, 2008, p.3).
12
   “Japan Pledges Big Cut in Emissions,” FT, June 10, 2008 p.6; and Associated Press, June 10, 2009,
respectively.
13
    The Japan Times, September 8, 2009.
14
   S. 2191: America's Climate Security Act of 2007
15
   In other words, a 70 percent reduction from emissions levels at the start date of the policy. Section 1201,
pages 30-32. (The percentage is measured non-logarithmically.)


                                                                                                           16
election campaign, the Republican candidate, John McCain advocated a 2050 emissions
target of 60 percent below 1990 levels16 while Barack Obama endorsed a more
aggressive target of reducing 2050 emissions 80 percent below 1990 levels.17
         .
         The earlier paper (Frankel, 2009) assumed targets that cut the average annual
emissions growth rate in half during the period 2008–2012, to 0.7 percent per year.18 At
that point, we assumed emissions plateau (growth is held to zero) for the period 2012–
2017. Then we implemented the rest of the Lieberman–Warner formula, such that
emissions in 2050 reach a level that is 67 percent below 1990 levels.19 Spread over 38
years, this implies sustained reductions of 2.6 percent per year on average, or 13 percent
every five years.
         The Waxman-Markey bill that was passed by the House of Representatives in
June 2009-- the American Clean-Energy and Security Act, or ACES Act -- was
substantially less aggressive with respect to the near-term targets.                   The ACES Act
specifies that US emission allowances continue to grow at 3 per cent per year from 2012
to 2017.20        On the other hand, it is very aggressive with respect to the subsequent 33
years:       Waxman-Markey or ACES assumes a US rate of reduction of about 5 per cent
per year from 2017 to 2050 -- unless the price ceiling specified by an escape clause kicks
in.


         Australia.      Canberra had been reluctant to take strong actions because the
country is so dependent on coal.          In July of 2008, however, Australian Prime Minister




16
   Or 66 percent below 2005 levels. Washington Post, May 13, 2008, p. A14; and FT, May 13, 2008, p.4.
17
   FT, Oct. 17, 2008.
18
   Or 3.5 percent cumulatively, so that emissions in 2012 are 31.5 percent above 1990 levels. That is, 27
percent logarithmically. This is the preferred way of defining percentage changes. True, logarithms are
too technical for non-specialist audiences. But measuring changes non-logarithmically has the undesirable
property that a 50 percent increase [to 1.50] followed by a 50 percent reduction [to 0.75] does not get you
back to your starting point [1.00].)
19
   Using our postponed base this is 98.5 percent below 2012 levels, logarithmically.
20
   Title VII, Part C, Section 721, sub-section (e) of HR 2454, also known as the Waxman-Markey bill. The
preceding draft of the bill, proposed March 31, 2009, called for emissions targets that increased at about
2% per year from 2012 to 2017, peaked in 2021, and hit the same 2050 level as in the version passed by the
House in June.


                                                                                                        17
Kevin Rudd announced plans to cut emissions to 60 percent below 2000 levels by 2050.21
In the regional groupings of our model, Australia is classified together with South Korea
and South Africa, which are also coal-dependent..


         Korea and South Africa. Until recently it looked unlikely that any “non-Annex
I” countries would consider taking on serious cuts below a BAU growth path within the
next decade.      But in March 2008, the new president of South Korea, Myung-bak Lee,
“tabled a plan to cap emissions at current levels over the first Kyoto period.”22 This was
an extraordinarily ambitious target in light of Korea’s economic growth rate.                     He also
                                                                             23
“vowed his country would slash emissions in half by 2050,”                        like the industrialized
countries—of which Korea is now one. Emissions have risen 90 percent since 1990 and
it is hard to imagine any country applying the brakes so sharply as to switch instantly
from 5 percent annual growth in emissions to zero.                We chose to interpret the Korean
plan to flatten emissions as covering a period that stretches out over the next eleven
years, so that in 2020 the level of emissions is the same as in 2005.24
         Meanwhile, South Africa has evidently proposed that its emissions would peak by
2025 and begin declining by 2030. 25


         Mexico.      President Felipe Calderon's environment minister, Juan Rafael Elvira,
announced in mid-2009 that Mexico was committing itself to reduce its greenhouse gas




21
   A July 16, 2008, government “green paper,” Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, reported details on
implementation via a domestic cap-and-trade program. Rudd’s initiative appears to have domestic political
support (The Economist, July 26, 2008, p.52). The government went on to set a target of 15 percent above
1990 levels by 2020 (FT, Jan. 2, 2009, p.5) and then 5 per cent below 2000 levels by 2020 (The Economist,
June 6, 2009, p. 39).
22
   “South Korea Plans to Cap Emissions,” International Herald Tribune, March 21, 2008.
23
    “South Korea: Developing Countries Move Toward Targets,” Lisa Friedman, ClimateWire, Oct. 3, 2008.
24
   One could note, first, that President Lee came to office setting a variety of ambitious goals beyond his
power to bring about, especially for economic growth, and second that his popularity quickly plummeted.
At the time of writing, his ability to persuade his countrymen to take serious measures was in question.
25
   ClimateWire, Oct.3, 2008, op cit. Statements from environmental or foreign ministries do not
necessarily carry a lot of weight, if they have not been vetted by finance or economics ministries let alone
issued by heads of government or approved by parliaments,. An example would be Argentina’s
announcement of a target in 1998.


                                                                                                         18
emissions by 50 million metric tons a year between then and 2012, and by 50 percent
below 2002 levels by 2050.26


        China. Getting China to agree to binding commitments is the sine qua non of any
successful post-Kyoto plan. In mid-August 2009, a Chinese top climate change policy-
maker set a target for emissions to peak by 2050.27            In the earlier paper we assumed that
China starts cutting relative to BAU in 2030.               But since we are now assuming more
aggressive cuts by the industrialized countries during this period, and the year-2100 goal
of CO2 concentrations at 460 ppm cannot be met without substantial effort by China as
well, we now move up the date at which it begins to cut to 2025.


        This still leaves three questions: (1) how to determine the magnitude of China’s
cuts in this first budget period—that is, for the first period in which it is asked to make
cuts below BAU; (2) how to determine Korea’s cuts in its second budget period; and (3)
how to set targets for everyone else. The other regions are Latin America—which like
Korea would logically act before China and India, in light of its stage of development—
Russia, Middle East/North Africa, Southeast Asia, India/South Asia, and Africa. Table 1
shows the starting dates for each, which are placed earlier than in the preceding paper, in
order to hit the more aggressive environmental goal.


        Our general guiding principle for the emission targets, once they are to start
cutting below BAU, is to ask countries only to do what is analogous to what has been
done by others who have gone before them.               This general principle is put into practice
by means of the three factors.




26
   “Mexico: A Model for Developing Countries,” Council on Hemispheric Affairs, August 12, 2009.
http://www.coha.org/2009/08/mexico-a-model-for-developing-countries/.
27
   Su Wei, Director-General of the climate change department of China's planning body, as quoted in the
Financial Times, August 15/16, 2009.


                                                                                                      19
Guidelines for formulas that ask developing countries to accept “fair” targets,
analogous to those who have gone before


       This section discusses the three factors for determining “fair” emissions targets
for developing countries. The three factors are additive (logarithmically).


       We call the first the Progressive Reductions Factor. It is based on the pattern of
emission reductions (relative to BAU) assigned to countries under the Kyoto Protocol, as
a function of income per capita. This pattern is illustrated in Figure 1, which comes from
the data as they were reported at that time. Other things equal, richer countries are asked
to make more severe cuts relative to BAU, the status quo from which they are departing
in the first period. Specifically, each 1 percent difference in income per capita, measured
relative to EU income in 1997, increases the abatement obligation by 0.14 percent, where
the abatement obligation is measured in terms of reductions from BAU relative to the EU
cuts agreed at Kyoto.   Normally, at least in their early budget periods, most countries’
incomes will be below what the Europeans had in 1997, so that this factor dictates milder
cuts relative to BAU than Europe made at Kyoto. In fact the resulting targets are likely to
reflect a “growth path”—that is, they will allow for actual emission increases relative to
the preceding periods. The formula is:

PRF (expressed as country cuts vs. BAU)

                          = EU's Kyoto commitment for 2008 relative to its BAU + .14
* (gap between the country’s income per capita and the EU’s 2007 income per capita).

The parameter (0.14) was suggested by ordinary least squares (OLS) regression estimates
using the data shown in Figure 1.        Other parameters could be chosen instead, if the
parties to a new agreement wanted to increase or decrease the degree of progressivity.




                                                                                         20
                                                   Figure 1: The Emissions Cuts Agreed at Kyoto Were
Progressive with Respect to Income, when Expressed Relative to BAU

                                                 50%
 Percent reduction from 2010 business-as-usual




                                                 40%

                                                 30%

                                                 20%

                                                 10%

                                                  0%

                                                 -10%

                                                 -20%

                                                 -30%
                                                      500    1,000    2,000         5,000     10,000       20,000    50,000
                                                     2.699                           3.699                             4.699
                                                                1996 GDP per capita (1987 US dollars, ratio scale)


Sources: The World Bank, the U.S. Energy Information Administration, and national
communications to the UNFCCC




                                                   The Latecomer Catch-up Factor is the second element in the formula.
Latecomers are defined as those countries that have not ratified Kyoto or for which Kyoto
did not set quantitative targets. (Perhaps it should also include those like Canada that
ratified the treaty but are not expected to meet the goal.) These countries should not be
rewarded by permanently readjusting their targets to a higher baseline. Aside from
notions of fairness, such re-basing would give all latecomers an incentive to ramp up
their emissions before signing on to binding targets, or at a minimum would undercut any
socially-conscious incentives they might otherwise introduce to reduce emissions
unilaterally in the time period before they join the system. Thus the Latecomer Catch-up
factor is designed to close gradually the gap between the starting point of the latecomers
and their 1990 emission levels. It is parameterized according to the numbers implicit in
the Waxman-Markey bill to bring US emissions to 70 percent below 1990 levels by 2050


                                                                                                                          21
and the Lee proposal to flatten South Korea’s emissions over a period beginning in 2008.
In other words, countries are asked to move gradually in the direction of 1990 emissions
in the same way that the United States and Korea under current proposals will have done
before them.
         The formula for a country’s Latecomer Catch-up Factor (LCF) is as follows.
Further percentage cuts (relative to BAU plus a Progressive Reductions Factor) are
proportional to how far emissions have been allowed to rise above 1990 levels by the
time the country joins in. That is, it is given by:


LCF       =     α    +    λ (percentage gap between country’s lagged emissions and 1990).


The parameter λ represents the firmness with which latecomers are pulled back toward
their 1990 emission levels.          The value of λ implicit for Europe at the time the Kyoto
Protocol was negotiated was sufficient to pull the EU-average below its 1990 level. But
to calibrate this formula, the most relevant countries are not European (since the
Europeans are not latecomers), but rather the United States and Korea, since these are the
only countries among those that did not commit themselves to Kyoto targets whose
political leaders have said explicitly what targets they are willing to accept in the second
budget period. The parameters α and λ were chosen as the unique solutions to two
simultaneous equations representing the US target in the 2009 Waxman-Markey bill and
the Korean target (a flattening of emissions being interpreted here as holding absolute
emissions in 2020 equal to 2005 levels).                        The parameters then work out to
α = 0.54 and λ = -0.773
Thus:
                                                                                                                28
LCF = 0 . 54 - 0 .773 log(country’s current emissions / country’s 1990 emissions).


         In order to come close to our environmental target (460 ppmCO2 is as close as we
get) without an unacceptable allocation of economic costs across countries, we had to
sacrifice a little of the simplicity of the LCF equation, by adding a dummy variable for

28
  If Korea were to back away from its president’s commitment, but some other important middle-income
country were to step up to the plate with explicit and specific numerical targets, then the calculation could
be redone.


                                                                                                            22
both TE and China.           Transition Economies experienced emissions in 1990 that were
higher than the subsequent trend; whereas China would be experiencing extremely high
costs due to the projected baseline. Hence, we introduced two dummy variables (εChina = -
0.13 and εTE = 0.38) so that the LCF becomes:


LCF
= 0 . 54 + εcountry - 0 .773 log(country’s current emissions / country’s 1990 emissions)29


         The third element is the Gradual Equalization Factor (GEF). Even though
developing countries under the plan benefit from not being asked for abatement efforts
until after the rich countries have begun to act, and face milder reduction requirements,
they will still complain that it is the rich countries that originally created an
environmental problem for which the poor will disproportionately bear the costs, rather
than the other way around. Such complaints are not unreasonable. If we stopped with
the first two factors, the richer countries would be left with the permanent right to emit
more GHGs, every year in perpetuity. This seems unfair.
         In the short run, pointing out the gap in per capita targets is simply not going to
alter the outcome. India and other poor countries will have to live with it. Calls for the
rich countries to cut per capita emissions rapidly, in the direction of poor-country levels,
ignore the fact that the economic costs of such a requirement would be so astronomical
that no rich country would ever agree to it. When one is talking about a lead time of 50
to 100 years, however, the situation changes. With time to adjust, the economic costs are
not impossibly high, and it is reasonable to ask rich countries to bear their full share of
the burden. Furthermore, over a time horizon this long some of the poor countries will in
any case become rich (and possibly vice versa).
         Accordingly, during each decade of the second half of the century, the formula
includes an equity factor that moves per capita emissions in each country a small step in
the direction of the global average. This means downward in the case of the rich
countries and upward in the case of the poor countries. Asymptotically, the repeated
29
  This is a departure from our preferred principle of applying the same formula for all countries, a
simplicity that is appealing aesthetically and, more important, politically. (As in Frankel, 2009.) But it is
one of the concessions we have to make to attain the more aggressive environmental goal.


                                                                                                          23
application of this factor would eventually leave all countries with equal emissions per
capita, although corresponding national targets need not necessarily converge fully by
2100.30
          The parameter (δ) for the speed of adjustment in the direction of the world
average was initially chosen to match the rate at which the EU’s already-announced goals
for 2045–2050 converge to the world average. This number is δ=0.1 per decade, which
is also very similar to the rate of convergence implicit in the goals set by the Lieberman
bills for the United States during 2045–2050. Thus:


GEF
= -0.1 ( percentage gap between country’s lagged emissions per capita and the world’s).


          In order to attain lower stabilization levels one could adjust δ, but the effect would
be that costs increase dramatically, especially for some countries like China and
Transition Economies.


          The formulas are summarized overall as follows:
          Log Target (country i, t) = log (BAU i, t ) – (PCF i, t ) + (LCF i, t ) + (GEF i, t ) ,
where the three factors (except in periods when set = 0 as indicated in Table 1) are given
by:
PCF i,t = log (emission target EU 2008/ BAU EU 2008)
          + 0.14 log (country i's income/cap t-1 / EU income/cap 2007);
LCF i,t = 0.54 +εcountry- 0.773 log (country i's emissions t-1 / country i's emissions 1990).
GEFi,t = - 0.1 log (country i's emissions per capt-1 / global ave. emissions per cap              t-1).




30
   Zhang (2008) and others, motivated by a rights-based approach, propose that countries “contract and
converge” to targets that reflect equal emissions per capita. The Greenhouse Development Rights approach
of Baer et al. (2008), as extended by Cao (2008), emphasizes, from a philosophical standpoint, the
allocation of emission rights at the individual level, though these authors apparently recognize that, in
practice, individual targets would have to be aggregated and implemented at the national level.


                                                                                                      24
The numerical emission target: paths that follow from the formulas


        Table 2, at the end of the chapter, reports the emissions targets produced by the
formulas for each of eleven geographical regions, for every period between now and the
end of the century. We express the emission targets in several terms:
•   in absolute tons (which is what ultimately matters for determining economic and
    environmental effects),
•   in per capita terms (which is necessary for considering any issues of cross-country
    distribution of burden),
•   relative to 1990 levels, which is the baseline used for Kyoto, and which remains
    relevant in our framework in the form of the Latecomer Catch-up term, and
•   relative to the BAU path, which is important for evaluating the sacrifice asked of
    individual countries as they join the agreement in the early decades.


        The eleven regions are:
EU = West Europe and Est Europe
US = United States                        KOSAU = Korea, South Africa, and Australia
CAJAZ = Canada, Japan, and New Zealand TE = Russia and other Transition Economies
MENA = Middle East and North Africa       SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa
SASIA= India and the rest of South Asia   CHINA = PRC
EASIA = Smaller countries of East Asia    LAM = Latin America and the Caribbean


        Table 1 summarizes the dates at which all countries are asked to take on BAU
targets and then reductions below BAU as governed by the different formula elements
discussed previously (i.e., PRF, LCF, and then GEF).
        The bar chart in Figure 2 shows actual emissions, expressed in per capita terms,
for every region in every budget period.        The United States, even more than other rich
countries, is currently conspicuous by virtue of its high per capita emissions. But its
target path begins to come down after 2010. Emissions in all the rich regions decline
rapidly between 2020 and 2050. Emissions in developing countries continue to rise for a
bit longer, and then come down more gradually. But their emissions per capita numbers
of course start from a much lower base.         China peaks at about 1 ½ ton C per capita in


                                                                                         25
2020. None of the other developing countries ever get above 1 ton C per capita. The
industrialized countries, in contrast, emit between 2 and 5 ½ tons C per capita before they
start to cut. In the second half of the century, everyone converges to levels below one
ton per capita.
         Figure 3 reports aggregate targets (caps) for member countries of the
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). They decline from
about 4 gigaton or Gt C in 2020 to 1 Gt C in 2060. The graph also shows the simulated
value for actual emissions of the rich countries, which decline more gradually than the
targets through 2070 because carbon permits are purchased on the world market, as is
economically efficient. The total value of the permit purchases runs about ½ Gt C in the
middle decades of the century.        The quantity of permits purchased by the OECD
countries is generally less than one fifth of their total reductions. The US is the larger
buyer.     This is a far smaller trading share than was the case in the earlier paper, a
consequence of the tougher targets that are here imposed on the developing countries.
The share falls off sharply in the second half of the century. (We assume no banking.)
         Emissions peak in 2020 in the TE group (transition economies), MENA, China,
and Latin America.      Emissions in sub-Saharan Africa remain at very low levels
throughout the century. Figure 4 shows that among non-OECD countries overall, both
emissions targets and actual emissions peak in 2020.         The simulated path of actual
emissions lies a little above the target caps. The difference, again, is the value of permits
sold by the poor countries to the rich countries. The total falls to 2 Gt C at the beginning
of the 22nd century.
         Figure 5 shows the global aggregate. Total world emissions peak in 2020 below
10 Gt C.


         Figure 2: Actual Emission per capita throughout the century, for 11 regions




                                                                                          26
                    6




                    5


                                                                                                                              USA
                                                                                                                              EURO
                    4
                                                                                                                              KOSAU
                                                                                                                              CAJAZ
tonC/cap per year




                                                                                                                              TE
                    3                                                                                                         MENA
                                                                                                                              SSA
                                                                                                                              SASIA
                                                                                                                              CHINA
                    2
                                                                                                                              EASIA
                                                                                                                              LACA
                                                                                                                              World
                    1




                    0
                        2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050 2055 2060 2065 2070 2075 2080 2085 2090 2095 2100




                                                                                                                                     27
Figure 3:
 Assigned targets and actual emissions for industrialized countries in the aggregate
(Note: Predicted actual emissions exceed caps by amount of permit purchases)




            7
            6
            5
                                                                      BaU
            4
     GtC




                                                                      Actual Emissions
            3
                                                                      Assigned Amount
            2
            1
            0
                2005 2015 2025 2035 2045 2055 2065 2075 2085 2095




Figure 4: Assigned targets and actual emissions for poor countries in the aggregate
(Note: Predicted actual emissions fall below caps by amount of permit sales)



           18
           16
           14
           12                                                        BaU
           10
    GtC




                                                                     Actual Emissions
            8
            6                                                        Assigned Amount
            4
            2
            0
                2005 2015 2025 2035 2045 2055 2065 2075 2085 2095




                                                                                    28
Figure 5: Emissions target path for the world, in the aggregate




           25

           20
                                                                  BaU
           15
     GtC




                                                                  Assigned Amount
           10

           5

           0
                2005 2015 2025 2035 2045 2055 2065 2075 2085 2095




                                                                               29
Economic and environmental consequences of the numerical targets,
according to the WITCH model


        Estimating the economic and environmental implications of any set of targets is a
complex task.31 WITCH (www.feem-web.it/witch) is an energy-economy-climate model
developed by the climate change modeling group at FEEM. The model has been used
extensively in the past four years to analyze the economic impacts of climate change
policies. WITCH is a hybrid top-down economic model with energy sector
disaggregation. Those who might be skeptical of economists’ models on the grounds that
“technology is the answer” should rest assured that technology is central to this model.
(Economists are optimists when it comes to what new technologies might be called forth
by a higher price for carbon, but pessimists when it comes to how much technological
response to international treaties will occur absent an increase in price.)                  The model
features endogenous technological change via both experience and innovation processes.
Countries are grouped in twelve regions, where Western Europe and Eastern Europe are
counted separately, that cover the world and that strategically interact following a game
theoretic set-up. The WITCH model and detailed structure are described in Bosetti et al.
(2006) and Bosetti, Massetti, and Tavoni (2007).
        Original baselines in many models have been disrupted in recent years by such
developments as stronger-than-expected growth in Chinese energy demand and the
unexpected spike in world oil prices that culminated in 2008. WITCH has been updated
with more recent data and revised projections for key drivers such as population, GDP,
fuel prices, and energy technology characteristics. The base calibration year has been set
at 2005, for which data on socio-economic, energy, and environmental variables are now
available (Bosetti, Carraro, Sgobbi, and Tavoni, 2008).




31
  Researchers have applied a number of different models to estimate the economic and environmental
effects of various specific proposed emission paths; see, for example, Edmonds, Pitcher, Barns, Baron, and
Wise (1992); Edmonds, Kim, McCracken, Sands, and Wise (1997); Hammett (1999); Manne,
Mendelsohn, and Richels (1995); Manne and Richels (1997); McKibbin and Wilcoxen (2006); and
Nordhaus (1994, 2008). Weyant (2001) provides an explanation and comparison of different models.


                                                                                                       30
Economic effects
       Although economists trained in cost-benefit analysis tend to focus on economic
costs expressed as a percentage of income, the politically attuned tend to focus at least as
much on the predicted carbon price, which in turn has a direct impact on the prices of
gasoline, home heating oil, and electric power.                 Figure 6 illustrates the price of carbon
dioxide under these targets. It rises very substantially, reaching $1800 per ton in 2100,
approximately twice what the CO2 price was with an environmental goal of 500 ppm.
But at least the rise is smooth, which is a desirable property.             (Kinks or discontinuities in
the rate of price increase, such as a temporary flattening around 2020-2030 in the earlier
paper, could distort behavior.) The right margin of the graph translates the cost from
dollars per ton of carbon to terms that the American consumer can relate to:                                                the
increment to the cost of gasoline.                 It rises to European levels by 2040, and to $16 per
gallon in 2100.


Figure 6: Price of Carbon Dioxide Rises Steadily Over the Century

                              2000

                              1800                                                       16

                              1600                                                       14



                                                                                               $ per gallon motor asoline
                              1400
                                                                                         12
           $ per ton of CO2




                              1200
                                                                                         10
                              1000
                                                                                         8
                              800
                                                                                         6
                              600
                                                                                         4
                              400

                              200                                                        2

                                0                                                        0
                                     2015 2025 2035 2045 2055 2065 2075 2085 2095




                                                                                                                            31
          Economic losses measured in terms of national income are illustrated in Figure 7a
and 7b, for the first and second halves of the century, respectively.                             They too rise
gradually. Given a positive rate of time discount, this is a good outcome. As late as
2055, all regions sustain economic losses that are no greater than 3.5 per cent of income.
(As of mid-century, the US is running the largest cost among OECD countries, relative to
BAU, and MENA and China are running the largest costs among non-OECD countries.)
Later in the century, the costs go much higher, above 11 percent of income in the case of
TE and China. 32             The combination of parameters used produced imply costs that rise
above our self-imposed threshold of 5 percent of national income, after 2065, a
consequence of the more aggressive environmental goal. All economic effects are gross
of environmental benefits—that is, no attempt is made to estimate environmental benefits
or net them out.


Figure 7: Income Losses by Region and Period over the Century
a) 2010-2045
  2.00%



  1.00%

                                                                                                       USA
                                                                                                       EU
  0.00%
                                                                                                       KOSAU
                                                                                                       CAJAZ
                                                                                                       TE
 ‐1.00%
                                                                                                       MENA
                                                                                                       SSA

 ‐2.00%                                                                                                SASIA
                                                                                                       CHINA
                                                                                                       EASIA
 ‐3.00%                                                                                                LAM



 ‐4.00%
           2010       2015         2020      2025        2030       2035       2040        2045




32
   These costs of participation are overestimated in one sense, and increasingly so in the later decades, if
the alternative to staying in the treaty one more decade is dropping out after seven or eight decades of
participation. The reason is that countries will have already substantially altered their capital stock and
economic structure in a carbon-friendly direction. The economic costs reported in the simulations and
graphs treat the alternative to participation as never having joined the treaty in the first place. In another
sense, however, the costs are underestimated: any country that drops out can in fact exploit leakage
opportunities to the hilt. Its firms can buy fossil fuels at far lower prices than their competitors in countries
that continue to participate.


                                                                                                               32
b) 2050- 2100
 25.00%


 20.00%


 15.00%                                                                                  USA
                                                                                         EU

 10.00%                                                                                  KOSAU
                                                                                         CAJAZ
                                                                                         TE
  5.00%
                                                                                         MENA
                                                                                         SSA
  0.00%
                                                                                         SASIA
                                                                                         CHINA
  ‐5.00%
                                                                                         EASIA
                                                                                         LAM
 ‐10.00%


 ‐15.00%
            2050   2055   2060   2065   2070   2075   2080   2085   2090   2095   2100




           Figure 8 provides Gross World Product loss aggregated across regions worldwide,
and discounted to present value using a discount rate of 5 percent. Total economic costs
come to 1.39 percent of annual gross world product. Figure 9 provides the regional detail
for these figures.




                                                                                                 33
Figure 8:
Global Income Loss -- By Budget Period, 2010-2100, and PDV (discounted to 2005)
                                       2005   2015    2025           2035    2045    2055   2065   2075   2085   2095
                               0.0%

                               ‐0.5%

                               ‐1.0%
        GWP % Change wrt BAU




                               ‐1.5%

                               ‐2.0%

                               ‐2.5%

                               ‐3.0%

                               ‐3.5%
                                                     Global Losses
                                                     Discounted Global Losses (5%)
                               ‐4.0%

                               ‐4.5%




                                                                                                                 34
Figure 9:
Losses by Region -- PDV (discounted to 2005 at 5% discount rate), 2010-2100
                                            4.0%


                                            3.0%
  Net Present Value Income Losses wrt BAU




                                            2.0%


                                            1.0%


                                            0.0%
                                                    USA   EU   KOSAU CAJAZ   TE   MENA   SSA   SASIA CHINA EASIA   LAM
                                            ‐1.0%


                                            ‐2.0%


                                            ‐3.0%


                                            ‐4.0%




Environmental effects
                                             The outcome of this plan in terms of cumulative emissions of GHGs is close to
those of some models that build in environmental effects or science-based constraints,
even though no such inputs were used here: The concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere
reaches 460 ppm in the latter half of the century.




                                                                                                                         35
Figure 10: CO2 concentrations achieve year-2100 concentration goal of 460 ppm
                800
                750
                700
                650
                600
       ppmv



                550
                                                                                              bau
                500
                                                                                              Frankel Architecture
                450
                400
                350
                300




               Figure 11 shows the path of temperature.                       Based on the modeled concentration
trajectory, global average temperature is projected to stay below 2.8 degrees Celsius (°C)
above pre-industrial levels at the end of the century,33 as opposed to almost 4°C under the
BAU trajectory. Policies aiming at reducing emissions from land use and other
greenhouse gasses could lead to a larger effect on concentrations and final temperature
increase. Still, the result is less ambitious than the goal set by the G-8 leaders at their
2009 summit of stabilizing the temperature increase below 2°C.


Figure 11: Rise in temperature under proposed targets vs. BAU
      4

     3.5

      3

     2.5

      2
                                                                                                 bau

     1.5                                                                                         Frankel Architecture


      1

     0.5

      0
              2005

                      2015

                             2025

                                    2035

                                           2045

                                                  2055

                                                         2065

                                                                2075

                                                                       2085

                                                                                2095

                                                                                       2105




33
  One might be disappointed by the modest gain in temperature in which increasingly stringent climate
policies result. The reason for this is nonlinearity: temperature is a logarithmic function of concentration.


                                                                                                                        36
Conclusion


          Several particular extensions are possible for future research.


Directions for future research
          First, we could compare our set of numerical emissions paths to other plans under
discussion in the climate change policy community or being analyzed using other
integrated assessment models.34 Our conjecture is that we could identify countries and
periods in alternative pathways where an agreement would be unlikely to hold up because
its targets were not designed to limit economic costs for each country.
          Second, we could take into account GHGs other than CO2.
          Third, we could implement constraints on international trading, along the lines
that the Europeans have sometimes discussed. Such constraints can arise either from a
philosophical worldview that considers it unethical to pay others to take one’s medicine,
or from a more cynical worldview that assumes international transfers via permit sales
will only line the pockets of corrupt leaders. Constraints on trading could take the form
of quantity restrictions—for example, that a country cannot satisfy more than Z percent of
its emissions obligation by international permit purchases. Or eligibility to sell permits
could be restricted to countries with a score in international governance ratings over a
particular threshold, or to countries that promise to use the funds for green projects, or to
those that have a track record of demonstrably meeting their commitments under the
treaty.
          The fourth possible extension of this research represents the most important step
intellectually: to introduce uncertainty, especially in the form of stochastic growth
processes. The variance of the GDP forecasts at various horizons would be drawn from
historical data. We would adduce the consequences of our rule that if any country makes
an ex post determination in any period that by staying in the treaty it loses more than X
percent of income, even though this had not been the expectation ex ante, that country
34
  For example, the CLEAR path proposed by Wagner et al. (2008, Table 2) proposes that by 2050 Russia
has cut its emissions 30 percent below 1990 levels, China 46 percent below 2012 levels, India 8 percent
above 2012 levels, and the other non-Annex I countries 23 percent below 2012. The Global Development
Rights approach of Baer et al. (2008) apparently proposes a US emissions target for 2025 that is 99 percent
below its BAU path.


                                                                                                        37
will drop out. At a first pass, we could keep the assumption that if one country pulls out,
the entire system falls apart. The goal would then be to design a version of the formulas
framework that minimizes the probability of collapse.
           The ultimate objective in making the model stochastic is to seek modifications of
the policy framework that are robust, that protect against inadvertent stringency on the
one hand—that is, a situation where the cost burden imposed on a particular country is
much higher than expected—or inadvertent “hot air” on the other hand. “Hot air” refers
to the possibility that targets are based on obsolete emission levels with the result that
countries are credited for cutting tons that wouldn’t have been emitted anyway. Three
possible modifications to deal with uncertainty are promising. First, we could allow for
some degree of re-adjustment to emission targets in the future, based solely on
unexpected changes in the evolution in population and income.                Second, when the
target for each decade is set, it could be indexed to GDP within that budget period.
Perhaps the constant of proportionality in the indexation formula would simply equal 1,
in which case it becomes an efficiency target, expressed in carbon emissions per unit of
GDP. This approach would be much less vulnerable to within-decade uncertainty.35 A
third possible feature that would make the policy more robust and that is strongly favored
by many economists is an escape clause or safety valve that would limit costs in the event
that mitigation proves more expensive than expected, perhaps with a symmetric floor on
the price of carbon in addition to the usual ceiling.


A politically credible framework

           Some may conclude that the environmental goals of 380 or 450 ppm in CO2
concentrations are not attainable in practice; they will be more interested in our results
for the objective of 500 ppm (Frankel, 2009). Others may judge that the political process
will tolerate the looser constraints that correspond to the emission paths explored in this
paper.        Either way, the approach developed in these papers provides a framework for
maximization of the tradeoff between the benefits of cutting global emissions and the
political feasibility of getting individual countries to share the burden.


35
     Lutter (2000).


                                                                                          38
       Our framework specifies the allocation of emission targets across countries in
such a way that every country is given reason to feel that it is only doing its fair share and
in such a way as to build trust as the decades pass.           Without such a framework,
announcements of distant future goals are not credible and so will not have the desired
effects. Furthermore, this framework—in providing for a decade-by-decade sequence of
emission targets, each determined on the basis of a few principles and formulas—is
flexible enough that it can accommodate, by small changes in the formula parameters,
major changes in circumstances during the course of the century.




References
Aldy, Joseph, Scott Barrett, and Robert Stavins, 2003, “Thirteen Plus One: A Comparison of
Global Climate Architectures,” Climate Policy, 3, no. 4, 373-97.

--- and Jeffrey Frankel, 2004, “Designing a Regime of Emission Commitments for Developing
Countries that is Cost-Effective and Equitable,” G20 Leaders and Climate Change, Council on
Foreign Relations.

--- , Peter Orszag, and Joseph Stiglitz, 2001, "Climate Change: An Agenda for Global Collective
Action." Prepared for The Pew Center Workshop on the Timing of Climate Change Policies. The
Westin Grand Hotel, Washington, D.C. October 11-12.

Baer, Paul, Tom Athanasiou, Sivan Kartha and Eric Kemp-Benedict, 2008, The Greenhouse
Development Rights Framework: The Right to Development in a Climate Constrained World
(Hendrich Boll Stiftung, Stockholm, 2nd edition).

Barrett, Scott, 2006, “Climate Treaties and ‘Breakthrough’ Technologies,” American Economic
Review, Papers and Proceedings, vol. 96, no. 2, May, 22-25.

Baumert, Kevin and Donald Goldberg, 2006, “Action targets: A New Approach to International
Greenhouse Gas Controls,“ Climate Policy, 5, pp. 561-81.

Bosetti, V., C. Carraro, M. Galeotti, E. Massetti and M. Tavoni, 2006, “WITCH: A World
Induced Technical Change Hybrid Model.” The Energy Journal, Special Issue on Hybrid
Modeling of Energy-Environment Policies: Reconciling Bottom-up and Top-down, 13-38.

---, C. Carraro, A. Sgobbi, M. Tavoni, 2008, "The 2008 WITCH Model: New Model Features and
Baseline," Mimeo, August. Forthcoming as a FEEM Working paper,




                                                                                            39
--- , E. Massetti and M. Tavoni, 2007, “The WITCH Model. Structure, Baseline, Solutions”.
Working Paper 10. (Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei: Milan).

Cao, Jing, 2008, "Reconciling Human Development and Climate Protection: Perspectives from
Developing Countries on Post-2012 International Climate Change Policy." Discussion Paper 08-
25, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Project on International Climate Agreements, December.

Edmonds, J.A., H.M. Pitcher, D.Barns, R.Baron, and M.A. Wise, 1992, “Modeling Future
Greenhouse Gas Emissions: The Second Generation Model,” in Modeling Global Climate
Change, Lawrence Klein and Fu-chen Lo, editors (United Nations University Press: Tokyo) pp.
295-340.

--- S.H. Kim, C.N.McCracken, R.D. Sands, and M.A. Wise, 1997, “Return to 1990: The Cost of
Mitigating United States Carbon Emission in the Post-2000 Period,” October, Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory, Operated by Battelle Memorial Institute.

Ellerman, Denny, and Barbara Buchner, 2007, "Over-Allocation or Abatement? A Prelminary
Analyusis of the EU ETS Based on the 2005-06 Emissions Data." Forthcoming, Environmental
and Resource Economics.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 1999, “Greenhouse Gas Emissions,” Policy Brief no.52, Brookings Institution,
Washington, DC, June.

--- 2005, “You’re Getting Warmer: The Most Feasible Path for Addressing Global Climate
Change Does Run Through Kyoto,” in Trade and Environment: Theory and Policy in the Context
of EU Enlargement and Transition Economies, edited J.Maxwell and R.Reuveny (Edward Elgar
Publishers, UK).

--- 2007, “Formulas for Quantitative Emission Targets,” in Architectures for Agreement:
Addressing Global Climate Change in the Post Kyoto World, J.Aldy and R. Stavins, eds.
(Cambridge University Press).

--- , 2009, “An Elaborated Proposal For Global Climate Policy Architecture: Specific Formulas
and Emission Targets for All Countries in All Decades,” Chapter 2, forthcoming in Post-Kyoto
International Climate Policy, edited by Joe Aldy and Rob Stavins, Cambridge University Press.
HPICA DP 08-08. NBER WP 18476.

Gore, Al, 1993, Earth in the Balance (Penguin Books, New York).

Hammett, James, 1999, “Evaluation Endpoints and Climate Policy: Atmospheric Stabilization,
Benefit-Cost Analysis, and Near-Term Greenhouse Gas Emissions, Harvard Univ. Climatic
Change 41: 447-468.

Karp, Larry, and Jinha Zhao, 2009, Suggestions for the Road to Copenhagen, Report to the
Expert Group on Environmental Studies, Ministry of Finance, Sweden.

Lutter, Randy, 2000, “Developing Countries’ Greenhouse Emissions: Uncertainty and
Implications for Participation in the Kyoto Protocol,” Energy Journal 21(4): 93-120.

Manne, Alan, Robert Mendelsohn, Richard Richels, 1995, "MERGE: A Model for Evaluating
Regional and Global Effects of GHG Reduction Policies." Energy Policy 23:17.


                                                                                           40
--- and Richard Richels, 1997, “On Stabilizing CO2 Concentrations – Cost-Effective Emission
Reduction Strategies,” Stanford University and Electric Power Research Institute, April.

McKibbin, Warwick, Adele Morris and Peter Wilcoxen, 2008, “Expecting the Unexpected:
Macroeconomic Volatility and Climate Policy,” HPICA, Discussion Zpaper No. 08-16,
November.

--- and Peter Wilcoxen, 2007, “A Credible Foundation for Long Term International Cooperation
on Climate Change,” in Architectures for Agreement: Addressing Global Climate Change in the
Post-Kyoto World, edited by Joseph Aldy and Robert Stavins, Cambridge University Press.

Nordhaus, William, 1994, Managing the Global Commons: The Economics of Climate Change,
MIT Press: Cambridge.

--- 2006, “Life After Kyoto: Alternative Approaches Global Warming Policies,”        American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, vol. 96, no. 2, May: 31-34.

--- 2008, A Question of Balance: Weighing the Options on Global Warming Policies (Yale
University Press).

Olmstead, Sheila, and Robert Stavins, 2006, “An International Policy Architecture for the Post-
Kyoto Era,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, vol. 96, no. 2, May: 35-38.

Pizer, William, 2006, “The Evolution of a Global Climate Change Agreement,”          American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, vol.96, no.2, May, 26-30.

Stewart, Richard, and Jonathan Weiner, 2003, Reconstructing Climate Policy: Beyond Kyoto
(American Enterprise Institute Press, Washington DC).

Subramanian, Arvind, and Nancy Birdsall, 2009, “Energy Not Emissions: Equitable Burden-
Sharing on Climate Change” (Center for Global Development, Washington, DC).

Victor, David, 2004, Climate Change: Debating America’s Policy Options (Council on Foreign
Relations, New York).

Wagner, Gernot, James Wang, Stanislas de Margerie and Daniel Dudek, 2008, “The CLEAR
Path: How to Ensure that if Developing Nations Adopt Carbon Limits, Their Early Actions Will
be Rewarded,” Environmental Defense Fund Working Paper, October 30.

Weyant, John, 2001, "Economic Models: How They Work & Why Their Results Differ." In
Climate Change: Science, Strategies, & Solutions. Eileen Claussen, Vicki Arroyo Cochran, and
Debra Davis, editors, The Pew Center on Global Climate Change (Brill Academic Press, Leiden),
pp. 193-208.

Zhang, Yongsheng, 2008, “An Analytical Framework and Proposal to Succeed Kyoto Protocol: A
Chinese Perspective, “ Development Research Center of the State Council, China, Dec 8.




                                                                                            41
EU = West Europe and East Europe               KOSAU = Korea, South Africa + Australia (all coal-users)
CAJAZ = Canada, Japan + New Zealand            TE = Russia and other Transition Economies
MENA = Middle East + North Africa              SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa
SASIA= India and the rest of South Asia        CHINA = PRC
EASIA = Smaller countries of East Asia         LAM = Latin America + the Caribbean


Table 1: Years when signers are to commit to targets at BAU and then below BAU
                       year when they are      year when they are assumed to
                      assumed to commit to   commit to TARGET (PCF & LCF) never      year when GEF kicks in
                         TARGET or BAU                   above BAU
    USA                      2010                          2010                                 2050
        EU                   2010                           2010                                2050
   KOSAU                     2010                           2020                                2050
    CAJAZ                    2010                           2015                                2050
        TE                   2010                           2025                                2055
   MENA                      2010                           2025                                2055
        SSA                  2025                           2050                                2080
    SASIA                    2010                           2025                                2055
   CHINA                     2010                           2025                                2055
    EASIA                    2010                           2025                                2055
    LAM                      2010                           2020                                2050



Table 2: Emission Targets for each of 11 regions, according to the formulas
Table 2.a Fossil Fuel Emission Targets in Gton C
              USA    EU     KOSAU    CAJAZ    TE    MENA     SSA    SASIA    CHINA      EASIA          LAM
 2010        1.88    1.11    0.40     0.58   0.84   0.51     0.06   0.41      1.83       0.40          0.50
 2015        1.88    0.97    0.42     0.54   0.90   0.59     0.08   0.51      2.08       0.48          0.58
 2020        1.88    0.84    0.25     0.36   0.96   0.66     0.09   0.64      2.41       0.58          0.68
 2025        1.37    0.81    0.19     0.33   1.09   0.70     0.12   0.68      2.50       0.70          0.57
 2030        1.00    0.77    0.17     0.32   0.84   0.59     0.14   0.56      2.05       0.58          0.49
 2035        0.73    0.75    0.17     0.31   0.72   0.51     0.17   0.48      1.74       0.50          0.45
 2040        0.54    0.70    0.16     0.30   0.66   0.47     0.20   0.45      1.59       0.46          0.42
 2045        0.48    0.61    0.16     0.29   0.61   0.44     0.23   0.42      1.47       0.43          0.40
 2050        0.43    0.53    0.15     0.24   0.57   0.42     0.26   0.39      1.36       0.40          0.38
 2055        0.39    0.46    0.13     0.20   0.54   0.40     0.30   0.37      1.28       0.38          0.37
 2060        0.35    0.41    0.12     0.17   0.45   0.37     0.34   0.50      1.12       0.38          0.36
 2065        0.31    0.36    0.10     0.15   0.38   0.34     0.39   0.58      0.98       0.37          0.34
 2070        0.28    0.31    0.09     0.12   0.32   0.31     0.44   0.63      0.86       0.35          0.32
 2075        0.25    0.27    0.08     0.11   0.27   0.28     0.49   0.65      0.75       0.34          0.30
 2080        0.23    0.24    0.07     0.09   0.23   0.26     0.54   0.65      0.66       0.31          0.27
 2085        0.20    0.21    0.06     0.08   0.19   0.23     0.59   0.63      0.58       0.29          0.25
 2090        0.18    0.19    0.05     0.07   0.17   0.21     0.63   0.60      0.51       0.27          0.23
 2095        0.16    0.16    0.05     0.06   0.14   0.18     0.67   0.57      0.45       0.24          0.21
 2100         0.14   0.14    0.04     0.05   0.12    0.16    0.70    0.52     0.40       0.22          0.19



                                                                                                              42
Table 2.b Fossil Fuel Emission Targets in per capita terms
        USA    EU     KOSAU   CAJAZ    TE    MENA   SSA     SASIA    CHINA   EASIA   LAM
 2010   6.0    2.2     3.4     3.5    2.4    1.4    0.1      0.2      1.3     0.6    0.9
 2015   5.7    1.9     3.4     3.2    2.5    1.5    0.1      0.3      1.5     0.7    1.0
 2020   5.5    1.6     2.0     2.2    2.7    1.6    0.1      0.3      1.7     0.8    1.1
 2025   3.9    1.6     1.5     2.0    3.1    1.6    0.1      0.3      1.7     0.9    0.9
 2030   2.7    1.5     1.3     2.0    2.4    1.3    0.1      0.3      1.4     0.7    0.7
 2035   1.9    1.5     1.3     1.9    2.1    1.1    0.1      0.2      1.2     0.6    0.7
 2040   1.4    1.4     1.3     1.9    1.9    0.9    0.1      0.2      1.1     0.5    0.6
 2045   1.2    1.2     1.3     1.9    1.8    0.8    0.1      0.2      1.0     0.5    0.6
 2050   1.1    1.1     1.2     1.6    1.7    0.8    0.1      0.2      1.0     0.4    0.5
 2055   1.0    0.9     1.0     1.4    1.7    0.7    0.2      0.2      0.9     0.4    0.5
 2060   0.8    0.8     1.0     1.2    1.4    0.7    0.2      0.2      0.8     0.4    0.5
 2065   0.7    0.8     0.8     1.1    1.2    0.6    0.2      0.2      0.7     0.4    0.5
 2070   0.7    0.7     0.7     0.9    1.0    0.5    0.2      0.3      0.6     0.4    0.4
 2075   0.6    0.6     0.7     0.8    0.9    0.5    0.2      0.3      0.6     0.4    0.4
 2080   0.5    0.5     0.6     0.7    0.8    0.5    0.2      0.3      0.5     0.3    0.4
 2085   0.5    0.5     0.5     0.6    0.6    0.4    0.3      0.3      0.5     0.3    0.4
 2090   0.4    0.4     0.4     0.5    0.6    0.4    0.3      0.2      0.4     0.3    0.3
 2095   0.4    0.4     0.4     0.5    0.5    0.3    0.3      0.2      0.4     0.3    0.3
 2100   0.3    0.3     0.4     0.4    0.4    0.3    0.3      0.2      0.3     0.3    0.3




Table 2.c Fossil Fuel Emission Targets relative to 1990 levels
        USA    EU     KOSAU   CAJAZ    TE    MENA   SSA      SASIA   CHINA   EASIA   LAM
 2010   1.30   0.92   1.72    1.30    0.89   1.63   1.69      2.03    2.20   3.17    1.69
 2015   1.30   0.80   1.81    1.21    0.95   1.89   2.25      2.52    2.50   3.81    1.96
 2020   1.30   0.70   1.08    0.81    1.01   2.12   2.53      3.17    2.90   4.60    2.30
 2025   0.95   0.67   0.82    0.74    1.15   2.24   3.38      3.37    3.01   5.56    1.93
 2030   0.69   0.64   0.73    0.72    0.89   1.89   3.94      2.77    2.47   4.60    1.66
 2035   0.51   0.62   0.73    0.70    0.76   1.63   4.79      2.38    2.09   3.97    1.52
 2040   0.37   0.58   0.69    0.67    0.70   1.51   5.63      2.23    1.91   3.65    1.42
 2045   0.33   0.51   0.69    0.65    0.64   1.41   6.48      2.08    1.77   3.41    1.35
 2050   0.30   0.44   0.65    0.54    0.60   1.35   7.32      1.93    1.64   3.17    1.28
 2055   0.27   0.38   0.56    0.45    0.57   1.28   8.45      1.83    1.54   3.02    1.25
 2060   0.24   0.34   0.52    0.38    0.48   1.19   9.57      2.48    1.35   3.02    1.22
 2065   0.21   0.30   0.43    0.34    0.40   1.09   10.98     2.87    1.18   2.94    1.15
 2070   0.19   0.26   0.39    0.27    0.34   0.99   12.39     3.12    1.03   2.78    1.08
 2075   0.17   0.22   0.34    0.25    0.29   0.90   13.80     3.22    0.90   2.70    1.01
 2080   0.16   0.20   0.30    0.20    0.24   0.83   15.21     3.22    0.79   2.46    0.91
 2085   0.14   0.17   0.26    0.18    0.20   0.74   16.61     3.12    0.70   2.30    0.84
 2090   0.12   0.16   0.22    0.16    0.18   0.67   17.74     2.97    0.61   2.14    0.78
 2095   0.11   0.13   0.22    0.13    0.15   0.58   18.87     2.82    0.54   1.90    0.71
 2100   0.10   0.12   0.17    0.11    0.13   0.51   19.71     2.57    0.48   1.75    0.64




                                                                                            43
      Table 2.d Fossil Fuel Emission Targets in relative to 2005 levels
                 USA      EU      KOSAU        CAJAZ    TE      MENA     SSA    SASIA     CHINA      EASIA       LAM
        2010     1.13    0.94      1.06        1.08    1.10     1.19    1.26     1.14      1.06      1.31        1.16
        2015     1.13    0.82      1.11        1.01    1.18     1.38    1.69     1.42      1.21      1.57        1.35
        2020     1.13    0.71      0.66        0.67    1.26     1.54    1.90     1.78      1.40      1.90        1.58
        2025     0.82    0.68      0.50        0.62    1.43     1.64    2.53     1.89      1.45      2.29        1.32
        2030     0.60    0.65      0.45        0.60    1.10     1.38    2.95     1.56      1.19      1.90        1.14
        2035     0.44    0.63      0.45        0.58    0.94     1.19    3.58     1.33      1.01      1.64        1.04
        2040     0.32    0.59      0.42        0.56    0.87     1.10    4.21     1.25      0.92      1.51        0.97
        2045     0.29    0.51      0.42        0.54    0.80     1.03    4.85     1.17      0.85      1.41        0.93
        2050     0.26    0.45      0.40        0.45    0.75     0.98    5.48     1.08      0.79      1.31        0.88
        2055     0.23    0.39      0.34        0.37    0.71     0.94    6.32     1.03      0.74      1.25        0.86
        2060     0.21    0.35      0.32        0.32    0.59     0.87    7.16     1.39      0.65      1.25        0.84
        2065     0.19    0.30      0.26        0.28    0.50     0.80    8.22     1.61      0.57      1.21        0.79
        2070     0.17    0.26      0.24        0.22    0.42     0.72    9.27     1.75      0.50      1.15        0.74
        2075     0.15    0.23      0.21        0.21    0.35     0.65    10.32    1.81      0.43      1.11        0.70
        2080     0.14    0.20      0.18        0.17    0.30     0.61    11.38    1.81      0.38      1.02        0.63
        2085     0.12    0.18      0.16        0.15    0.25     0.54    12.43    1.75      0.34      0.95        0.58
        2090     0.11    0.16      0.13        0.13    0.22     0.49    13.27    1.67      0.30      0.88        0.53
        2095     0.10    0.13      0.13        0.11    0.18     0.42    14.12    1.58      0.26      0.79        0.49
        2100     0.08    0.12      0.11        0.09    0.16     0.37    14.75    1.45      0.23      0.72        0.44


      Table 3: Regions’ GDP and Emissions Data before and after the target
               per cap          per cap         per cap GDP     per cap GDP     per capita     per cap           per cap       per cap
               GDP 2010 ,       GDP year        2100 (with      2100 (with‐     emissions      emissions,        emissions     emissions
               K$ (2005 $)      of 1st cut,     policy), K$     out policy)     2010           year of first     2100          2100
                                                                                                                               (without
                                K$              (2005 $)        K$ (2005 $)                    target            (with
                                                                                                                               policy)
                                (2005 $)                                                                         policy)
USA                    46.68         46.68             143.03          149.44           5.96              5.96          0.46         8.79
EU                     22.95         22.95              67.76           69.00           2.54              2.54          0.48         4.22
KOSAU                  17.10         21.29              69.01           72.34           3.33              3.62          0.66         5.02
CAJAZ                  40.10         44.76             123.49          126.71           3.49              3.69          0.79         5.16
TE                      4.83          8.79              34.62           39.64           2.36              2.86          1.00         4.32
MENA                    4.49          7.06              35.36           39.02           1.45              2.38          0.35         3.04
SSA                     0.64          2.13               8.86            7.45           0.07              0.15          0.05         0.32
SASIA                   0.89          2.08              21.81           22.02           0.25              0.39          0.12         1.47
CHINA                   2.49          6.36              48.27           54.29           1.35              1.91          0.74         5.30
EASIA                   1.93          4.21              17.52           18.06           0.57              0.85          0.16         1.77
LAM                     5.61            8.52            61.78           65.41           0.89              1.09          0.33         3.00




                 Table 4: Implied Economic Cost of Emission Targets for each of 11 regions
                 (PDV at discount rate = 5%, expressed as per cent of income loss)
        USA         EU          KOSAU         CAJAZ      TE      MENA       SSA     SASIA         CHINA        EASIA    LAM
        1.4%       0.6%          1.3%         0.6%      1.2%     2.8%      ‐3.6%    1.6%           3.3%        1.8%     2.0%



                                                                                                                          44
Appendix
        We have performed a substantial number of alternative simulations -- changing
starting dates for regional policies and changing the parameters in the Latecomer Catch
Up and Gradual Equalization factors -- in the quest for a set of targets abiding to our
political rules and leading to increasingly stricter environmental targets.
        We present below (Figures A1, A2 and A3) the results for a subset of policy
agreements spanning the space of the long-term environmental target. Figure A1 reports
global costs expressed as present value GWP losses. Figure A2 reports the maximum
national income loss that is incurred in any period by any country. Finally, Figure A3
reports the maximum present value national income loss that is incurred by the major
regional loser.
       In figures A1, A2 and A3, agreements represented by blue diamonds differ only
with respect to when developing regions get a target below BAU and in how fast they
gradually converge to equal per capita emissions. All parameters are equal for all regions.
Within this group the red square represent the agreement presented in the present paper.
Agreements represented by green triangles were obtained by changing Latecomer Catch
Up and Gradual Equalization factors for different regions, thus tailoring rules to regional
cases with the aim of improving efficiency and lowering maximum regional costs.
       First, it is immediately visible how the choice of target, mainly defined by the
speed of long term equalization and the delaying of active reduction in developing
countries, is the major driver of costs. Hence, although our general formulae could be
improved in terms of maximum losses to any country (see green triangles in figure A1,
A2 and A3), losing the simplicity and the political appeal of equal rules for all countries
might not be justified in terms of global efficiency gains.
       The second basic fact is that, given realistic assumptions on what will happen
during the first half of the century, it will be increasingly costly to pursue policies aiming
at 470 ppm CO2 and below. No matter how much we tailor the parameters to regional
necessities and how we might change the ranking losers, maximum national income
losses will be higher than 10% in the latest part of the century for any parameter
specification.



                                                                                           45
Figure A1. Reports global costs expressed as present value GWP losses

                                   1.60%
                                   1.40%
   Present Value GWP Loss




                                   1.20%
                                   1.00%
                                   0.80%
                                   0.60%
                                   0.40%
                                   0.20%
                                   0.00%
                                             450       460   470       480         490   500   510
                                                                   ppm CO2 only


Figure A2. Maximum national income loss that is incurred in any period by any
country

                                        14.00%
  Maximum National Income Loss in any




                                        12.00%

                                        10.00%

                                        8.00%
               Period




                                        6.00%

                                        4.00%

                                        2.00%

                                        0.00%
                                                 450   460   470        480        490   500    510
                                                                    ppm CO2 only




                                                                                               46
Figure A3. Maximum present value national income loss incurred by greatest loser

  Maximum Present Value National Income   4.50%
                                          4.00%
                                          3.50%
                                          3.00%
                                          2.50%
                 Loss




                                          2.00%
                                          1.50%
                                          1.00%
                                          0.50%
                                          0.00%
                                                  450   460   470       480        490   500    510
                                                                    ppm CO2 only




                                                                                               47
