                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    TRUST AND DELEGATION

                                           Stephen Brown
                                         William Goetzmann
                                             Bing Liang
                                         Christopher Schwarz

                                        Working Paper 15529
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15529


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2009




We thank Mila Getmansky, Ed Kane, Bob Krause, Hossein Kazemi, and Andrew Lo and seminar participants
at the Oxford-Man Institute for Quantitative Finance and Rutgers University for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. We are grateful to HedgeFundDueDiligence.com for providing
their data for this research (http://www.hedgefundduediligence.com/).

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Stephen Brown, William Goetzmann, Bing Liang, and Christopher Schwarz. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trust and Delegation
Stephen Brown, William Goetzmann, Bing Liang, and Christopher Schwarz
NBER Working Paper No. 15529
November 2009
JEL No. G2,K2

                                               ABSTRACT

Due to imperfect transparency and costly auditing, trust is an essential component of financial intermediation.
In this paper we study a sample of 444 due diligence (DD) reports from a major hedge fund DD firm.
A routine feature of due diligence is an assessment of integrity. We find that misrepresentation about
past legal and regulatory problems is frequent (21%), as is incorrect or unverifiable representations
about other topics (28%). Misrepresentation, the failure to use a major auditing firm, and the use of
internal pricing are significantly related to legal and regulatory problems, indices of operational risk.
We find that DD reports are typically performed after positive performance and investor inflows. We
control for potential bias due to this and other potential conditioning. An operational risk score based
on information contained in the DD reports significantly predicts subsequent fund failure and statistical
performance characteristics out of sample. Finally we find that observed operational risk characteristics
do not appear to moderate fund flow.


Stephen Brown                                          Bing Liang
Stern School of Business                               Isenberg School of Management
New York University                                    University of Massachusetts Amherst
New York, NY 10012                                     Amherst, MA 01002
sbrown@stern.nyu.edu                                   bliang@som.umass.edu

William Goetzmann                                      Christopher Schwarz
School of Management                                   University of California at Irvine
Yale University                                        Irvine, CA 92697-3125
Box 208200                                             cschwarz@uci.edu
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
william.goetzmann@yale.edu
           “The positive proposition that increasing the integrity of a firm will
           contribute to increasing its value is no different in kind from the positive
           proposition that the net present value investment rule will lead to value
           creation.”-Michael Jensen1

           In the modern era of fund-based asset management, most investment decisions are

delegated to agents whose behavior and character are imperfectly observed and known.

Trust is thus an essential feature of the principal-agent relationship in the investment

industry and integrity is an important factor in delegated fund management. A variety of

institutions have developed to mediate the trust relationship, including regulators,

independent auditors and service providers, third-party due diligence firms and informal

word-of-mouth networks. Each time a manager “touches” one of these institutions,

verifiable information is generated. The consistent or contradictory nature of this

information has the potential to enhance or reduce the perceived trustworthiness of the

manager.

           The issue of trust is particularly important in the hedge fund industry. Many U.S.

domiciled hedge funds register with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) on a

voluntary basis only. Because they are constrained from marketing to non-qualified

investors, the amount of publicly available information available about their performance,

strategies, organization, third-party relationships, and personnel is limited to investors

who review the fund offering memoranda. Hedge funds, particularly those that use

proprietary trading models to generate returns, typically offer less information about their

investment process than do other kinds of investment managers such as mutual funds.

Although hedge fund data services such as TASS, HFR, and CISDM report such things

1
    Jensen (2009)

                                                1
as fund styles, leverage and fees, historical performance, and related advisor entities, they

ultimately rely on the funds themselves to voluntarily provide this information,

sometimes without verification

        In part because the SEC does not allow hedge funds to engage in general

solicitation, fund advisors have historically relied on trusted referrals as a prime

distribution channel. This reliance on referrals, and the limited transparency with respect

to performance and operations, are potential reasons why the Madoff scheme could last

so long. Relatively few third party entities had access to performance statistics,

information about firm auditors, pricing policies, self-administration and custody. In an

environment lacking multiple, comparable sources of information about an agent’s

credibility, trust is even more important, as are mechanisms to verify trustworthiness.

        In this paper, we analyze a comprehensive database of due diligence reports on

hedge funds provided by a major investigation firm. Due diligence (DD) firms specialize

in gathering and verifying information potentially relevant to operational risk assessment.

They are typically retained by clients who are considering an investment in a hedge fund,

and who wish to gather more information beyond what is provided by the fund

prospectus and by regulatory filings.2 While the academic literature has widely studied

the roles of regulators, auditors and informal reputation within financial markets, research

on third-party investigation is comparatively recent. For example, using essentially the

same database, Cassar and Gerakos (2008) document correlation between hedge fund

internal controls and manager fees, arguing that the extent of operational risk controls is

endogenous.


2
  Typical clients are mainly funds of hedge funds, but also include investment banks, family offices, and
other institutions.

                                                   2
       The novel feature of the DD reports for our purpose is that they document factual

misrepresentations and inconsistencies in statements and materials provided by hedge

fund managers. The due diligence database employed in the current study allows us to

address some basic questions about trust and credibility in the investment industry.

       First, do managers misreport to investigators about operational risk factors?

Although, as we shall discuss, the sample of firms subject to due diligence is

endogenously determined by such issues as scale, past performance and risk concerns,

the basic evidence in the DD records about the rates and nature of informational conflicts

is sufficient to give investors serious cause for concern. We focus in particular on

misrepresentations related to past regulatory and legal problems, and upon

misrepresentations or verification problems relating to performance. The former is

pertinent to the potential for future operational events, the latter is important because it is

relevant to the reliability of investor returns.           We find that both types of

misrepresentation are common in the data.

        The second question we investigate is whether informational contradictions

matter to performance and risk. In particular, we ask whether variables related to honesty

explain future reported returns, and also whether they explain the probability of fund

failure. This question is complicated by the obvious problem that if managers

misrepresent their performance, their reported returns may not be a trustworthy basis for

assessing their ex post or ex ante performance.

       Thirdly, we ask how the DD process relates to other institutional filters on

operational risk. The most striking result we find is that the failure to use a Big 4




                                              3
accounting firm is a consistent indicator of factors associated with operational risk,

including self-pricing of securities.

       Finally, we build a single operational risk score as in Brown et al. (2008) to

predict fund failure and future performance. This measure maps information that arises in

the context of an operational due diligence examination to broadly available information

about funds. Out-of-sample tests show that it is strongly related to poor subsequent

performance and is also highly predictive of fund failure. A flow-performance analysis

using this operations risk score indicates that investors chase past high returns

irrespective of operational risk exposure. These results confirm findings of Brown et al.

(2008) that are based on an analysis of Form ADV filings required of U.S. domiciled

funds in 2006. An event study shows that the DD reports are typically issued on high

return funds three months after the historical performance has peaked. The DD reports

are also issued at the point of highest investor flow into the fund. This pattern is also

consistent with the return chasing behavior by institutional hedge fund investors we

observe from the flow-performance relation.

       In this analysis we address the fact that past performance and past legal or

regulatory problems influence which funds receive a DD report. For example, a hedge

fund with a stellar historical record might also have a history of regulatory problems

which would motivate a fiduciary to more thoroughly vet the manager. In controlling for

sample selection we estimate a model that explains the decision to undertake the DD

process. This allows us to draw unbiased inferences about performance differentials

between problem and non-problem funds. Additionally, the selection model is interesting




                                           4
in its own right, as it provides additional insight into the determinants of hedge funds

flows.

          The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section we

describe the data. In section III we report the determinants of funds selected for due

diligence and address the selection bias issue. Section IV presents our results on

operational risk analysis, manager integrity, fund performance, and flow-performance

relation. We develop a univariate measure of operational risk which we validate on an

out-of-sample basis by examining its relationship to subsequent survival, performance

and future cash flows into the fund. Section V concludes.



II. Data

Our sample consists of 444 due diligence reports compiled by a third party hedge fund

due diligence service provider, HedgeFundDueDiligence.com.3 These funds are managed

by 403 different advisors over the period 2003 to 2008. The DD report information is

gathered by the company through several channels: the offering document and marketing

materials provided by the manager, on site interviews with the manager, and forms filled

out by the manager. They augment this by verifying operational controls, assets under

management, and performance with the administrator. Finally, they attempt to verify the

authenticity of the audit with the auditor and perform a background check on the

management company and its key staff.

          A typical DD report spans between 100 to 200 pages with both quantitative and

qualitative sections prepared for the clients. Conventional databases such as TASS, HFR,


3
    The company’s website is http://www.hedgefundduediligence.com/


                                                   5
or CISDM usually provide fund level information such as strategy, performance, assets,

fees, and leverage, but they do not document the investment and operational process. In

contrast, the DD reports reveal how portfolio values are determined, where day-to-day

accounting is done, how the DD firm verifies the accuracy of the data provided, and how

the governance and control processes are conducted. As a result, DD reports provide a

natural platform for us to study operational risk – a major factor in hedge fund failures.4

By hand collecting data from the DD reports, we create 45 variables for our analysis,

although not all data is available for all funds.5 Data definitions for these variables are

reported in Appendix A.

        We supplement the information collected by the DD company with data from a

combined TASS/CISDM dataset. These two datasets are matched via names and other

characteristics. If a fund exists in both CISDM and TASS, we default to the characteristic

and return data provided in TASS. As of March 2009, TASS has a total of 12,656 funds

and CISDM has 13,171 funds, both live and defunct funds. We are able to match 5,879

TASS funds and CISDM funds, which leaves us a combined hedge fund database of

19,948 unique funds. Our analyses focus on fields that overlap between both datasets. We

use the style definitions utilized by Agarwal, Daniel and Naik (2008) for our combined

dataset. Using this matched dataset, we then match the DD funds via fund names. If we

are able to match a DD fund to our TASS/CISDM merged dataset, we rely on the

performance information in the TASS/CISDM database for our performance and flow

analyses.



4
  See Capco (2003). Brown et al. (2009) find that a measure of operational risk is more predictive of fund
failure than is financial risk.
5
  For example, most onshore hedge funds are limited partnerships, which do not have boards of directors.

                                                    6
        In addition to the specific funds that investors requested the DD company to

investigate, some advisors also manage other hedge funds besides those in the DD

dataset. These funds are listed in the same DD report, along with information indicating

if they are offshore, onshore equivalents or part of the master feeder structure of the fund

being investigated. In the cases where the “other” funds listed on the DD report are

distinct, we also add these funds to our sample when investigating performance and fund

death. Since these funds are being operated by the same managers they are arguably

exposed to the same operational risks.6 We present summary statistics for the DD funds

in Table I.



                                   <Insert Table I about here>



        Of particular interest are variables related to operational issues that were

previously unavailable from other hedge fund data sources. One set of variables of

interest is the method of pricing securities by the fund. Hedge funds that invest in

infrequently traded or illiquid securities cannot rely solely on observed market prices for

establishing the portfolio value of the fund. In these cases, managers may supply their

own estimates of the hard-to-value security price. This method has obvious potential for

operational risk or downright fraud, if employed by an untrustworthy manager.7 If

securities in the fund are priced either entirely or partially by the manager we set the

“pricing” variable equal to 0; if priced completely externally it is equal to 1. Another


6
  These “other” funds may have some operational qualities that do not match the DD fund. We run all
performance and flow analyses on the DD funds only and came to similar concludes to those presented in
the text.


                                                  7
variable related to pricing is the NavRestate variable. This variable indicates whether the

net asset value has been restated in the fund’s history and is a related indicator of the

reliability of the pricing mechanism.

        Another group of four variables evaluates the signature controls of the fund. Two

variables indicate the number of signatures required to move money from a bank or the

prime broker. Generally, the more signatures required to move money from one location

to another, the lower the operational risk. However, the number of signatures does not

completely capture the security of cash accounts. A two signature requirement, while

better than a single signature, may be of little value if both signatures are non-

independent. To supplement these signature measures, the DD company also indicates

whether money movements are restricted to certain locations. For example, money

movements from the prime broker may be limited to only the fund’s bank account. The

final signature-related variable indicates whether the signature controls are of

“institutional quality,” meeting the best practice standard for the institutional investment

industry. The DD company defines institutional quality as all money movements

requiring an internal and independent third party signature.8

        Two of the due diligence variables address personnel and governance: the number

of staff departures from the fund and the number of fund board members who are

independent. The first of these relates to the risk involved when a position is vacated and

know-how is lost, or continuity in oversight is compromised. Higher personnel turnover

taxes the attention of other members of the firm and is a common “red flag” for

operational risk. The count of independent board members is a standard governance


8
  The DD company does note they do not use the term institutional quality to render an opinion about the
signature controls, but rather to compare the fund’s signature controls against a predefined standard.

                                                   8
measure that equates independence with disincentive for fraud and lack of conflicts of

interest. It has been shown to be a useful variable in studies of the mutual fund industry

(see Cremers and Nair (2005)). In a practical sense, in the hedge fund universe, only

funds organized offshore tend to have directors.9                 For both employee turnover and

independent board members, there is the additional possibility that leaving a fund, or an

unwillingness of an independent director to serve on a board is an indication of potential

problems.

        The DD firm also reports whether the fund is audited by a Big 4 accounting firm.

This variable is of particular interest because the fund “inherits” the positive reputation of

the firm to the extent that the auditor issues an unqualified opinion with respect to the

audited assets and valuation procedures. In the aftermath of the Enron case that brought

down a major accounting firm, the risks to the auditor of taking on an untrustworthy

client are clearly evident. Thus, this simple variable is expected to carry considerable

weight in separating funds with and without significant risk of fraud.10 Because of this

liability, the auditing firm typically pre-screens managers for the potential risk they pose

the firm before taking them as a client. This risk analysis continues after the firm is

accepted as a client.11 Because of client confidentiality issue, audit firms are not a public

source of information about manager operational risk.12


9
  Only a hand full of onshore funds in our sample has boards of directors. Aragon, Liang, and Park (2009)
indicate that most onshore funds are organized as partnership while most offshore funds are organize as
open-end investment companies.
10
   Liang (2003) indicates that hedge funds that employed Big 4 auditors tend to be large funds and have less
reporting discrepancies.
11
    From one of the DD reports: “… also stated that OneBig4Auditor performs extensive Due Diligence
prior to accepting a new client.”
12
   Auditors were unresponsive to all DD company questions except for the most basic requests for
information. Most auditors, especially the ‘Big 4’ would not discuss any aspect of their audits with the DD
company, even going as far in some cases as not to confirm the fund was a client of the company. This was
regardless of whether or not the fund gave the auditor permission. In some circumstances, the DD company

                                                     9
        One key operational risk variable we use in our analysis is whether or not the fund

has had a previous regulatory problem or has been involved in a lawsuit. For a brief

period in 2006 most U.S. based hedge funds were required to register with the SEC as

investment advisors and file a Form ADV disclosure that provided operational details of

the funds, including ownership details, evidence of external and internal conflicts of

interest and legal and regulatory problems, along with other information.13 Brown et al.

(2008) found that, among other things, problem funds had significantly more conflicts of

interest compared to non-problem funds, suggesting that the potential for exploiting

customers was associated with past adverse events. Table I shows that that 41% of the

funds in our sample have some form of legal or regulatory problem, more than twice the

frequency of problems reported in the 2006 Form ADV filings (Brown et al., 2008). Of

this number, 32% of the funds have been involved in legal disputes as defendants and

15% of funds in the database have past regulatory problems. Firms with problems of this

nature would be less inclined to reveal them publicly through registration. Unscrupulous

managers might even misrepresent the extent of past problems to customers. Fee-based

due diligence service providers seek to capture this kind of misrepresentation through

background research and direct interviews with managers.14

        We use the DD forms to indicate whether managers indeed misrepresent past

problems, or their past experiences. The DD firm compared the manager’s statement

about past legal and regulatory events to third-party records and noted whether the


was able to obtain audits from either the administrator or the fund itself to help verify performance and
asset information. However, without auditor verification, the DD company would be unable to verify the
authenticity of the audit.
13
   The filing deadline was February 1, 2006, but on June 23, 2006, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia Circuit vacated the rule changes that had required many newly-registered hedge fund
managers to register as investment advisers under the Investment Advisers Act.
14
   Currently, a typical DD report costs a client $12.500.

                                                   10
manager’s account squared with the independent evidence.15 These third-party records

can come from auditors, administrators, custodian, or prime brokers. A manager who

misrepresented his or her background also falls into this category. We further break this

indicator down into misrepresentation about lawsuits vs. regulatory problems. We also

have an indicator for whether the DD company could not verify other information

provided by the manager, for example discrepancies relating to operational issues such as

the signatures required for fund transfer. The manager may report that the fund uses one

procedure and the bank or broker may report that the fund uses another. The category

Noted Verification Problem indicates that 42% of the funds in our sample had either a

misrepresentation or an inconsistency problem.

        To further investigate the trustworthiness of these funds, we break these variables

down further in Table II. Signature Disagreement indicates that in 16% of the cases, the

fund’s version of the signature process did not match the version explained by the

administrator, while Pricing Disagreement indicates that 3.6% of the funds disagreed

with the administrator on the process used to price the portfolio. Switched Vendor

indicates that 11% of the funds switched a major data vendor in the last 3 years, while

Refused DD Question means that 14% of the funds or the administrator refused to answer

DD company questions.



                                        <Insert Table II about here>




15
  Rather than answer open ended questions, the DD company uses a hard copy form for past legal and
regulatory disclosure. The form is signed by the manager and consists of several ‘yes/no’ questions.

                                                   11
        In the wake of the Madoff scandal, verifying performance and existence of assets

has taken on greater importance.16 Surprisingly, nearly 19% of funds’ asset information

either could not be verified independently (Assets Disagree) or the DD firm found a

disagreement between the fund’s reported assets and evidence from an alternative source

(Can’t Verify Assets).       Similar discrepancies (Performance Disagree) or verification

problems (Can’t Verify Performance) with respect to reported performance were noted

for 14% of DD investigations. The DD firm also found that 20% of managers (Bad

Recall) interviewed verbally stated incorrect information to the DD company when check

against written documentation, including poor recollection about basic levels of assets

and performance.17

        We found it useful to rank managers on how forthcoming they were concerning

past problems. We considered three cases. In the first case, managers voluntary disclosed

a past problem; however, after further investigation, the DD company found additional

legal or regulatory items that should have been disclosed. This occurred in 6% of the

cases. We label these “strategic misstatements” in Table II. In the second case, managers

disclosed no past problems, but the DD company found they had past legal or regulatory

problems.     This occurred 9% of the time. We simply label these as misstatements.

Finally, if a fund disclosed past problems and the DD company found these were all of

the problems with no additional misrepresentations concerning their backgrounds, we

labeled these managers “truth-tellers” (23%). A final category is the group of managers

who had no past legal or regulatory problems to disclose. It is remarkable that 15% of

16
  "It's very easy if you want. You must do a third-party check. It's an absolute must," Mr. Madoff said of
how one investigates a Ponzi scheme. "It's accounting 101." Wall Street Journal, October 31, 2009.
17
  For example, one manager’s verbal assets under management figure were over $300 million higher than
the actual number.

                                                   12
funds intentionally or unintentionally misstated material facts to the DD company even

when they knew that the company was hired to verify this information.

       To investigate the relationship between funds’ operational properties and past

problems, we separate out the problem funds (i.e. those that have experienced legal and

regulatory problems) from non problem funds and report mean fund characteristics and

differences in means in Table III.



                               <Insert Table III about here>



       We find little difference in the performance of the two groups. Problem funds

tend to be larger than non-problem funds, which may be a function of larger funds having

more opportunities for lawsuits. This is consistent with Brown et al. (2008). We do find

non-problem funds have some better operating controls. Non-problem funds more

frequently use independent pricing procedures than do problem funds, although problem

funds are also more illiquid (measured by longer lockup and redemption periods) and

therefore may have to rely on internal pricing. Non-problem funds also have Big 4

auditors more often as well as lower levels of noted verification problems. However,

there are few differences in the signature setups between the two groups. The Big 4

auditor variable is particularly interesting in light of the practice of auditors “pre-

screening” clients through their own due diligence process. Finally, the problem funds are

more likely to switch data vendors, perhaps because irregularities may have been

discovered by the previous vendor.




                                            13
III. Determinants of Fund Selection

        Our univariate results indicate that problem funds are more likely to have poorer

operational controls while problem funds have similar performance to non-problem

funds. However, one confounding aspect in any empirical analysis is the potential for

selection bias. Unlike the TASS/CISDM database which comprises thousands of hedge

funds, we only have results for 444 funds the DD company examined at the specific

request of a potential or current investor in each fund. Previous research, such as Ding,

Getmansky, Liang and Wermers (2008), has found investors are more likely to invest in

hedge funds that have certain characteristics such as higher historical performance.

Investors may also be more likely to request a DD report when they do not trust self-

reported measures of historical performance. For these reasons, funds in our DD sample

may not represent a random sample of funds from the entire hedge fund universe.

        We examine this selection issue in the following manner. Using our combined

TASS/CISDM database, we create a list of hedge funds available to be selected each year

based on characteristic and performance data ending the previous calendar year. For

example, in 2003, any hedge fund alive during the second half of 2002 with the relevant

characteristic and performance data is included in our sample. We then label funds

selected for a DD report in the following year with a “1” while funds not selected are

labeled with a “0”. We create a data panel extending from 2003 to 2008, which we then

use to run a logistic regression predicting which funds are selected based on their

characteristics.

        We include prior performance (Return Mean), prior risk (Return Standard

Deviation), return autocorrelation (Ret Autocorrelation) size (Log Assets), fees and share



                                           14
restriction measures. We also include a dummy variable indicating whether the fund has a

Big 4 auditor as indicated in TASS/CISDM. While we do not have background checks on

all funds in TASS/CISDM, we utilize the Big 4 auditor flag to proxy for a lack of past

problems, due to indications that the Big 4 auditors screen potential clients. We fit for the

case of funds selected for a DD report so positive coefficients indicate a fund with those

characteristics is more likely to be chosen for a DD report. We run two models. One

model only examines the selection of the DD funds for which we were able to match that

DD fund with our combined TASS/CISDM. The other model includes funds that we were

unable to match. We used data from the DD reports to populate the necessarily fields for

these funds to be included in the selection model. While these funds could not have been

selected solely from TASS/CISDM due to their lack of inclusion in those datasets, these

funds had to be known by the individuals requesting the DD reports and therefore it

seems reasonable to include them in the analysis. We include style and year dummies as

well as clustered standard errors by fund. The results are reported in Table IV.



                                 <Insert Table IV about here>



    As one would expect, larger funds with better prior performance are more likely to

be selected. Larger funds have more clients and higher visibility, which increases the

likelihood one would select the fund for a report. As Ding et al. (2008) find, funds with

superior past performance are more likely to receive attention from potential investors.

We also find that funds with Big 4 auditors are less likely to be selected. If it is perceived

that problem funds are less likely to have Big 4 auditors, this fact alone may be a



                                             15
sufficient “red flag” to require the services of a DD company before investing in such a

fund. An alternative interpretation is that investors are more comfortable if a fund has a

well-known auditor due to their reliance on the auditor’s opinion with respect to

operational risk. Major fraud cases, such as Bayou and Madoff, involved smaller,

unknown auditors. Funds with higher incentive fees and those with a high water mark

provision are more likely to be selected, as these variables are likely to reflect manager

quality (Brown et al. (2008)). The selection model results are consistent whether or not

we include the unmatched DD funds. Consistent with prior findings (Agarwal et al.

(2008), Brown et al. (2008) and Ding et al. (2008)), these selection results suggest

investors chase past returns.

       We also examine performance and flows to the DD funds around the DD report

date. Each month we compute monthly flow for all funds, which is the difference

between this month’s assets and last month’s assets adjusted for this month’s

performance divided by the prior month’s assets, similar to Sirri and Tufano (1998). We

then compute the median of all funds’ monthly flows by the number of months that flow

occurred from the report date. We do the same for monthly returns. We report median

values from two years prior to the report date to two years after the report date with zero

being the report month. Figure 1 displays results for monthly returns while Figure 2

displays results for monthly flows.



                                <Insert Figures 1 and 2 about here>




                                              16
        Both flows and returns peak slightly before the funds had a DD report. If one

were to include a lag from the time that the fund was selected by the investor for a DD

report and the report date, investors are selecting funds, on average, exactly at the peak of

their performance and investor flows. The two graphs also nicely show how flows lag

performance by approximately 6 to 8 months, consistent with the evidence that investors

chase past performance.18

        In additional to the selection bias concerning which funds get selected for the DD

reports from the entire hedge fund universe, the DD funds that choose to list in major

databases may be significantly different from funds that choose to not report. We

compare the DD funds listed in CISDM/TASS and funds that were not listed.

Interestingly, there are almost no differences between the two groups. The only

significant difference lies in the autocorrelation of returns. All other performance,

operating and truthfulness variables are not significantly different. These results,

however, are conditional on funds being selected for analysis.19



IV. Measuring Operational Risk

A. Relationship between fund problems and operational characteristics

        Potential hedge fund investors must decide whether to trust managers with their

money. An important question for investors is whether the operational controls of the

fund compensate for any potential historical breaches of trust. For example, if managers

have a history of legal or regulatory problems then strong operational controls, such as a

Big 4 auditor or external pricing, may alleviant investors’ concerns. In addition, if a

18
  It takes from 4-8 weeks from a client’s request to the completion of the report by the DD company.
19
  To save space, we do not report the results here, which are available upon request. Cassar and Gerakos
(2008) perform a similar comparison and find similar results.

                                                  17
relationship between problems and operational controls exists, then simply having

information about the background history of the managers may provide investors with

some comfort regarding the funds’ operational controls.

       To test these propositions, we examine the relationship between past regulatory or

legal problems and operational control variables using a logistic model. We control for

selection bias by performing the analysis using the two-stage Heckman (1979) model

introduced in the previous Section. The lambda term represents the inverse Mills ratio

obtained from the first stage regression. The second stage logistic model utilizes advisor

information to cluster standard errors and also includes style dummies. In this model,

positive coefficients indicate a higher likelihood of problems. Results are reported in

Table V.



                                   <Insert Table V about here>



       We find that funds with legal and regulatory problems have poor operational

controls. Problem funds are less likely to have independent pricing. We also find problem

funds are more likely to have switched vendors in the last three years. While changing

vendors to upgrade the quality of pricing or trade execution is positive for investors,

changing vendors may also be a red flag as the fund may have been dropped by the

vendor due to data inconsistency. Finally, problem funds are less likely to have a Big 4

auditor; although this result is consistent with Big 4 auditors avoiding funds with legal or

regulatory issues. This evidence is consistent with Brown et al. (2008) who find that

operational risk (measured by the probability of having problems) is positively associated



                                            18
with conflict of interest and concentrated ownership problems. We would expect that

having a Big 4 auditor and independent pricing would be negatively associated with

conflicts of interest. One potential drawback of using background information on

managers is the reliability of this information, especially if it is self-reported. Indeed, we

find approximately 20% of funds have managers who misrepresented past problems or

their background information. 10% of funds would have been classified as non-problem

funds based on the information disclosed voluntarily to the DD company and through any

precompiled due diligence questionnaires, but were found to be problem funds after

background checks by the DD company. In results not reported here we find that not

having a Big 4 auditor is strongly correlated with the probability that the fund

misrepresents material facts to the DD company20. This relationship may again by due to

the Big 4 auditor’s prescreening clients. Those who misstate material facts are less likely

to have Big 4 auditors.



B. Canonical Correlation Analysis

           The incidence of legal and regulatory problems is only one aspect of operational

risk. The DD forms can run over several hundred pages and contain a large number of

variables. Brown et al. (2008) show that it is possible to define a univariate measure of

operational risk (ω-Score). The ω-Score is a linear combination of operational

characteristics that maximally correlates with factors shown to contribute to fund failure.

In order to apply this method to the DD database, we first identify a set of TASS

variables that have been related to fund death in previous literature (Liang, 2000; Brown,

Goetzmann, and Park, 2001). As a result, the following variables are chosen: average
20
     To save space, we do not report the results here, which are available upon request.

                                                       19
monthly returns from the previous year, monthly standard deviation and the first-order

autocorrelation from the previous year, size at the beginning of the period, fund age, fees,

leverage, lockup provision, and advanced notice period. Next, we form a linear

combination of these TASS variables that maximally correlate to the set of the DD

variables we have considered21. The maximum correlation between the two linear

combinations is 0.48. Finally, the resulted linear combination of the DD variables

provides the desired single operational risk measure which we refer to as the ω-Score.

Note that it is more advantageous to build the ω-Score directly from operational control

variables in the DD reports than indirectly from performance and risk information from

TASS.22



                                   <Insert Table VI about here>



        Table VI indicates that funds with better past performance have lower operational

risk; funds with smoothed returns (lower standard deviation and autocorrelation) display

higher operational risk; younger and smaller funds suffer from higher operational risk;

high quality managers (signaled by higher management and incentive fees as well as the

use of leverage) are associated with lower operational risk. Finally, funds with longer

lockup and redemption notice periods in general invest in illiquid assets so the managers




21
   To address sample selection concerns we first orthogonalize these variables with respect to the inverse
Mills ratio computed in the first stage of the Heckman selection model we estimate.
22
   Brown et al. (2008) construct the ω-Score from TASS data instead of the ADV information as the full
ADV data is no longer available to the general public after 2006. On the other hand, investors’ can
purchase DD reports and access much better information.

                                                   20
will have more discretion in smoothing returns or pricing the portfolio, hence higher

operational risk.23

        In terms of the DD variables, the variables internal accounting, misstatements,

the interaction of the use of industrial quality signature procedures (Sign IQ) and internal

accounting, are all positively related to operational risk. In contrast, the use of Big 4

auditor and external pricing significantly reduces the operational risk. As we note above,

the use of a Big 4 auditor may serve as a certification role. A fund with poor operational

controls might be less willing or able to retain a major auditing firm.



C. Does Operational Risk Predict Fund Failure?

        Thus far, we have established a relationship between operational risk and past

regulatory and legal problems and have found relationships between operational risk

variables and fund performance. While managers with low quality operational procedures

may be able to smooth performance, ultimately this behavior may have little long-term

effect on the performance outcome for investors. However, if a manager is committing a

serious breach of fiduciary duty which causes fund closure, this could lead to substantial

loss or inconvenience. In addition, artificially high performance could attract more flows

from other investors, allowing such things as performance smoothing or allowing

fraudulent Ponzi schemes to continue over long periods.



                                 <Insert Table VII about here>




23
  Cassar and Gerkos (2009) find similar results that funds using less independent pricing sources and
funds with greater manager discretion in pricing portfolios are more likely to smooth returns.

                                                 21
        In Table VII, we examine the relationship between fund “death” and operational

risk variables and other fund characteristics to determine whether operational risk affects

the probability of fund death. For our purpose, fund death is defined as the cessation of

the fund reporting to the database24. We run a Cox proportional hazards model

controlling for right-censoring. As with the other models, we include the Heckman

lambda to control for selection bias.



        Our results indicate that funds with higher operational risk are more likely to fail.

Brown et al. (2009) argue that operational risk is more predictive of fund failure than is

financial risk (measured as the log of prior standard deviation). Indeed, in our sample

return standard deviation is inversely related to fund failure. This is consistent with the

view that firms which engage in return smoothing behavior are most likely to fail. The

global financial crisis was a difficult time for all funds. The probability of fund failure

increased during this period regardless of operational or financial risk characteristics, as

indicated by the fixed effect for the crisis defined as the period between August 2007 and

June 2009.



D. Operational Risk and Subsequent Fund Performance

        Results in the prior section find a relationship between operational risk and

problems, which is similar to previous results found by Brown et al. (2008, 2009) on

hedge fund operational risk. While those studies examined the relationship between

operational risk and potential conflicts of interest, the collected due diligence data

24
   The TASS database distinguishes between funds that are liquidated or otherwise no longer in operation
from those that simply stop reporting. We use this information to define “death”. In the subsample of firms
covered only by CISDM we use only the last reported return date as the date of death.

                                                    22
provides the opportunity to examine other potential operational risks for investors. In

light of Ponzi scheme scandals in the hedge fund area, one issue of great interest is

whether reported returns fairly represent investor performance. Prior research on hedge

fund performance has identified evidence that some hedge fund managers may game their

performance.25

        We examine the performance reported by the hedge funds in our due diligence

sample subsequent to the DD report date. For each fund in our sample, we compute the

appraisal ratio using the Fung and Hsieh (2004) seven factor model.26 In Table VIII we

regress this performance measure on operational risk and other fund characteristics. As

Brown et al. (2008) found, operational risk leads to low subsequent returns. We interpret

the negative sign on standard deviation and its interaction with operational risk to

indicate that funds with abnormally low reported standard deviation may have smoothed

prior returns. The (marginal) significance of the inverse Mills ratio tells us that we might

question the high returns and low volatility of returns which led to the DD report being

commissioned in the first place.



                                  <Insert Table VIII about here>



E. Relationship between Operational Risk and Future Flows




25
   For example, Bollen and Pool (2009) find a discontinuity in the distribution of hedge fund returns.
Getmansky et al. (2004) find significant autocorrelation of hedge fund returns while Agarwal et al. (2008)
find hedge funds’ December returns appear artificially high.
26
     We thank David Hsieh for making this data available at his website. See
http://faculty.fuqua.duke.edu/~dah7/HFData.htm. We also considered the Hsieh and Fung alpha as a
measure of performance, with very similar results.

                                                   23
        Operational risk characteristics revealed in the DD report indicate a high

probability of subsequent fund failure and lower than expected returns. Do investors

utilize this information? Some individuals refused to invest with Madoff due to

operational concerns. However, others continued to provide money even when they

understood his operational deficiencies.27 Prior research has shown no relationship

between investor flows and operational risk disclosed by hedge funds during the brief

period of mandatory disclosure by the SEC.28 However, it was unclear whether investors

did not know about the operational risk characteristics of the funds they invested in, or

whether they had full information but simply chose to ignore operational risk concerns.

While the DD reports are specifically prepared for one investor, the information will

clearly be known to one party either interested in investing or already invested in the

fund.29 In addition, the information from the DD report may also filter through third-party

channels and become “public” information to the investment community.30

        Do investors incorporate this information about operational risk into the decision

to commit funds? To examine this question we focus on the extent to which the measure

of operational risk mediates the flow-performance relationship that has been documented

for mutual funds and for hedge funds. We follow the procedure of Sirri and Tufano

(1998) with the exception that we define prior return ranking and subsequent annual

flows relative to the date of the DD report. In other words, for each DD fund, we track

back a minimum of nine months and a maximum of twelve months of complete return


27
   For example, the $17Billion fund (according to the Madoff SEC Form ADV filing) was audited not by a
Big 4 firm but rather by David Friehling, a strip mall accountant who has since pleaded guilty to charges
stemming from his role in the affair.
28
   See Brown et al. (2008).
29
   One investor can represent a large portion of a fund’s overall assets. The DD reports give information on
funds’ largest investors, who on average represent 21% of funds’ assets.
30
   In fact, clients and data subscribers are allowed to view other reports for an additional fee.

                                                    24
data for that fund. We then select every fund in the TASS/CISDM universe which has

returns during the same time period. We define the ranking of this DD fund with all other

funds available in that same time period. In Table IX, we find that flows are strongly and

positively related to high past performance. On the other hand, our measure of

operational risk does not in any way influence these flows. Our results here reinforce the

finding by Brown et al. (2008) that operational risk does not mediate the tendency of

naïve investors to chase past performance. Consistent with the prior literature (see Ding

et al. (2008)), the best-performed group attract the most fund flows. Large funds receive

low percentage flows, more volatile funds get less flows. Finally, the lambda variable is

significant, indicating that DD funds are selected based on large amount of investor

flows.



                                <Insert Table IX about here>



         As a final exercise on investor reaction to the DD reports, we investigate the level

of flows directed toward the DD funds after the DD reports versus funds with similar

size, age and performance in the same style prior to the DD report date. On the one hand,

we know investors are interested in these funds; thus the DD funds should have higher

levels of flows. However, all DD reports find some level of red flags. Even minor red

flags, especially considering the DD reports are being performed on funds that investors

are particularly concerned about, may deter investment. We report results comparing

flows of the DD funds to the matched funds in Table X.




                                             25
                               <Insert Table X about here>



        We find that the DD funds do have higher investor flows after the DD reports.

Thus, most investors must still feel comfortable enough to invest in these funds, even

after reading about funds’ operational deficiencies. Investors may use the DD report as

one of the screening criteria, together with their own information and connections.



V. Conclusion

        Using hand-collected and proprietary data from 444 hedge fund due diligence

(DD) reports, we study operational risk, manager integrity, the relation between hedge

fund performance and investor flows. Despite the fundamental importance of integrity in

the delegated asset management business, we find that incomplete and inaccurate

disclosure of important information is not uncommon among a sample of funds selected

for research by clients of a major due diligence firm. The sample selection issues with

respect to the database are themselves revealing. The DD reports are commissioned for

funds with high past performance, and this performance peaks around the time of the

report, consistent with a reversion towards the mean. The same is true for investor flows,

albeit with a lag.

        Our paper emphasizes the important role of operational due diligence in

diversified hedge fund strategies adopted by institutional and individual investors.

Misrepresentation of material facts is found to be a leading indicator of poor future

returns and fund failure in the longer term. In prior work, Brown et al. (2008) had

hypothesized an important role for private-sector information providers in the hedge fund



                                            26
industry. The current study allows us to study the private-sector mechanism in depth

using a key subsample for which information gathering was costly, and was evidently of

some value to the investor.

       We find that funds with legal or regulatory problems are less trustworthy. We also

find that a relationship with a major auditing firm is a sufficient statistic for the tendency

to tell the truth. This is particularly important as we find that misrepresentation of

pertinent facts is a leading indicator of poor future performance and fund failure. This

strongly suggests that the role of the auditing firm is an important one in the market for

investment services, especially hedge funds and other service providers that are lightly

regulated.

       Our sample does not represent the entire hedge fund industry, but rather the

relatively small sample which is chosen to receive a due diligence report. These reports

are costly and we find that it is the funds with the highest return and positive fund flow

which receive these reports, which is consistent with return chasing behavior on the part

of institutional investors. It is important to control for the fact that funds with high prior

returns are selected for due diligence scrutiny and we do so using a two stage Heckman

procedure. We find strong evidence that the operational risk characteristics revealed in

the resulting due diligence report are highly correlated with subsequent poor returns and

indeed fund failure. However, we do not find evidence that this information influences

the flow-performance relationship. This seems to confirm that institutions investing in

hedge funds are merely chasing past high returns. Overall, these results emphasize the

important role of operational due diligence in diversified hedge fund strategies adopted

by institutional investors and high net worth individuals.



                                             27
28
REFERENCES

Agarwal, Vikas, Naveen D. Daniel, and Narayan Y. Naik, 2008, Role of managerial
incentives and discretion in hedge fund performance, forthcoming Journal of Finance.

Agarwal, Vikas, Naveen D. Daniel, and Narayan Y. Naik, 2008, Why is Santa so kind to
hedge funds? The December return puzzle! London Business School, working paper.

Aragon, George. O., 2007, Share restrictions and asset pricing: Evidence from the hedge
fund industry, Journal of Financial Economics 83, 33-58.

Aragon, George O., Bing Liang, and Hyuna Park, 2009, Liquidity premium: Evidence
from onshore and offshore hedge funds, University of Massachusetts Amherst, working
paper.

Bollen, Nicolas P. B. and Veronika K. Pool, 2009, Do hedge fund managers misreport
returns? Evidence from the pooled distribution, The Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Brown, Stephen J., William N. Goetzmann, Bing Liang, and Christopher Schwarz, 2008,
Mandatory disclosure and operational risk: Evidence from hedge fund registration, The
Journal of Finance 63, 2785-2815.

Brown, Stephen J., William N. Goetzmann, Bing Liang, and Christopher Schwarz, 2009,
Estimating operational risk for hedge funds: The -score, Financial Analysts Journal 65,
43-53.

Brown, Stephen J., Thomas Fraser, and Bing Liang, 2008, Hedge fund due diligence: A
source of alpha in a hedge fund portfolio strategy, Journal of Investment Management 6,
23-33.

Brown, Stephen J., William N. Goetzmann, and James Park, 2001, Careers and survival:
Competition and risk in the hedge fund and CTA industry, The Journal of Finance 56,
1869-1886.

Capco, 2003, Understanding and mitigating operational risk in hedge fund investments,
A Capco White Paper.

Cassar, Gavin and Joseph Gerakos, 2008, Determinants of hedge fund internal controls
and fees, University of Pennsylvania and University of Chicago, Working Paper.

Cassar Gavin, and Joseph Gerakos, 2009, Hedge Funds: Pricing Controls and the
Smoothing of Self‐Reported Returns, University of Pennsylvania and University of
Chicago working paper.




                                          29
Chevalier, Judith and Glenn Ellison, 1999, Career concerns of mutual fund managers,
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 389-432.

Cremers, K. J. Martijn, Nair, Vinay, 2005, Governance mechanisms and equity prices,
The Journal of Finance, 60(6), 2859-2875.

Cremers, K. J. Martijn, Joost Driessen, Pascal Maenhout, David Weinbaum, 2005, Does
skin in the game matter? Director incentives and governance in the mutual fund industry,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.

Ding, Bill, Mila Getmansky, Bing Liang, and Russ Wermers, 2008, Investor flows and
share restrictions in the hedge fund industry, Working Paper, University of Massachusetts
Amherst.

Fung, William and David Hsieh, 2004, Hedge fund benchmarks: A risk based approach,
Financial Analyst Journal, 60, 65-80.

Fung, William and David Hsieh, 2002, Benchmarks of hedge fund performance:
Information content and measurement biases, Financial Analysts Journal, 58, 22-34.

Fung, William and David Hsieh, 2000, Performance characteristics of hedge funds and
CTA funds: Natural versus spurious biases, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis, 35, 291-307.

Getmansky, Mila, Lo, Andrew W., and Igor Makarov, 2004, An econometric model of
serial correlation and illiquidity in hedge fund returns, Journal of Financial Economics,
74(3), 529-609.

Heckman, James, 1979, Sample selection bias as a specification error, Econometrica, 47
(1), 153-161.

Jensen, Michael J., 2009, Putting integrity into finance theory and practice: A positive
approach, Harvard Business School, Working Paper.

Liang, Bing, 2003, The accuracy of hedge fund returns, Journal of Portfolio Management
29, 111-122.

Liang, Bing, 2000. Hedge funds: The living and the dead, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 35, 309-326.

Liang, Kung-Yee and Scott Zeger, 1986, Longitudinal data analysis using generalized
linear models, Biometrika, 73(1), 13-22.

Newey, Whitney and Kenneth West, 1987, A simple positive semi-definite,
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica, 55,
703-708.

                                           30
Sirri, Erik and Peter Tufano, 1998, Costly search and mutual fund flows, The Journal of
Finance, 53(5), 1589-1622.




                                          31
                               Table I: Basic Statistics

This table reports summary statistics of our sample. Characteristic data concerning fund
properties, operations and background issues are hand collected from due diligence (DD)
reports while performance data are collected from TASS, CISDM and the DD reports. N
represents the number of observations, Mean is the mean value while Std. Dev. is the
standard deviation. Min and Max are the minimum and maximum values respectively. Data
definitions are reported in Appendix A.


 Performance                   N          Mean      Std. Dev.        Min         Max
 Avg. Returns                419           1.67          1.18       -1.97        9.73
 Return Std. Dev.            417           2.37          1.82        0.01       12.40
 Autocorrelation             393           0.15          0.23       -0.55        0.78
 Appraisal Ratio             336           1.05          2.33       -0.61       37.49
 Fund Properties
 Management fee (%)          441           1.54         0.48         0.00         3.5
 Incentive fee (%)           440          19.13         4.50         0.00       50.00
 High Water Mark             439           0.97         0.18         0.00        1.00
 Redemption period           441          72.25        74.97         1.00      730.00
 Lockup period               441          97.01       199.15         0.00     2000.00
 Notice period               442          50.36        35.84         1.00      365.00
 AUM (Millions of $)         441         380.62       861.55         0.00     8000.00
 Operations
 Pricing                     443           0.65            0.48      0.00         1.00
 Signature: bank             404           1.70            0.71      0.00         4.00
 Signature: prime broker     391           1.74            0.73      0.00         5.00
 Signature: IQ               438           0.25            0.44      0.00         1.00
 Big4Auditor                 443           0.63            0.48      0.00         1.00
 Money Restrictions          384           0.38            0.48      0.00         1.00
 NAV restate                 442           0.10            0.30      0.00         1.00
 Staff departure             437           0.49            0.95      0.00         7.00
 % of board Ind.             338           0.45            0.32      0.00         1.00
 Background Issues
 Problem                     443           0.41            0.49      0.00         1.00
 Lawsuit                     443           0.32            0.47      0.00         1.00
 Regulatory                  443           0.15            0.36      0.00         1.00
 Misrepresentation           443           0.21            0.41      0.00         1.00
 Inconsistency               443           0.28            0.45      0.00         1.00
 Noted Ver Problem           443           0.42            0.49      0.00         1.00




                                          32
               Table II: Univariate Information on Verification Problems

This table provides further univariate information on background issues based on information
contained in the DD reports. The Verification Problem section provide further detail on
Inconsistencies reported in Table 1 while the Noted Misstatements section provides further
information regarding Misrepresentations. N represents the number of observations, Mean is
the mean value while Std. Dev. is the standard deviation. Min and Max are the minimum and
maximum values respectively. Data definitions are reported in Appendix A.

 Verification Problems              N          Mean         Std dev      Min         Max
 Signature Disagreement           443        16.03%        36. 73%         0           1
 Pricing Disagreement             443         3.60%        18.68%          0           1
 Bad Recall                       443        20.99%        40.77%          0           1
 Assets Disagree                  443        10.38%        30.54%          0           1
 Performance Disagree             442         4.52%        20.81%          0           1
 Switched Vendor                  443        11.51%        31.95%          0           1
 Refused DD question              443        14.00%        34.73%          0           1
 Can't Verify Assets              443         8.13%        27.35%          0           1
 Can't Verify Performance         443         9.03%        28.69%          0           1

 Noted Misstatements                N          Mean         Std dev      Min         Max
 Strategic Misstatements          443         6.32%         24.36%         0           1
 Misstatements                    443         9.26%         29.01%         0           1
 Truthteller                      443        23.48%         42.43%         0           1

 Regulatory Misstatement          443         6.32%         24.36%          0           1
 Lawsuit Misstatement             443        17.38%         37.94%          0           1
 Legal Misstatement               443         2.26%         14.87%          0           1
 Background Misstatement          443         5.87%         23.53%          0           1




                                            33
                  Table III: Problem and Non-problem Funds Compared
This table examines univariate differences of Non-Problem and Problem funds. Data
definitions are reported in Appendix A. Problem funds are those funds that have either a
regulatory issue or a lawsuit discussed on the DD report, while Non-Problem funds do not
have such disclosures. The number of observations (N) and mean value (Mean) for both
groups is presented. Diff is the difference between the two groups, with positive values
indicating higher values for the Non-Problem group and vice versa. Significance of the
difference is assessed using a t-test.
                                         Non-Problem       Problem
  Performance                            N     Mean         N      Mean       Diff
  Avg. Returns                         242       1.65     177       1.70      -0.05
  Return Std. Dev.                     240       2.29     177       2.47      -0.18
  Autocorrelation                      227       0.14     166       0.15      -0.01
  Appraisal Ratio                      198       0.95     138       1.20      -0.25
  Fund Properties
  Management fee (%)                   258       1.57     183       1.50       0.07
  Incentive fee (%)                    259      19.19     182      19.05       0.14
  High Water Mark                      256       0.98     183       0.96       0.02
  Redemption period (days)             260      64.41     181      83.51     -19.10*
  Lockup period (days)                 260      76.77     181     126.08     -49.31*
  Notice period (days)                 260      47.65     182      54.23      -6.58
  AUM (Millions of $)                  260    282.12      181     522.11 -239.99*
  Operations
  Pricing                              260       0.72     183       0.54       0.28**
  Signature: IQ                        256       0.26     182       0.25       0.01
  Big4Auditor                          260       0.70     183       0.52       0.18**
  Money Restrictions                   221       0.40     163       0.34       0.06
  NAV restate                          259       0.10     183       0.10       0.00
  Staff departure                      258       0.42     179       0.58      -0.16
  % of board Ind.                      214       0.47     124       0.43       0.04
  Background Issues
  Misrepresentation                    260       0.10     183       0.38      -0.28**
  Inconsistency                        260       0.27     183       0.30      -0.03
  Noted Ver Problem                    260       0.34     183       0.54      -0.20**
  Signature Disagreement               260       0.17     183       0.15       0.02
  Pricing Disagreement                 260       0.04     183       0.03       0.01
  Bad Recall                           260       0.20     183       0.22      -0.02
  Assets Disagree                      260       0.08     183       0.14      -0.06
  Performance Disagree                 260       0.04     182       0.05      -0.01
  Switched Vendor                      260       0.07     183       0.18      -0.11**
  Refused DD question                  260       0.13     183       0.15      -0.02
  Can't Verify Assets                  260       0.09     183       0.07       0.02
  Can't Verify Performance             260       0.09     183       0.09       0.00
 **Significant at the 1% level; *Significant at the 5% level




                                                      34
                       Table IV: Logistic Analysis of Fund Selection
Presented below are results from logistic models analyzing the selection of funds for a
DD reports. Log Assets is the log of the last assets reported by the fund. Management
Fee and Incentive Fee are the funds’ management fee and incentive fee, respectfully.
High Water Mark and Leveraged are one if the fund has a high water mark or uses
leverage, respectfully. Red Notice Period and Lockup Period is the length of notice (in
days) needed to request money and the length of time (in months) money is locked into
the fund. Return Mean, Return Std. Dev. and Ret Autocorrelation are the average monthly
return, monthly return standard deviation and autocorrelation of monthly returns
respectfully. Big 4 Auditor is one if the fund has a big 4 auditor. Standard errors are
clustered by fund.


                                  Database Matches                All Funds
                               coefficient     chi-sq    coefficient        chi-sq
   Log Assets                        0.391      108.07**       0.384         87.86**
   Management Fee                    0.285        6.97**       0.416         18.82**
   Incentive Fee                     0.047       14.48**       0.054         21.18**
   High Water Mark                   0.658       13.15**       0.817         22.14**
   Leveraged                         0.048        0.13         0.001           0.00
   Red Notice Period                 0.007       10.07**       0.009         23.07**
   Lockup Period                    -0.037       12.67**      -0.043         19.14**
   Return Mean                       0.841      144.55**       0.841        147.40**
   Return Std. Dev.                 -0.472       93.46**      -0.492        106.87**
   Ret Autocorrelation               0.300        1.13        -0.075           0.09
   Big 4 Auditor                    -0.475       13.62**      -1.041         80.53**

   Year Dummies                            Y                       Y
   Style Dummies                           Y                       Y
   Clustered by Fund                       Y                       Y

   Fund Year                        26,112                     26,203
   Observations
   Number of Funds                    8,999                     9,090
   R-Squared                           0.26                      0.27
 **Significant at the 1% level; *Significant at the 5% level




                                                   35
      Table V: Relationship between Problems and Operational Risk Variables

This table reports results of a logistic model investigating the relationship between
operational risk variables and problems defined as lawsuits and regulatory issues. The
dependent variable is one if the fund has a past legal or regulatory issue and zero
otherwise. The logistic model fits the one case; thus, positive values indicate a fund is
more likely to have a problem. Models are run with style dummies to control for style
effects. Models are run in connection with a two-stage Heckman model, where Lambda is
the control term. Variables definitions are in Appendix A.

                                     Model 1                             Model 2
                             coefficient     chi-sq            coefficient         chi-sq
Return mean                          0.193             0.99           0.041          0.03
Return Std. Dev.                     0.033             0.08           0.083          0.40
Return Autocorr                      0.032             0.00          -0.139          0.04
Log(assets)                          0.093             1.03           0.162          2.05
Fund age                             0.032             0.31           0.051          0.59
Management fee                      -0.469             2.66          -0.277          0.61
Incentive fee                       -0.027             0.85          -0.014          0.17
Lockup period                        0.005             0.05           0.014          0.26
Notice period                        0.002             0.41          -0.002          0.13
Background
Misstatement                         0.027            0.00            0.257          0.15
Signature IQ                        -0.023            0.00           -0.169          0.19
Pricing                             -0.699            6.82**         -0.904          6.91*
Big 4 auditor                       -0.825            7.43**         -0.889          5.14*
Perf Ver Issue                      -0.119            0.13            0.115          0.08
Bad Recall                          -0.066            0.05           -0.480          1.36
Oper Ver Issue                      -0.003            0.00           -0.397          1.02
Vendor Switch                        1.292           10.31**          1.565         12.42**
Refused DD Question                  0.219            0.40            0.450          1.20
# Ind Board                                                          -0.522          1.11
Lambda                               0.485             1.23           0.243          0.23

Pseudo R-square                       0.21                             0.27
Num Obs.                              382                              290
**Significant at the 1% level; *Significant at the 5% level




                                                     36
           Table VI: Canonical Correlation between TASS and DD Variables

This table reports the results of a canonical analysis relating operational risk DD data to
the observable TASS/CISDM data. The canonical analysis uses the information
contained in the DD report to construct a univariate measure of operational risk, or ω-
score, using the linear combination implied by the DD canonical variate that is maximally
correlated with the set of TASS variables we consider. DD variables definitions are in
Appendix A.

 TASS/CISDM Variables                             DD Variables
 Previous Returns                -0.19**          Misstatements                        0.23**
 Previous Std. Dev.              -0.18**          SignIQ                               0.09
 1st Order AC                    -0.21**          Big4Auditor                         -0.90**
 Fund Age                        -0.26**          Pricing                             -0.39**
 Log of Assets                   -0.54**          Internal Accounting                  0.42**
 Management Fee                  -0.28**          Misstatements*SignIQ                 0.19**
 Incentive Fee                   -0.24**          Misstatements*Big4Auditor           -0.06
 Leverage                        -0.50**          Misstatements*Pricing               -0.01
 Lockup                           0.54**          Misstatements*Internal Accounting    0.40**
 Advance Notice                   0.25**



 Correlation Between
 TASS and DD Panels               0.48**
**Significant at the 1% level; *Significant at the 5% level




                                                     37
                 Table VII: Cox Proportional Hazard Model and ω-Score

This table reports results of a Cox proportional hazards model investigating the
relationship between operational risk, the ω-score variable, volatility, given as the natural
logarithm of prior standard deviation, and the length of time to death after the DD report.
The dependent variable is the number of years to death after the DD report date. Models
are run with style dummies to control for style effects. Models are run in connection with
a two-stage Heckman model, where Lambda is the inverse Mills ratio. GFC captures the
global financial crisis fixed effect between August 2007 to June 2009.

                               Model 1                                  Model 2
                         coefficient   t-stat                  coefficient        t-stat
Volatility                    -9.583          -1.44              -15.303           -2.02*
Omega                          0.325           2.01*               0.341            2.04*
Volatility*Omega             -17.162          -2.44*             -16.541           -2.34*
GFC                            0.747           3.61**              0.700            3.35**
Directional Traders                                               -0.789           -2.10*
FOF                                                               -0.578           -1.58
Managed Futures                                                   -0.111           -0.15
Multi-Process                                                     -0.730           -2.36*
Relative Value                                                    -0.391           -1.34
Lambda                        -0.036          -0.35               -0.030           -0.29

**Significant at the 1% level; *Significant at the 5% level.




                                                      38
    Table VIII: Relationship between Post Appraisal Ratio and Operational Risk
                                 Variable ω-Score
This table reports results investigating the relationship between operational risk, the ω-
score, and performance after the DD report date. Standard deviation is the monthly return
standard deviation up to but not including the report dates. Both DD funds and their
related funds are included in the analysis. The fund’s appraisal ratio computed using the
Fung and Hsieh (2004) seven factor model using returns after the DD report is the
dependent variable. Models are run with style dummies to control for style effects.
Models are run in connection with a two-stage Heckman model, where Lambda is the
inverse Mills ratio.


                             Model 1                        Model 2              Model 3
                            coeff. t-value                 coeff. t-value       coeff. t-value
Intercept                  -1.161     -5.56**             -1.331     -6.13**   -0.490     -0.99
Omega                      -1.359     -6.99**             -1.312     -6.71**   -1.344     -6.84**
Prior Std. Dev.            -0.293     -5.81**             -0.346     -6.14**   -0.343     -5.97**
Omega* Std. Dev.           -0.361     -7.65**             -0.348     -7.35**   -0.352     -7.43**
Directional Traders                                       -0.017     -0.14      0.004      0.03
FOF                                                       -0.358     -2.43*    -0.347     -2.35*
Managed Futures                                            0.390      1.35      0.362      1.23
Multi-Process                                              0.065      0.59      0.097      0.88
Relative Value                                            -0.099     -0.82     -0.054     -0.44
Log(assets)                                                                    -0.047     -1.79
Fund age                                                                       -0.005     -0.31
Lambda                      0.075        1.91             0.072      1.82       0.083      2.05*

Adj. R-squared               0.31                          0.33                  0.33
Num Obs.                     317                            317                   317
**Significant at the 1% level; *Significant at the 5% level.




                                                     39
   Table IX: Relationship between Future Flows and Operational Risk ω-Score

This table reports results with examining investor flows after the DD report. The
dependent variable is the fund’s flow computed as the percentage change in prior assets
over the 12 months after their DD report after controlling for organic growth. Each DD
fund’s performance is ranked against other funds available at the time of the DD report.
Models are run in connection with a two-stage Heckman model, where Lambda is the
control term.

                                   Model 1                            Model 2
                            coefficient    t-stat               coefficient     t-stat
  Intercept                      6.609       3.93**                  6.784        3.98**
  Low Rank                       3.989       1.27                    4.272        1.33
  Mid Rank                      -0.997      -0.60                   -1.236       -0.74
  High Rank                      3.597       2.63**                  3.659        2.66**
  Omega                         -0.098      -0.86                    0.018        0.02
  Log(assets)                   -0.393      -5.02**                 -0.403       -5.10**
  Prior Std. Dev.              -18.569      -2.77**                -19.182       -2.83**
  Low Rank*omega                                                     0.739        0.25
  Mid Rank*omega                                                    -1.066       -0.68
  High Rank*omega                                                   -0.539       -0.42
  Lambda                          0.294            2.60**            0.284        2.48*

  Adjusted R-squared               0.13                              0.13
  Num Obs.                         247                                247
 **Significant at the 1% level; *Significant at the 5% level.




                                                    40
     Table X: Comparison of Flows and Appraisal Ratios after the DD Report

This tables reports results comparing the flows and appraisal ratios of funds selected for
DD reports and other matched funds from our combined TASS/CISDM database. Funds
for the appraisal ratio results were matched by age, size and prior appraisal ratio. The
matching fund was selected as the fund with the lowest total difference across all three
variables with prior appraisal ratio receiving twice as much weight. Match funds for the
flow results were selected by age, assets and return performance over the prior period.
The matching fund was selected as the fund with the lowest total difference across all
three variables with prior return performance receiving twice as much weight. Results for
all DD funds, problem funds and non-problem funds are reported as well as p-values for
the difference.

                        DD Funds         Non-DD             Difference       p-value
                                         Matched Funds
 Flows                  1.483            0.632              0.851            0.00
 Problem Flows          1.675            0.736              0.939            0.00
 Non-Pro Flows          1.277            0.521              0.756            0.00

 Appraisal ratio        0.212            0.137              0.074            0.31
 Problem funds          0.244            0.183              0.060            0.64
 Non-Problem funds      0.181            0.094              0.087            0.22




                                           41
                                                   Figure 1: Median Returns
                1.6


                1.4


                1.2


                 1
Median Return




                0.8


                0.6


                0.4


                0.2


                 0
                      -24 -22 -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10   -8   -6   -4   -2        0   2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20   22   24
                                                                  Months from Report Date




                                                                            42
                                                   Figure 2: Median Flows
              0.08


              0.07


              0.06


              0.05
Median Flow




              0.04


              0.03


              0.02


              0.01


                 0
                      -24 -22 -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10   -8   -6    -4   -2    0   2   4     6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20   22   24

              -0.01
                                                                  Months from Report Date




                                                                         43
                               Appendix A: Data Definitions
Data is from a due diligence company. There are 444 funds. All data are hand-collected.

 Performance
 Avg. Returns               Average Monthly Return prior to the DD report in percent
 Return Std. Dev.           Avg, Return standard deviation prior to the DD report
 Autocorrelation            Avg, Return autocorrelation prior to the DD report
 Fund Properties
 Management fee (%)         Fund’s management fee in percent
 Incentive fee (%)          Fund’s incentive fee in percent
 High Water Mark            1 if the fund has a high water mark and zero otherwise
 Redemption period          Number of days between redemption opportunities
 Lockup period              Number of days new money is locked into fund
 Notice period              Number of days request for a redemption notice
 AUM (Millions of $)        Assets under management at DD report time
 Log(assets)                Log of assets in US Dollars
 Fund age                   Age of fund in years
 Operations
 Pricing                    Priced completely externally = 1, mixed or internal = 0


 Signature: IQ              1 if signature controls are institutional quality, zero otherwise
 Big4Auditor                1 if fund’s auditor is a big 4 auditor, zero otherwise
 Money Restrictions         1 if restrictions on where money can be sent from Bank/PB
 NAV restate                1 if fund has restated NAV in the past
 Staff departure            # of persons that have departed the fund
 % of board Ind.            % of board members that are independent
 Internal Accounting        1 if fund uses day-to-day internal accounting
 Background Issues
 Problem                    1 if fund has a lawsuit or regulatory problem, 0 otherwise
 Lawsuit                    1 if fund has a lawsuit, 0 otherwise
 Regulatory                 1 if fund has a regulatory issue, 0 otherwise
 Misrepresentation          1 if managers failed to disclose past regulatory or legal issue
 Noted Ver Problem          1 if DD company had a problem verifying information This
                            includes significant differences between performance/assets
                            and operational rules and failing to disclose prior problems
Misstatement Information
Strategic Misstatement   Fund voluntarily discloses a problem, but does not disclose all
                         problems.
Misstatement             Fund discloses no problems, but has problems.
Truthteller              Fund discloses all problems.
Regulatory               Did not disclose all regulatory infractions
Misstatement
Lawsuit Misstatement     Did not disclose all lawsuits
Legal Misstatement       Did not disclose all legal problems
Background               Misrepresented personal background information
Misstatement

Background Issues
Signature Disagreement   Signature process to move money disagreed between fund and
                         administrator
Pricing Disagreement     Process to price the portfolio disagreed between fund,
                         administrator and/or auditor.
Bad Recall               Fund verbally said something incorrect during DD visit.
Assets Disagree          Asset information disagrees between fund, administrator
                         and/or auditor
Performance Disagree     Performance information disagrees between fund,
                         administrator and/or auditor
Switched Vendor          Fund switched the vendor of a major process in the last three
                         years.
Refused DD Question      Fund and/or administrator refused to answer a DD question
Can’t Verify Assets      DD company cannot independently verify asset information
Can’t Verify Performance DD company cannot independently verify performance
                         information
Perf Ver Problem         1 if Assets Disagree, Performance Disagree, Can’t Verify
                         Assets or Can’t Verify Performance =1
Oper Ver Issue           1 if Signature Disagreement or Pricing Disagreement =1




                                           1
