NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMMIGRATION, WAGES, AND COMPOSITIONAL AMENITIES
David Card
Christian Dustmann
Ian Preston
Working Paper 15521
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15521

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2009

We are extremely grateful to the European Social Survey questionnaire design team for their assistance
in the design of the questions included in the 2002 ESS Survey, and to the Nuffield Foundation, the
Centre for Research and Analysis of Migration (CReAM), and the Center for Labor Economics at
Berkeley for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by David Card, Christian Dustmann, and Ian Preston. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Immigration, Wages, and Compositional Amenities
David Card, Christian Dustmann, and Ian Preston
NBER Working Paper No. 15521
November 2009
JEL No. J61
ABSTRACT
Economists are often puzzled by the stronger public opposition to immigration than trade, since the
two policies have similar effects on wages. Unlike trade, however, immigration can alter the composition
of the local population, imposing potential externalities on natives. While previous studies have addressed
fiscal spillover effects, a broader class of externalities arise because people value the 'compositional
amenities' associated with the characteristics of their neighbors and co-workers. In this paper we present
a new method for quantifying the relative importance of these amenities in shaping attitudes toward
immigration. We use data for 21 countries in the 2002 European Social Survey, which included a
series of questions on the economic and social impacts of immigration, as well as on the desirability
of increasing or reducing immigrant inflows. We find that individual attitudes toward immigration
policy reflect a combination of concerns over conventional economic impacts (i.e., wages and taxes)
and compositional amenities, with substantially more weight on the latter. Most of the difference in
attitudes toward immigration between more and less educated natives is attributable to heightened
concerns over compositional amenities among the less-educated.

David Card
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu
Christian Dustmann
Department of Economics
University College London
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK
c.dustmann@ucl.ac.uk

Ian Preston
Department of Economics
University College London
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK
i.preston@ucl.ac.uk

Standard economic reasoning suggests that immigration, like trade, creates a
surplus that in principle can be redistributed so all natives are better off (Mundell, 1957).
In practice redistributive mechanisms are incomplete so both policies tend to create
winners and losers. Even so, public support for increased immigration is far weaker than
for expanding trade.1 While the two policies have similar effects on relative factor prices,
immigration also changes the composition of the receiving country’s population,
imposing externalities on the existing population. Previous studies have focused on the
fiscal externalities created by redistributive taxes and benefits (e.g., MaCurdy, Nechyba,
and Bhattacharya, 1998; Borjas, 1999, Hanson, Scheve and Slaughter, 2005). A wider
class of externalities arise through the fact that people value the ‘compositional
amenities’ associated with the characteristics of their neighbors and co-workers. Such
preferences are central to understanding discrimination (Becker, 1957) and choices
between neighborhoods and schools (e.g., Bayer, Ferreira, and McMillan, 2007) and
arguably play an important role in mediating views about immigration.
This paper presents a new method for quantifying the relative importance of
compositional amenities in shaping individual attitudes toward immigration. The key to
our approach is a series of questions included in the 2002 European Social Survey (ESS)
that elicited views on the effects of immigration on specific domains – including impacts
on relative wages and the fiscal balance, and a country’s culture life – as well as on the
importance of maintaining shared religious beliefs, language, and customs. We use a
latent-factor approach to combine these questions into two factors: one representing
concerns over wages, taxes and benefits; and another representing concerns over
1

For example, a recent international opinion poll conducted by the Pew Foundation (Pew Global Attitudes
Project, 2007) found uniformly more positive views for free trade than for immigration. Mayda (2008)
documents the same divergence using data from the International Social Survey Program.

compositional amenities. We then relate views on immigration policy, and overall
assessments about the effect of immigration on the economy and the quality of life, to
these latent factors. Our method yields a simple decomposition of the differences in
opinions between demographic groups (e.g., more and less educated worker) into
differences in the two types of concerns.
Our empirical analysis leads to three main conclusions. First, we find that
attitudes to immigration – expressed by the answer to a question of whether more or
fewer immigrants from certain source countries should be permitted to enter, for example
– reflect a combination of concerns over compositional amenities and the direct economic
impacts of immigration on wages and taxes. Second, we find that the strength of the
concerns that people express over the two channels are positively correlated. This means
that studies that focus exclusively on one factor or the other capture a reasonable share of
the variation in attitudes for or against increased immigration.2
Our third conclusion is that concerns over compositional amenities are
substantially more important than concerns over the impacts on wages and taxes.3
Specifically, variation in concerns over compositional amenities explain 3-5 times more
of the individual-specific variation in answers to the question of whether more or fewer
immigrants should be permitted to enter than does variation in concerns over wages and
taxes. Concerns over compositional amenities are even more important in understanding
attitudes toward immigrant groups that are ethnically different, or come from poorer
2

Some previous studies of attitudes toward immigration have ignored compositional amenity effects (e.g.,
Scheve and Slaughter, 2001) while others have focused on “non-economic” explanations for antiimmigrant attitudes (Espenshade and Hempstead, 1996). An exception is Mayda (2006), who focuses on
both economic and non-economic factors. We interpret concerns over racial and cultural homogeneity –
which are sometimes interpreted as “non-economic” factors – as expressing the importance of
compositional amenities.
3
A similar conclusion is reached by Citrin, Green, Muste and Wong (1997) using data for the U.S. and by
Dustmann and Preston (2007) using data for the U.K.

2

countries. Similarly, differences in concerns over compositional amenities account for
about 70% of the gap between high- and low-education respondents over whether more
immigrants should be permitted to enter the country.
Reassuringly, the latent component of variation that our model identifies as a
concern over the economic impacts of immigration explains a much larger share of
differences in responses to the question of whether immigration is good or bad for the
economy. The contrast suggests that respondents distinguish between the wage and tax
effects of immigration and effects on the composition of the host country, and place
substantial weight on the latter in forming overall views about immigration policies.
The next section of the paper describes our methodology for evaluating the
relative importance of concerns over direct economic impacts and compositional
amenities in shaping attitudes toward immigration. We describe our basic factor model
and the assumptions we use to identify the model using the questions in the ESS. Section
III gives a brief overview of the ESS and the patterns of responses to the key questions
about immigration in the survey. Section IV presents our main empirical findings, while
Section V presents a series of extensions and robustness checks. We summarize our
main conclusions in Section VI.

II. Theoretical Framework and Estimation Methodology
a. Basic Framework
Assume that a given individual (indexed by i) evaluates alternative policy
scenarios though an indirect utility function that depends on his or her net income and on
the characteristics of his or her community:

3

ui( wi + bi − ti , ai ) ,
where wi represents individual i’s gross income, bi and ti represent transfer benefits and
taxes, respectively, and ai is a (multi-dimensional) summary of the characteristics of i’s
community, including such features as the racial composition and religious affiliation of
i’s neighborhood and workplace, and the mean income and poverty rate of i’s neighbors.
When asked to decide whether more immigration should be allowed, we assume
that the individual compares a hypothetical environment in the presence of more
immigrants (wi′, bi′, ti′, ai′) to the current situation (wiº, biº, tiº, aiº) and reports a
transformation of the difference in indirect utilities:
yi = gi [ ui(wi′ + bi′ − ti′ , ai′) − ui(wiº + biº − tiº, aiº) ] ,
where gi is a person-specific response function (assumed to be monotonically increasing).
Taking a first order approximation, and allowing for an additive effect from a vector of
covariates (Xi), the observed response of individual i is:
(1)

yi ≈ λ1i ( Δwi + Δbi − Δti ) + λ2i Δai + αXi + μi

where Δwi = wi′ − wiº is the difference in gross earnings between the alternative
scenarios, Δbi, Δti and Δai are the corresponding differences in benefits, taxes, and
compositional amenities, respectively, and μi is an approximating error. Defining λ1 =
E[λ1i] and λ2 = E[λ2i], equation (1) can be rewritten as
(2)

yi =

λ1 f1i + λ2 f2i + αXi + μi

where
f1i ≡ [λ1i/λ1] × ( Δwi + Δbi − Δti ) and
f2i ≡ [λ2i/λ2] × Δai .

4

The individual-specific variables f1i and f2i represent the relative intensities of individual
i’s concerns over the direct economic effect and the compositional amenity effect of the
change, respectively. Note that f1i and f2i incorporate both the magnitudes of the changes
envisioned by the individual (reflected in Δwi, Δbi, Δti, Δai), and the relative importance
of the changes to i (reflected in the magnitudes of λ1i/λ1 and λ2i/λ2).4 An individual may
express stronger concerns about the wage impacts of immigration, for example, because
she projects a larger wage loss as a result of the policy, because she has a higher marginal
utility of income, or because she interprets the response scale differently (i.e., has a
steeper gi function).
We do not observe f1i and f2i directly. Instead, we observe responses to a series of
questions that provide information about an individual’s realizations of f1i and f2i.
Specifically, we assume that the intensity of concern about direct economic effects of
immigration is reflected in answers to five questions:5
i. Do you agree or disagree that wages and salaries are brought down by immigration?
ii Do you agree or disagree that immigrants harm the economic prospects of the poor?
iii. Do you agree or disagree that immigrants help to fill jobs where there are shortages
of workers?
iv. Would you say that immigrants generally take jobs away from natives or help create
new jobs?
v. On balance do you think that immigrants take out more (in health benfefits and
welfare services) than they put in (in taxes)?

4

From (1), λ1i = gi′ × ∂ui/∂wi and λ2i = gi′ × ∂ui/∂ai. Thus variation in λji/λj reflects variation in the way that
different individuals interpret the response scale used to measure their policy views, as well as in the
marginal utilities of wages and amenities. Note that the relative magnitude of λ1i and λ2i does not depend
on gi′.
5
The economic impact questions in the ESS elicit respondents’ views about the effects of immigration on
wages and job opportunities in general, rather than about impacts on their own situation. This wording
choice was influenced by the findings of Kinder and Kiewert (1981) and subsequent researchers that policy
opinions are more closely aligned with answers to questions that pose sociotropic concerns than those that
pose narrow self-interest concerns. Whether this is because people care more about society-wide policy
impacts than personal impacts is widely debated. Our view is that answers to sociotropic questions identify
the strength of personal concern about an issue, and reflect a combination of perceived personal and social
impacts. A similar view is expressed in Bobo and Kluegel (1993).

5

We assume that concerns about compositional amenities are reflected in answers to five
other questions:
vi. Do you agree or disagree that it is better for a country if everyone shares the same
customs and traditions?
vii. Do you agree or disagree that it is better for a country if there is a variety of different
religions?
viii. Do you agree or disagree that it is better for a country if everyone can speak one
common language?
ix. Would you say that a country’s cultural life is undermined or enriched by the
presence of immigrants?
x. Do you agree or disagree that a country should stop immigration if it wants to
reduce social tensions?
Formally, we assume that the responses to these 10 questions, denoted as (z1i, z2i,…,z10i),
are related to the underlying factors f1i and f2i and to observed characteristics of the
respondent by a set of linear equations:6
(3a)

zji = Mj f1i + cj Xi + νji

, j=1,2,…5.

(3b)

zji = Mj f2i + cj Xi + νji

, j=6,7,…10.

Thus, responses to the first 5 questions are treated as noisy indicators of f1i, while
responses to the second group of questions are treated as noisy indicators of f2i.
To complete the model, we assume that the latent factors are related to the
observed respondent characteristics and a pair of idiosyncratic errors:
(4a)

f1i = b1 Xi + ω1i

(4b)

f2i = b2 Xi + ω2i .

Combing the preceding equations yields a set of reduced forms for the responses (yi, zji):
(5a)

yi = Γ0 Xi + ε0i
Γ0 = λ1b1 + λ2b2 + α ;

(5b)

ε0i = λ1 ω1i + λ2 ω2i + μi

,

zji = Γj Xi + εji

6

Different questions in the ESS used different response scales. As explained below, we assign cardinal
values to the ordered responses then linearly transform the responses to lie between 0 and 1.

6

Γj = Mj b1 + cj ;

εji = Mj ω1i + νji ,

j=1,2,…5 ,

Γj = Mj b2 + cj ;

εji = Mj ω2i + νji,

j=6,7,…10 .

These equations form a linear system with cross-equation and covariance restrictions.
Our goal is to identify the relative importance of the factors f1i and f2i in shaping
preferences over immigration policy.7 We proceed by making a series of assumptions on
the covariances between the error components in the structural equations (2), (3) and (4)
that allow us to identify λ1, λ2, and the Mj’s from the variance-covariance matrix of the
reduced-form residuals ε0i and εji (j=1…10). The remaining parameters – in particular the
coefficients α, b1, and b2 that determine the projection of y on the X’s – are then
identified from the Γj’s (i.e., the reduced-form regression coefficients).8
Our key assumptions on the error components (μi, νji, ω1i, ω2i) are:
(6a)

Var[ω1i | Xi] = 1, Var[ω2i | Xi] = 1, Cov[ω1i , ω2i | Xi] = σ12 .

(6b)

Var[νji | Xi] = φj , Cov[νji , νki | Xi] = 0 ( j ≠ k ) ,
Cov[νji, ω1i | Xi] = Cov[νji, ω2i | Xi] = 0 .

(6c)

Var[μi | Xi] = v, Cov[μi ,ω1i | Xi] = Cov[μi ,ω2i | Xi] = Cov[μi , νji | Xi] = 0 .

The assumptions in (6a) are normalizations: we scale the model by assuming that the
variances of the unobserved determinants f1i and f2i are both equal to 1, and we allow an
arbitrary correlation σ12 between them. The assumptions in (6b) are restrictive: here we
are assuming that the correlation between the structural errors for any two indicators

7

Following footnote 4, note if λ1i = gi′ × ∂ui/∂wi and λ2i = gi′ × ∂ui/∂ai, then the relative magnitude of λ1i
and λ2i does not depend on gi′. So the relative strength of concerns is invariant to the response function.
8

In practice we follow this “two step” procedure, first estimating a model for the variance-covariance
matrix of the reduced form residuals of the z’s and y, then estimating α, b1, and b2 from the Γj’s. In
principal we could also use a 1-step method.

7

arises solely through their joint dependence on the latent factors f1i and f2i. Substituting
these assumptions into (5b) and (5b) we have
(7a)

Var[εji | Xi] = Mj² + φj ,

(7b)

Cov[εji, εki | Xi] = Mj Mk

(7c)

Cov[εji, εki | Xi] = Mj Mk σ12

if j≠k and they are from the same group of indicators
if j≠k and they are from different groups.

Equations (7a)-(7c) restrict the 10×10 covariance matrix of the reduced form errors for
the observed indicators to be a function of only 21 parameters: the 10 Mj’s, the 10 φj’s,
and σ12.
The assumptions in equation (6c) are also restrictive: here we are assuming that
the structural error in the primary response equation, μi, is uncorrelated with the
unobserved determinants of the latent factors, and with structural errors in the equations
for the indicators zji. Provided the two latent factors f1i and f2i are the only channels that
mediate concerns over immigration, these restrictions are plausible, since in that case μi is
effectively an approximation error. As discussed below we evaluate this assumption by
fitting a more general model that allows for a third independent factor representing
altruistic concerns over people in other countries.
The assumptions in (6c) impose a simple structure on the covariances between the
reduced form error in y and the reduced form errors for the zj’s:
(8a)

Cov[ε0i, εji | Xi] = (λ1 + λ2 σ12 )Mj ,

j≤5

(8b)

Cov[ε0i, εji | Xi] = (λ2 + λ1 σ12 )Mj ,

j≥6 .

(8c)

Var[ε0i | Xi] = λ12 + λ22 + 2λ1λ2σ12 + v .

8

Given σ12 and the Mj’s, λ1, λ2 and v are identified from these residual covariances. In
practice we fit equations (7) and (8) jointly and obtain (Mj , σ12, λ1, λ2, v) in a single
step.9

b. Decomposition of Differences Between Groups
Although the relative size of λ1 and λ2 identifies the relative importance of
economic concerns and compositional concerns in explaining differences in attitudes
within groups, a decomposition of differences in attitudes between groups requires
estimates of the parameters (α, b1, b2). Equation (5a) specifies that the reduced-form
coefficients relating y to X can be decomposed as:
Γ0 = λ1b1 + λ2b2 + α .
The total effect of X on y arises through three channels: economic concerns (λ1b1);
amenity concerns (λ2b2); and any direct effect of the X’s on attitudes (α). To sort out the
relative importance of these channels we need estimates of α, b1, and b2.
Even knowing (Mj , σ12, λ1, λ2, v) it is not possible to separately identify (α, b1, b2)
without further assumptions. Indeed, equations (5a) and (5b) imply that the 11 reducedform coefficient vectors (Γ0, Γ1,…Γ10) depend on 13 structural coefficient vectors (α, b1,
b2, c1,… c10). Obviously we need to impose some restrictions on the c’s in order to
identify (α, b1, b2) from the estimated Γk’s. We consider three cases. As a baseline we
assume that cj=0 for j=1,2…10. Under this assumption, the X’s exert no independent
effect on the indicator questions. A weaker assumption is that cj=c for j=1,2…10 (i.e.,
that the X’s have a parallel effect on all the Z’s, holding constant f1i and f2i). A third,

9

As explained below, we actually fit the system with multiple “y” variables, allowing separate values of λ1
and λ2 (and a separate value for the variance v) for each y-variable.

9

even weaker assumption is that the X’s have the same effects on the indicators for each of
the underlying factors, i.e., that
c1 = c2 = c3 = c 4 = c5 = cE

and c6 = c7 = c8 = c9 = c10 = cA .

Each of these assumptions is sufficient to allow us to identify the key coefficients (α, b1,
b2). As we discuss in more detail below, our main decomposition results are quite
similar regardless of the restrictions we impose on the c’s to achieve identification.

c. Extensions
The model represented by equations (2), (3) and (4) can be extended in a number
of directions. One possibility is that attitudes toward immigration depend on more than
the two factors included in our basic model. As a check we add a third “altruism factor”
reflecting concerns about the welfare of potential immigrants, and use a set of additional
questions in the ESS as indicators of this factor. In principal other factors could also be
added, although identification depends on the availability of suitable indicator questions.
A second extension is to relax (or modify) the assumed relationship between the
observed indicator questions and the underlying factors. We report on two examples in
Section V, below. In one variant we add a 6th potential indicator of concern over
compositional amenities – a question on the potential relationship between immigration
and crime (“Are crime problems made better or worse by people coming to stay here?”).
In another variant we drop one of the indicators of economic concern (“Do you agree or
disagree that immigrants help to fill jobs where there are shortages of workers?”) that
has a relatively weak relation with the other four questions.

10

III. Data Sources and Descriptive Statistics
a. The 2002 ESS Survey
The European Social Survey (ESS) is an annual cross-country survey covering 21
European countries, with 1,500-3,000 respondents per country.10 In collaboration with
the ESS survey design team we developed a special immigration module for the 2002
survey. The aim of the module was to gather respondents’ opinions about immigration
policy, and their views on how immigration affects conditions in their country, in order to
better understand the channels that mediate pro- or anti-immigrant sentiment. We
developed a series of questions that attempt to distinguish between the perceived impacts
of immigration on economic conditions (wages, taxes, unemployment) and social
homogeneity and cohesion that we use as indicators of economic and compositional
amenity concerns.
Some basic descriptive statistics for the 2002 ESS survey are presented in
Appendix Table 1, which shows sample sizes and demographic characteristics of
respondents in each country. The pooled sample for all 21 countries contains about
36,000 observations and is just over 50% female, has an average age of 47, is made up of
about 90% natives and 10% immigrants, and includes about 3% minority group members
(most of whom are immigrants). As would be expected, the shares of immigrants (and
ethnic minorities) vary substantially across countries, with relatively low immigrant
shares in Finland, Italy, Hungary, and Poland and relatively high fractions in Luxemburg
and Switzerland. On average about one-half of respondents are employed and one-fifth
are retired: these fractions also vary somewhat by country. Forty percent of respondents
10

Israel also participated in the 2002 ESS, but is excluded from our analysis. Detailed information on the
2002 ESS design and implementation is available at
http://ess.nsd.uib.no/index.jsp?year=2003&country=&module=documentation .

11

have only primary schooling while 18% have some tertiary education. The share of lesseducated respondents is relatively high in Portugal, Hungary, Spain, Greece, Italy and the
UK, and relatively low in Norway and Germany.

b. Respondent Attitudes to Immigration
This subsection describes the questions in the ESS that we use to measure proand anti-immigrant sentiment. A preliminary issue that arises in any cross-country
survey is how to define “immigrants”. Although in Britain and the U.S. an “immigrant”
is usually interpreted as someone born abroad, in countries with citizenship based on
blood ancestry (jus sanguinis) “immigrants” may include people born in the country who
are not citizens. To eliminate ambiguity the questions in the ESS module refer to “people
who come to live in a country” (rather than immigrants or migrants) and solicit opinions
about whether more or less people should be allowed to “come to live here.” For
readability, however, we use the term “immigrants” throughout this paper.
A related issue is how to measure respondents’ views about restricting the number
of immigrants from different source countries. The ESS module uses a 4-way
classification: richer European countries; poorer European countries; richer nonEuropean countries; and poorer non-European countries. It also asks separate questions
about admitting people of the same or different ethnicity than the majority population,
yielding a total of 6 questions on the tightening or loosening of immigration policies for
specific immigrant groups. We consider responses to each of these questions as well as
the “average response” to the four country-group-specific responses (i.e., an unweighted
average of the four ordinal responses).

12

We also examine responses to two summary assessment questions about the effect
of immigration: (1) “Would you say it is generally bad or good for [this country’s]
economy that people come to live here from other countries?”; (2) Is [this country]
made a worse or a better place to live by people coming to live here from other
countries? These two, plus the seven questions on immigration policy for specific
groups, form the dependent variables in our statistical analysis (i.e., the “y” variables in
our model).
The ESS questionnaire elicited views about allowing more or less people to come
from different source countries using a 4 point scale (“allow many to come here”, “allow
some”, “allow a few”, “allow none”). Opinions on the two summary assessment
questions were elicited using an 11 point scale (scored 0 to 10).11 Table 1 shows the
distributions of the responses to these questions across all respondents in our 21-country
sample.12 For the 4-point questions (Panel A) we show the complete distribution,
whereas for the 11-point questions (Panel B) we classify the responses into 5 intervals: 01 (relatively strong negative opinion); 2-4 (somewhat negative); 5 (the midpoint
response); 6-8 (somewhat positive) and 9-10 (relatively strong positive).
The responses in Panel A suggest a diversity of opinion on immigration issues,
with 40-45% of ESS respondents preferring to admit none, or only a few immigrants
from a particular source group, and 55-60% preferring to admit some or many.
Respondents are slightly more supportive of immigration from rich European countries
than from poor non-European countries, although the differential is modest. They are

11

I.e., respondents were asked to fill in a number between 1 and 10 with 1 representing “bad for the
economy” (or “worse place to live”) and 10 representing “good for the economy” (or “better place to live”).
12
In Table 1 and elsewhere in the paper we drop all missing or “don’t know” responses.

13

also more favourably disposed toward people of the same ethnicity than those of a
different ethnic background, but again the differential is small.
The responses to the overall assessment questions, in Panel B, reveal a similar
diversity of opinion. Interestingly, people have more positive views about the economic
effects of immigration than on the question of whether immigrants make the country a
better place to live. For example, 38% rate the economic effect of immigration with a
score of 6 or higher (on a 0-10 point scale), whereas only 28% rate the effect on the
quality of life in the same positive range. In the context of our model this contrast
suggests that many respondents associate immigration with negative compositional
amenities that offset the economic benefits of population inflows.
For ease of interpretation we linearly re-scaled the ordinal responses to these
questions so that the most positive (pro-immigrant) response is 1 and the most negative
(anti-immigrant) response is 0. Table 2 shows the correlation matrix of the re-scaled
responses to the 8 questions across the overall ESS sample. The main entries in the table
are simple correlations, while the entries in parentheses are adjusted correlations, based
on residuals from regressions on country dummies and a set of observed covariates
(gender, age, ethnicity, employment status, and city residence). Responses to the first
six immigration policy questions are highly inter-correlated, but the correlations between
these questions and the overall assessment questions are weaker. The adjusted
correlations are only slightly smaller in magnitude than the raw correlations, reflecting
the fact that the R-squared coefficients from the first-step regressions are modest (<0.15).
Although our focus in this paper is on understanding the channels that mediate
pro- and anti-immigrant sentiment within a given country, much existing research has

14

addressed cross-country differences in attitudes toward immigration.13 Appendix Table 2
presents the means of the standardized responses to the questions described in Tables 1
and 2 for each of the 21 countries in our sample. The range of national opinions is
relatively wide: in the two countries with the most negative views about immigration
(Greece and Hungary) the mean standardized response to the question on allowing more
immigrants of a different ethnicity is 0.3114, whereas in Sweden – the country with the
most positive view – the mean standardized response is 0.69. Using the same metric,
opinions are also relatively negative in Portugal (0.41) and Austria (0.44), and relatively
positive in Switzerland (0.59) and Italy (0.57).
Figure 1 illustrates the cross-country variation in average responses to the two
“overall assessment” questions. Each point in the figure represents a country: the x-axis
shows the mean response to the question “Is immigration good or bad for the economy?”
while the y-axis shows the mean response to the question “Do immigrants make the
country a better or worse place to live?” Across countries the answers are highly
correlated (ρ=0.7), though there are some notable departures from the 45 degree line.
Sweden (SE) and Austria (AT) make an interesting comparison: residents of the two
countries have similar (and relatively positive) opinions about the economic effect of
immigrants, but much different views about their effect on quality of life. Interestingly,
their responses on the immigration policy questions are more closely aligned with the
latter: Swedes have the most positive opinion on allowing more immigrants whereas
Austrians are among the most negative.

13

Recent contributions include Gang et al. (2002); Mayda, 2006; and Davidov et al. (2009).
Note that the standardized response for this question assigns a value of 1 for “allow many”, 0.66 for
“allow some”, 0.33 for “allow few” and 0 for “allow none. A mean value of 0.31 implies that the average
response is somewhat less favorable than the second lowest category.

14

15

c. Indicators of Concerns about the Effects of Immigration
An innovative feature of the ESS immigration module, and the key to our
identification strategy, is the series of “indicator” questions described in Section II that
ask respondents about the effects of immigration on wages, job opportunities, and taxes,
on one hand, and social, cultural, and linguistic cohesion on the other. Table 3 shows the
mean values of the standardized responses to these questions (column 1), along with the
correlations of the indicator responses with three summary measures of pro- or antiimmigrant sentiment: the average response to the four questions about allowing
many/some/few/none people from different sending countries (column 2); the response to
whether immigration is good or bad for the economy (column 3); and the response to
whether immigrants make the country a better or worse place to live (column 4).15
The mean responses to the indicator questions suggest a mildly negative opinion
about the economic effects of immigration. For example, the mean responses to the
questions “Do you agree or disagree that wages are brought down by immigration?” and
“Do you agree or disagree that immigrants harm the economic prospects of the poor?”
are 0.49 and 0.43, respectively, using the scaling convention that “strongly agree”=0,
“strongly disagree”=1, and “neither agree nor disagree”=0.5. Opinions on the
compositional effects of immigration are more variable. There is wide agreement that “it
is better for a country if everyone can speak a common language?” (mean = 0.17),
whereas respondents are evenly split over the value of a single religion (mean = 0.51) and
are mildly supportive of the view that immigration enriches cultural life (mean = 0.58).

15

As with the questions on immigration policy and the overall effect of immigration, we standardize the
responses to the indicator questions using a linear transformation of the original ordinal scale that sets the
most negative (anti-immigrant) response to 0 and the most positive (pro-immigrant) response to 1.

16

In one of our robustness checks (see section Va) we consider adding a sixth
indicator of compositional concerns, based on responses to the question “Are crime
problems made worse or better by people coming to live here?”. As shown in Table 3,
responses to this question show that many people believe immigrants cause additional
crime: the standardized response is 0.31, with 40% of respondents in the lowest 3
categories (0-3 on a 0-10 scale) 16 Responses to this question are reasonably highly
correlated with responses to the other 5 indicators of compositional concerns (with
correlations between 0.16 and 0.35).
We also extend our basic two-factor model by adding a third channel of concern
reflecting international responsibility and altruism. We use responses to three additional
questions as indicators of this factor:
i. Do you think that when people leave their country to come here it has a good or bad
effect on their country in the long run?
ii. Do you agree or disagree that richer countries have a responsibility to accept people
from poorer countries?
iii. Do you agree or disagree that all countries benefit if people can move to countries
where their skills are most needed?
Responses to these three questions are summarized in the bottom rows of Table 3. ESS
respondents tend to agree that emigration harms the sending country (mean response =
0.44), but also tend to agree that rich countries have a responsibility to accept
immigrants, (mean response = 0.60), and that free mobility benefits all countries (mean
response = 0.68).
As shown in columns (2)-(4) of Table 3, responses to most of the indicator
questions are reasonably highly correlated with views on immigration policy (column 2),
and with overall assessments of the effects of immigration (columns 3 and 4). Focusing
16

Unlike the case in the U.S. (see e.g., Butcher and Piehl, 2007) immigrants appear to be over-represented
in the prison populations in many European countries – see Wasquant, 1999.

17

on the indicators for our two main channels, the weakest correlations are for the question
of whether immigrants tend to fill shortages, and on the value of a common language.
The “fill vacancies” question is also weakly correlated with the other indicators of
economic concerns, so in one of our robustness checks we consider taking it out of the
model. The low correlation between the “common language” question and the yvariables reflects the near consensus on the positive value of a common language.17
Looking across the rows of Table 3, the question asking whether immigrants undermine
or enrich cultural life has the strongest correlation with the overall assessment of whether
immigration is good or bad for the country (ρ=0.61). Responses to several other
indicators for economic and compositional concerns are also relatively highly correlated
with the “good or bad for the country” question, e.g., whether immigrants take away or
create jobs (ρ=0.47) and whether the country should stop immigration to reduce social
tensions (ρ=0.45). In contrast, the indicators for altruistic concerns are relatively weakly
correlated with the outcome variables.

IV. Estimation Results
a. Preliminaries
Our estimation procedure has three steps. First, we estimate unrestricted OLS
regressions of the outcome variable (y) and the indicators (the z’s) on the observed
covariates X. Then we take the covariance matrix of the reduced form residuals and
apply a minimum-distance technique to estimate the structural parameters (M1,…M10,

17

Over 90 percent of respondents either strongly agree (42%) or agree (51%) with the view that a common
language is better.

18

φ1,…φ10, σ12, λ1, λ2, v).18 Finally, we use these parameters and the estimated reducedform coefficients Γj (j=0,1,…10) to estimate the coefficient vectors b1, b2, and c1,… c10.
As explained in Appendix A, the third step is accomplished by a simple least squares
algorithm.
We include in the vector X a constant, country dummies, and a set of 13 personal
characteristics: indicators for age (3 dummies), gender, education (2 dummies), labor
force status (3 dummies), immigrant status, minority status, and city size (2 dummies).
Thus, the Γj’s and the vectors (α, b1, b2, cj) all have dimension 34. As noted earlier, we
use 9 different y-variables (the 8 variables listed in Table 1 plus an average of the
responses to the 4 questions on allowing different groups to immigrate). Estimates of the
Γj’s for these 9 y-variables and the total of 13 potential indicator variables, as well as the
variance-covariance matrix of the estimated reduced form residuals, are available from
the authors on request.

b. Results for Baseline Model
Table 4 summarizes the estimation results from our baseline specification. (A
complete set of parameter estimates is available on request). The columns of Table 4
shows the results for 3 choices of y: the average of the responses to the 4 questions on
allowing people to immigrate (column 1); the response to whether immigration is good or
bad for the economy (column 2); and the response to whether immigrants make the
country better or worse (column 3). For each choice of y we show the estimated values
of the “loading factors” (λ1, λ2), the estimate of the correlation σ12 between the two latent
18

We use unweighted minimum distance. Our methodology is summarized in Appendix A. We actually
fit the model to the indicators and the full set of 9 y’s jointly. Thus we estimate (M1,…M10), (φ1,…φ10),
σ12, and 9 triples of coefficients (λ1, λ2,v) – one triple for each y. .

19

factors (which is the same, regardless of the choice of y), and the implied decompositions
of the estimated differentials in the outcomes between young (under 30) and old (over 60)
respondents (rows 3a-3c), between high- and low- education respondents (rows 4a-4c),
between unemployed and employed respondents (rows 5a-5c), and between big city
residents and residents of rural areas (rows 6a-6c).19
Looking first at our main outcome measure – the averaged “immigration policy”
variable in column 120 – the estimates of λ1 and λ2 are 0.025 and 0.102, respectively.
Since the latent factors are scaled to have unit variance, these estimates imply that
concerns over compositional amenities are roughly 4 times more important in explaining
the variation in opinions on immigration policy within demographic subgroups than
concerns over economic issues.
The estimate of the correlation of the latent factors is relatively high (close to 0.8)
so on average, people who express stronger concerns about one factor tend to express
stronger concerns about the other. In the context of the model represented by equations
(1) and (2) the scale of this correlation depends on the correlation of the presumed
impacts of immigration on respondents’ incomes and local amenities, and on how these
impacts are correlated with the “loudness” that people report their concerns on a survey
like the ESS. If people who tend to respond to questionnaires by selecting extreme
responses anticipate larger impacts of immigration on their wages and local amenities the
two latent concerns will be more highly correlated than if those who tend to select
19

As shown in equation (5a), the reduced form regression coefficients Γ0 (from the regression of y on X)
can be decomposed as: Γ0 = λ1b1 + λ2b2 + α . Since all the elements of X are dummies representing
different categories of people, the estimated coefficients in Γ0 represent differentials in mean responses
across groups.
20
This average is perhaps most similar to the question typically analyzed in the literature (e.g. Scheve and
Slaughter 2001; Mayda, 2006; O’Rourke and Sinnott 2003), which asks whether immigration should be
reduced or increased, with no reference to source country.

20

responses closer to the middle anticipate larger impacts.21 In any case, the high
correlation of the latent factors suggests that one could elicit a relatively accurate overall
opinion about immigration policy by only focusing on one channel or the other.
The decomposition results in rows 3-6 suggest that a relatively high fraction of
the differences in opinions about immigration policy by age, education, labor force status,
and city size is explained by differences in concerns over compositional amenities,
whereas the contribution of economic concerns is smaller. Specifically, about 70% of the
gaps between older and younger respondents, and between low-educated and higheducated respondents, are attributed to compositional concerns. The share of the gap
between employed and unemployed is smaller (50%) whereas the share of the gap
between large city and rural residents is a little larger (77%).
The results in column 2 for the question of whether immigration is good or bad
for the economy provide an interesting contrast to those in column 1. Here, the loading
factors are 0.120 and 0.038, respectively, suggesting that the latent component of
variance we are identifying as “economic concerns” (over wages, taxes and benefits) has
over a 4 times larger effect on the overall assessment about economic effects of
immigration than the latent component we are identifying as “compositional amenity
concerns.” At first glance the fact that compositional concerns play any role in the
response on the “good or bad for the economy” question may be interpreted as a problem
for our identification assumptions. Our interpretation, however, is that respondents, like
many economists, view cultural, linguistic, and ethnic diversity as potential problems for
21

Suppose that respondent i believes that an increase in immigration will lead to a change Δwi in her wage,
and a change Δai in the composition of her neighborhood. Suppose that people have similar indirect utility
functions u(w+b−t, a), but vary in their response functions gi. Respondent i’s concern about the wage
effect of immigration is gi′·∂u/∂w Δwi while her concern about the amenity effect is gi′·∂u/∂a Δai. The
correlation of the reported concerns depends on how gi is correlated with Δwi, and Δai.

21

the economy. Lazear (1999) for example, has argued that a common culture and
language enhance trade and specialization. Likewise a large literature in development
economics concludes that ethnic diversity harms political stability and growth (see e.g.,
Easterly and Levine, 1997; Alesina and La Ferrera, 2003).
Consistent with the relative magnitudes of λ1 and λ2, a relatively large share of the
between-group differences in answers to the “good or bad for the economy” question is
explained by differential economic concerns. For example, about 70% of the 0.12 gap
between high- and low education respondents is attributable to economic concerns.
Economic concerns more than fully explain the gaps between young and old respondents,
and between the employed and unemployed.
Column 3 shows the results for a second overall assessment question – do
immigrants make the country a better or worse place to live? For this question λ1=0.047
and λ2=0.100, implying that compositional concerns are about twice as important as
economic concerns. There is some tendency for the model to “over-explain” differentials
in answers to this question by age and education. Indeed, differences in compositional
concerns are large enough to fully explain the age and education gaps. Differences in
economic concerns tend to contribute more explanatory power.
Although the average response to questions about admitting more or less
immigrants is a useful summary measure of policy views, it is also interesting to compare
the relative importance of economic and compositional concerns in explaining opinions
about specific immigrant groups. Table 5 shows the results for the average measure (top
row of the table) and for each of the four country groups, as well as for questions about
admission of people of the same or different ethnicity. The estimate of λ1 – which

22

reflects the relative intensity of economic concerns – is a little bigger for questions about
European versus non-European immigrants, and for people of the same ethnicity than for
those of different ethnicity. One explanation for this pattern is that respondents perceive
Europeans and immigrants of the same ethnicity as potential substitutes for their labor
services, whereas non-Europeans and those of a different ethnicity as viewed as potential
complements. The estimates of λ2 – which reflect the relative intensity of compositional
concerns – follow a very different pattern, being lower for people from rich countries
(and for those of the same ethnicity), and higher for people from poor countries (and for
those of a different ethnicity).
As shown in columns 3-8 of Table 3, differences in the intensity of economic
concerns explain a relatively modest share (10-20%) of the age and education gaps in
average opinions about admission of different groups. Differences in the intensity of
concern over compositional effects play a larger role, explaining 50% of differential
between high- and low educated respondents in views about admitting people from rich
European countries but 90% or more of the gap in views about admitting people from
poorer countries or those of a different ethnicity.

V. Robustness Checks and Extensions
a. Varying the Indicator Questions
The identification of our structural model is predicated on the a priori link
between the latent factors and the indicator questions. We have estimated a number of
alternative specifications in which we add or subtract questions from the set that are
associated with each factor. In this section we briefly summarize two examples. First, we

23

consider adding a sixth question on immigration and crime to the set of indicators of
concern over compositional amenities. Crime is a “hot button” issue that is often raised
by critics of immigration, and as we noted in the discussion of Table 3, responses on the
question of whether immigration makes crime better or worse are fairly high correlated
with our the indicators of compositional concern. Second, we consider removing the
question on whether immigrants fill job vacancies from the set of indicators of economic
concerns. Responses to this question are more favorable (i.e., pro-immigrant) than
responses to the other economic indicators and are also noticeably less related to opinions
on immigration policy (see Table 3).
Table 6a summarizes the estimation results for the specification that adds the
question on crime as a sixth indicator of compositional concerns. This addition leads to a
larger estimate of λ2 and a smaller estimate of λ1 for all three outcome variables in the
table. For the immigration policy question (column 1) and the quality of life measure
(column 3) compositional concerns are now about 9-10 times more important than
economic concerns in explaining within-group variation in attitudes. For the “good or
bad for the economy” question (column 2) the relative size of f λ2 is also increased
relative to the baseline specification, though the change is small. When concerns over
crime are included as an indicator of compositional concerns, this factor also explains a
somewhat larger share of the variation in average responses by age, education,
employment status, or city size.
Table 6b summarizes the results when we remove the “weakest” indicator of
economic concerns, which asks to what extent immigrants fill job vacancies. This
change leads to estimates that are very close to our baseline model, although for all three

24

outcomes the relative importance of economic concerns falls slightly. Similar findings
emerge when we evaluate the effect of removing other indicator questions. In each case
we obtain estimates that are relatively close to those from our baseline model, with
similar magnitudes for the key factor loading parameters λ1 and λ2.
We have also estimated variants of the model in which one (or more) of the
indicator questions is allowed to reflect both economic and compositional concerns.22 In
one case, for example, we allowed the question on whether “immigrants take out more
than they put in” to depend on both economic and compositional concerns. This
specification led to estimates of λ1 and λ2 that are not too different from those in our
baseline model, though again the relative importance of compositional concerns was
slightly higher. All in all we believe the estimates reported for our baseline model are
broadly representative of the range of results from alternative specifications of the
indicator variables.

b. Alternative Assumptions on the c-vector
In our model the relative effects of economic and compositional concerns are
identified from the correlations of the responses of the indicator questions to the outcome
questions, after conditioning out the effects of the X’s (i.e., within demographic groups)
As noted in Section II, we then have to restrict the way that the X’s affect the indicator
questions (i.e., the c vectors in equations 3a and 3b) in order to identify the contributions
of economic and compositional concerns in explaining differences in average opinions
across demographic groups. Our baseline model imposes the rather strict assumption
22

Formally, This change replaces equations (3a) and (3b) with a more general specification: zji = M1j f1i +
M2j f2i + cj Xi + νji . Provided that there are some indicators that only depend on f1i, and others that only
depend on f2i, the model remains identified.

25

that cj = 0 for all j. Table 7 compares the implications of this choice to two alternatives:
cj = c for all j (i.e., a single c vector) and cj = cE for all 5 indicators of economic concern,
cj = cA for all 5 indicators of compositional concerns (i.e., factor-specific c-vectors).23
Comparisons across the columns of Table 7 suggest that the alternative choices lead to
similar qualitative conclusions about the relative importance of economic and
compositional concerns in explaining views about admitting more or less immigrants.
Irrespective of the assumptions on the c-vectors, our model implies that most of the
differences in average opinions by age, education, employment status, and city size are
driven by differences in compositional concerns.
We have also compared the decompositions of mean responses for the countrygroup specific questions and for the two summary questions, and found that the
qualitative conclusions are invariant to the specification of the c-vector. Mean
differences across groups in response to the “better or worse for the economy” question
are largely attributable to differences in economic concerns, while differences in response
to the question “do immigrants make this a better or worse place to live” are mainly
attributed to differences in compositional concerns.

c. Three Factor Model
Our baseline model assumes that respondents answer questions about immigration
policy from a purely self-interested perspective, giving no weight to the welfare of
potential immigrants. To evaluate the potential limitations of this view we developed an
extended 3-factor model that includes a third “altruistic” channel. We use the three

23

Note that alternative assumptions on cj have no effect on the estimates of λ1, λ2, or σ12: in all three cases
these are the same as in Table 4.

26

questions described at the bottom of Table 3 as indicators of respondents’ altruistic
concerns. These questions ask whether respondents think immigration is good or bad for
the sending country; whether rich countries have a responsibility to accept migrants; and
whether they agree or disagree that free mobility benefits all countries (i.e., both sending
and receiving nations).
Estimation results for this model are summarized in Table 8. The estimates of the
loading factors λ1 and λ2 are not too different from our baseline model, although in the
case of the immigration policy question (column 1) the altruism factor appears to pick up
some of the variation that was attributed to compositional concerns in our 2-factor model.
For the overall assessment questions (columns 2 and 3) the estimates of λ3 are statistically
different than 0 but of a relatively small magnitude. The estimated correlations of the
three latent factors are all relatively large and positive.
Interestingly, the addition of altruistic concerns does not change our conclusion
about the relative importance of economic and compositional concerns in explaining
differences in views across groups. The decompositions in Table 8 suggest that
compositional concerns account for 60% or more of the gaps across age and education
groups, whereas economic concerns account for no more than 13%.

d. Fitting the Model by Country
Up to this point we have pooled responses to the ESS survey from each of the 21
countries, adding a set of country dummy variables to the vector X to adjust for
differences across countries. Arguably, however, there are such wide differences across
European countries in the historical context of immigration, and in the salience of

27

economic and compositional concerns, that the full set of parameters in our model may
vary across countries. As a final robustness check we therefore estimated our baseline
model separately for each country. The results are summarized in Table 9, where we
show the estimates of the key parameters λ1 and λ2 for each country, along with the
shares of the age and education gaps in average opinions about whether more or less
immigrants should be admitted that are attributable to economic and compositional
concerns.
The estimates of λ1 and λ2 for the individual countries suggest that in nearly all
European countries, compositional concerns outweigh economic concerns in mediating
opinions about immigration policy. In three countries – Austria, Spain, and France – the
estimate of λ1 is actually slightly negative while in 8 others the estimate is positive but
relatively small and insignificantly different from 0. In contrast the estimates of λ2 are all
positive and significant, with a range of point estimates from 0.053 to 0.156.24 The sole
exception to the tendency for the estimate of λ2 to exceed the estimate of λ1 is Poland.25
Reflecting the relative magnitudes of the estimates of λ1 and λ2, the
decompositions of the age and education gaps in opinions about immigration policy in
columns 3-8 of Table 9 suggest that compositional concerns are typically more important
than economic concerns in explaining the more negative opinions of older (over age 60)
versus younger (under age 30) respondents, and likewise in explaining the more positive
opinions of highly educated (at least some tertiary education) versus poorly educated

24

Although not reported in the table, the estimates of the correlation between the latent factors are all in the
range of 0.70 to 0.90.
25
The parameter estimates for Luxembourg are not reported in Table 9, since the estimates are extremely
imprecise. The estimates for λ1 and λ2 are -0.74 (standard error = 1.54) and 0.87 (1.54) respectively. We
attribute the imprecision to the very small sample of respondents with useable data from Luxembourg
(n=553).

28

(only primary schooling) respondents. The relative importance of compositional
concerns in explaining the education gaps for different countries is illustrated in Figure 2,
which plots the education gap in compositional concerns in each country against the raw
education gap for that country. The scatter of points suggests that a very strong
relationship between the total gap and the share attributable to compositional concerns.
We also examined the relative importance of economic and compositional
concerns in explaining responses to the two overall assessment questions. Consistent
with our findings for the pooled sample, in nearly all countries economic concerns are the
dominant channel influencing views about whether immigrants are “good or bad for the
economy” whereas compositional concerns are the dominant channel influencing views
about whether immigrants make the country “ a better or worse place to live”.26 As in
Table 9, the estimates of λ1 and λ2 for the two overall assessment questions are relatively
tightly distributed around the corresponding point estimates from the pooled model,
suggesting that the pooled estimates are a good summary of the “average” importance of
the channels in different countries.

VI. Discussion and Conclusion
Why is the general public more favorably inclined to the liberalization of trade
than to an opening-up of immigration? In standard models the two policies are
effectively substitutes. But these models fail to take into account the value that people
place on compositional amenities. Immigration, unlike trade, changes the composition of
the receiving country’s population: its ethnic distribution, culture, and religion. A large
body of economic research has shown that concerns over the characteristics of neighbors,
26

Luxembourg generates poorly identified (and rather large) estimates for λ1 and λ2 for these outcomes too.

29

schoolmates, and co-workers play an important role in decision-making over what
neighborhood to live in; what schools to attend; which city to live in; and which
employees to hire. In this paper we argue that similar concerns play an important part in
mediating views about immigration policy.
Using a set of questions explicitly designed for the 2002 European Social Survey
we estimate a simple structural model that assumes that people care about both the
“conventional” economic effects of immigration (on their wages, taxes, and benefits) and
the compositional effects on their neighborhoods, schools, and workplaces. Our
empirical results confirm that both concerns are important, though compositional
concerns are significantly more important in understanding the variation in attitudes
toward immigration policy. For example, 70% of the gap between the most- and leasteducated respondents in the ESS on the issue of whether immigration should be increased
or reduced is attributable to differences in the intensity of concern over compositional
amenities, while differences in economic concerns account for 10-15%. Differences in
compositional concerns also explain most of the differences in attitudes between older
and younger respondents. The age gap is a particular puzzle for models of immigration
preferences that ignore compositional amenities, because many older people are retired,
and face a much lower threat of labor market competition than young people.
While our inferences are based on purely observational data, and rely on a
restrictive structural model, we present a number of robustness checks and extensions
that support our general conclusions about the importance of compositional concerns.
Importantly, however, we also show that economic concerns explain a very high share of
the variation in attitudes to a question about whether immigration is “good or bad for the

30

economy”. Respondents appear to distinguish between the conventional economic effects
of immigration on relative wages and fiscal balances, and the effects on compositional
amenities, and place a relatively high weight on the compositional effects in deciding
their views about immigration policy.

31

References
Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara. “Ethnic Diversity and Economic Performance.”
Journal of Economic Literature 43 (September 2005): pp. 762-800.

Bayer, Patrick, Fernando V. Ferreira, and Robert McMillan. “A Unified Framework for
Measuring Preferences for Schools and Neighborhoods.” Journal of Political Economy
115 (December 2007): 1097 -99.

Becker, Gary S. The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press, 1957.

Bobo, Lawrence and J. R. Kluegel. “Opposition to Race Targeting: Self Interest,
Stratification Ideology, or Racial Attitudes?” American Sociological Review 58,
(December 1993): 443–64.

Borjas, George J. “The Economic Analysis of Immigration.” In Orley Ashenfelter and
David Card, editors, Handbook of Labor Economics Volume 3B. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Science. 1999: 1697-1760.

Butcher, Kristin and Anne M. Piehl. “Why Are Immgrants’ Incarceration Rates So Low?
Evidence on Selective Immigration, Deterrence, and Deportation.” NBER Working
Paper #13229. Cambridge, MA: NBER, July 2007.

32

Citrin, Jack, Donald P. Green, Christopher Muste, and Cara Wong. “Public Opinion
Towards Immigration Reform: The Role of Economic Motivations. “ Journal of Politics
59(May 1997): 858-881.

Davidov, Eldad, Bart Meuleman, Jaak Billiet and Peter Schmidt. “Values and Support for
Immigration: A Cross-Country Comparison.” European Sociological Review 24 (March
2008): 583-599.

Dustmann, Christian and Ian Preston. “Racial and Economic Factors in Attitudes to
Immigration." Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy 7 (2007): 1655-1655.

Espenshade, Thomas J. and Katherine Hempstead. “Contemporary American Attitudes
Toward U.S. Immigration.” International Migration Review, 30 (Summer, 1996): 535570

Easterly, William and Ross Levine. “Africa's Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic
Divisions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (November, 1997):1203-1250

Gang, Ira, Francisco Rivera-Batiz, and Myeong-Su Yun. “Economic Strain, Ethnic
Concentration and Attitudes Towards Foreigners in the European Union” Rutgers
University Department of Economics Working Papers 2002-14. New Brunswick NJ:
Rutgers University Department of Economics, 2002.

33

Hanson, Gordon, Kenneth Scheve, and Matthew J. Slaughter. “Public Finance and
Individual Preferences over Globalization Strategies. NBER Working Paper #11028.
Cambridge, MA: NBER, January 2005.

Kinder, Donald R. and D. Roderick Kiewiet. “Sociotropic Politics.” British Journal of
Political Science 11 (April 1981): 129–61.

Lazear, Edward P. “Culture and Language.” Journal of Political Economy 107
(Supplement, 1999): S95-S126.

MaCurdy, Thomas, Thomas Nechyba, and Jay Bhattacharya. “An Economic Framework
for Assessing the Fiscal Impacts of Immigration.” In James P. Smith and Barry
Edmonston, editors, The Immigration Debate: Studies on the Economic, Demographic
and Fiscal Effects of Immigration. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 1998.

Mayda, Anna M. “Who is Against Immigration? A Cross-Country Investigation of
Attitudes Towards Immigrants.” Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (August 2006):
510-530.

34

Mayda, Anna M. “Why Are People More Pro-trade than Pro-migration?” Economics
Letters 101 (December 2008): 160-163.

Mundell, Robert A (1957) International Trade and Factor Mobility The American
Economic Review, 47 (3): 321-335

O’Rourke, Kevin H. and Richard Sinnott “Migration Flows: Political Economy of
Migration and the Empirical Challenges.” Trinity College Economics Papers 20036,
Dublin: Trinity College Department of Economics, July 2003.

Pew Global Attitudes Project, 2007 World Publics Welcome Global Trade – But Not
Immigration, Pew Research Centre, Washington

Rodrik, Dani. Comments at the conference on "Immigration policy and the welfare state".
In Tito Boeri, Gordon H. Hanson, and Barry McCormick, editors, Immigration Policy
and the Welfare System. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.

Scheve, K. F. and M. J. Slaughter (2001) .Labor Market Competition and Individual
Preferences over Immigration Policy.Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(1): 133145.

35

Wacquant, Loic. “Suitable Enemies: Foreigners and Immigrants in the Prisons of
Europe.” Punishment and Society 1 (1999): 215-222.

36

Appendix A: Estimation Procedures and Identification
In this section we explain in detail how we estimate the parameters of the model and
derive standard errors. To simplify notation and allow for an arbitrary number of
concerns, we use matrix algebra notation. We assume the sample consists of N
independent observations on an outcome response (y), and a set of indicator responses
(z’s). Specifically, let y be the 1×N vector of outcome responses, z be the q×N matrix of
underlying opinions, X be the k×N matrix of covariates and f be the p×N matrix of
underlying factors (or “concerns”). Let μ , v and ω be 1×N, q×N and p×N vectors of
residuals. Model parameters then include a 1×p vector Λ , a 1×k vector α , a q×p vector

M, a q×k vector C and a 1×p vector B such that
(A-1) y = Λf + αX + μ
(A-2) z = Mf + CX + ν
(A-3) f = BX + ω
Equation (A-1) corresponds to equation (2), where we have combined λ1 and λ2 to form
the vector Λ and generalized to allow for p factors. Equations (A-2) and (A-3)
corresponds to equations (3-a), (3-b) and (4-a), (4-b) where we have again combined
parameters to form appropriate matrices. Note that M has the special form

⎛ M1
⎜
⎜ 0
(A-4) M = ⎜
:
⎜
⎜ 0
⎝

0
M2
:
0

0 ⎞
⎟
... 0 ⎟
.
:
: ⎟
⎟
... M P ⎟⎠

...

To form the reduced form equations (corresponding to equations (5-a) and (5-b) in the
text) , we substitute (A-3) into (A-1) and (A-2) to obtain:

(A-5)

y = (ΛB + α ) X + ( μ + Λω ) = Γ0 X + ε 0

(A-6) z = (MB + C)X + (ν + Mω ) = Γ 1 X + ε 1
⎛ε ⎞
and let ε = ⎜⎜ 0 ⎟⎟ with Ω = E (εε') .
⎝ ε1 ⎠

Step 1: Estimating the reduced form
We begin by estimating the reduced form coefficients by standard multivariate linear
regression to form estimates Γˆ 0 = yX' (XX' ) −1 and Γˆ 1 = zX' (XX' ) −1 . This allows us to

condition out the effects of the variables collected in X, and work with the reduced form
⎛ εˆ ⎞
residuals εˆ = ⎜⎜ 0 ⎟⎟ = εP , where εˆ0 = y (I − X' (XX' ) −1 X) = yP = ε 0 P and
⎝ εˆ 1 ⎠

εˆ 1 = z(I − X' (XX' ) −1 X) = zP = ε 1 P . The variance-covariance matrix Ω is consistently

ˆ =
estimated by Ω

1
ˆ ) = 1 E (εPε ') = 1 E (trPεε') = Ω .
εˆεˆ ' , since E (Ω
N −k
N −k
N −k

Asymptotically the estimates are distributed as
(A-7)

−1
⎛ vecΓˆ − vecΓ ⎞
⎞
⎛
⎟ → N ⎜ ⎛⎜ 0 ⎞⎟, ⎛⎜ Ω ⊗ ( XX' ) 0 ⎞⎟ ⎟ ≡ N (0, V ) ,
N⎜
⎟
⎟
⎜
⎜⎝0⎠ ⎜0
⎜ vecΩ
ˆ − vecΩ ⎟
Q ⎠ ⎟⎠
⎝
⎝
⎠
⎝

where Q is an appropriately defined matrix of fourth order moments.

38

Step 2: Estimating the Loading Matrix Μ
We assume that (in accordance with equations (6-a), (6-b) and (6-c)) μ , v and ω are
mutually orthogonal so that
⎡⎛ μ ⎞⎛ μ ⎞ ' ⎤
⎛σ μ 0 0 ⎞
⎜
⎥
⎢⎜ i ⎟⎜ i ⎟
⎟
(A-8) E ⎢⎜ ν i ⎟⎜ ν i ⎟ X i ⎥ = ⎜ 0 φ 0 ⎟
⎜
⎥
⎢⎜ ω ⎟⎜ ω ⎟
⎟
⎝0 0 Σ⎠
⎦⎥
⎣⎢⎝ i ⎠⎝ i ⎠
where φ is diagonal and the diagonal elements of Σ are all unity. Therefore
⎛ ΛΣΛ '+σ μ
(A-9) Ω = ⎜⎜
⎝ MΣΛ '

ΛΣM ' ⎞ ⎛ Ω 11 Ω 12 ⎞
⎟.
⎟=⎜
MΣM '+ϕ ⎟⎠ ⎜⎝ Ω 21 Ω 22 ⎟⎠

ˆ ,Σ
ˆ , φˆ by equally weighted minimum distance. That is to say we set the
We estimate M
ˆ ,Σ
ˆ , φˆ to solve
free parameters of M
ˆ )' v(M
ˆ )
ˆΣ
ˆM
ˆ '+φˆ − Ω
ˆΣ
ˆM
ˆ '+φˆ − Ω
(A-10) min v(M
22
22
where v(.) denotes the operator eliminating the supradiagonal elements from the
vectorisation of the argument (applied to avoid duplication of the off-diagonal moment
conditions). Vectorising and totally differentiating the moment conditions yields:
d vec Ω 22 = [(MΣ ⊗ I q ) + (I q ⊗ MΣ)K qq ] d vec M + (M ⊗ M) d vec Σ + d vec φ
= G M dvec M + G Σ dvecΣ + G φ dvecφ
where K qq is an appropriate commutation matrix and this equation defines G M , G Σ and
G φ . Hence

39

ˆ ⎞
⎛ vec M
⎜
⎟
ˆ ⎟ = G + ' Var ( vec Ω )G +
(A-11) Var⎜ vec Σ
1
22
1
⎜
⎟
⎜ vec φˆ ⎟
⎝
⎠
⎛ G m '⎞
⎜
⎟
where G 1 = ⎜ G Σ ' ⎟ and G 1+ = G 1 (G 1 ' G 1 ) −1 is the Moore-Penrose inverse.
⎜
⎟
⎜Gφ ' ⎟
⎝
⎠

Step 3: Estimating the Factor Weights Λ
ˆ M
ˆ +Σ
ˆ −1 where
Having obtained estimates of M and Σ , we now estimate Λ by Λˆ = Ω
12
ˆ + =M
ˆ (M
ˆ 'M
ˆ ) −1 , which amounts again to applying equally weighted minimum
M
distance. Thus, vectorising and totally differentiating the above expression gives
ˆ + [Σ
ˆ ]d vec M
ˆ M + ]d vec Σ
ˆ −1 M
ˆ + ' ]d vec Ω
ˆ −1 ⊗ Ω
ˆ + + [I ⊗ Ω
ˆ −1 ,
d vec Λˆ = dΛˆ ' = [ Σ
12
12
q
12
from which, using standard formulae for differentials of inverses, we can form an
ˆ + H d vec M + H d vec Σ
ˆ for appropriate
expression of the form d Λˆ ' = H 12 d vec Ω
12
M
Σ
H 12 , H M and H Σ . Thus, letting

⎛ H 12 ' ⎞
⎟
⎜
⎛ J 12
⎞
H M '⎟
⎜
⎟
and H 1 = ⎜⎜ +
H2 =
⎟
⎜H ' ⎟
G
J
1
22
⎝
⎠
Σ
⎟
⎜
0
⎠
⎝

where J 12 and J 22 pick out the elements of Ω 12 and Ω 22 in vec Ω ,
(A-12) Var ( Λˆ ' ) = H 2 ' H1 ' Var ( vecΩ)H1H 2 .

40

Step 4: De-composing Γ0 across the channels

)
ˆ + ' Γˆ
Consider first the case where C = 0 . Then we estimate B by B = M
1
)
)
ˆ + F d vec Γ
ˆ + + (I ⊗ M + ' )d vec Γ = F d vec M
and d vec Bˆ = (Γˆ 1 '⊗I P )K qp d vec M
k
1
M
r
1

for appropriate FM and Fr .
⎛F
Let F2 = ⎜⎜ r
⎝0

0

Fm

H 22

Hm

⎛ J1
⎜
0 0⎞
⎟⎟ and F1 = ⎜ 0
H Σ 0⎠
⎜0
⎝

⎞
⎟
J 12 ⎟ where J 1 picks out the
G 1+ J 22 ⎟⎠
0

elements of Γ 1 in vec Γ . Then
⎛ vec Bˆ ⎞
⎟ = F ' F ' VF1 F2
(A-13) Var⎜
⎜ vec Λ̂ ⎟ 2 1
⎝
⎠

where V is as defined in (A-7).
⎛ B1 ⎞
⎜ ⎟
⎜ B2 ⎟
If B = ⎜ ⎟ and Λ = (λ1, λ 2, L λ p ) then Γ 0 = ΛB + α = α + ∑i λi Bi which is the basis
M
⎜ ⎟
⎜B ⎟
⎝ p⎠

for decomposing Γ̂ 0 into contributions through the p channels, λ̂i B̂i for i=1,…p, and

( )

also for estimating α. Furthermore d λˆi Bˆ i = λˆi d Bˆ i + d λˆi Bˆ i from which standard errors
on the components of the decomposition can easily be calculated given the formula above
for the joint distribution of B̂ and Λ̂ .

41

Consider now the case where C ≠ 0. Suppose, for example, that C = ec where e is a q×1
vector of ones and c is a 1×k row vector of elements to be estimated. Then B and c are

⎛ Bˆ ⎞
ˆ e) + ' Γˆ .
jointly estimated by ⎜⎜ ⎟⎟ = (M
1
⎝ cˆ ⎠
We can weaken this even further by keeping C = ec but generalizing e to a (q×p) matrix
of ones and zeros
⎛ e1
⎜
⎜0
e=⎜
:
⎜
⎜0
⎝

0
e2

:
0

0⎞
⎛ c1 ⎞
⎜ ⎟
⎟
... 0 ⎟
⎜ c2 ⎟
and
c
to
a
(p×k)
matrix
c
=
⎜ M ⎟ .
: : ⎟
⎜ ⎟
⎟
⎜c ⎟
... e P ⎟⎠
⎝ p⎠
...

Standard errors are calculated following the procedure described earlier for the simpler
case of C=0.

42

Appendix Table 1: Characteristics of 2002 ESS Sample by Country
Age Distribution (%)
Under 30 30-54 Over 54
(3)
(4)
(5)

Ethnicity (%)
Empl. Status (%) In Larger
Education (%)
Minority Immigrant Employed Retired City (%) Primary Tertiary
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)

Sample
Size
(1)

Male (%)
(2)

Austria

2,257

46.2

20.0

47.8

32.2

5.7

8.9

55.7

24.8

36.2

31.6

12.7

Belgium

1,899

51.5

28.1

43.4

28.4

2.2

8.3

49.6

17.9

22.8

35.0

13.6

Switzerland

2,040

48.1

16.3

48.6

35.1

4.6

16.9

55.4

17.5

21.1

18.1

16.1

Czech Republic

1,360

47.7

15.9

38.2

45.9

2.2

4.3

46.9

33.5

32.8

15.9

11.1

Germany

2,919

48.2

19.6

45.3

35.1

3.9

7.3

47.0

23.1

33.2

15.5

21.6

Denmark

1,506

50.7

22.0

44.6

33.4

2.5

5.2

59.8

20.4

35.5

24.8

17.2

Spain

1,729

47.3

20.7

40.5

38.8

2.9

4.6

42.3

16.8

30.1

58.7

14.6

Finland

2,000

48.0

26.1

40.6

33.3

1.2

3.2

52.6

24.7

27.9

40.1

24.9

France

1,503

45.2

21.7

42.2

36.1

4.0

10.0

46.7

27.5

36.0

51.7

26.0

United Kingdom

2,052

46.6

18.8

43.1

38.1

6.2

9.3

51.7

24.2

29.5

55.8

23.4

Greece

2,566

43.4

19.4

38.3

42.3

3.7

9.8

40.8

25.2

56.0

57.8

14.0

Hungary

1,685

48.0

24.9

41.4

33.7

5.1

2.4

42.8

22.9

24.9

63.0

13.5

Ireland

2,046

46.1

23.5

43.2

33.4

1.7

7.3

51.6

13.5

32.7

47.0

12.8

Italy

1,207

45.4

22.2

45.1

32.7

1.0

2.2

49.0

18.6

17.6

56.1

8.0

Luxemburg

1,552

47.4

31.8

39.0

29.2

6.8

31.0

40.4

15.9

22.7

46.0

16.7

Netherlands

2,364

44.1

16.0

47.4

36.5

4.2

6.6

46.6

15.3

29.3

42.8

23.3

Norway

2,036

54.2

20.4

48.4

31.2

2.4

6.5

62.6

15.6

35.6

14.9

28.1

Poland

2,110

48.9

32.3

40.8

26.9

2.8

1.5

40.4

23.8

27.4

55.2

14.1

Portugal

1,511

41.7

22.2

39.2

38.6

1.2

6.0

49.8

22.2

41.6

75.1

8.9

Sweden

1,999

50.8

23.3

41.8

34.9

2.9

10.7

58.9

17.1

32.9

47.8

30.6

Slovenia

1,519

47.6

27.8

42.7

29.6

3.0

8.9

39.8

21.0

23.6

30.4

14.1

Notes: unweighted means from 2002 ESS sample. Sample sizes include all valid observations: number of valid responses for specific items vary.

Appendix Table 2: Mean Standardized Responses to Views on Immigration Across Countries
Allow Many/Some/Few/None of:
Average of
People of
People of
4 CountrySame
Different
Groups
Ethnicity
Ethnicity
(1)
(2)
(3)

Immigration
Good or
Bad for the
Economy
(4)

Immigrants
Make Country
Better/Worse
Place to Live
(5)

All Countries

0.52

0.58

0.49

0.50

0.48

Austria

0.46

0.49

0.44

0.56

0.47

Belgium

0.53

0.58

0.50

0.46

0.43

Switzerland

0.60

0.67

0.59

0.59

0.53

Czech Republic

0.53

0.52

0.46

0.44

0.42

Germany

0.55

0.63

0.53

0.51

0.48

Denmark

0.56

0.65

0.51

0.48

0.55

Spain

0.54

0.56

0.53

0.54

0.47

Finland

0.49

0.56

0.45

0.53

0.53

France

0.49

0.56

0.50

0.51

0.45

United Kingdom

0.49

0.55

0.47

0.44

0.46

Greece

0.36

0.42

0.31

0.36

0.34

Hungary

0.35

0.54

0.31

0.41

0.40

Ireland

0.57

0.66

0.56

0.50

0.53

Italy

0.59

0.62

0.57

0.53

0.45

Luxemburg

0.50

0.56

0.47

0.68

0.58

Netherlands

0.50

0.55

0.52

0.48

0.47

Norway

0.56

0.63

0.54

0.54

0.48

Poland

0.57

0.59

0.53

0.45

0.52

Portugal

0.43

0.44

0.41

0.50

0.39

Sweden

0.69

0.73

0.69

0.55

0.62

Slovenia

0.55

0.57

0.51

0.43

0.45

Notes: Original 4 point or 11 point responses are linearly rescaled to lie between 0 (most negative
response) and 1 (most positive). Entries in column 1 are unweighted averages of rescaled
responses for questions on allowing many/some/few/none people from rich European countries,
poor European countris, rich non-European countries, and poor non-European countries.

Table 1: Distributions of Responses to Summary Views on Immigration

Panel A: Whether to Allow Many/Some/Few or None of Different Immigrant Groups

Standard

Percentage Distribution of
Preferred Share Allowed to Immigrate:

Meana
(1)

Deviation
(2)

None
(3)

Few
(4)

Some
(5)

Many
(6)

People from Rich European Countries

2.62

0.85

9.9

32.6

43.3

14.2

People from Poor European Countries

2.57

0.81

9.0

36.8

42.8

11.4

People from Rich non-European Countries

2.53

0.84

11.3

36.2

41.1

11.4

People from Poor non-European Countries

2.49

0.82

10.8

39.0

40.1

10.0

People of the Same Race/Ethnicity as
the Majority

2.73

0.80

6.3

30.8

47.1

15.8

People of a Different Race/Ethnicity as
the Majority

2.48

0.82

11.3

38.9

40.0

9.7

Notes: sample size ranges from 37,778 to 38,087 depending on question. Don't know responses are assigned to "some"
category.
a

None response=1, few=2, some=3, many=4.

Panel B: Overall Assessments of the Effect of Immigration
Standard

Percentage Distribution of Responses: 0-11 Scale

Meana
(1)

Deviation
(2)

0-1
(3)

2-4
(4)

5
(5)

6-8
(6)

9-10
(7)

Immigration is Good/Bad for the Economy

4.97

2.36

9.3

25.0

28.1

32.0

5.5

Immigrants Make the Country a Better/Worse
Place

4.77

2.18

8.3

28.1

34.6

24.8

4.3

Notes: sample sizes are 37,405 for the economy question and 37,823 for the country question. Don't know responses are assigned to
category 5.
a

Make worse response=0, make better response=10.

Table 2: Simple Correlations of Standardized Responses to Views on Immigration

(1)

(2)

Correlation with Variable Number:
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

(7)

1. Allow people from rich
European countries to come

1.00

2. Allow people from poor
European countries to come

0.63
0.59

1.00

3. Allow people from rich
non-European countries to come

0.82
0.8

0.65
0.61

1.00

4. Allow people from poor
non-European countries to come

0.60
0.55

0.87
0.84

0.68
0.64

1.00

5. Allow people of the same
ethnicity to come

0.61
0.58

0.80
0.77

0.66
0.62

0.81
0.78

1.00

6. Allow people of different
ethnicity to come

0.64
0.6

0.72
0.69

0.62
0.58

0.69
0.65

0.73
0.7

1.00

7. Immigration is good/bad for
the economy

0.33
0.29

0.41
0.37

0.35
0.31

0.41
0.37

0.42
0.38

0.37
0.33

1.00

8. Immigrants make the country
a better/worse place to live

0.33
0.26

0.44
0.37

0.35
0.29

0.45
0.36

0.46
0.39

0.39
0.32

0.57
0.53

(8)

1.00

Note: main entries are unweighted correlations of standardized responses to 8 questions across all respondents in 2002 ESS. Entries in Italics are adjusted correlations,
based on residuals from regressions on country dummies and observed covariates. Orginal 4-point or 11-point responses are linearly re-scaled to lie between 0 (most
negative response) and 1 (most positive).

Table 3: Responses to Indicator Questions and Correlations with Summary Views on Immigration
Correlation of Indicator with Summary Views
Mean of
Standardized
Responsea

Allow Many/None Immigration
Average of
Good or
4 CountryBad for the
Groups
Economy

Immigrants
Make Country
Better/Worse
Place to Live

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Wages are brought down by immigrants
(5 point agree/disagree; agree=0)

0.49

0.33

0.34

0.35

Immigrants harm the prospects of the poor
(5 point agree/disagree; agree=0)

0.43

0.35

0.37

0.37

Immigrants fill jobs where there are shortages
(5 point agree/disagree, disagree=0)

0.63

0.17

0.26

0.19

Immigrants take away jobs/create jobs
(11 point numerical scale, take away=0)

0.45

0.36

0.52

0.47

Immigrants take out more/less than they put in
(11 point numerical scale; take out more=0)

0.42

0.32

0.52

0.45

It is better to have common customs/traditions
(5 point agree/disagree; agree=0)

0.41

0.33

0.31

0.35

It is better to have a variety of religions
(5 point agree/disagree, disagree=0)

0.51

0.25

0.25

0.29

It is better to have a common language
(5 point agree/disagree; agree=0)

0.17

0.10

0.08

0.12

Immigrants undermine/enrich cultural life
(11 point numerical scale; undermine=0)

0.58

0.42

0.56

0.61

Stop immigration to reduce social tensions
(5 point agree/disagree; agree=0)

0.47

0.46

0.43

0.45

0.31

0.31

0.38

0.45

Immigration has good/bad effect on sending country
(11 point numerical scale; bad effect=0)

0.44

-0.02

0.05

0.03

Rich countries have a responsibility to accept imms.
(5 point agree/disagree, disagree=0)

0.60

0.23

0.20

0.24

All countries benefit from free mobility
(5 point agree/disagree; agree=0)

0.68

0.14

0.14

0.12

Indicators of Economic Concerns:

Indicators of Compositional Amenity Concerns:

Extra indicator:
Immigrants make crime worse/better
(11 point numerical scale; worse=0)
Indicators of Altruistic Concerns:

Notes: sample sizes range from 37,244 to 39,149. Entries in columns 2-4 are correlations of standardized indicator with
standardized responses to views on immigration (also scaled between 0 and 1).
a

Original 5 point or 11 point responses are linearly rescaled to lie between 0 (most negative response) and 1 (most positive).

Table 4: Summary of Estimates from Baseline Model
Dependent Variable (y):
Allow Many/None
Immigration
(Average of
Good or
4 CountryBad for the
Groups)
Economy
(1)
(2)
1. Estimates of λ:
a. λ1 = effect of economic concerns on y

Immigrants
Make Country
Better/Worse
Place to Live
(3)

0.025
(0.004)

0.120
(0.004)

0.047
(0.003)

0.102
(0.004)

0.038
(0.003)

0.100
(0.003)

2. Correlation of economic/compositional factors

0.784

0.784

0.784

3. Decomposition of Age Gap (old vs. young)
a. Total estimated gap

-0.070

-0.020

-0.043

b. Gap attributed to economic concerns

-0.006

-0.026

-0.010

c. Gap attributed to compositional concerns

-0.048

-0.018

-0.048

0.131

0.120

0.098

b. Gap attributed to economic concerns

0.019

0.088

0.034

c. Gap attributed to compositional concerns

0.094

0.035

0.092

5. Decomposition of Unemp. Gap (unemp. vs. employed)
a. Total estimated gap
-0.029

-0.035

-0.029

b. λ2 = effect of compositional concerns on y

4. Decomposition of Education Gap (tertiary vs. primary)
a. Total estimated gap

b. Gap attributed to economic concerns

-0.009

-0.040

-0.016

c. Gap attributed to compositional concerns

-0.015

-0.005

-0.014

0.026

0.028

0.022

b. Gap attributed to economic concerns

0.002

0.011

0.004

c. Gap attributed to compositional concerns

0.020

0.008

0.020

6. Decomposition of Urban Gap (large city vs. rural)
a. Total estimated gap

Notes: estimated by minimim distance on reduced form coefficients and residual variance-covariance matrix
(see text). Standard errors in parentheses.

Table 5: Explaining Variation in Attitudes toward Different Potential Immigrant Groups
Estimates of λ:
Economic Composition
λ1
λ2
(1)
(2)
By Country of Origin:
Average of 4 Country Groups

Age Gap: (old v. young)
Education Gap (tertiary v. primary)
Explained by:
Explained by:
Actual
Economic Composition
Actual
Economic Composition
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

0.025
(0.004)

0.102
(0.004)

-0.070

-0.006
8.6%

-0.048
68.6%

0.131

0.019
14.5%

0.094
71.9%

People from Rich
European Countries

0.028
(0.004)

0.079
(0.004)

-0.050

-0.006
12.0%

-0.038
76.0%

0.147

0.020
13.6%

0.073
49.7%

People from Poor
European Countries

0.029
(0.004)

0.111
(0.004)

-0.080

-0.006
7.5%

-0.053
66.3%

0.116

0.021
18.1%

0.102
87.9%

People from Rich
non-European Countries

0.022
(0.004)

0.095
(0.004)

-0.063

-0.005
7.9%

-0.045
71.4%

0.144

0.016
11.1%

0.087
60.4%

People from Poor
non-European Countries

0.023
(0.004)

0.124
(0.004)

-0.089

-0.005
5.6%

-0.059
66.3%

0.116

0.017
14.7%

0.113
97.4%

0.035
(0.004)

0.085
(0.004)

-0.067

-0.008
11.9%

-0.040
59.7%

0.129

0.025
19.4%

0.078
60.5%

0.014
(0.004)

0.135
(0.004)

-0.094

-0.003
3.2%

-0.064
68.1%

0.136

0.010
7.4%

0.123
90.4%

By Ethnicity:
People of Same Ethnicity
People of Different Ethnicity

Notes: Based on estimates from baseline model summarized in Table 4 with alternative dependent variables. Dependent variable in each
row is rescaled response to question of whether many, some, few, or no immigrants from indicated source group should be allowed to come
to live in the respondent's country. Standard errors in parentheses. Percentages below the explained gaps represent shares of the actual
gap explained by the factor.

Table 6a: Summary of Estimates from Variant of Baseline Model (Add Crime as Indicator)
Dependent Variable (y):
Allow Many/None
Immigration
(Average of
Good or
4 CountryBad for the
Groups)
Economy
(1)
(2)
1. Estimates of λ:
a. λ1 = effect of economic concerns on y

Immigrants
Make Country
Better/Worse
Place to Live
(2)

0.011
(0.004)

0.116
(0.004)

0.015
(0.004)

0.113
(0.004)

0.042
(0.004)

0.133
(0.004)

2. Correlation of economic/compositional factors

0.832

0.832

0.832

3. Decomposition of Age Gap (old vs. young)
a. Total estimated gap

-0.070

-0.020

-0.043

b. Gap attributed to economic concerns

-0.002

-0.025

-0.002

c. Gap attributed to compositional concerns

-0.054

-0.020

-0.064

0.131

0.120

0.098

b. Gap attributed to economic concerns

0.008

0.086

0.011

c. Gap attributed to compositional concerns

0.098

0.036

0.115

5. Decomposition of Unemp. Gap (unemp. vs. employed)
a. Total estimated gap
-0.029

-0.035

-0.029

b. λ2 = effect of compositional concerns on y

4. Decomposition of Education Gap (tertiary vs. primary)
a. Total estimated gap

b. Gap attributed to economic concerns

-0.004

-0.039

-0.005

c. Gap attributed to compositional concerns

-0.018

-0.007

-0.021

0.026

0.028

0.022

b. Gap attributed to economic concerns

0.001

0.010

0.001

c. Gap attributed to compositional concerns

0.022

0.008

0.026

6. Decomposition of Urban Gap (large city vs. rural)
a. Total estimated gap

Notes: estimated by minimim distance on reduced form coefficients and residual variance-covariance matrix
(see text). Standard errors in parentheses. This variant includes an extra indicator variable for compositional
concerns, based on whether the respondent thinks immigrants increase crime problems.

Table 6b: Summary of Estimates from Variant of Baseline Model (Remove "Fill Jobs" Indicator)
Dependent Variable (y):
Allow Many/None
Immigration
(Average of
Good or
4 CountryBad for the
Groups)
Economy
(1)
(2)
1. Estimates of λ:
a. λ1 = effect of economic concerns on y

Immigrants
Make Country
Better/Worse
Place to Live
(2)

0.021
(0.003)

0.110
(0.003)

0.044
(0.003)

0.106
(0.003)

0.047
(0.003)

0.103
(0.003)

2. Correlation of economic/compositional factors

0.776

0.776

0.776

3. Decomposition of Age Gap (old vs. young)
a. Total estimated gap

-0.070

-0.020

-0.043

b. Gap attributed to economic concerns

-0.005

-0.027

-0.011

c. Gap attributed to compositional concerns

-0.050

-0.022

-0.049

0.131

0.120

0.098

b. Gap attributed to economic concerns

0.016

0.080

0.031

c. Gap attributed to compositional concerns

0.097

0.042

0.094

5. Decomposition of Unemp. Gap (unemp. vs. employed)
a. Total estimated gap
-0.029

-0.035

-0.029

b. λ2 = effect of compositional concerns on y

4. Decomposition of Education Gap (tertiary vs. primary)
a. Total estimated gap

b. Gap attributed to economic concerns

-0.007

-0.036

-0.014

c. Gap attributed to compositional concerns

-0.015

-0.007

-0.015

0.026

0.028

0.022

b. Gap attributed to economic concerns

0.002

0.009

0.004

c. Gap attributed to compositional concerns

0.021

0.009

0.021

6. Decomposition of Urban Gap (large city vs. rural)
a. Total estimated gap

Notes: estimated by minimim distance on reduced form coefficients and residual variance-covariance matrix
(see text). Standard errors in parentheses. This variant excludes the question on whether immigrants fill
jobs where there are vacancies as an indicator of economic concerns.

Table 7: Decompositions of Views on Immigration Policy Under Alternative Assumptions on c-coefficients
Assumption on c-vector
cj=0
(baseline)
(1)

Single c vector
(2)

Factor-specific
c-vector
(3)

-0.070

-0.070

-0.070

b. Gap attributed to economic concerns

-0.006

-0.010

-0.020

c. Gap attributed to compositional concerns

-0.048

-0.067

-0.044

0.131

0.131

0.131

b. Gap attributed to economic concerns

0.019

0.026

0.015

c. Gap attributed to compositional concerns

0.094

0.122

0.147

3. Decomposition of Unemp. Gap (unemp. vs. employed)
a. Total estimated gap
-0.029

-0.029

-0.029

1. Decomposition of Age Gap (old vs. young)
a. Total estimated gap

2. Decomposition of Education Gap (tertiary vs. primary)
a. Total estimated gap

b. Gap attributed to economic concerns

-0.009

-0.009

-0.006

c. Gap attributed to compositional concerns

-0.015

-0.015

-0.022

0.026

0.026

0.026

b. Gap attributed to economic concerns

0.002

0.002

0.000

c. Gap attributed to compositional concerns

0.020

0.019

0.025

4. Decomposition of Urban Gap (large city vs. rural)
a. Total estimated gap

Notes: estimated by minimim distance on reduced form coefficients and residual variance-covariance matrix
(see text). Standard errors in parentheses. Estimates of λ 1, λ2 , and σ12 are the same as in Table 4.
Specification in column 1 sets all c-vectors to 0. Specification in column 2 assumes c j=c (a single vector for
all 10 indicators). Specification in column 3 assumes c j=ce for the 5 indicators of economic concerns, and
cj=ca for the 5 indicators of compositional concerns (i.e., factor-specific c-vectors).

Table 8: Summary of Estimates from Three Factor Model
Dependent Variable (y):
Allow Many/None
Immigration
(Average of
Good or
4 CountryBad for the
Groups)
Economy
(1)
(2)
1. Estimates of λ:
a. λ1 = effect of economic concerns on y

Immigrants
Make Country
Better/Worse
Place to Live
(2)

0.023
(0.004)

0.122
(0.004)

0.047
(0.003)

b. λ2 = effect of compositional concerns on y

0.088
(0.004)

0.034
(0.004)

0.096
(0.003)

c. λ3 = effect of altruism concerns on y

0.034
(0.004)

0.005
(0.002)

0.010
(0.002)

2. Correlations of 3 factors
a. correlation of economic/compostion factors
b. correlation of economic/altruism factors

0.787
0.403

0.787
0.403

0.787
0.403

c. correlation of altruism/composition factors

0.471

0.471

0.471

-0.070

-0.020

-0.043

b. Gap attributed to economic concerns

-0.005

-0.026

-0.010

c. Gap attributed to compositional concerns

-0.042

-0.016

-0.045

d. Gap attributed to altruism concerns

0.005

0.001

0.002

0.131

0.120

0.098

b. Gap attributed to economic concerns

0.017

0.089

0.034

c. Gap attributed to compositional concerns

0.081

0.032

0.088

d. Gap attributed to altruism concerns

0.003

0.001

0.010

5. Decomposition of Unemp. Gap (unemp. vs. employed)
a. Total estimated gap
-0.029

-0.035

-0.029

3. Decomposition of Age Gap (old vs. young)
a. Total estimated gap

4. Decomposition of Education Gap (tertiary vs. primary)
a. Total estimated gap

b. Gap attributed to economic concerns

-0.008

-0.041

-0.016

c. Gap attributed to compositional concerns

-0.013

-0.005

-0.014

d. Gap attributed to altruism concerns

0.001

0.000

0.000

0.026

0.028

0.022

b. Gap attributed to economic concerns

0.002

0.012

0.004

c. Gap attributed to compositional concerns

0.018

0.007

0.019

d. Gap attributed to altruism concerns

0.002

0.000

0.001

6. Decomposition of Urban Gap (large city vs. rural)
a. Total estimated gap

Notes: estimated by minimim distance on reduced form coefficients and residual variance-covariance matrix
(see text). Standard errors in parentheses.

Table 9: Summary of Estimates of Baseline Model, Estimated by Country
Estimates of λ:
Economic Composition
λ1
λ2
(1)
(2)

Age Gap: (old v. young)
Explained by:
Actual
Economic Composition
(3)
(4)
(5)

Education Gap (tertiary v. primary)
Explained by:
Actual
Economic Composition
(6)
(7)
(8)

Austria

-0.001
(0.017)

0.109
(0.016)

-0.127

0.000

-0.037

0.129

-0.003

0.142

Belgium

0.010
(0.014)

0.120
(0.014)

-0.026

-0.006

-0.112

0.197

0.009

0.167

Switzerland

0.007
(0.012)

0.105
(0.012)

-0.081

-0.003

-0.047

0.133

0.005

0.072

Czech Republic

0.044
(0.021)

0.094
(0.022)

-0.080

-0.029

-0.083

0.126

0.044

0.090

Germany

0.047
(0.001)

0.088
(0.011)

-0.115

-0.034

-0.080

0.126

0.044

0.077

Denmark

0.011
(0.016)

0.105
(0.015)

-0.035

-0.002

-0.084

0.173

0.011

0.145

Spain

-0.012
(0.021)

0.154
(0.022)

-0.024

0.002

-0.069

0.087

-0.006

0.083

Finland

0.037
(0.013)

0.093
(0.014)

-0.038

-0.004

-0.034

0.102

0.044

0.148

France

-0.029
(0.026)

0.156
(0.026)

-0.122

0.009

-0.098

0.144

-0.019

0.141

United Kingdom

0.050
(0.013)

0.097
(0.013)

-0.084

0.000

-0.043

0.180

0.066

0.141

Greece

0.021
(0.021)

0.089
(0.022)

-0.051

0.005

0.010

0.087

0.015

0.059

Hungary

0.038
(0.016)

0.057
(0.016)

-0.025

-0.016

-0.035

0.069

0.032

0.061

Ireland

0.043
(0.015)

0.082
(0.015)

-0.040

-0.022

-0.022

0.118

0.057

0.130

Italy

0.035
(0.018)

0.113
(0.018)

-0.048

0.013

-0.015

0.169

0.028

0.103

Netherlands

0.036
(0.014)

0.078
(0.014)

-0.030

-0.019

-0.065

0.129

0.045

0.115

Norway

0.017
(0.013)

0.095
(0.012)

-0.093

0.000

-0.039

0.147

0.023

0.138

Poland

0.063
(0.015)

0.053
(0.015)

-0.069

-0.032

-0.047

0.119

0.051

0.045

Portugal

0.019
(0.026)

0.126
(0.026)

0.000

0.000

-0.038

0.150

0.012

0.131

Sweden

0.022
(0.014)

0.099
(0.013)

-0.041

-0.016

-0.107

0.116

0.033

0.160

Slovenia

0.023
(0.019)

0.103
(0.019)

-0.121

-0.026

-0.170

0.116

0.026

0.139

Notes: See notes to Tables 4 and 5. Standard errrors in parentheses. Estimates for Luxembourg not reported: see text.

Figure 1: Cross-Country Correlation in Two Assessments of the Effect of Immigration

Immigrants Make Country Better/Worse Place

0.8

0.7

SE

0.6

LU

DK
IE
CH

PL
0.5

DE
AT

0.4

HU

PT

GR
0.3
0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Immigration Good/Bad for the Economy

0.7

0.8

Figure 2: Share of Educ. Gap in Immigration Policy Question Attributed to Compostional Concerns
0.20

0.18

Gap in Compositional Concerns

BE
SE

0.16
FI
0.14

AT

DK

DK

FR

GB
PT

0.12
NL
IT

0.10
CZ
0.08

ES

DE
CH

0.06

HU

GR
PL

0.04
0.04

0.06

0.08

0.10

0.12

0.14

Education Gap (tertiary v. primary)

0.16

0.18

0.20

