NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DISCOVERING ONE'S TALENT:
LEARNING FROM ACADEMIC SPECIALIZATION
Ofer Malamud
Working Paper 15522
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15522

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2009

I wish to thank Nittai Bergman, Kerwin Charles, Claudia Goldin, Caroline Hoxby, Seema Jayachandran,
William Johnson, Larry Katz, Bob Lalonde, Derek Neal, Cristian Pop-Eleches, Bruce Sacerdote, two
anonymous referees, as well as seminar participants at Clemson University, Hebrew University, Harvard
University, Michigan State University, Tel-Aviv University, UCSD, UC Riverside, University of Chicago,
and the NBER Higher Education meeting for many helpful suggestions. I am grateful to the Universities
Statistical Record, the UK Data Archive, and several university administrators in Scotland and England
for assistance. All errors are my own. This work was supported by a grant from the Spencer Foundation.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Ofer Malamud. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DISCOVERING ONE'S TALENT:
LEARNING FROM ACADEMIC SPECIALIZATION
Ofer Malamud
Working Paper 15522
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15522

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2009

I wish to thank Nittai Bergman, Kerwin Charles, Claudia Goldin, Caroline Hoxby, Seema Jayachandran,
William Johnson, Larry Katz, Bob Lalonde, Derek Neal, Cristian Pop-Eleches, Bruce Sacerdote, two
anonymous referees, as well as seminar participants at Clemson University, Hebrew University, Harvard
University, Michigan State University, Tel-Aviv University, UCSD, UC Riverside, University of Chicago,
and the NBER Higher Education meeting for many helpful suggestions. I am grateful to the Universities
Statistical Record, the UK Data Archive, and several university administrators in Scotland and England
for assistance. All errors are my own. This work was supported by a grant from the Spencer Foundation.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2009 by Ofer Malamud. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Discovering One's Talent: Learning from Academic Specialization
Ofer Malamud
NBER Working Paper No. 15522
November 2009
JEL No. J24
ABSTRACT
In addition to providing useful skills, education may also yield valuable information about one's tastes
and talents. This paper exploits an exogenous difference in the timing of academic specialization within
the British system of higher education to test whether education provides such information. I develop
a model in which individuals, by taking courses in different fields of study, accumulate field-specific
skills and receive noisy signals of match quality to these fields. Distinguishing between educational
regimes with early and late specialization, I derive comparative static predictions about the likelihood
of switching to an occupation that is unrelated to one's field of study. If higher education serves mainly
to provide specific skills, the model predicts more switching in a regime with late specialization because
the cost of switching is lower in terms of foregone skills. Using survey and administrative data on
university graduates, I find that individuals from Scotland, where specialization occurs relatively late,
are less likely to switch to an unrelated occupation compared to their English counterparts who specialize
early. This implies that the benefits to increased match quality are sufficiently large to outweigh the
greater loss in skills from specializing early, and thus confirms the important role of higher education
in helping students discover their own tastes and talents.

Ofer Malamud
Harris School of Public Policy Studies
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
malamud@uchicago.edu

“With regard to instruction, economists have made substantial progress in specifying and
identifying the economic value of higher education, as it increases the value productivity of
human agents as workers. . . the much neglected activity is that of discovering talent. It, too,
can be approached by treating it as a process which provides students with opportunities to
discover whether they have the particular capabilities that are required for the type and level
of education at which they are working.” (Theodore W. Shultz, 1968, p. 331)

1

Introduction

Almost 40 years have passed since Theodore Shultz argued that higher education provides students with the opportunity to discover their talents, but relatively little research has explored this
important aspect of higher education. In this paper, I use an exogenous di¤erence in the timing of specialization within the British system of higher education to test whether education can
provide valuable information about one’s talents. In one system, students are required to choose
a …eld of study before they apply to college. In the other, students postpone the decision until
late in their college careers. Such di¤erences in the timing of academic specialization highlight the
trade-o¤ between accumulating skills in a particular …eld versus gathering additional information
about alternative …elds. This paper exploits these di¤erences to examine the importance of higher
education in helping students to discover their talents and tastes for di¤erent …elds of study.
I introduce a simple model of higher education in which individuals can learn about how well
they match to di¤erent …elds by taking courses. I assume that individuals initially take courses in
a number of di¤erent …elds of study but specialize at some point by choosing a particular …eld in
which they must take all of their remaining courses. Each course in a given …eld of study provides
…eld-speci…c skills as well as a signal of their match quality to that …eld. Upon completing their
education, individuals choose whether to work in a related …eld or switch to an occupation that is
unrelated to their chosen …eld of study.1 I distinguish between educational regimes with early and
late specialization according to the number of courses taken prior to specialization. While later
specialization provides students with more time to learn about match quality to di¤erent …elds, it
a¤ords less time to acquire …eld-speci…c skills after a …eld has been chosen. If higher education
serves mainly to provide speci…c skills, the model predicts that students in a regime with late
1
The possibility of switching to an unrelated occupation …eld is related to the literature on “educational mismatch.”
However, most of this research focuses on the labor market consequences of being overeducated or undereducated
relative to one’s job requirements; see Sicherman (1991) and McMillen, Singell, and Seaman (2007).

2

specialization will be more likely to switch to an occupation that is unrelated to their …eld of study.
This is because the cost of switching in a late regime is lower in terms of foregone skills. On the
other hand, if the bene…t of higher education comes mainly from providing valuable information
about match quality, the incidence of switching to an unrelated occupation will be higher in a
regime with early specialization. This is because the bene…t associated with higher expected match
quality when switching in an early regime will outweigh the greater loss of …eld-speci…c skills. By
focusing on the decision to switch to an unrelated occupation, these comparative static predictions
account for non-pecuniary considerations as well as pecuniary ones.
In order to test whether education provides important information about one’s talent, I exploit
an exogenous di¤erence in the timing of specialization within the British system of undergraduate
education. In England, students apply to a speci…c …eld of study at a particular university while
still in secondary school. Once admitted to study a certain …eld, they usually follow a narrow
curriculum that focuses on the chosen subject and allows for few courses in other …elds. English
students are thus required to specialize early. In contrast, Scottish students are typically admitted
to a broad faculty rather than a speci…c …eld. They are required to study several di¤erent …elds
during their …rst two years before specializing in a particular …eld. Scottish students are therefore
required to generalize early and specialize late. Comparing England and Scotland is valuable
because, while their educational systems are separate and arguably exogenously di¤erent, their labor
markets are relatively well integrated and macroeconomic policies are determined by a common
government. Furthermore, Wales serves as a useful “placebo test”because students there specialize
at the same time as in England. Britain is thus a particularly appropriate setting in which to test
the comparative static predictions generated by the model.
Using university administrative data and survey data on college graduates, I …nd that individuals
from Scotland, who specialize relatively late, are less likely to switch to an unrelated occupation
than their counterparts from England. This di¤erence continues to hold when controlling for …eld
of study and region of work. The pattern is even more striking when I instrument for English and
Scottish degrees with region of prior residence. In contrast, I …nd no di¤erence in the probability
of switching between England and Wales where the timing of academic specialization is similar.
As further evidence that academic specialization is driving the main results, I …nd no di¤erence
in the probability of switching between England and Scotland at the graduate level where the

3

timing of specialization is similar. These …ndings indicate that the return to match quality is high
relative to the return to speci…c skills. In other words, the fact that England –a regime with early
specialization –exhibits a higher incidence of switching implies that the bene…ts to increased match
quality are substantial, and, indeed, large enough to outweigh the greater loss of skills. The data
thus con…rm that undergraduate education has an important role in helping students discover their
tastes and talents.
The notion that individuals may discover their talents and learn about their match quality to
di¤erent …elds is a prominent feature in models of job turnover.2 Thus, for example, Jovanovic
and Nyarko (1996) explore whether job market experience provides information about a worker’s
innate traits or raises productivity on speci…c tasks. But few papers have explicitly considered
the role of education. Johnson (1978) postulates that education provides workers with information
about their general ability and concludes that education may lower job mobility by reducing its
role in acquiring information.3 More recently, Hvide (2003) extends Spence’s (1973) signaling
model to allow for learning about overall ability and suggests that certain types of education, such
as U.S. college degrees, may primarily provide information about ability, while others, such as
U.K. college degrees, serve to augment productivity. In this paper, the process of accumulating
skills and learning about unobserved match quality in di¤erent …elds of study is made explicit.
Altonji (1993) also introduces a model where individuals learn their preference between two …elds
of study by attending college while Arcidiacono (2004) estimates a structural model of student
learning. However, by embedding both skill acquisition and learning within a model of academic
specialization, this paper derives and tests a simple comparative static prediction for the importance
of learning about one’s talents through higher education.
The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 outlines a simple model of academic specialization and
derives comparative static predictions across regimes with early and late academic specialization.
Section 3 explores the di¤erences between the English and Scottish systems of higher education in
more detail. Section 4 describes the data and the empirical methodology. Section 5 presents results
from the regression analysis. Section 6 concludes.
2
McCall (1990), Miller (1984), Neal (1999), and Shaw (1987) extend the notion of job match quality presented
by Johnson (1978) and Jovanovic (1979) to the occupational level and present some evidence for learning about
occupational match quality.
3
In a related paper, Johnson (1979) explores the positive relation between general education and occupational
mobility and shows that exogenous general education raises the probability of job change.

4

2

A Simple Model of Academic Specialization

This section develops a simple model of academic specialization: Suppose individuals take n courses
in each of k …elds of study prior to specialization. Each course in a given …eld provides …eld-speci…c
skills and a noisy signal of match quality in that …eld. In specializing, individuals choose a …eld
and take (N

nk) additional courses in this chosen …eld of study. After completing a total of N

courses, individuals choose whether to work in an occupational …eld that is related to their chosen
…eld of study or to switch to an unrelated occupation. Upon entering the labor market, individuals
enjoy returns that are increasing in both match quality and …eld-speci…c skills. I describe this basic
setup in greater detail below. Then, I proceed to compare the probability of switching between
an early regime in which individuals are required to specialize after nE courses in each …eld and
a late regime in which individuals are required to specialize after nL courses in each …eld, where
nE < nL . Analytical proofs are relegated to the Mathematical Appendix which o¤ers a more formal
treatment of the model.

2.1

Setup

Assume that individuals are risk neutral and have identical prior distributions on match quality for
each …eld. Speci…cally, assume that match quality,

i,

in each …eld i is a random draw from a normal

distribution with the same mean and variance, so that

i

N( ;

2 ).
0

Match quality is therefore

uncorrelated across …elds and can include any …eld-speci…c component of education that a¤ects
utility, either directly or through wages –for example, innate ability or interest which contributes
to productivity or enjoyment of working in a speci…c …eld. In the empirical analysis, I will attempt
to control for indicators of predictable match quality so that the remaining components of match
quality are random. In fact, we may expect prior distributions to di¤er across …elds. Allowing
for di¤erent prior means is straightforward and would not alter any of the results from the model.
Di¤erences in prior variances would introduce option value considerations similar to ones considered
by Johnson (1978) and Miller (1984) so we abstract from them to keep the model parsimonious. I
discuss extending the model to allow for di¤erent prior variances and risk aversion in section 2.5.
By taking courses in a given …eld, individuals will (i) accumulate …eld-speci…c skills and (ii)
receive noisy signals of their match quality to that …eld. For simplicity, suppose that the quantity

5

of skills accumulated in a …eld, si , is equivalent to the number of courses spent studying that …eld.
Each course of study j in …eld i provides a signal of match quality in that …eld, xij =
"ij

N (0;

2)

i + "ij

where

and j = 1; :::; n. Noise in the signal may be due to any number of idiosyncratic

factors such as the quality of instruction or the particular circumstances of the student at the time.
I assume that skills are perfectly speci…c to a particular …eld but I will consider the possibility of
spillovers across …elds in section 2.5.
The overall returns to …eld i upon entering the labor market is an increasing function of both
match quality and skills: ui = u( i ; si ) with

@u
@

> 0 and

@u
@s

> 0. For simplicity, I assume that

returns are a linear function of match quality and skills, u( i ; si ) =

i

+ si . I take

as an

indication of the return to match quality relative to the return to speci…c skills. More generally, we
might expect the presence of additional random shocks which cannot be learned about in advance.
Furthermore, we expect returns to di¤er across di¤erent …elds. In the empirical analysis, I compare
outcomes for individuals controlling for …eld of study so that mean di¤erences across …elds can be
ignored.

2.2

Choice of …eld at specialization

The posterior distribution of match quality after studying n courses in …eld i is a normal distribution
with mean

0
i

and variance

0 .4

And the quantity of skills in each …eld at the point of specialization

is s0 = n. Therefore, in specializing, risk neutral individuals with identical prior distributions across
…elds will choose the …eld of study with the highest expected returns:

choose i = arg max

i=1;:::k

E u

0 0
i; s

Since the quantity of speci…c skills in each …eld is identical, individuals simply choose the …eld with
the highest posterior mean of match quality, i = arg maxi=1;:::k f 0i g.5 Thus, the posterior mean of
match quality in the chosen …eld at the time of specialization will be

0 .6
i

0
The posterior mean is a weighted average of the prior mean and the mean of the signals:
=
i
Pj
1
2
2
2
2
2
0
2
1
nxi = 0 + n
where xi = n
xij . The posterior variance is = 0 + n
. See DeGroot
0 +
(1970) for a detailed exposition.
5
Strictly speaking, expected future utility should include expected skills rather than the quantity of skills at the
point of specialization. But since expected match quality and skills are separable and individuals are risk neutral,
this will lead to the same choice at the point of specialization
2
6
2
Speci…cally, 0i =
n maxi xi = 0 2 + n 2 .
0 +
4

6

2.3

Decision on whether to switch

Following specialization, individuals take (N

nk) additional courses in the chosen …eld. Hence,

the quantity of skills in the chosen …eld prior to entering the labor market is s00 = n + (N

nk).

Individuals will also receive additional signals in the chosen …eld, i . De…ne these signals as yi l =
i

+ "i l , where l = nk; :::; N . Consequently, the posterior distribution of match quality in the

chosen …eld after (N
variance

00 .7

nk) additional signals will be a normal distribution with mean

00
i

and

Now, given the opportunity to switch to another …eld prior to entering the labor

market, individuals will compare expected returns in the chosen …eld with expected wages in the
next best …eld:
f ield switch () E u

00
i

; s00

< max E u
i6=i

0 0
i; s

Intuitively, individuals will switch if the posterior mean of match quality in the chosen …eld falls
su¢ ciently far below the posterior mean of another …eld to outweigh the loss in speci…c skills from
switching. Note that, if individuals do decide to switch, they will always choose the …eld with the
second-highest posterior mean since all …elds other than the one chosen are associated with the
same quantity of speci…c skills and posterior variance. The decision about whether to switch can
therefore be framed as a comparison between the …rst best …eld, i , and the …eld that was second
best at the time of specialization, ia . The …eld selected after the second stage will be denoted i
where i

2.4

2 fi ; ia g.

Probability of …eld switching

Now consider the likelihood of switching to an alternative occupational …eld prior to entering the
labor market. Posterior distributions at the time of specialization will be more di¤use for individuals
in the early regime. Moreover, these individuals will receive more signals in the chosen …eld after
specializing than their counterparts in the late regime. Thus, in the early regime, assessments of
perceived match quality in the chosen …eld will experience relatively greater updating and make
individuals more likely to conclude that they made a mistake when they initially inferred which
7

So that
and y i = (N

00
i =
Pl
1
nk)

2
0

xi

l

+
and

2

n maxi xi +
00
= 02+n

2

(N nk) y i =
2
+ (N nk)

7

2
0
2

+n
1
.

2

+ (N

nk)

2

where xi =

1
n

Pj

xij

…eld had the highest match quality.8 However, in switching, individuals will lose the additional
skills acquired in the chosen …eld of study through specialization. Individuals will therefore switch
only if the posterior mean of the …rst-best …eld falls su¢ ciently below that of the second best …eld
to outweigh the loss in speci…c skills. Since the loss in speci…c skills is always be greater in the
early regime, whether switching is higher in the early or late regime will depend on the relative
return of match quality.
Proposition 1 A regime with early specialization, nE , will have higher rates of switching than a
regime with late specialization, nL , only if the return to match quality is su¢ ciently higher than the
return to speci…c skills:
P (switch)E > P (switch)L ()

>C>0

Figure 1 plots the probability of switching for an early and a late regime over the full range of
relative returns to match quality which are normalized by taking
from 0 to 1 as

= (1

) so that ( = ) goes

goes from 0 to 1.9 . Since the model abstracts from other reasons for switching

…elds, no switching occurs in either regime if the return to match quality is su¢ ciently low. However,
by introducing an additional stochastic element to the model, i.e. u( i ; si ) =
N (0;

i

2 ),

i

+ si +

i

where

switching can take place even if the return to match quality is zero. Allowing for

these additional random shocks, we can derive the following corollary:
Corollary 1 If there is no return to information about match quality ( = 0) or taking courses
does not provide information about match quality ( 2 = 1) then a regime with early specialization,
nE , will have lower rates of switching than a regime with late specialization, nL .
Note the subtle distinction between the return to information on match quality,

= , and the

2.

But in either

quality of information on match quality provided by undergraduate courses,

case, a regime with early specialization would be expected to have a lower rate of switching than a
regime with late specialization. Observing a higher rate of switching in an early regime than in a
8

Speci…cally, the posterior distribution is more likely to shift in response to the additional information received in
the early regime. Hence, the mean of the posterior distribution of the chosen …eld is also more likely to move below
the posterior mean of the second best …eld at specialization and indicate a perceived mistake. This is particularly
intuitive in the case where individuals specialize immediately prior to entering the labor market. In this case, the
probability of perceiving a mistake will be zero since no additional information is received following specialization.
9
All simulations are based on 5000 repetitions for k = 2; N = 21; 1 = 2 = 0; 2 = 100; and 20 = 25. Early
regimes are characterized by nE = 2; late regimes are characterized by nL = 6. Expected wages are determined
b = si + are normalized skills.
according to E (wi ) = E ( i + sbi ) where si
N=k

8

late regime would imply that education provides valuable information on match quality and that
this information strongly a¤ects the returns to education.
Focusing on the probability of switching to an unrelated occupation may appear to be an indirect
way of testing whether education provides information about match quality. Indeed, according to
this model, the trade-o¤ between learning about match quality and accumulating speci…c skills is
central to optimal timing of specialization in higher education. With later specialization, students
have more time to learn about match quality in each …eld but less time to acquire speci…c skills
once a …eld is chosen. Figure 2 simulates expected wages for an early and a late regime for the
full range of relative returns to match quality. Clearly, observing higher overall returns in the late
regime would also serve to indicate that the relative return to match quality is high. But it is very
di¢ cult to obtain empirical measures that capture all of the returns to occupational choice. Since
the decision to switch to an unrelated occupational …eld encompasses non-pecuniary considerations
as well as pecuniary ones, there a signi…cant advantage in focusing on the likelihood of switching.10

2.5

Extensions

Throughout I have assumed that individuals are risk neutral. Introducing risk aversion does not
alter the decision at the point of specialization because the variances of the posterior distributions
across …elds are identical; individuals would continue to choose the …eld with the highest posterior
mean. However, in considering a …eld switch, the presence of risk aversion would make the relative
variances of the posterior distributions relevant. Speci…cally, switches would be less common because, even in instances where the chosen …eld has a lower posterior mean than another …eld, its
lower variance could be su¢ ciently valuable to risk-averse individuals so as to prevent switching.
Moreover, this e¤ect is stronger in the early regime since the trade-o¤ between the posterior variances at the time of specialization and the posterior variance of the chosen …eld after the receipt
of additional signals is more extreme. Field switching would therefore decline more in the early
regime than in the late regime due to the presence of risk aversion.
The assumption that prior distributions on match quality are identical across …elds implies
that individuals do not need to consider the possibility of later switching when making their initial
10

This is especially important in light of Arcidiacono’s (2004) …nding that most sorting across majors is due to
di¤erent preferences rather than di¤erential monetary returns to ability.

9

choice of …eld at the point of specialization. Allowing for prior variances on match quality to vary
by …eld introduces option value considerations. These would push individuals to specialize in riskier
…elds because they could switch in case of a bad realization. Moreover, …elds with a larger prior
variance would have greater option value in the early regime than in the late regime. With more
signals following specialization, greater updating in the early regime generates a higher probability
that the ultimate posterior mean will surpass that of the chosen …eld. Hence, individuals in the
early regime would be more likely to choose a …eld with a lower posterior mean at the point of
specialization because of the greater option value. Since, on average, such …elds have lower expected
match quality than those with the highest posterior mean, we expect more …eld switching in the
early regime due to option value considerations.11
As it stands, the model contains no truly general skills. A person has general skills only in
the sense of having greater levels of speci…c skills in a variety of alternative …elds, and this a¤ects
returns only when switching into one of these …elds. Nevertheless, it would be relatively simple to
incorporate general skills by including some measure of average skill in the …elds not chosen for
P
specialization: for example, s = J1 j6=j sj . Introducing such general skills would not alter the
main predictions of the model. More generally, we can consider the possibility of spillovers in skills

across …elds. This would serve to lessen the trade-o¤ between skills and match quality because
additional learning about match quality would be less costly in terms of forgone skill acquisition.

3

Background: Higher Education in Britain

The British system of higher education provides a particularly appropriate setting in which to
examine the predictions of the model. Undergraduate education in England and Scotland, though
similar in aim and overall structure, varies widely in the timing of academic specialization. In
England, students apply to a speci…c …eld of study at a particular university.12 Once admitted
to a speci…c …eld, English students usually follow a narrow curriculum that focuses on the main
11

However, this e¤ect will be small because all …elds are sampled prior to specialization and the option value needs
to be greater than the di¤erence in the posterior means of match quality between the relevant …elds. Furthermore,
the presence of risk aversion would counteract the bene…ts of having high variance in the posterior distributions.
12
There some exceptions: for example, students in Cambridge are accepted into the engineering faculty and only
specialize in a certain sub-…eld of engineering during the course of their studies.

10

…eld and allows for little exposure to other …elds.13 Indeed, most universities in England require
students who switch …elds of study to start university anew (though several do allow for some
limited switching across related …elds). In contrast, Scottish students are typically admitted to
a faculty rather than a department; in some universities, admission is to the university at large.
Furthermore, they are required to study several di¤erent …elds during their …rst two years. As an
undergraduate prospectus for the University of Edinburgh explains:
“You would normally take courses in three or more subjects in the …rst year and, commonly,
these are followed by second courses in at least two of the subjects in your second year. This
will then give you a choice from two, or even three, subjects to pursue to degree level, and you
can delay this decision until quite a late stage...In choosing courses to be taken in the …rst two
years, you can select from a very wide range of courses o¤ered across several faculties.”

Similar course structures exist in most Scottish universities. Scottish universities thus allow for
substantial choice among …elds of study within faculties and, to some degree, across faculties as
well.14 Students in Scotland are required to take a broader range of courses and choose a …eld
of study much later than their English counterparts.15 Given these di¤erences, it is quite natural
to regard the English system of higher education as an “early regime” and the Scottish system of
higher education as a “late regime”.
There is some variation in the average length of the undergraduate degree between England and
Scotland. Although there is some heterogeneity among degrees within each nation, most English
degrees are completed within 3 years whereas most Scottish degrees are completed within 4 years.
However, many Scottish students enter university after 6 years of secondary schooling rather than
the 7 years customary in England. According to this calculation, English and Scottish students who
attain a BA degree receive roughly the same number of years of schooling (and this is con…rmed
in the data by examining the age of graduation). Loosely speaking, the …rst year of university in
Scotland may be said to correspond to the …nal year of secondary school in England. But even
13

Again, there are exceptions: for example, in Cambridge, the system of Tripos allows some ‡exibility in making
changes to courses of study; and certain universities o¤er courses of study, such as Oxford’s PPE (Politics, Philosophy,
Economics) course, that allow students to study a broader range of subjects.
14
Note, however, that changing across certain …elds is not always possible (e.g. from history to physics without
the necessary prerequisites). Moreover, certain professional faculties, such as medicine and law, are more insular.
Engineering is usually a separate faculty but changes from the physical sciences are often permitted.
15
Numerous scholars of British educational systems have noted that Scottish institutions allow for later specialization than English ones: e.g. Evans (1976), Hunter (1971), Osborne (1967), Squires (1987). Personal conversations
and correspondences with university administrators in England and Scotland con…rm these observations. This is
also supported by evidence that the proportion of individuals that change their …eld of study between admission and
graduation in Scottish universities is more than double that of English universities under various classi…cations of
…elds.

11

so, since English students apply to university in the beginning of their …nal year of secondary
school while Scottish students only make their …nal choice of …eld at the end of their second year
of university, there is substantial di¤erence in the timing of specialization.
The di¤erence between English and Scottish universities arose from their unique respective historical traditions. English universities were largely independent and free to set their curriculum
and course structures. Long into the nineteenth century, Oxford and Cambridge maintained their
focus on the traditional subjects (classics, Aristotelian philosophy, and mathematics) with less emphasis on modern subjects such as natural science. (Evans, 1975) The provincial civic universities
established later in urban centers did not substantially depart from the traditions of the “ancient”
universities. Even with the introduction of broad faculties and additional courses of study, admissions remained at the departmental level.16 On the other hand, Scottish universities became
regulated under the Universities (Scotland) Act of 1858 that set up an executive commission to
draw up uniform conditions for courses of study. The Universities (Scotland) Act of 1889 further
increased the choice of subjects available in Scottish universities, re‡ecting the “traditional Scottish
preference for a broad general education.” (Hunter, 1971, p. 237) In large part, these two Acts of
Scottish Parliament determined the distinctive characteristics of universities in Scotland, including
the emphasis on late academic specialization.
In addition to di¤erences in higher education, England and Scotland also di¤er in their system
of secondary school education. In England, students need GCE Advanced-level examinations (Alevels) in 2 or 3 subjects to gain acceptance into university.17 In l989, a new exam, the Advanced
Supplementary examination (AS-level) was brought in to broaden the curriculum; it was to be
the same standard as an A-level, but half the content. Students were encouraged to substitute
two AS-levels for one of their A-levels but most universities did not regard these examinations as
commensurate alternatives and it did little to change the character of English secondary school
education. In Scotland, on the other hand, students need SCE Higher Examinations in 5 or 6
16
There is one important exception in the University of Keele which gained full independent status in 1962, and
implemented an experimental modular curriculum.
17
Interestingly, the introduction of A-levels in 1951 to replace the Higher School Certi…cates was a response to the
criticism that these latter quali…cations were denying opportunity to pupils with talent in individual subjects who
were less successful in others (especially in foreign language requirements). Indeed, the Higher School Certi…cates
had attempted to ensure that pupils followed a su¢ ciently broad and balanced curriculum by requiring candidates
to achieve the minimum standard in a range of subjects for a pass. Dolton and Vignoles (2002) examine the e¤ect of
choosing a broader set of courses in secondary school in the United Kingdon.

12

subjects to gain acceptance into university.18 More recently, Advanced Highers and Higher Still
certi…cations have been introduced to provide the opportunity for further specialization in secondary
school. However, universities continue to use Highers as the primary basis for admission and there
is little doubt that the Scottish system of secondary education provides a broader curriculum than
the English one. Again, the reasons for these di¤erences in secondary school curriculum can be
traced to historical antecedents. In e¤ect, specialization trickled down from the universities to
secondary schools. Moreover, the early in‡uence of English universities on secondary school leaving
exams was far stronger than that of Scottish universities since Scottish secondary school leaving
certi…cates had to be approved by the Scottish Education Department.
The di¤erence in the timing of specialization between the English and Scottish systems of undergraduate education does not arise at the graduate level. Graduate degrees in both England and
Scotland require admission to a speci…c course of study. As a result, comparisons between England and Scotland at the graduate level can serve as an important “placebo test,”after accounting
for initial di¤erences due to undergraduate specialization. These comparisons are explored further in Section 5. The discussion above has focused on England and Scotland but Britain also
includes Wales, which has a distinct system of higher education. However, in contrast to Scotland,
undergraduate students in Wales apply to a speci…c course of study in similar fashion as in England. Hence, though we will exclude Wales from the main empirical analysis, comparisons between
England and Wales at the undergraduate level can also serve as a useful “placebo test”.

4

Data and Empirical Strategy

4.1

Data

Data for the empirical analysis come from two sources: the Universities Statistical Record (USR)
and the 1980 National Survey of Graduates and Diplomates (NSGD). The USR consists of administrative data on all students in British universities undertaking courses of one academic year or longer
between 1972-1993: almost 1.9 million undergraduates and over 1 million graduate students.19 For
18

These Scottish quali…cations evolved directly from the earlier Leaving and Intermediate Certi…cates which required pro…ciency over a group of subjects rather than in single subjects.
19
Excluded are students enrolled in the Open University, Cran…eld University, the independent University of
Buckingham, and the former polytechnics and central institutions which obtained university status from 1992 onwards.

13

the most part, we shall focus on students who completed their degree in 1980 to correspond with
the data from the NSGD. These administrative data include detailed background information on
demographic characteristics and entry quali…cations in addition to information related to the degree attained. This is supplemented by information on the occupation, industry and location of
the job held in the …rst year following graduation. The NSGD contains information obtained from
a national postal survey of some 8,000 graduates undertaken in 1986/7 by the British Department
of Employment. It includes a random sample of one in six university graduates in 1980.20 The
NSGD contains information about their 1980 quali…cation, their subsequent labor market experience (occupation, industry, and wages for …rst and current jobs) and further educational pursuits.
There is also information about their high school examination results and some questions regarding
satisfaction with their 1980 quali…cation. Although it is not possible to identify speci…c universities
in the NSGD, there is information on whether students took English or Scottish secondary school
leaving exams.
Note that neither dataset is representative of the overall population. Therefore, we might be
concerned that the English and Scottish samples of university graduates may not be comparable
because of di¤ering participation rates. Using two nationally representative datasets which include
all individuals born in Great Britain during one week in 1958 and 1970 (the National Child Development Study and British Cohort Study respectively), I calculated the percentage of individuals
that have attained a …rst degree from university by age 26. In both of these datasets, the participation rates to university are remarkably similar between England and Scotland: 8% of the 1958
cohort and 12% of the 1970 cohort.21
Table 1 reveals that the average characteristics of those attending English and Scottish universities are quite similar in both the USR and NSGD. Summary statistics are shown for the sample
of students used in the regression analysis. There is a slightly larger percentage of women and
married students in Scottish universities. The average age upon completion of the …rst degree is
almost equivalent in England and Scotland but the average duration of the degree is somewhat
longer in Scotland. And although the average age that students begin university is slightly lower in
20
The NSGD also includes one in four graduates from other institutions (polytechnics, colleges of education) but I
exclude them from the present analysis. Engineering students in Scottish universities are oversampled in the NSGD.
Consequently, it is particularly important to control for …elds of study with the NSGD sample.
21
The oft-mentioned higher participation rate in Scotland usually includes students enrolled in non-university higher
education institutions, such as polytechnics and colleges of education.

14

Scotland, the median age of students during their …rst year in university is 19 for both England and
Scotland (not shown). The raw GPA scores shown in Table 1 are converted from letter grades in
the A-level and Scottish Higher school leaving examinations. In the regression analysis, these scores
are normalized within nation so that coe¢ cients represent the e¤ect of a one standard deviation
increase in GPA. Honors level is a measure of success at university ranging from 0 (no honors)
to 4 (highest honors) based on the class of degree awarded and standardized across nations. For
this sample, almost all students successfully complete their degree (due to rounding). As expected,
there are striking di¤erences in the likelihood that students change their major …eld of study in
university.22 If we exclude the handful of English universities which allow for some limited switching
across related …elds, the probability of switching for English students drops to less than 4%.
Table 2 indicates that the composition of broad …elds of study across the two nations is not too
dissimilar. Nevertheless, relatively more students in Scotland study life sciences, health sciences,
and business and relatively fewer study mathematical and social sciences. The composition of
occupations across the two nations is also largely comparable. As expected, the majority of students
in both England and Scotland enter employment in the UK. The lower rate of unemployment among
Scottish individuals is a consequence of the oversampling of engineering graduates who are less likely
to be unemployed than others. Note that some individuals do work concurrently while pursuing
further study in the UK. Finally, results from the IEA Third International Mathematics and Science
Study (TIMSS) in 1994-95 indicate no signi…cant di¤erences between England and Scotland in the
mathematics achievement for students in fourth and eighth grade.23
The model introduces an important distinction between individuals who enter an occupation
that is related to their …eld of study and those who switch to an unrelated occupation. I construct
a variable SW IT CH that captures …eld switching by grouping …elds of study and occupations
into categories (see the Data Appendix for more details). As shown in Appendix Table 1, I allow
for three levels of classi…cation: narrow (42 categories), broad (12 categories), and very broad (6
categories). Individuals are said to switch to an unrelated occupation when the …eld of study of their
degree and their occupational …eld are in di¤erent categories, subject to the level of classi…cation.
22
Using the USR, I can record changes to the major …eld of study by observing that the …eld of study upon entering
university is di¤erent from the …eld of study in the degree awarded. In Scottish universities, students are coded with
the broad faculty to begin with and changed appropriately when they select a speci…c …eld.
23
There are, however, some di¤erences in the science achievement scores. English students in the eighth grade do
somewhat better than their Scottish counterparts but there is no signi…cant di¤erence for fourth graders.

15

Therefore, SW IT CH is de…ned as 1 if the occupational …eld is di¤erent from the …eld of study at
university, and 0 otherwise.24 Broader classi…cations indicate lower rates of …eld switching since
only drastic changes from …elds of study to occupational …elds will register. But the rate of …eld
switching is substantially lower in Scotland than in England according to all classi…cations. For
example, in terms of the broad classi…cation, the rate of …eld switching in Scotland is between 10
and 20 percentage points lower than the rate of …eld switching in England. Most of the empirical
analysis will focus on the broad classi…cation of …elds.25
Using data from the USR, Figure 3 plots the rates of …eld switching, unemployment, and
the continuation of further studies following graduation from 1973-1993 as well as the proportion
of students who change a major …eld of study while in university. The raw di¤erential in …eld
switching between England and Scotland is persistent over time. On the other hand, the rates
of unemployment and further study are very similar across England and Scotland for most years.
Interestingly, the recessions in the early 1980s and early 1990s appear to be associated with an
increase in the rate of …eld switching.

4.2

Empirical Strategy

The base sample includes all individuals aiming to attain a BA degree in 1980 and employed fulltime in the …rst year following completion of their quali…cation. I exclude individuals pursuing
graduate studies while working because this may select for weaker students who need to work while
pursuing higher degrees. Using the USR, I verify that the main results hold for other years as well.
Using the NSGD, I check whether the main results continue to hold 6 years after entry into the
labor market. Furthermore, I explore a variety of alternative sampling restrictions: (i) including
graduate students who have occupation data, (ii) including unclassi…ed occupations such as manual
and clerical occupations instead of coding them as switches since individuals in one nation may
be more likely to end up in non-professional occupations, (iii) coding individuals who end up
24

For example, an individual that studies physics at university will have their …eld of study coded as “physics”
according the narrow classi…cation, “physical sciences” according to the broad classi…cation, and “mathematical,
computer, and physical sciences” according to the very broad classi…cation. If this individual is employed as a
computer programmer, the occupational switch variable will take on a value of 1 according to the narrow and broad
classi…cations and a value of 0 according to the very broad classi…cation. Individuals studying combined …elds are
recorded as switches if not employed in any of the …elds mentioned.
25
These include: Math/Computer Sciences, Physical Sciences, Architecture, Engineering, Biological Sciences,
Health, Social Services, Social Sciences, Business, Law, Education, and Arts.

16

unemployed as switches since this may be the result of a di¤erential macroeconomic shock across
the two nations, and (iv) excluding the …elds of education and business or coding individuals who
study them as non-switches since they are particularly subject to misclassi…cation (and similarly
with combined …elds). Additional robustness checks restrict the sample to students with top high
school grades who are clearly free to choose their …elds, unconstrained by admissions requirements
and the availability of slots. Finally, I also try to focus on the sample of English students from
northern England since they are probably most similar to individuals from Scotland.
The e¤ect of a Scottish degree on the probability of switching is captured by

in the following

regression equation:
SW IT CHij =

0

Xij + SCOTij +

j

+ "ij

(1)

where SW IT CHij is a dummy variable for a …eld switch for individual i in …eld j, SCOTij is a
dummy variable indicating the individual received a Scottish degree and therefore specialized late,
j

is a set of …eld of study e¤ects, Xij are demographic characteristics, and "ij is a disturbance

term. The primary demographic controls include sex, age, marital status, high school GPA, and
parent’s socioeconomic status. In further robustness checks, I also show results from regressions run
separately by …eld of study, and two “placebo tests” where W ALESij or SCOT GRADij are used
in place of SCOTij to explore comparisons between England and Wales or England and Scotland
at the graduate level.
Note, however, that attainment of a Scottish or English degree is not randomly assigned. Rather,
once they complete their secondary education, individuals can choose to attend universities in either
England or Scotland. Table 2 shows the national breakdown of individuals studying in England and
Scotland. The migration patterns from prior residence to university indicate that 3.3 percent of
individuals with English prior residence choose to study in Scotland while 7.4 percent of individuals
with Scottish prior residence choose to study in England.26 There may be systematic di¤erences
between those individuals that decide to attend university in an alternative regime. If these di¤erences are uncorrelated with the probability of switching, this should not pose a problem. However,
if individuals who migrate to university have a di¤erent likelihood of switching, OLS estimates will
be biased. This might arise because individuals who migrate have unobserved characteristics which
26
Note that, since England is much more populous, the 3.3% of English individuals that study in Scotland make
up over 18% of the student body in Scottish universities.

17

are correlated with the likelihood of switching. Or more directly, individuals might choose a regime
based on their own expected likelihood of switching. For example, individuals from England that
have less precise priors on match quality may decide to attend universities in Scotland where academic specialization is postponed. Hence, I will also consider regressions in which I instrument for
the attainment of a Scottish or English degree with the region of prior residence. Since the type of
degree and region of prior residence are not available in the NSGD, I use the type of school leaving
examinations (whether Scottish or English) to estimate a reduced form equation of the probability
of …eld switching.27

5

Results

The main predictions on …eld switching are examined with both the USR and NSGD in Tables
3, 4 and 5. Across almost all speci…cations, the probability of a …eld switch is signi…cantly lower
for individuals with Scottish degrees than for their English counterparts. The estimated di¤erence
in …eld switching between England and Scotland from the preferred 2SLS speci…cation is approximately 6 percentage points, which is substantial considering that the rate of …eld switching in
Scotland is about .42. Indeed, the coe¢ cient on SCOT from equation 1 is negative and signi…cant
in almost every year between 1973 and 1993 (results not shown, but Panel A of Figure 3 displays
the raw di¤erences over time). According to the model, these …ndings indicate that the return to
match quality is high relative to the return to speci…c skills. That we observe a higher incidence
of switching in England, a regime with early specialization, implies that the bene…ts to increased
match quality are substantial, and, indeed, large enough to outweigh the greater loss of skills.

5.1

Main …ndings

Using data from the USR, Table 3 shows the pattern of …eld switching for students who graduated
in 1980. As a baseline, Panel A includes all English students. All regressions include controls
for gender, marital status, age, high school GPA, and parental SES. In column (1), I estimate the
di¤erence in the probability of …eld switching between England and Scotland without controlling for
27

While there is some choice available with the type of secondary school, through boarding school perhaps, it is
undoubtedly much less than in university (the correlation between Scottish residence and attendance in Scottish high
school is .96). Furthermore, few secondary schools in Scotland o¤er English leaving examinations (the correlation
between attendance in a Scottish high school and sitting Scottish leaving examinations is .98).

18

…elds of study or region of work. Once I control for the composition of …elds across nations in column
(2), the estimated di¤erential in …eld switching declines substantially. In other words, not only do
individuals in Scotland switch less, but they also tend to study …elds which are associated with less
switching.28 In column (3), I add controls for region of work and the coe¢ cient on SCOT becomes
smaller still, suggesting that there may be less switching among Scottish employers who prefer to
hire individuals with related quali…cations. However, this speci…cation needs to be interpreted with
care since the decision to work in England or Scotland is probably endogenous; individuals who
decide to switch may also make systematically di¤erent decisions about where they wish to work.
In columns (4), (5) and (6), I instrument for the attainment of a Scottish degree with the
region of prior residence.29 2SLS estimates of the di¤erence in …eld switching between England
and Scotland increase substantially and lend support to the hypothesis of non-random selection:
If individuals who are less focused and hence more likely to switch decide to get their degrees
in Scotland, OLS estimates of …eld switching in Scotland will be biased towards more switching.
Similarly, if individuals who are more focused and less likely to switch decide to get their degrees in
England, OLS estimates of …eld switching in England will be biased towards less switching. Since
individuals with Scottish degrees are, in fact, less likely to switch than their English counterparts,
2SLS estimates should and do indicate an even greater di¤erential in …eld switching. Panel B uses
information from the USR to restrict the sample of English students to those from northern England
since they are the most convincing comparison group to individuals from Scotland.30 The pattern
of …eld switching between Scotland and northern England appears to be even stronger than one
found when all students from England are included. Results are also unchanged when we exclude
students at Oxford and Cambridge (not shown). The main robustness checks for …eld switching
described in the previous section are shown in Appendix Table 2. In particular, our …ndings remain
when using alternative classi…cations and restricting to the sample of students with top high school
28

In fact, English students may be endogenously choosing broader …elds which facilitate switching to avoid specializing in an excessively narrow …eld. Much of the variation in …eld switching is explained by di¤erences across …elds
of study (the R2 increases from .03 to .39 once controls for …elds of study are included).
29
Coe¢ cient estimates are almost equivalent when instrumenting for attainment of a Scottish degree with the type
of secondary school leaving exams completed (English A-levels or Scottish Highers) or with the location of secondary
school (England or Scotland).
30
On this …nal sample restriction, I also consider whether there are di¤erent migration patterns for work in London
from Northern England as compared to Scotland. However, I …nd that few individuals from either region (approximately 5% from each) migrate to London for work. Note, this result emerges from a di¤erent dataset (National
Survey of Graduates 1985/90) since neither the USR or NSGD contains detailed regions of work and origin.

19

GPAs.
Table 4 examines …eld switching within the …eld of engineering. A degree in engineering is
associated with a well-de…ned occupation and the content of such degrees is extremely similar
across the two nations. Using the narrow classi…cation we can identify …eld switches by sub…eld;
i.e. from studying mechanical engineering to becoming an electrical engineer. In order to increase
precision, we pool the USR data on engineers from 1980 to 1992.31 The main results are con…rmed
in this setting: Individuals who study engineering in Scotland are generally less likely to switch to an
unrelated occupation than their counterparts who study engineering in England. Appendix Table
3 shows the likelihood of switching in each …eld of study using USR data pooled from 1980 to 1992.
The coe¢ cient on SCOT for social sciences and the arts is negative and signi…cant, indicating that
this di¤erential is also associated with …elds outside the hard sciences (where switching out may
be easier). Not surprisingly, there are no signi…cant di¤erences in …eld switching across England
and Scotland for certain …elds such as health, business, and education. The degree in medicine
is an extremely specialized course in both English and Scottish institutions. And both education
and business provide a very broad set of skills that may dampen the di¤erences which usually arise
from early versus late specialization.32
Table 5 uses data from the NSGD to examine …eld switching between England and Scotland.
We estimate a reduced-form equation where SCOT is a dummy variable identifying whether students took English or Scottish secondary school leaving exams, because that is the only indicator
available in the NSGD. As a result, we cannot restrict the sample to individuals from northern
England. Again, all regressions include controls for gender, marital status, age, high school GPA,
parental SES. Columns (1), (2) and (3) show the reduced-form e¤ect of having completed school
leaving exams in Scotland on the likelihood of working in an occupation unrelated to the chosen
…eld of study in the …rst year following graduation. Con…rming our results from the USR, most
speci…cations show that students from England are more likely to switch …elds than their counterparts from Scotland. However, the NSGD also contains information on student outcomes six years
following the completion of their degree. Columns (4), (5), and (6) indicate that the di¤erential
31
Note that we exclude 1973-1979 and 1993 because there is no information on parental SES. We get similar results
if we include these years and drop the measures of SES.
32
More generally, estimates of di¤erences in occupational switching between England and Scotland may vary across
…elds because of di¤ering relative returns to match quality. Learning about match quality may be more important
in certain …elds than in others.

20

in …eld switching between England and Scotland remains after six years. Even stronger results are
obtained if we consider all individuals employed six years following completion of the BA degree
by including those who were not employed in the …rst year after completing their degree (results
not shown).

5.2

Two “placebo experiments”

In addition to the various robustness checks discussed above, Table 6 presents two “placebo tests”to
verify that the di¤erential in …eld switching between England and Scotland is not due to di¤erences
in unobserved characteristics across the two nations. Panel A examines the di¤erence in switching
between England and Wales for 1980 college graduates using data from the USR where we can
identify whether individuals attended university in Wales. Since undergraduate students in both
England and Wales apply to a speci…c …eld of study in university, we would expect no di¤erence in
…eld switching between England and Wales. The speci…cations are analogous to those in Panel A
of Table 3. Columns (1), (2) and (3) report the results from OLS regressions where W ALES is a
dummy variable indicating whether individuals completed university in Wales. Columns (4), (5) and
(6) show results from the 2SLS regressions where the attainment of a Welsh degree is instrumented
with the region of prior residence. None of the speci…cations indicate any signi…cant di¤erence in
…eld switching between England and Wales. Since the timing of academic specialization in Wales
is identical to that of England, the absence of a di¤erence in …eld switching between England
and Wales is reassuring and supports the contention that the di¤erence in …eld switching between
England and Scotland is a consequence of the timing of specialization.
Panel B examines the di¤erence in …eld switching between England and Scotland, but at the
graduate level. Since graduate degrees in both England and Scotland are similar in terms of
specialization – both require admission to a very speci…c …eld of study – we expect to see no
di¤erence in …eld switching at the graduate level. Of course, we must control for undergraduate
degree since the model itself predicts that students who complete an undergraduate degree in
Scotland will have higher match quality and lower speci…c skills than those in England. The USR
has separate …les containing information on students with graduate degrees. We focus on the
sample of students who completed their studies in 1980 and therefore entered the labor market at
the same time as the undergraduate students discussed above. Columns (1), (2) and (3) report

21

results from the OLS regressions where SCOT GRAD is a dummy variable indicating whether
individuals completed their graduate degrees in Scotland.33 Controlling for undergraduate degree,
there is no signi…cant di¤erence in the probability of …eld switching between England and Scotland
at the graduate level. The NSGD includes students who graduated from college in 1980 and
completed their graduate degrees some years later. Columns (4), (5) and (6) report results from
the reduced form regression where the completion of graduate degrees in Scotland is proxied by
whether students took English or Scottish secondary school leaving exams - unfortunately, we
cannot control for undergraduate degree in these regressions. Still, there is no signi…cant di¤erence
in …eld switching between England and Scotland at the graduate level. These results further
support the argument that the di¤erence in …eld switching between England and Scotland derives
from the timing of specialization in undergraduate education and not from some other characteristic
inherent to English and Scottish individuals, or from labor market conditions particular to England
and Scotland.34

5.3

Alternative explanations for …eld switching

Field switching may arise for reasons other than those described by a model of academic specialization. If certain individuals are particularly indecisive, they may be more likely to experience …eld
switching. Other individuals may simply be more adept at making changes and therefore more
likely to switch to an occupation unrelated to their …eld of study. While these characteristics are
generally unobservable, I can examine whether …eld switching is correlated with other decisions,
such as a change in major …eld of study in university. Regression analysis con…rms that individuals
who change …elds of study during university are also signi…cantly more likely to experience a …eld
switch (not shown). But according to the USR sample of 1980 graduates, 18 percent of Scottish
students change their …eld of study during university compared to just 7 percent of the English
33

The USR does not contain information on birth region so we cannot instrument for whether an individual attained
a Scottish degree with their place of birth or place of residence prior to commencing their studies.
34
I also examine the probability of switching to a graduate degree in a …eld that is unrelated to the undergraduate
…eld of study – “academic switching”. The probability of switching to an unrelated graduate degree is generally
not signi…cantly di¤erent for individuals with a Scottish undergraduate degree than for individuals with an English
undergraduate degree (results not shown). Indeed, the sign is actually positive in some cases. One possible explanation
is that the relative return to match quality for success in further study is di¤erent than for wages in the labor market.
If further study at the graduate level puts more emphasis on the speci…c skills acquired at the undergraduate level
than a job in the same occupational …eld, the bene…ts from switching may no longer exceed the greater loss of skills
in the early regime. In other words, the relative return to academic skills in graduate education may be substantially
larger than that in the job market.

22

students (see Panel B of Figure 3 for a graph of this di¤erential across all years). That students in
Scotland are more likely to change their declared …eld of study after entry into university is strong
evidence that the di¤erential in …eld switching between England and Scotland is not driven by a
lower propensity to make changes in Scotland.
Field switching may also be driven by the availability of jobs in di¤erent occupational …elds.
If certain sectors su¤er shocks to labor demand, recent graduates may be forced to switch to a
di¤erent occupational …eld from the one they studied. Appendix Table 4 shows the percentage of
individuals employed in di¤erent occupational …elds by …eld of study in 1980. As expected, certain
…elds of study have substantial out‡ows into unrelated occupational …elds (social sciences, physical
sciences, and arts). Other occupational …elds have substantial in‡ows from unrelated …eld of study
(business, engineering, education). However, evidence for ‡ows in both directions – for example,
from math/computer sciences to physical sciences and vice versa –suggests that …eld switching is
not driven solely by the availability of jobs in di¤erent occupational …elds.

5.4

Variation in …eld switching across universities

A comparison of labor market outcomes across England and Scotland has the disadvantage of
including only two nations. An alternative approach could have been to compare student outcomes
across universities. The model assumed that the cost to switching majors in university following
specialization was in…nite and identical across all universities within each regime. But in fact, there
is some variation across institutions. In England, although almost all universities require students
to apply to a speci…c …eld prior to entry, there are di¤erences in the penalty to changing …elds of
study once students are enrolled in a speci…c course. Some universities require students who switch
…elds of study to start university anew while others allow for limited switching across related …elds.
In Scotland, students are either required to write down their expected …eld of study or they are
coded with a broad faculty to begin with and changed appropriately when they select a speci…c
…eld. Since these penalties are di¢ cult to quantify, we might consider using the actual proportion
of students that change …elds as a proxy for the penalty.
However, any comparison across universities will su¤er from selection bias as students choose
among the many universities available to them. We expect individuals who are unsure about what
to study to be more likely to choose a university with less stringent penalties and also be more likely

23

to switch to an unrelated occupation upon entering the labor force. Moreover, using the actual
proportion of students that change …elds as a proxy may well confound the actual penalty with
student characteristics that are correlated with these changes and other labor market outcomes.
Indeed, if students who switch …elds are also more likely to switch to unrelated occupations, then
any unequal distribution of students across universities will yield this correlation. Figure 4 plots
the proportion of individuals who switch to an unrelated occupation by the proportion of students
that change …elds of study while in university. The positive correlation for both England and
Scotland would mistakenly suggest that students attending universities with less stringent penalties
for specializing later are also more likely to switch to an unrelated occupation –a rather di¤erent
result from the one we reached by comparing across nations. Thus, selection bias is a serious
problem if we don’t consider exogenous di¤erences in the timing of specialization. Note that Figure
4 also reveals evidence for the …ndings between England and Scotland. That most of the points
representing Scottish universities lie below the English ones con…rms that individuals in Scotland
are less likely to switch to an unrelated occupation.

6

Conclusion

Substantial research has examined the e¤ect of education on labor market outcomes. Recent
work has con…rmed that the relationship between education and outcomes such as wages is indeed
causal.35 However, there has been less progress in understanding why education a¤ects labor market
outcomes. Education is often thought to provides certain skills that make workers more productive
in performing tasks that are valued in the labor market.36 Alternatively, education may enhance
workers ability to deal with disequilibria which may result from technological change.37 This paper
examines another important mechanism for why education might improve labor market outcomes.
By providing valuable information about talents and tastes, education may help individuals match
more successfully to di¤erent occupational …elds.
I develop a model of specialization in which individuals, by taking courses in di¤erent …elds
35

See Card (1999) for a survey of the recent literature on returns to schooling.
There is evidence that education can improve skills, as measured by the Armed Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT);
see Neal and Johnson (1996) and Cascio and Lewis (2006).
37
Nelson and Phelps (1966) show that greater technological change may raise the return to education while Bowles
(1970) interprets the ability of dealing with disequilibria within the context of migration.
36

24

of study, accumulate …eld-speci…c skills and receive noisy signals of match quality in these …elds.
Distinguishing between educational regimes with early and late specialization, I derive a comparative static prediction regarding the probability of switching to an occupation unrelated to one’s
…eld of study. If higher education serves mainly to provide speci…c skills, the model predicts more
switching in a regime with late specialization because the cost of switching is lower in terms of foregone skills. On the other hand, if higher education serves mainly to provide valuable information
about match quality, switching may be higher in a regime with early specialization because the
bene…ts from higher expected match quality from switching will outweigh overwhelm the greater
loss of speci…c skills. Testing these predictions across British systems of higher education, I …nd
that individuals in the Scottish system, where specialization occurs relatively late, are less likely
to switch to an unrelated occupation than their counterparts in England, who specialize early. No
such di¤erential is observed at the graduate level or between England and Wales where the systems
coincide in the timing of specialization. Hence, observing a higher probability of switching a regime
with early specialization, such as England, implies that the return to match quality is su¢ ciently
high to overwhelm the greater loss of skills.
The notion that people switch to di¤erent …elds in order to correct for choices made in the past is
a central feature of this paper. Clearly, there are other reasons why individuals may end up working
in occupations that are unrelated to their …elds of study. So simply observing that …eld switching
takes place is not su¢ cient evidence that education provides valuable information about match
quality. However, by exploiting the exogenous di¤erence in the timing of academic specialization
across two systems of higher education, we can take advantage of a simple comparative static
prediction to test for the importance of such information. Moreover, focusing on the likelihood of
switching is particularly useful since the decision to switch to an unrelated occupation encompasses
non-pecuniary as well as pecuniary considerations. The …ndings in this paper con…rm that education
is important, not only in providing speci…c skills that are useful in the labor market, but also in
helping students learn about their own tastes and talents.

25

References
Altonji, J.G. (1993): “The Demand for and Return to Education When Education Outcomes Are
Uncertain,” Journal of Labor Economics 11(1), 48-83
Arcidiacono, P. (2004): “Ability Sorting and the Returns to College Major,” Journal of Econometrics, 121(1-2), 343-375
Bowles, S. (1970): “Migration as Investment: Empirical Tests of the Human Investment Approach
to Geographical Mobility,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 52 (4), 356-362.
Card D. (1999): “The Causal E¤ect of Education on Earnings,” Handbook of Labor Economics,
Vol 3, 1801-1863
Cascio, E. and E. Lewis (2006): “Schooling and the Armed Forces Qualifying Test: Evidence
from School-Entry Laws,” Journal of Human Resources 41(2), 294-318.
DeGroot, M. H. (1970): Optimal Statistical Decisions. McGraw-Hill Company
Evans, K. (1975): The Development and Structure of the English Educational System. University
of London Press
Gupta, S.S. and K.J. Miescke (1996): “Bayesian look ahead one-stage sampling allocations for
selection of the best population,” Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference 54, 229-244
Gupta, S.S. and K.J. Miescke (1994): “Bayesian look ahead one stage sampling allocations for
selecting of largest normal mean,” Statistical Papers 35, 169-177
Hunter, S.L. (1971): The Scottish Educational System. Oxford: Pergamon Press
Hvide, H.K. (2003): “Education and the Allocation of Talent,”Journal of Labor Economics 21(4),
945-976
Johnson, W.R. (1978): “A Theory of Job Shopping,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 92(2),
261-278
Johnson, W.R. (1979): “The Demand for General and Speci…c Education with Occupational
Mobility,” Review of Economic Studies 46(4), 695-705
Jovanovic, B. (1979): “Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover,”Journal of Political Economy
87(5), 972-990
Jovanovic, B. and Nyarko Y. (1997): “Stepping Stone Mobility,”Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy 46, 289-326
Malamud, O. and C. Pop-Eleches (2007): “General Education versus Vocational Training: Evidence from an Economy in Transition,” mimeo.
McCall, B. (1990): “Occupational Matching: A Test of Sorts,” Journal of Political Economy
98(1), 45-69
McMillen, D.P., Seaman, P.T., L.D. Singell (2007): “A Mismatch Made in Heaven: A Hedonic
Analysis of Overeducation and Undereducation,” Southern Economic Journal 73(4): 901-930

26

Miescke, K.J. (1999): “Bayes sampling designs for selection procedures". Invited chapter in:
Multivariate, Design, and Sampling, S. Ghosh ed., M. Dekker, New York, 93-117.
Miller, R. (1984): “Job Matching and Occupational Choice,”Journal of Political Economy 92(6),
1086-1120
Neal, D. (1999): “Complexity of Job Mobility among Young Men,”Journal of Labor Economics
17(2), 237-261
Neal, D. and W.R. Johnson (1996): “The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White Wage Differences,” Journal of Political Economy 104(5), 869-895
Nelson, R.R. and E.S. Phelps (1966): “Investment in Humans, Technological Di¤usion, and
Economic Growth,” American Economic Review, 69-75
Osborne, G.S. (1967): Scottish and English Schools: A comparative survey of the past …fty years.
University of Pittsburgh Press
Schultz, T.W. (1968): “Resources for Higher Education: An Economist’s View,” Journal of
Political Economy 67(3), 327-347
Shaw, K.L. (1987): “Occupational Change, Employer Change, and the Transferability of Skills,”
Southern Economic Journal 53, 702-719
Sicherman N. (1991): “Overeducation in the Labor Market,” Journal of Labor Economics 9(2),
101-123
Spence, M. (1973): “Job Market Signaling,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 87, 355-374
Squires, G. (1987): “The Curriculum,” British Higher Education (ed. Tony Becher). London:
Allen & Unwin
Trow, M. (1999): “From Mass Higher Education to Universal Access: The American Advantage”
Minerva 37, 1-26
University of Edinburgh: 2003 Undergraduate Prospectus

27

A

Data Appendix

Complete documentation for the Universities’Statistical Record, 1972/73-1993/4: Undergraduate
Records, Postgraduate Records and the National Survey of 1980 Graduates and Diplomates, 19861987 are available from the UK Data Archive: http://www.data-archive.ac.uk. Details of the
variables constructed for this study are described as follows:
Field switch
A …eld switch is de…ned as a binary variable that takes on a value of 1 if an individual is
employed in an occupation that is unrelated to his major …eld of study at the undergraduate level,
and 0 otherwise. In order to determine whether an individual is employed in an occupation that is
related or unrelated to his …eld of study, I group …elds of study and occupations into categories. As
shown in Appendix Table 1, I allow for three gradations of classi…cation: narrow (42 categories),
broad (12 categories), and very broad (6 categories). Occupations and …elds of study are coded
according to each of the alternative classi…cations. Where the occupation and …eld of study are
classi…ed in di¤erent categories, the …eld switch variable takes on a value of 1. For example,
an individual that studies physics at university will have their …eld of study coded as “physics”
according the narrow classi…cation, “physical sciences” according to the broad classi…cation, and
“mathematical, computer, and physical sciences”according to the very broad classi…cation. If this
individual is employed as a computer programmer, the …eld switch variable will take on a value of
1 according to the narrow and broad classi…cations and a value of 0 according to the very broad
classi…cation. Combined …elds are considered switches if the individual is not employed in any of
the …elds mentioned.
Degree Honors
There is some variation in honors classi…cations among universities in general, and between
Scottish and English institutions in particular. Hence, I aggregate honors levels into roughly comparable categories. The honors variable takes on the value of 4 for a 1st, unclassi…ed, and enhanced
degree class, 3 for upper 2nd, undivided 2nd degree class, and ordinary, 2 for lower 2nd, Aegrotata,
and Pass, and 1 for 3rd, 4th and General degree class.
High school GPA
Scores on secondary school leaving exams are o¢ cially coded as letter grades (A, B, C, etc.).
These are converted into numerical scores where A=10, B=8, C=6, D=4, and E=2. Average scores
are then standardized by nation and combined so that the overall distribution of high school GPA
has mean 0 and standard deviation 1.
SES
Individual SES scores are based on parental occupations as follows: 0-unstated, retired, or
unknown, 1-professionals workers, 2-intermediate workers, 3-skilled non-manual, 4-skilled manual,
5-partially skilled, 6-unskilled, and 7-unemployed.
Region of Work
Region of work is classi…ed as England, Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland or abroad in the
USR. Region of work is classi…ed as London, Southern England, Midlands, East Anglia, Northern
England, Wales, Scotland, Northern Ireland or abroad in the NSGD.
Industry
Industry are classi…ed according to broad SIC codes: Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries (0),
Mining (1), Mineral Extraction and Production (2), Heavy Manufacturing (3), Light Manufacturing
(4), Construction (5), Wholesale and Retail Trade (6), Transportation, Communication, and Public
Utilities (7), Financial and Business Services (8), Professional and Related Services (9)

28

B

Mathematical Appendix

The mathematical appendix provides a formal treatment of the model of academic specialization
presented in the main text. For ease of exposition, the structure of the appendix and most of the
notation parallels the main text.
Formal Setup
Suppose N courses are taken in k
2 …elds of study. Let F1 ; :::; Fk be normal populations
associated with …elds of study i = 1; :::; k, each with unknown mean 1 ; : : : ; k and a common
known variance 2 > 0. The unknown means 1 ; : : : ; k represent unobserved match quality in
each …eld.
Sequence of observations
In Stage 1, n observations from each population Pi are observed. These correspond to observations on match quality from courses taken in each …eld of study prior to specialization. The sample
means of these observations, Xi , are independent and distributed N i ; p 1 with p = n 2 . In
Stage 2, one population, i , is selected for further sampling and (N nk) additional observations
are observed from this population. These correspond to observations on match quality in the chosen
…eld from courses taken following specialization. The sample mean of the second set of observations, Y , is distributed N i ; q 1 with q = (N nk) 2 and where i is the (unknown) mean
of the population chosen after Stage 1.38
Beliefs on match quality
Belief about match quality 1 ; : : : ; k are represented by the parameters b1 ; : : : ; bk . These parameters are random and follow independent and identical prior distributions assumed to have
bi N ; 1 with = 2 . The conditional distribution of b at each stage can be expressed as
0
follows:
bi j X = x

N

bi j X = x; Y = y

pxi +
p+
N

; (p + )

1

i (x)

;

i = 1; : : : ; k independent

+ qi Y
; ( + qi )
+q

1

;

qi = q and 0 otherwise

where = p + represents the relative combined (prior plus sampling) information gained from
…eld Fi , and where i (x) = (pxi + ) = (p + ) represents the estimated mean of …eld Fi after
Stage 1. In terms of the notation in the main text, 0i = i (x) and 00i = i (x;y) .39
Payo¤ s
The returns associated with …eld Fi is denoted by ui =
i + si where si is the cumulative
number of observations from …eld Fi . This return represents the wage received in …eld i upon
entering the labor market. In terms of the model of academic specialization, is the return to
match quality and is the return to speci…c skills. Note that we can express the loss function
associated with population Fi as Li ( ; s) =
si 40
i
Decision rules
38

Since Xi and Yi already correspond to the mean of the samples, we will use xi and yi instead of xi and y i .
Note also that the conditional distribution of Y given X = x is distributed N ( i (x); w) with w = ( + q) q.
40
This corresponds to a linear loss function, Li ( ; s) = [k]
i , where [k] = max f 1 ; : : : ; k g is normalized to
zero and with an additional negative cost associated with the amount of sampling from the population i.
39

29

After X = x has been observed at Stage 1, the Bayes selection rule i = d1 (x) can be found
by minimizing the posterior expected loss (or in our framework, maximizing posterior expected
wages):
EX L b; d1 (X) j X = x

=

bi + si j X = x

max EX

i=1;:::;k

=
=

max EX bi j X = x + s

i=1;:::;k

max

i=1;:::;k

i (x)

+ s=

p (maxi=1;:::;k xi ) +
p+

+ s

where s corresponds to the speci…c skills in each …eld which are equivalent across …elds. The
optimal selection, i , at Stage 1 will therefore be the population with the largest observed sample
mean after Stage 1 since d1 (x) = arg maxi=1;:::;k xi . This is intuitive since, with identical prior
distributions on match quality, the only distinguishing feature of each population is the information
received in Stage 1. Let x[1] < x[2] <
< x[k] denote the order sample means from Stage 1 and
(x)
<
(x)
<
<
(x)
denote
the
ordered posterior means from Stage 1. Note that, in
[1]
[2]
[k]
terms of the notation in the main text, 0i = [k] (x) and 0ia = [k 1] (x).
Similarly, after Y = y has been observed at Stage 2, the Bayes selection rule i = d2 (x;y) will
satisfy
E L b; d2 (X; Y) j X = x;Y = y = max E
i=1;:::;k

bi + si j X = x;Y = y

These Bayes selection rules yield the maximum posterior expected wages, or Bayes risk, of their
respective problems in Stages 1 and 2. Let 00i = [k] (x;y) denote the posterior mean of …eld, i ,
after Stage 2. An important feature of this decision problem is that the selection i = d2 (x;y)
after Stage 2 may di¤er from the selection i = d1 (x) after Stage 1 since further observations in
Stage 2 may reveal that the initial choice was not as good as initially thought. This corresponds
precisely to the possibility of switching …elds expressed in the main theoretical framework.
Proof of Proposition 1. The probability of switching can be expressed as follows:
Pr (switch) = Pr u
where u (

00
i

; s) = u

0
ia ; s

[k] (x;y); s

>u

00
i

;s

or Pr u

[k 1] (x); s

>u

[k] (x;y); s

is the wage expected in the chosen …eld based on the beliefs after

Stage 2 and u ( 0ia ; s) = u [k 1] (x); s is the wage expected in the second-best …eld based on
the beliefs after Stage 1. Using the latter notation and since individuals are assumed to be riskneutral, we can write the probability of switching in terms of skills and beliefs about the mean of
match quality: Pr
nk)) . We can further decompose
[k 1] (x) + n >
[k] (x;y) + (n + (N
[k] (x;y), into the mean of match quality in the chosen …eld after Stage 1, [k] (x), and the mean of

30

the observations taken from the chosen …eld in Stage 2, Y [k] :41
Pr (switch) = Pr

[k 1] (x)

d
dn

qi
( + qi )

< 0,

[k] (x)

d
dn

p
p+

+

1=2

q
( + q)

= Pr
where

>

q
( + q)

Y [k] <
> 0 and

p
p+

d
dn

Y

x[k]

(N

!

1=2
[k]

x[k

nk)

+

(N

nk)
(N

1]

!

nk)

<0

The left-hand side term represents new information about match quality in the chosen …eld revealed
in Stage 2; the …rst term on the right-hand side represents the loss in match quality from switching
based on beliefs from Stage 1; the second term on the right-hand side represents the loss in skills
from switching to the second-best …eld. Individuals will switch …elds when the new information
about match quality is su¢ ciently negative so as to overwhelm the loss in match quality and skills
from switching.
Later specialization corresponds to more observations in Stage 1 which decreases the relative
importance of new information in Stage 2, increases the relative importance of information in Stage
1, and raises the loss in skills associated with switching. When is large relative to , the loss in
d
skills associated with switching will dominate and dn
Pr (switch) > 0.42 When is large relative
d
to , the loss in match quality associated with switching will dominate and dn
Pr (switch) < 0.43
Using numerical methods, we can always …nd a unique constant C > 0, so that a regime with early
specialization, nE , will have a higher probability of switching than a regime with late specialization,
nL , if > C and a regime with late specialization, nL , will have a higher probability of switching
than a regime with late specialization, nL , if < C:
Proof of Corollary 1. Suppose now that u( i ; si ) = i + si + i where i N (0; 2 ). Then,
if the return to match quality is equal to zero, = 0, we can express the probability of switching
as follows:
Pr (switch) = Pr

[k 1] (x)

+ n+

[k 1]

= Pr

n+

[k 1]

>

(n + (N

= Pr

[k 1]

[k]

<

(N

(nk N )
p
2 2

=

>

[k] (x;y)

nk)) +

+

(n + (N

nk)) +

[k]

[k]

nk)

since

[k 1]

[k]

N (0; 2 2 )

Assuming that 2 = 1 yields the same expression since p = n 2 = 0 and q = (N nk) 2 =
0. Hence, in either case, a larger n causes the probability of switching to increase. Therefore, if
= 0 or 2 = 1, a regime with early specialization will have a lower probability of switching than
a regime with late specialization.

41
So Y [k] is a random variable representing observations from an extreme value distribution. See Gupta and Miescke
(1994, 1996) and Miescke (1999) for similar decompositions.
42
This holds so long as switching continues to take place. If is extremely large relative
(e.g. if
= 0) no
switching will take place because the loss of skills becomes to large.
43

This is clear if

less negative and

= 0 and there is no loss in skills from switching. In this case, a larger n will make
p
p+

x[k]

x[k

1]

more negative, reducing the probability of a switch.

31

q
( +q)

1=2

Y[k]

Table 1: Summary Statistics for 1980 College Graduates
Mean

England
SD

Obs

Mean

Scotland
SD

Individual characteristics
Female
Married (during degree)
Average age (upon completion)
High School GPA (out of 30)
Number of high school subjects

0.38
0.03
22.39
20.92
3.22

0.48
0.18
2.40
6.39
0.71

10,455
10,455
10,455
10,455
10,455

0.43
0.05
22.57
19.91
4.78

0.50
0.21
2.78
6.06
1.27

3,427
3,427
3,427
3,427
3,427

Degree characteristics
Honors
Duration
Successful completion
Changed major

2.38
3.33
1.00
0.07

0.74
0.73
0.04
0.25

10,434
10,455
10,455
10,455

2.27
3.97
1.00
0.18

0.58
0.75
0.04
0.39

3,422
3,427
3,427
3,427

Occupational switching
Very broad classification
Broad classification
Narrow classification

0.39
0.49
0.68

0.49
0.50
0.47

10,455
10,455
10,455

0.35
0.42
0.63

0.48
0.49
0.48

3,427
3,427
3,427

Individual characteristics
Female
Married (6 years after degree)
Average age (upon completion)
High School GPA (out of 30)
Number of high school subjects

0.34
0.53
22.01
19.71
3.18

0.47
0.50
1.51
5.84
0.69

1,242
1,242
1,242
1,242
1,242

0.31
0.59
22.26
18.25
5.15

0.47
0.49
2.40
5.77
1.04

213
213
213
213
213

Degree characteristics
Honors

2.42

0.79

1,236

2.48

0.71

213

Occupational switching
Very broad classification
Broad classification
Narrow classification

0.44
0.50
0.63

0.50
0.50
0.48

1,242
1,242
1,242

0.29
0.34
0.51

0.45
0.48
0.50

213
213
213

Obs

Panel A: USR

Panel A: NSGD

Notes: The base sample for the Universities Statistical Records (USR) includes all individuals who aimed to attain a BA degree
in 1980 and were employed in a job during the 1st year following graduation and not pursuing graduate studies. The base sample
for the 1980 National Survey of Graduates and Diplomates (NSGD) includes all individuals who attained a BA degree in 1980
and were employed in a job during the 1st year following graduation and not pursuing graduate studies. Median age at the start of
the degree is 19 for both nations. GPA is an average measure of the achievement in secondary school leaving exams out of 30
(but standardized by nation in all regressions). Honors is a measure of success at university standardized across nations taking
discrete values from 0 (no honors) to 4 (highest honors). Occupational switch is defined as 1 if field of study at the undergraduate
level is different from the occupational field of first job 6 months following degree and 0 otherwise (see Data Appendix for
further discussion of classification groups).

32

Table 2: Further Summary Statistics on Degrees and Destinations for 1980 College Graduates
USR

NSGD

England

Scotland

England

Scotland

Degree Field Composition (%)
Math and Computer Sciences
Physical Sciences
Architecture
Engineering
Life Sciences
Health Sciences
Social Services and Welfare
Social Sciences
Business/Accounting
Law
Education
Art

6.44
9.52
1.56
11.41
5.96
16.15
2.94
16.06
3.59
8.13
1.23
17.03

4.20
9.22
1.31
8.70
7.56
19.67
3.68
16.72
5.52
6.45
1.28
15.70

7.57
14.65
1.77
21.18
6.76
4.27
2.98
18.92
4.43
1.29
3.14
13.04

3.76
7.51
2.35
30.05
7.98
5.16
1.88
15.49
6.10
9.86
4.23
5.63

Occupational Field Composition (%)
Math and Computer Scientists
Physical Scientists
Architects/Planners
Engineers
Life Scientists
Medical Professionals
Social Services Professionals
Social Scientists
Accountants/Managers
Lawyers/Judges
Educators/Teachers
Artists/Journalists/Entertainers

5.23
6.74
1.43
10.13
0.39
16.56
1.71
2.09
27.69
7.55
17.24
3.24

4.64
6.36
1.69
7.76
0.50
20.51
2.63
2.92
29.00
6.07
15.76
2.16

11.19
6.04
2.74
21.42
2.17
5.56
3.22
1.85
34.78
0.24
7.89
2.90

6.10
4.23
3.29
30.52
3.76
4.69
2.35
2.82
24.88
7.51
7.98
1.88

Post-BA Activity (%)ª
Entering employment
Further Study
Unemployed

76.74
11.64
11.63

79.28
10.11
10.61

61.86
27.65
10.48

64.13
29.00
6.88

Region of Work (%)
England
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
Abroad

87.17
1.15
1.90
0.37
9.40

32.59
61.04
1.02
0.50
4.84

87.36
1.77
3.38
0.32
7.17

25.35
70.89
0.47
0.00
3.29

Region of Prior Residence (%)
England
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
Abroad

91.91
0.61
4.75
1.19
1.54

15.61
81.27
0.35
1.69
1.08

Notes: Composition of fields of study and occupational fields are based on a broad classification (other classifications are
discussed in the Data Appendix). Occupational field represents the field of employment in the 1st year after completing degree.
Foreign students returning overseas are excluded from counts of Post-BA activity. ª is out of the unrestricted sample including
unemployed and graduate students.

33

Table 3: Effect of Scottish Degree on Occupational Switching for 1980 College Graduates (USR sample)
dependent variable: switched to occupation unrelated to field of study
Panel A: Scotland vs. England
OLS

2SLS

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.079**
[0.016]

-0.064**
[0.017]

-0.048*
[0.023]

-0.107**
[0.034]

-0.089**
[0.019]

-0.099**
[0.029]

Main controls
Field of study effects
Region of work effects

X

X
X

X
X
X

X

X
X

X
X
X

R2
Observations
Mean of dep. variable

0.03
13,882
0.47

0.39
13,882
0.47

0.39
13,882
0.47

0.03
13,882
0.47

0.39
13,882
0.47

0.39
13,882
0.47

(6)

SCOT

Panel B: Scotland vs. Northern England
(1)

OLS
(2)

(3)

(4)

2SLS
(5)

-0.086*
[0.029]

-0.079**
[0.023]

-0.079**
[0.023]

-0.093
[0.047]

-0.101**
[0.025]

-0.128**
[0.031]

Main controls
Field of study effects
Region of work effects

X

X
X

X
X
X

X

X
X

X
X
X

R2
Observations
Mean of dep. variable

0.03
4,921
0.42

0.37
4,921
0.42

0.37
4,921
0.42

0.03
4,921
0.42

0.37
4,921
0.42

0.37
4,921
0.42

SCOT

Notes: Huber-White standard errors, clustered by university in brackets. * and ** indicate significance at the 5% and 1% level
respectively. Sample includes all students who aimed to attain a first degree in England and Scotland with occupation data and
were not pursing further studies. Dependent variable is defined as 1 if broad field of study at the undergraduate level is different
from the broad occupational field of the first job in the 1st year following degree and 0 otherwise. SCOT is defined as 1 for
Scottish degree and 0 for English degree. SCOT is instrumented with nation of prior residence in columns (4), (5), and (6). Main
controls include sex, marital status, age, high school GPA, and parent SES. Panel B is restricted to students in England whose
region of prior residence was northern England (including North East and Tyne, and all of Yorkshire)

34

Table 4: Effect of a Scottish Degree on Occupational Switching for Engineers (USR, 1980-1992)
Dependent variable: switched to occupation unrelated to engineering subfield

(1)

OLS
(2)

(3)

-0.062
[0.032]

-0.037*
[0.014]

Main controls
Sub-field effects
Region of work effects

X

R2
Observations
Mean of dep. variable

0.02
21,819
0.28

SCOT

(4)

2SLS
(5)

(6)

-0.034*
[0.016]

-0.064*
[0.032]

-0.047**
[0.012]

-0.049**
[0.015]

X
X

X
X
X

X

X
X

X
X
X

0.29
22,320
0.28

0.29
22,320
0.28

0.02
22,320
0.28

0.29
22,320
0.28

0.29
22,320
0.28

Notes: Huber-White standard errors, clustered by university in brackets (that the standard errors are larger for OLS than 2SLS
may occur because of the strong first stage and the cross-correlations within the clustered groups). * and ** indicate significance
at the 5% and 1% level respectively. Sample includes all students who aimed to attain a first engineering degree in England and
Scotland with occupation data and were not pursing further studies. Dependent variable is defined as 1 if the engineering subfield
at the undergraduate level is different from the engineering subfield of the first job in the 1st year following degree and 0
otherwise. SCOT is defined as 1 for Scottish degree and 0 for English degree. SCOT is instrumented with nation of prior
residence in columns (4), (5), and (6). Main controls include sex, marital status, age, high school GPA, parent SES and year fixed
effects.

35

Table 5: Effect of Scottish Degree on Occupational Switching for 1980 College Graduates (NSGD)
dependent variable: switched to occupation unrelated to field of study
1st year after completing degree
(1)
(2)
(3)

6th year after completing degree
(4)
(5)
(6)

-0.151**
[0.035]

-0.086**
[0.028]

0.014
[0.045]

-0.174**
[0.036]

-0.110**
[0.029]

-0.053
[0.046]

Main controls
Field of study effects
Region of work effects

X

X
X

X
X
X

X

X
X

X
X
X

R2
Observations
Mean of dep. variable

0.03
1,455
0.48

0.35
1,455
0.48

0.36
1,455
0.48

0.03
1,455
0.52

0.30
1,455
0.52

0.31
1,455
0.52

SCOT

Notes: Huber-White standard errors, clustered by university in brackets. * and ** indicate significance at the 5% and 1% level
respectively. Sample includes all students who aimed to attain a first degree in England and Scotland with occupation data and
were not pursing further studies. Dependent variable is defined as 1 if field of study at the undergraduate level is different from
the broad occupational field of the first job in the 1st year following the degree and 0 otherwise. SCOT is defined as 1 for having
completed Scottish school leaving exams and 0 for English school leaving exams. Main controls include sex, marital status, age,
high school GPA, and parent SES.

36

Table 6: "Placebo Tests" of Occupational Switching
dependent variable: switched to occupation unrelated to field of study
Panel A: Wales vs. England (USR sample)
OLS

2SLS

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.094
[0.051]

-0.001
[0.019]

-0.003
[0.020]

-0.08
[0.120]

-0.02
[0.036]

-0.034
[0.048]

Main controls
Field of study effects
Region of work effects

X

X
X

X
X
X

X

X
X

X
X
X

R2
Observations
Mean of dep. variable

0.03
12,082
0.51

0.40
12,082
0.51

0.41
12,082
0.51

0.03
12,082
0.51

0.40
12,082
0.51

0.40
12,082
0.51

WALES

Panel B: Graduate-level Occupational Switching in Scotland and England
USR Sample (OLS)

SCOTGRAD
Undergrad degree (SCOT)
Main controls
Field of study effects
Region of work effects
R2
Observations
Mean of dep. variable

NSGD sample (reduced form)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.038
[0.036]

0.021
[0.042]

0.01
[0.040]

0.048
[0.048]

0.062
[0.040]

0.039
[0.072]

X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X

X
X

X
X
X

0.02
4,400
0.49

0.19
4,400
0.49

0.19
4,400
0.49

0.01
976
0.58

0.24
976
0.58

0.27
967
0.58

Notes: Huber-White standard errors, clustered by university in brackets. * and ** indicate significance at the 5% and 1% level
respectively. Dependent variable in Panel A is defined as 1 if the broad field of study at the undergraduate level is different from
the broad occupational field of first job in the 1st year following degree and 0 otherwise. WALES is defined as 1 for Welsh
degree and 0 for English degree. WALES is instrumented with nation of prior residence in columns (4), (5), and (6) of Panel A.
Main controls include sex, marital status, age, high school GPA, and parent SES. Dependent variable in Panel B is defined as 1 if
the broad field of study at the graduate level is different from the broad occupational field of first job in the 1st year following
degree and 0 otherwise. SCOTGRAD is defined as 1 for graduate Scottish degree and 0 for graduate English degree. Columns
(4), (5), and (6) of Panel B show the reduced form using Scottish school leaving exams as a proxy for a Scottish graduate degree.
Main controls for the USR in Panel B include sex, marital status and age. Main controls for the NSGD include sex, marital status,
age, high school GPA, and parent SES.

37

Appendix Table 1: Classification of Fields and Occupations
Fields
111 Math/Comp. Science
1111 Math Sciences
1112 Computer Sciences
112 Physical Sciences
1121 Chemistry
1122 Geology
1123 Physics
121 Architecture
1210 Architecture
122 Engineering
1221 Mechanical
1222 Chemical
1223 Civil
1224 Electrical
1225 Industrial
1226 Materials
1227 Aeronautical
131 Life Sciences
1311 Agriculture
1312 Biology
132 Health Sciences
1321 Physicians
1322 Dentists/Vets/Pharm
1323 Nursing/Related
211 Social Service
2111 Psychology
2112 Sociology/Social Work
212 Social Sciences
2121 Economics
2122 History/ Geography
2123 Govt., Public Admin.
2124 Other Social
221 Business
2211 Accounting, Finance
2212 Management
2213 Sales
2214 Related Business
222 Law
2220 Law
231 Education
2310 Education
232 Arts
2321 English/Languages
2322 Art
2323 Performing arts
2324 Religion/Philosophy

Subject codes (NSGD/USR-1980)

Occupational Codes (NSGD)

Occupational Codes (USR-1980)

Mathematics (81)
Computer Science (82); Math/Comp. Science (31)

Mathematician (444); Statistician (242)…
Computer Programmer (244); Analyst/programmer (246)…

Operational research (441); Statistician (452)
Systems analysis (442); Computer programming (443)…

Chemistry (34); Environmental Science (36)
Geology (35)
Physics (33); Mathematics/Physics (32)

Chemical scientist (442)
Geological scientist (445)
Physical scientist (443)

Scientist (510) + Chemical and allied industries (240-247)
Scientist (510) + Oil, mining industries (230-235)
Scientist (510) + Atomic energy (284); Other manufacturing

Architecture (51); Town plan (52); Surveying (17)

Architect (511); Town planning (514); Draughtsman (490)…

Architect (551); Town planning (553); Surveying (554)…

Mechanical engineering (12)
Chemical Engineering (9)
Civil Engineering (10)
Electrical Engineering (11)
Production engineering (13)
Mining (14); Metallurgy (15)
Aeronautical engineer. (8)

Mechanical or aeronautical engineer (461)
Chemical engineer (481)
Civil, municipal or structural engineer (451)…
Electrical engineer (471); Electronic engineer (472,473)
Production engineer (482); Planning engineer (483)…
Mining engineer (452); Metallurgist (485)
Mechanical or aeronautical engineer (461)

Engineer (520) + Automotive industry (253)
Engineer (520) + Chemical and allied industries (240-247)
Engineer (520) + Civil engineering contractors (220-225)…
Engineer (520) + Electronic (256); Computers (257)…
Engineer (520) + Food (261); Drink (262); Textiles (271)…
Engineer (520) + Oil, mining industries (230-235)
Engineer (520) + Aircraft, aerospace industry (254)

Agriculture (20); Forestry (23)…
Biology (25); Botany (26); Zoology (27)…

Farmer, farm manager, horticulturist (600)
Biological scientist, biochemist (441)

Scientist (510) + Agriculture, horticulture, forestry(210-214)
Scientist (510) + Health authorities (154)

Medicine (3)
Dentistry (4); Veterinary (24); Pharmacology (5,6)
Studies allied to medicine/health (7)

Medical practitioner (351)
Dentist (352); Veterinarian (382); Pharmacist (371)…
Nurse (360); Physiotherapist (374)…

Medicine (631); Medical & para-medical services (630)
Dentistry (632); Veterinary (640); Pharmacy (634)…
Nursing (633); Physio-occupational, speech & therapy (636)

Psychology (46)
Sociology (47)

Psychologist (324)
Sociologist (323); Welfare worker (333)...

Psychology (623); Occupational guidance (624)
Social, welfare, religious (620); Social/welfare (621)…

Economics (41)
History (69); Archeology (70); Geography (42)
Government and public administration (44)
Social anthropology (48)

Economist (241)
Librarian, information officer (294)
Inspector (263); General administration (local govt) (280)…
Social or behavioural scientist (325)

Economic (450); Economist (451)
Librarian (721) Archivist (722)
Consumer protection, environmental health, safety (653)…
Non-scientific research (730); Information research (700)…

Accountancy (43)
Business, management studies (40, 53)
Business, management studies (40, 53)
Secretarial studies (84)

Accountant (221); Investment analyst (228)…
Management consultant (296); Manager (561)…
Advertising executive (252); Buying and selling (255)…
Office manager (572); Personal assistant (297)…

Financial (460); Accountancy (461); Banking (462)…
Management & supporting occupations (400)…
Purchasing (431); Selling (432); Marketing (434)…
Clerical, secreterial & related (930)…

Law (45)

Judge (211); Advocate, barrister (212); Solicitor (213)…

Baristor (471); Solicitor (472); Trusts (473)…

Education (1)

Teacher (secondary) (311); Teacher (primary) (312)…

Primary (611); Middle school (612); Secondary (613)…

English (55); French (57); German (59)…
Art (73)
Drama (74); Music (75)
Religion (72); Philosophy (71)

Author, writer, journalist, editor (391)
Artist, commercial artist (401); Designer (402-406)
Actor, entertainer, musician, singer, stage manager (411)…
Clergy, minister of religion (340)

Journalist (811); Technical writer (711); Translater (712)…
Art, sculpture, design (820); Fashion & textiles (823)…
Acting, music, sport (830); Broadcasting/stage/film (840)…
Pastoral (622)

Notes: Subject codes for USR are correct for 1972-1984 (different codes for 1985-1993) and occupational codes for the USR are correct from 1980-1993 (different codes for 19731979). Occupational codes omit some categories for brevity and indicated with “…” when excluded. Engineers and scientist in the USR are matched with industry codes in order to
identify particular specializations within each category. Further details are available from the author. Broad fields are in bold. Very broad fields are expressed by the 2-digit codes.

38

Appendix Table 2: Robustness Checks (Coefficients on SCOT)
USR
(1)

NSGD
(2)

-0.089**
[0.019]

-0.086**
[0.028]

Narrow

-0.077*
[0.029]

-0.062
[0.034]

Very Broad

-0.059**
[0.010]

-0.070*
[0.028]

Unemployed as Switch

-0.050**
[0.010]

-0.089**
[0.028]

Unclassified Occupations as Switch

-0.054**
[0.014]

-0.064*
[0.026]

Include Graduate Students

-0.050**
[0.011]

-0.088**
[0.028]

Graduate Students as Non-switch

-0.052**
[0.010]

-0.086**
[0.028]

Exclude Education

-0.052**
[0.011]

-0.092**
[0.029]

Education as Non-switch

-0.052**
[0.011]

-0.089**
[0.028]

Exclude Business

-0.051**
[0.011]

-0.079**
[0.030]

Business as Non-Switch

-0.048**
[0.010]

-0.074**
[0.028]

Exclude Combined fields

-0.052**
[0.010]

-0.107**
[0.028]

-0.038*
[0.016]

-0.081
[0.065]

Baseline
Classification of Fields

Occupational Restrictions

Field Restrictions

Population restrictions
Restrict to highest GPA students

Notes: Huber-White standard errors in brackets, clustered by university for USR samples. *, **, indicate significance at the 5%
and 1% level respectively. Coefficients from the USR sample are for 2SLS with main controls, controls for field of study, but no
controls for region of work. Coefficients on occupational switching from in the NSGD sample include main controls, controls for
field of study, but no controls for region of work. Coefficients on all wage regressions include main controls, controls for field of
study, region of work, and industry.

39

Appendix Table 3: Occupational Switching by Field (USR, 1980-92)
dependent variable: occupational switch
Math/Comp

Physical

Architect

Engineer

Biology

Health

Social Serv.

Social Sci.

Business

Law

Educ

Arts

-0.143*
[0.054]

-0.051*
[0.022]

-0.141
[0.070]

-0.097**
[0.020]

-0.102**
[0.027]

-0.003
[0.012]

-0.076**
[0.020]

-0.102**
[0.028]

-0.031
[0.022]

-0.042*
[0.018]

-0.038
[0.054]

-0.205**
[0.066]

Main controls

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Observations

12,861

16,535

2,516

21,819

11,112

33,354

5,739

25,111

8,745

14,410

2,804

26,114

R2
Mean of dep.
variable

0.04

0.08

0.07

0.02

0.01

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.01

0.09

0.04

0.64

0.76

0.19

0.28

0.73

0.04

0.76

0.86

0.08

0.14

0.16

0.78

SCOT

Notes: Huber-White standard errors, clustered by university in brackets. * and ** indicate significance at the 5%, and 1% level respectively. Sample includes all students who
aimed to attain a first degree in England and Scotland with occupation data and were not pursing further studies. Dependent variable is defined as 1 if broad field of study at the
undergraduate level is different from the broad occupational field in the 1st year following degree and 0 otherwise. SCOT is defined as 1 for Scottish degree and 0 for English
degree. Main controls include sex, marital status, age, high school GPA, parent SES, and year fixed effects.

40

Appendix Table 4: Percentage Employment in Different Occupational Fields by Field of Study in 1980 BA Degree (USR)
ENGLAND
Occupational Field
Field of Study
Math/Comp
Physical Sci.

Architecture
Engineering
Biology
Health
Social Serv
Social Sci.
Business
Law
Education
Arts

unclassified

Math/Comp

Physical

Architect

Engineer

Bio

Health

Social Serv.

Social Sci.

Business

Law

Educ

Arts

2.7
6.8
10.0
5.8
12.0
0.3
11.0
13.2
3.9
2.0
5.9
16.6

38.3
11.2
0.2
2.6
3.9
0.1
2.9
3.0
3.3
0.2
0.8
1.6

7.2
31.3
1.5
7.1
25.8
2.2
1.3
0.6
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.1

0.1
0.8
57.1
1.1
0.4
0.0
0.2
1.6
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.1

5.7
9.8
0.0
71.3
0.8
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.8
0.1
0.3
0.1

0.0
0.3
0.2
0.1
3.4
0.2
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.1
0.9
0.0
0.2
5.0
94.4
7.6
0.9
0.2
0.1
5.6
1.5

0.8
1.1
0.2
0.5
1.4
0.1
24.2
2.5
0.3
0.5
2.2
2.2

0.4
2.5
0.4
0.3
2.3
1.0
4.1
6.0
0.9
1.8
0.0
4.0

27.9
18.6
28.6
8.9
25.8
1.0
23.6
47.5
87.6
11.8
7.0
26.5

0.1
0.6
0.2
0.1
0.4
0.0
1.0
2.5
0.4
81.8
0.3
1.5

15.8
14.6
0.9
1.5
17.4
0.6
21.4
18.8
1.9
0.9
76.9
34.7

0.8
1.3
0.7
0.6
1.5
0.1
2.0
3.4
0.3
0.7
0.8
11.3

SCOTLAND
Occupational Field
Field of Study
Math/Comp
Physical Sci.

Architecture
Engineering
Biology
Health
Social Serv.
Social Sci.
Business
Law
Education
Arts

unclassified

Math/Comp

Physical

Architect

Engineer

Bio

Health

Social Serv.

Social Sci.

Business

Law

Educ

Arts

1.6
6.5
10.1
4.3
14.6
0.0
13.1
9.6
2.7
1.1
6.6
12.8

49.8
7.4
0.9
2.1
1.7
0.0
5.0
2.7
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.8

6.2
31.7
0.0
5.7
24.9
0.5
2.3
0.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.3
74.3
0.3
0.9
0.0
0.5
3.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

2.3
14.8
0.9
74.1
0.9
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.0
0.3

0.0
0.9
0.0
0.0
3.5
0.1
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.3
0.0
0.2
4.7
97.4
4.5
0.7
0.9
0.2
19.7
0.9

0.0
0.0
1.8
0.2
1.2
0.0
26.7
4.5
0.0
0.4
0.8
2.2

0.4
0.6
1.8
0.3
3.1
0.9
2.7
8.4
0.0
1.3
0.0
4.5

24.1
15.1
10.1
9.9
25.2
0.8
28.5
44.6
94.7
8.7
4.9
24.5

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.9
1.3
0.6
88.1
0.0
0.9

15.6
21.5
0.0
2.9
17.9
0.2
14.5
19.6
0.3
0.0
68.0
38.8

0.0
0.9
0.0
0.0
1.2
0.1
1.4
3.9
0.3
0.0
0.0
14.3

41

Figure 1: Probability of Occupational Switching by Relative Return
to Match Quality

Figure 2: Expected Returns by Relative Return to Match Quality

Notes: All simulations are based on 5000 repetitions for k=2, N=21, μ=0, σ0=25, and σ=100. Early regimes are
characterized by nE=2; late regimes are characterized by nL=6. The relative returns to match quality are normalized by
taking β=(1-α) so that (α/β) goes from 0 to ∞ as α goes from 0 to 1. Expected wages are log wages determined
according to E(ln wj)=E(αθi + βsi) where si=[si/(N/k)]+μ are normalized skills.

42

Figure 3: Outcomes by Year of Graduation (USR sample)
Panel B: Change in Field of Study

Proportion

0

0

Proportion

1

.4

Panel A: Occupational Switching

70

75

80

85

90

95

70

75

80

Year

85

90

95

90

95

Year

Proportion

0

0

Proportion

.4

Panel D: Further Study

.2

Panel C: Unemployment

70

75

80

85

90

95

Year

70

75

80

85
Year

Notes: Closed and open circles represent England and Scotland averages respectively. Outcomes based on USR
samples of undergraduates from 1973-1993. Field switching is calculated with the broad classification (see Appendix
Table 1). Change of field of study is determined by students who receive a degree in a field different from the one they
applied for. Unemployment and Further study are during the 1st year following graduation.

43

0

Proportion of Occupational Switching

1

Figure 4: Changes in Major and Field Switching by University (USR)

0

.1

.2

.3

Proportion Changing Major

Notes: Closed and open circles represent English and Scottish university averages respectively. Outcomes based on
USR samples of undergraduates from 1973-1993. Field switching is calculated with the broad classification (see
Appendix Table 1). Change of field of study is determined by students who receive a degree in a field different from
the one they applied for.

44

