                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       WHEN SAFE PROVED RISKY:
         COMMERCIAL PAPER DURING THE FINANCIAL CRISIS OF 2007-2009

                                         Marcin Kacperczyk
                                          Philipp Schnabl

                                        Working Paper 15538
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15538


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2009




We would like to thank David Autor, Charles Jones, Andrei Shleifer, Timothy Taylor, and especially
Jeremy Stein for helpful discussions and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Marcin Kacperczyk and Philipp Schnabl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
When Safe Proved Risky: Commercial Paper During the Financial Crisis of 2007-2009
Marcin Kacperczyk and Philipp Schnabl
NBER Working Paper No. 15538
November 2009
JEL No. G01,G11,G2

                                              ABSTRACT

Commercial paper is one of the largest money market instruments and has long been viewed as a safe
haven for investors seeking low risk. However, during the financial crisis of 2007-2009, the commercial
paper market experienced twice the modern-day equivalent of a bank run with investors unwilling
to refinance maturing commercial paper. We analyze the supply of and demand for commercial paper
and show that, in contrast to previous turbulent episodes, the crisis centered on commercial paper issued
by, or guaranteed by, financial institutions. We describe the importance of Federal Reserve’s interventions
in restoring stability of the market. Finally, we propose three possible explanations for the sharp decline
of the commercial paper market: substitution to alternative sources of financing by commercial paper
issuers, adverse selection, and institutional constraints among money market funds.


Marcin Kacperczyk
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
KMC 9-190
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
mkacperc@stern.nyu.edu

Philipp Schnabl
Leonard N. Stern School of Business
Kaufman Management Center
44 West 4th Street, Room 9-76
New York, NY 10012
schnabl@stern.nyu.edu
       Commercial paper is a short-term debt instrument issued by large corporations.

For issuers, commercial paper is a way of raising capital cheaply at short-term interest

rates. For investors, commercial paper offers returns slightly higher than Treasury bills

in exchange for taking on minimal credit risk. At the beginning of 2007, commercial

paper was the largest U.S. short-term debt instrument with more than $1.97 trillion

outstanding. Most of the commercial paper was issued by the financial sector, which

accounted for 92 percent of all commercial paper outstanding.

       Commercial paper played a central role during the financial crisis of 2007-2009.

Before the crisis, market participants used to regard commercial paper as a safe asset due

to its short maturity and high credit rating. Two events changed this perception. The first

event began to unfold on July 31, 2007, when two Bear Stearns’ hedge funds that had

invested in subprime mortgages filed for bankruptcy. In the following week, other

investors also announced losses on subprime mortgages. On August 7, 2007, BNP

Paribas suspended withdrawals from its three investment funds because of its inability to

assess the value of the mortgages and other investment held by the funds. Given that

similar assets served as collateral for a specific category of commercial paper—asset-

backed commercial paper—many investors became reluctant to purchase asset-backed

commercial paper. The total value of asset-backed commercial paper outstanding fell by

37 percent, from $1.18 trillion in August 2007 to $745 billion in August 2008. Other

categories of commercial paper remained stable during this period.

       The second event occurred on September 16, 2008, when the Reserve Primary

Fund—a large money market fund with $65 billion of assets under management—

announced that it had suffered significant losses on its $785 million holdings of Lehman




                                            -1-
Brothers’ commercial paper. Instead of each of its shares being worth $1—a common

rule in the money market industry—the Reserve Fund announced its shares were worth

only 97 cents. In other words, the fund broke the buck—an occurrence that had

happened only once before in the history of money market funds. This news triggered

the modern-day equivalent of a bank run, leading to about $172 billion worth of

redemptions from the $3.45 trillion worth money market fund sector. The run stopped on

September 19, 2008—three days after it started—when the U.S. government announced

that it would provide deposit insurance to investments in money market funds. Even

though the announcement halted the run on money market funds, most funds nonetheless

reduced their holdings of all types of commercial paper because they deemed them too

risky. Within one month after the Reserve Fund’s announcement, the total value of

commercial paper outstanding fell by 15 percent, from $1.76 trillion to $1.43 trillion.

       To stop the sudden decline in commercial paper, the Federal Reserve decided—

for the first time in its history—to purchase commercial paper directly. The Federal

Reserve started purchasing commercial paper on October 26, 2008 and its action

promptly stabilized the market. By early January 2009, the Federal Reserve was the

single largest purchaser of commercial paper and owned paper worth $357 billion, or

22.4% of the market, through a variety of lending facilities. Throughout the year 2009,

the Federal Reserve steadily reduced its holdings and in October 2009 it held $40 billion

of commercial paper accounting for 3.4% of the market.

       In this paper, we analyze the commercial paper market during the financial crisis.

First, we describe the institutional background of the commercial paper market. Second,

we analyze the supply and demand sides of the market. Third, we examine the most




                                            -2-
important developments during the crisis of 2007-2009. Last, we discuss three

explanations of the decline in the commercial paper market: substitution to alternative

sources of financing by commercial paper issuers, adverse selection, and institutional

constraints among money market funds.




Basics of Commercial Paper

        In the United States, commercial paper has been an important source of financing

since the 19th century. According to the Securities Industry and Financial Markets

Association, in early 2007, total U.S. short-term debt financing, also referred to as money

market financing, accounted for approximately $5 trillion. Commercial paper was the

largest instrument in this market with more than $1.97 trillion outstanding. In turn, the

second-largest instrument was U.S. Treasury bill, which accounted for $940 billion

outstanding. Other important short-term debt instruments included time deposits,

repurchase agreements, short-term notes, and bankers’ acceptances.1

        Commercial paper is usually issued at a discount to a pre-determined face value,

which means that investors acquire commercial paper at a price below the face value and

receive the face value at maturity. The difference between the purchase price and the

face value is the discount—that is, the interest received on commercial paper. In

practice, the interest rate on commercial paper is a bit higher than the interest rate on


1
  The commercial paper market also exists in Europe, albeit the market is smaller. In January 2007,
according to Euroclear—a consortium of the main European securities depositories—total value of
commercial paper outstanding amounted to $691 billion. In many ways, the commercial paper market in
Europe is similar to that in the United States; the key difference, however, is that offerings are often
denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. Nevertheless, many large issuers are active in both
markets and issue simultaneously in Europe and in the United States. For the sake of brevity, we focus on
the commercial paper market in the United States though most of our analysis also applies to the
commercial paper market in Europe.


                                                   -3-
Treasury bills of the same maturity and a bit lower than the interest rate on loans of the

same maturity such as LIBOR (London Interbank Offered Rate), the benchmark interest

rate paid on short-term lending among large banks (Stigum and Crescenzi, 2007).

       Almost all commercial paper is rated by one or more nationally accredited rating

agencies like Moody’s, Standard & Poor’s, or Fitch. Commercial paper sold in the

market typically has the highest short-term rating as many market participants—either by

choice or by regulation—restrict their purchases to high-quality papers.

       Commercial paper is issued either via a dealer or directly by a corporation that

needs to raise capital. In August 2006, about 80 percent of commercial paper was issued

by dealers and the remaining 20 percent by corporations. Dealers charge fees of 5 to 12.5

basis points for issuing commercial paper; the fees vary according to the issuers’ credit

history, issuance size, and market conditions. Dealers typically advise issuers on pricing

and purchase positions that do not sell in the market (Stigum and Crescenzi, 2007).

       Most investors in commercial paper market purchase the paper at issuance and

hold it until maturity. Hence, there is little trading of commercial paper in secondary

markets. Instead, many investors continuously roll over maturing commercial paper,

which means that they purchase newly issued commercial paper from the same issuer

once their holdings of commercial paper mature. As a result, issuers usually refinance

the repayment of maturing commercial paper with newly issued commercial paper.

However, the need to roll over maturing commercial paper generates the risk that

investors may not be willing to refinance maturing commercial paper. This risk is often

called roll-over or liquidity risk. In this case, the issuer needs to find financing elsewhere

to repay maturing commercial paper.




                                             -4-
Supply Side of Commercial Paper

       From the perspective of a commercial paper issuer, one benefit of commercial

paper is that the issuer can avoid registration under the Securities Act of 1933, which is

the set of rules that requires any firm issuing securities to provide a description of the

company's properties and business, of the security itself, and of corporate management,

along with financial statements. Registration is generally considered an expensive and

lengthy process. The exemption from registration for commercial paper is usually based

on Section 3(a)(3) of the 1933 Securities Act, which requires commercial paper issuers to

satisfy three criteria. First, the maturity of commercial paper must not be more than 270

days. In practice, commercial paper typically has far shorter maturities—between 1 and

45 days—with an average maturity of about 30 days. Second, commercial paper must

not be targeted towards the general public. Hence, issuers of commercial paper cater to

institutional investors; usually offering large denominations of $100,000 or more. Third,

issuers of commercial paper must only use their proceeds from issuing commercial paper

to finance current assets such as receivables or inventory. In practice, this requirement

implies that firms need to demonstrate that they have sufficient scale of current

transactions to justify the size of their commercial paper programs (Hahn, Cook, and

Laroche, 1993).

       As an alternative to Section 3(a)(3), issuers can also claim an exemption from

registration under Section 4(2), which restricts the sale of commercial paper to accredited

investors and, in exchange, allows issuers to use the proceeds to finance long-term assets.

Issuers can also claim exemption under Section 3(a)(2), which requires commercial paper

to be fully supported by a bank guarantee (Fitch, 2001).




                                             -5-
           Depending on the issuer, there are three categories of commercial paper: asset-

backed, financial, and corporate commercial paper.2 Due to historical reasons, the last

two categories are sometimes simply referred to as commercial paper. To avoid

confusion, we use the term commercial paper only when we refer to all three categories at

once.

           Over the last two decades, the commercial paper market has grown substantially.

This growth was mostly spurred by the development of asset-backed commercial paper,

which was first issued in the 1980s. The total value of the commercial paper market in

1990 was $558 billion, of which 5.7 percent was asset-backed commercial paper, 59.9

percent was financial commercial paper, and 34.4 percent was corporate commercial

paper. In January 2007, the total value of commercial paper accounted for $1.97 trillion,

of which 56.8 percent was asset-backed commercial paper, 34.4 percent was financial

commercial paper, and 5.7 percent was corporate commercial paper.




Asset-backed Commercial Paper

           Asset-backed commercial paper is issued by off-balance sheet conduits of a large

financial institution, where off-balance sheet means that the assets and liabilities of the

conduit are not included on the financial institution’s balance sheet. However, the assets

are under the control of the financial institution in the sense that the conduit is a shell

company which is managed by the financial institution.

           Conduits typically hold diversified portfolios of financial assets. In the 1980s and

early 1990s, most conduits only invested in short-term and medium-term assets such as

2
    Corporate financial paper is also referred to as non-financial commercial paper.


                                                       -6-
trade receivables originated by their sponsoring financial institutions. During the late

1990s, some conduits started investing in long-term assets, including securitized assets

such as mortgage-backed securities. By the early 2000s, most conduits invested in long-

term assets, some of which were originated by the financial institutions’ own customers

and some of which were securitized assets originated by other financial institutions. As a

result of this investment strategy, conduits developed a maturity mismatch between the

long maturity of their assets and the short maturity of their asset-backed commercial

paper. This maturity mismatch exposed conduits to roll-over risk, the risk that investors

would stop refinancing the asset-backed commercial paper. The roll-over risk makes the

conduit riskier for outside investors because the conduit may go bankrupt if all investors

stop refinancing at the same time and the conduit cannot sell off its assets to repay

investors.

         To protect outside investors against roll-over risk, the financial institution which

manages the conduit typically provides credit guarantees to outside investors. Under

these credit guarantees, the financial institution promises to pay off maturing asset-

backed commercial paper in case the conduit is unable to do so. From an investor’s

perspective, the combination of credit guarantees and conduit’s assets substantially

reduces the default risk of asset-backed commercial paper (Moody’s Investors Service,

2003).

         Using data from credit rating agencies, Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2009)

show that, in January 2007, 296 conduits were authorized to issue asset-backed

commercial paper in the United States and Europe. The conduits were supported by a

total of 126 sponsoring financial institutions. Most sponsoring financial institutions were




                                              -7-
large commercial banks—based in the United States and Europe—many of which

sponsored more than one conduit. In total, commercial banks accounted for $903

billion—or 74.8 percent—of asset-backed commercial paper outstanding. For example,

the largest financial institution sponsoring conduits in the United States was Citigroup

with 16 conduits and $92.6 billion of asset-backed commercial paper outstanding. The

largest financial institution sponsoring conduits in Europe was the Dutch Bank ABN

Amro with 9 conduits and $68.6 billion of asset-backed commercial paper outstanding.

Besides commercial banks, large sponsors of conduits also included structured

investment groups ($182 billion), mortgage lenders ($72 billion), and other financial

institutions ($79 billion).

        About 74.1 percent of outstanding commercial paper was issued by conduits with

full credit guarantees. Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2009) show that full credit

guarantees are structured to avoid capital requirements required for assets held by banks

directly. They argue that the avoidance of capital requirements was an important driver

behind the growth of asset-backed commercial paper. An additional 18.4 percent of

outstanding commercial paper was issued by conduits with extendible notes guarantees.

Extendible notes guarantees are similar to full credit guarantees except that conduits can

extend the commercial paper’s maturity for a limited period of time. The remaining 7.5

percent was issued by structured investment vehicles, which are conduits that issue

longer-term debt in addition to asset-backed commercial paper. Credit guarantees of

structured investment vehicles typically cover asset-backed commercial paper, but not the

longer-maturity debt.




                                            -8-
Financial Commercial Paper

       Financial commercial paper is issued by large financial institutions. In contrast to

asset-backed commercial paper, financial commercial paper is issued by the institution

directly and not via a conduit. Also, financial commercial paper is unsecured and the

issuer does not pledge assets as collateral. Financial commercial paper is considered a

low-risk asset because of its short maturity and the fact that its issuers are large

institutions with strong balance sheets. If the balance sheet of an issuer deteriorates,

investors usually become reluctant to roll over maturing commercial paper and the issuer

has to exit the commercial paper market.

       The main issuers of financial paper are foreign financial institutions, accounting

for $455 billion of commercial paper in early 2007. Many foreign issuers are U.S.

subsidiaries of foreign banks, which are set up primarily to access the U.S. commercial

paper market. The two main U.S. issuers of financial commercial paper are captive

finance companies and bank-related finance companies. Captive finance companies are

subsidiaries of automobile companies or manufacturing companies that issue commercial

paper to secure financing for their parent companies (Fabozzi and Mann, 2005). In

January 2007, total liabilities of captive finance companies accounted for $1.87 trillion,

of which $165 billion was commercial paper. Some of the largest captive finance

companies issuing financial commercial paper are those owned by General Motors,

General Electric, and Toyota (Stigum and Crescenzi, 2007; Standard and Poor’s, 2009).

       Bank-related finance companies are funding subsidiaries of large bank holding

companies. Many bank holding companies use such funding subsidiaries to issue

commercial paper and pass the proceeds downstream into the bank. Bank holding




                                              -9-
companies choose such a structure because banks themselves are usually not allowed to

issue commercial paper. Some bank holding companies also issue commercial paper to

finance non-bank activities. In January 2007, total liabilities of bank holding companies

equaled $757 billion, of which $79 billion were in the form of commercial paper. Some

of the largest bank holding companies issuing financial paper are Citibank and American

Express (Saunders and Cornett, 2008; Standards and Poor’s, 2009).




Corporate Commercial Paper

         Corporate commercial paper is issued by non-financial businesses. In January

2007, total credit market debt of non-financial businesses was $9.16 trillion of which

$145 billion was commercial paper, accounting for 1.6 percent of total liabilities. Like

financial commercial paper, corporate commercial paper is unsecured and only large,

creditworthy firms with strong balance sheets can issue commercial paper. Most issuers

are in the largest size quintile of publicly traded corporations. For these firms,

commercial paper is an important source of financing, representing about 30 percent of

their current liabilities (Downing and Oliner, 2007). Among the main issuers of

corporate financial paper are General Electric and Coca-Cola (Standards and Poor’s,

2009).

         Historically, commercial paper issuers used the proceeds from issuance to cover

their short-term financing needs for working capital and inventory. Over time, many

issuers started rolling over maturing commercial paper at regular frequencies, thus

effectively financing a constant share of their activities via commercial paper. Kahl,




                                            -10-
Shivdasani, and Wang (2009) estimate that, on average, commercial paper borrowing

represents 36 percent of investment outlays among commercial paper issuers.




Demand Side of Commercial Paper

       Money market funds and mutual funds are the main investors in commercial

paper. In January 2007, money market funds and mutual funds owned commercial paper

worth $767 billion, or 31.4 percent of the market, according to the Federal Reserve Flow

of Funds data. Other important investor classes were foreign investors ($299 billion),

state and local governments ($205 billion), funding corporations ($198 billion), and non-

financial corporate businesses ($109 billion). Individual households own little

commercial paper directly, but they own commercial paper indirectly through their

ownership of money market funds and mutual funds.

       The dominant role of money market funds and mutual funds as commercial paper

investors is relatively new. Money market funds emerged in the 1970s as an alternative

to bank deposits that paid regulated interest rates below market-determined rates on

commercial paper. Over time, money market funds grew in size and totaled $2.4 trillion

at the start of 2007 (Federal Reserve Flow of Funds data).

       An important characteristic of money market funds is that, contrary to bank

deposits, investments in money market funds were not traditionally insured by the

government. Although money market funds seek to preserve the value of an investment

at $1.00 per share, it is possible that investors in money market funds can realize a loss

on their investments. The main risks faced by money market funds include changes in

interest rates and default on their investments (e.g., default on commercial paper).


                                            -11-
       To limit risks of money market fund investments, commercial paper holdings of

money market funds are regulated under Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act of

1940. Rule 2a-7 limits commercial paper holdings of money market funds to commercial

paper that carries either the highest or second-highest rating for short-term debt from at

least two of the nationally recognized credit rating agencies. Money market funds must

not hold more than 5 percent of their assets in securities of any individual issuer with the

highest rating and not more than 1 percent of their assets in securities of any individual

issuer. Also, holdings of securities with the second-highest rating must not exceed 5

percent of the funds’ assets. Notably, the rules requiring diversification reduce exposure

to idiosyncratic risk but cannot reduce exposure to systematic risk which affects all

commercial paper issuers at the same time.

       Importantly, these regulations prevent money market funds from purchasing long-

term assets such as mortgage-backed securities. However, the availability of asset-

backed commercial paper provided money market funds with an opportunity to invest in

such securities indirectly. In fact, some observers argue that the growth of the asset-

backed commercial paper market was fuelled by demand from money market funds,

which eventually spurred the rise in housing prices before the financial crisis. As a

result, the asset-backed commercial paper market enabled transforming short-term assets

into long-term assets—a function which is typically reserved for the financial institutions

operating under strict bank regulations.

       To analyze the importance of commercial paper for money market funds, we use

data provided by iMoneyNet. These data are the most comprehensive source of money

market funds’ asset holdings and, among others, cover all taxable money market funds,




                                            -12-
representing 84.5 percent of money market fund holdings. We focus on taxable money

market funds because non-taxable money market funds hold primarily tax-exempt

instruments issued by state and municipal governments.

       As of January 2007, there were 473 taxable money market funds holding assets

worth $1.95 trillion. About one-third of the funds were Treasury funds, which hold

almost exclusively government debt and government-backed agency debt. The other

two-thirds were prime funds that also invest in non-government assets such as

commercial paper. In January 2007, the largest asset class held by money market funds

was commercial paper, accounting for $634 billion or 32.5 percent of total asset holdings.

The other asset classes included government debt and government-backed agency debt

($585 billion), repurchase agreements ($390 billion), bank obligations ($297 billion), and

other assets ($45 billion).

       Most large money market funds are geared towards institutional investors. A

study by Moody’s Investor Service (2007a) shows that in January 2007, the largest 15

institutional prime funds accounted for a total of $459 billion worth of assets.

Institutional prime funds hold a large number of different money market instruments and

money market funds are therefore considered well diversified. Nevertheless, money

market funds are highly exposed to risks in the financial industry as whole. Assets

originated by the financial industry—measured as the total of financial commercial paper,

structured securities, bank obligations, and repurchase agreements—accounted for 91.4

percent of money market fund assets.




                                            -13-
Commercial Paper during the Financial Crisis

Commercial Paper and Financial Crisis in Historical Perspective

       Although the commercial paper market is generally a stable source of financing,

periodically there have been large and sudden declines in its size. The most prominent

example is the Penn Central’s failure (e.g., Calomiris, 1994; Calomiris, Himmelberg, and

Wachtel, 1995). In June 1970, the transportation company, Penn Central, declared

bankruptcy—the largest corporate bankruptcy up to that point—and as a result of its

bankruptcy defaulted on its commercial paper. Once Penn Central defaulted, investors

lost confidence in other non-financial commercial paper issuers and stopped refinancing

maturing commercial paper. Within three weeks of Penn Central’s bankruptcy, non-

financial commercial paper outstanding dropped by more than 9%, from $32 billion to

$29 billion. In response, the Federal Reserve responded by lending aggressively to banks

through the discount window, which alleviated liquidity constraints and stabilized the

market.

       After, and largely as a result of, the Penn Central’s failure non-financial issuers

started purchasing insurance against market-wide liquidity disruptions in the form of

backup loan commitments. Within a few years after the crisis, almost all non-financial

issuers held backup loan commitments covering 100 percent of outstanding commercial

paper. The loan commitments were issued by banks through which the Federal Reserve

had administered their lending during the crisis. This arrangement improved the safety of

the non-financial commercial paper market for two reasons. First, banks have access to

the discount window; second, banks typically experience deposit inflows during periods

of market-wide liquidity disruptions (Gatev and Strahan, 2006). However, the backup




                                            -14-
loan commitments increase the riskiness of the financial sector as a whole because the

risks of market-wide disruptions are effectively insured by the financial sector.

       Similar episodes of declines in the size of commercial paper market have occurred

since Penn Central. Typically in such cases, a single commercial paper issuer

experiences a negative shock which reduces investors’ confidence in other commercial

paper issuers. The common element of such episodes is that they appear suddenly and

lead to large, usually temporary contractions in the market size. For example, the failure

of the energy company Enron in 2001 raised concerns about the quality of financial

reporting and led to a sharp decline in outstanding corporate commercial paper.

However, an important difference between all such episodes, relative to the financial

crisis of 2007-2009, is that most of them concerned the non-financial commercial paper

market rather than the financial or the asset-backed commercial paper market.



Collapse of the Asset-backed Commercial Paper Market

       The decline in the asset-backed commercial paper market was triggered by the

crisis in the subprime mortgage market. Although delinquencies on subprime mortgages

had been rising through most of 2006, the financial crisis showed its first clear signs only

in summer 2007. On July 31, 2007, two Bear Stearns’s hedge funds that had invested in

subprime mortgages filed for bankruptcy. A third Bear Stearns’s hedge fund suspended

investors’ redemptions. In the following week, more news about delinquencies in

subprime mortgages hit the market. On August 7, 2007, BNP Paribas halted withdrawals

from its three investment funds and suspended calculation of their net asset values.




                                            -15-
       As a result of these announcements, investors in asset-backed commercial paper

became concerned that the collateral backing asset-backed commercial paper might be of

a lower quality than they initially thought. Consequently, many investors stopped

refinancing maturing commercial paper and within two days the spread on overnight

asset-backed commercial paper increased from a low 10 basis points to 150 basis points.

Because of the credit guarantees, sponsoring financial institutions had to provide liquidity

to pay off maturing asset-backed commercial paper. This obligation raised concerns

about counter-party risk among banks and caused inter-bank lending rates to shoot

upwards. The crisis in asset-backed commercial paper quickly spread across the financial

sector and affected banks worldwide (Acharya and Schnabl, 2009).

       As shown in Figure 1, from August 2007 to August 2008, the value of asset-

backed commercial paper outstanding fell by 33.1 percent, from $1.18 trillion to $789

billion. These numbers likely understate the actual decline in demand for asset-backed

commercial paper because credit guarantees often required sponsoring banks to directly

purchase asset-backed commercial paper.

       Even though asset-backed commercial paper outstanding decreased, issuance of

asset-backed commercial paper increased in late August 2007. As shown in Figure 2,

average daily issuance of asset-backed commercial paper increased from $71 billion in

early August 2007 to $106 billion in early September 2007. At the same time, however,

average maturity of asset-backed commercial paper decreased sufficiently to more than

offset the increase in issuance, thus resulting in an overall decline in commercial paper

market size. Figure 3 further shows that the spread between asset-backed commercial

paper and the Federal funds interest rate spiked up shortly after the crisis started. While




                                            -16-
in the year before the crisis the average spread equaled 3 basis points, in the year after the

crisis its value rose to 46 basis points.

        The decrease in outstanding asset-backed commercial paper, combined with the

increase in its spread, suggests that the decline was likely caused by a drop in demand

for, rather than supply of, asset-backed commercial paper. In line with this interpretation,

several money market funds reported that they had reduced their holdings of asset-backed

commercial paper to mitigate the risk of negative publicity, which could trigger

withdrawals by investors (Moody’s Investor Service, 2007b).

        Covitz, Liang, and Suarez (2009) show that conduits with the weakest credit

guarantees had the largest difficulties in rolling over their maturing asset-backed

commercial paper. For example, from July to December 2007, total asset-backed

commercial paper issued by structured investment vehicles fell from $84 billion to $15

billion. Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2009) further demonstrate that credit guarantees

covered almost all of the maturing asset-backed commercial paper and 97 percent of

asset-backed commercial paper was repaid at maturity or shortly thereafter. Issuers

defaulted only on 3 percent of asset-backed commercial paper outstanding. Hence, most

of the investment losses due to the fall in asset prices effectively remained contained with

the sponsoring financial institutions, not the investors in asset-backed commercial paper.

        Figures 1, 2, and 3 also illustrate that the events of August 2007 had little impact

on issuers of financial and corporate commercial paper. Those issuers continued rolling

over commercial paper at customary rates. For example, the spread of financial

commercial paper over the Federal funds rate remained at negative one basis point in the




                                            -17-
year before and the year after the crisis. The amount of non-asset backed commercial

paper outstanding remained stable at $980 billion in the year after the crisis.




Lehman’s Bankruptcy

       The second major negative shock in the commercial paper market was the default

of Lehman Brothers. In September 2008, many investors were surprised to learn that the

Reserve Primary Fund—one of the largest money market funds with more than $65

billion of assets under management—owned more than $785 million of Lehman’s

commercial paper. In fact, the founder of the Reserve Primary Fund, who had been one

of the pioneers of the money market industry, had publicly expressed the view that

money market funds should not invest in commercial paper because it was too risky. In

line with this view, until September 2005, the Reserve Primary Fund stated in its filings

with the Securities and Exchange Commission that the fund did not invest in commercial

paper. This commitment was abandoned in later filings and, from 2006 onwards, the

Reserve Primary Fund began acquiring significant amounts of commercial paper to boost

its performance (Stecklow and Gullappalli, 2008).

       The revelation of the Reserve Fund’s exposure to Lehman’s bankruptcy triggered

an immediate run on the fund. On September 16, 2008, the Reserve Primary Fund was

forced to pay out $10.8 billion in redemptions and faced about $28 billion of further

withdrawal requests. The run quickly spread to other money market funds with

commercial paper holdings. Our analysis based on iMoneyNet data shows that, within a

week, institutional investors reduced their investments in money market funds by more

than $172 billion. To stop the run on money market funds, on September 19, 2008, the



                                            -18-
U.S. Department of the Treasury announced a temporary deposit insurance covering all

money market investments. This announcement stopped the run on money market funds

and redemption requests promptly receded.

       Nonetheless, investors interpreted the Lehman’s bankruptcy as a signal that

commercial paper, issued and sponsored by financial institutions, was far riskier than

investors had previously thought. As Figure 1 indicates, financial commercial paper

outstanding dropped by 29.5 percent, from $806 billion on September 10, 2008 to $568

billion on October 22, 2008. Over the same time period, asset-backed commercial paper

outstanding dropped by a smaller 9.8 percent, from $741 billion to $668 billion. Also, as

Figure 2 indicates, even though the total value of issuances did not go to zero, one could

observe a significant jump in issuances which resulted from the replacement of long-term

commercial paper with the short-term one. The level of issuances has stabilized by the

end of 2008. Finally, the spreads of both asset-backed and financial paper significantly

increased, though the change for financial commercial paper was more temporary.

       Money market funds were a leading force in the decline of the commercial paper

market. Even though money market fund investments were considered safe because of

the newly introduced deposit insurance, money market funds themselves decided to

reduce their holdings of commercial paper. As shown in Figure 4, within one month after

Lehman’s bankruptcy, commercial paper holdings fell from 24.2 to 16.9 percent of

money market funds’ assets. To offset the decrease in commercial paper holdings,

money market funds expanded their holdings of government debt from 36.7 to 44.5

percent of asset holdings. This drastic change in asset holdings is often described as




                                           -19-
flight-to-quality, that is, an episode during which risk-averse investors, such as money

market funds, only want to hold assets of highest quality, such as government debt.




To the Rescue: Federal Reserve Interventions

       Both the collapse of the asset-backed commercial paper market and Lehman’s

bankruptcy triggered immediate responses by policymakers. The responses were largely

motivated by concerns about the impact of the commercial paper market on the real

economy. In particular, many financial intermediaries used commercial paper to finance

their lending activities and the difficulty to issue commercial paper sharply reduced their

abilities to provide loans to firms and individuals. The difficulties in the commercial

paper market also prompted non-financial corporations to draw on their back-up credit

lines, which further negatively affected financial intermediaries. Since the non-financial

sector accounted only for 20% of the commercial paper outstanding, the policy focus was

primarily on stabilizing the market for financial and asset-backed commercial paper.

       The policy interventions after the collapse of the asset-backed commercial market

were smaller in scale and scope than those after Lehman’s bankruptcy. The reason is that

the collapse of the asset-backed commercial market was viewed as a lack of liquidity—

that is, a lack of short-term financing—which could be remedied using conventional tools

of monetary policy such as providing collateralized loans via the discount window. In

contrast, Lehman’s bankruptcy was viewed as a lack of solvency—that is, a lack of

sufficient capital within the financial system to cover losses resulting from declines in

asset values—which required broader policy interventions such as setting up deposit




                                            -20-
insurance for money market funds, direct purchase of commercial paper, and capital

injections for financial institutions (e.g., Philippon and Schnabl, 2009).

        The Federal Reserve’s efforts to assure liquidity to banks, partly because of their

exposure to problems of the asset-backed commercial paper market, started on August 9,

2007. Over the following two days, the Federal Reserve used overnight repurchase

agreements worth a total of $62 billion to inject liquidity to the market so that banks

could cover their short-term financing needs (Cecchetti, 2008; Brunnermeier, 2009).3

(Repurchase agreements are collateralized loans used for bank borrowing.) The next

week, with conditions having deteriorated even further, the Federal Reserve reduced the

discount rate by 50 basis points and extended the maximum term for discount-window

loans to 30 days. On September 18, 2007, the Federal Reserve announced a new

initiative called the Term Auction Facility (TAF)—a lending program that provided loans

for a term of 28 to 35 days—longer than the usual discount-window practice. Over the

following months, the Federal Reserve lowered its target interest rate seven times,

totaling 325 basis points. In March 2008, the Fed increased the size of Term Auction

Facility and announced its intention to conduct a series of term repurchase transactions

totaling $100 billion. These transactions could be collateralized by a variety of securities,

including Treasury debt, agency debt, and agency mortgage-backed securities. The

Federal Reserve also extended liquidity provision to other financial institutions, for

example, allowing primary dealers (banks and securities broker-dealers allowed to trade

directly with the Federal Reserve System) to use mortgage-backed assets to borrow

overnight or for 28 days.

3
 On the same day, the European Central Bank also pumped 95 billion Euros in overnight lending into the
market—the largest loan in the bank’s history.


                                                 -21-
       These interventions seemed successful in improving financing conditions for

large financial firms. Even though the investment bank Bear Stearns failed in March

2008, its failure had little impact on the commercial paper market. By mid-2008, the

asset-backed commercial paper market had stabilized and larger conduits managed to

issue commercial paper. Also, financial companies and corporations were still able to

issue financial and corporate commercial paper.

       However, with the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers and the subsequent run on

money market funds, the situation in the commercial paper market worsened again.

Policy makers decided to roll out a number of new policy initiatives to contain the

situation. As mentioned above, the U.S. Treasury announced on September 19, 2008 that

the U.S. government would temporarily guarantee assets of money market funds. Since

the guarantee did not stop the decline in the commercial paper market outstanding, the

Federal Reserve announced several other initiatives to support the commercial paper

market directly. On September 18, 2008, it announced a new lending program called

Asset-backed commercial paper Money market mutual fund Liquidity Facility (AMLF).

The AMLF—administered by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston—was supposed to

provide loans to commercial banks so that they could purchase high-quality asset-backed

commercial paper from money market funds. These are non-recourse loans, that is, if the

asset-backed commercial paper defaults, the Federal Reserve takes over the commercial

paper instead of requiring repayment of the loan. As shown in Figure 5, AMLF started

buying commercial paper on September 24 and its first two weeks of activity amounted

to approximately $150 billion worth of purchases. Over time, AMLF lowered its

purchases and reduced its holdings almost to zero by October 2009.




                                           -22-
          On October 7, 2008, the Federal Reserve announced that, in addition to buying

through AMLF, it would purchase three-month commercial paper directly from eligible

issuers through the Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF). Only U.S. issuers of

commercial paper, including U.S. issuers with a foreign parent, were eligible to sell

commercial paper to this facility. The interest rate on corporate and financial commercial

paper was the three-month overnight indexed swap rate—a standard measure of

borrowing costs in money markets—plus 200 basis points. Likewise, the interest rate on

asset-backed commercial paper was the overnight indexed swap rate plus 300 basis

points.

          As shown in Figure 5, CPFF stared purchasing commercial paper on October 26,

2008. The impact of these purchases on the size and spreads of the commercial paper

market is immediately apparent in Figure 1 and Figure 3. The value of financial

commercial paper outstanding came back to its pre-crisis level. Also, the spreads on all

types of commercial paper significantly decreased. By the end of 2008, the total value of

commercial paper purchased under CPFF program equaled $335 billion dollars, out of

which one-third was ABCP. As a result, the Federal Reserve was the single largest buyer

of commercial paper (Federal Reserve Bank of NY, 2008). Initially, the program only

purchased assets with maturities over 15 days and only from January 2009 it expanded to

shorter-maturity assets. Also, like with AMLF, the value of assets purchased under CPFF

has been gradually declining and reached about $40 billion dollars in October, 2009 (see

Figure 5).

          On October 21, 2008, the Federal Reserve announced another lending program—

the Money Market Investor Funding Facility (MMIFF) —intended to complement




                                            -23-
AMLF. Similar to AMLF, the new program was supposed to provide non-recourse loans

to money market funds. The main difference was that it was restricted to money market

instruments other than asset-backed commercial paper, such as certificates of deposit,

bank notes, and financial and corporate commercial paper. The New York Fed began

funding eligible money market instruments under this program on November 24, 2008.

However, the facility never took off and, as of October 2009, it has not provided a single

loan to money market funds.




Why Did the Commercial Paper Market Collapse?

       We discuss three possible explanations for the collapse of the commercial paper

market: substitution to other sources of financing, adverse selection, and institutional

constraints faced by money market funds. These explanations are not mutually exclusive,

and we present evidence in favor of each of the explanations.




Substitution to Other Sources of Financing

       One possible reason for the decline in commercial paper is that buyers of

commercial paper, such as money market funds, learned during the financial crisis that

commercial paper was riskier than they initially thought and therefore they revised

upwards their expectations about the likelihood of commercial paper’s default. For

example, investors learned that asset-backed commercial paper was collateralized by

assets for which liquidity in the secondary market could suddenly disappear. With

Lehman’s bankruptcy, investors in commercial paper learned that even large financial

institutions could collapse overnight, causing the default of supposedly safe commercial


                                            -24-
paper. As a result, investors required higher return to compensate them for bearing more

risk, which substantially raised the cost of commercial paper funding.

       Also, before the financial crisis, most investors believed that commercial paper

almost never defaults and therefore had little incentives to invest in information gathering

about issuers of commercial paper. Such poor information-gathering incentives can

manifest themselves, for example, in low levels of funds’ portfolio concentrations (e.g.,

Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng, 2005; Kacperczyk, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp,

2009). This behavior seemed to have taken place among money market funds as most of

them held commercial paper from 50 or more issuers, in addition to holding other money

market instruments. However, during the crisis, investors decided to invest more

resources in information-gathering activities because the value of commercial paper was

more sensitive to new information. As a result, the spread on commercial paper

increased to compensate investors for the increase in costs of information gathering. This

effect is likely to be particularly strong in the short run as investors need some time to

adjust to the new market environment.

       As a result of the higher costs of commercial paper, some issuers of commercial

paper were forced to consider substitution to other sources of financing. In the case of

the collapse of the asset-backed commercial paper market, the primary sources of

alternative financing were the sponsoring financial institutions. The sponsoring financial

institutions were required to repurchase the assets from conduits in case investors were

unwilling to refinance maturing asset-backed commercial paper. Hence, sponsoring

financial institutions used other sources of financing, such as bank deposits, certificates




                                            -25-
of deposits, or even financial commercial paper to replace financing from the asset-

backed commercial paper market.

       In the period following Lehman’s bankruptcy in September 2008, the situation

was different. In this episode, the decline in asset-backed commercial paper looked much

as it had in fall of 2007. However, the impact on financial institutions was stronger

because—in addition to the financing requirements from conduits—financial institutions

themselves were unable to issue financial commercial paper. Other short-term funding,

such as repurchase agreements, also became unavailable at that time. Hence, many

financial institutions faced severe liquidity problems, which eventually prompted the

large-scale interventions by the Federal Reserve.

       The effect on corporate commercial paper was less severe, but several issuers

switched to alternative long-term financing, mostly as a response to growing uncertainty

regarding commercial paper market. For example, on March 3, 2009, Coca Cola

announced that it had sold $0.9 billion of five-year and $1.35 billion of ten-year notes to

repay its maturing commercial paper. In the process, it agreed to pay 4.875 percent to

replace short-term debt with an average yield of 0.41 percent. This swap amounted to

about $48 million in extra annual interest on every $1 billion borrowed and used to

replace commercial paper. Similarly, in February 2009, the largest U.S. health insurer by

enrollment—WellPoint—sold $1 billion of five-year and ten-year notes at rates as high as

7 percent to repay its commercial paper with an average yield of about 2 percent. Also,

General Electric Co. cut its financing arm’s commercial paper borrowing by about a

third, to $60 billion as part of a plan to reduce its overall debt (Keogh, Detrixhe, and




                                            -26-
Coppola, 2009). Overall, the substitution to other debt market’s instruments can explain

a fair share of the decline in commercial paper funding, but probably not all of it.




Adverse Selection

       During the financial crisis, many issuers found themselves unable to issue any

commercial paper at all, independent of the interest rate offered. For example, during the

decline in asset-backed commercial paper, Moody’s Investor Services (2007b) reported

that “… programs [conduits] found it difficult or impossible to issue commercial paper”

and that “…issuing paper at longer maturities was unavailable.” Similarly, after the

Lehman’s bankruptcy, the Wall Street Journal reported that “… the [commercial paper]

market all but froze” (Mollenkamp, Whitehouse, Hilsenrath, and Dugan, 2009).

       One possible explanation for the sharp decline in the market size is adverse

selection between commercial paper’s issuers and investors. Suppose that the highest-

quality issuers left the commercial paper market because interest rates go up. This may

happen if such issuers could obtain financing most easily and cheaply elsewhere. As a

result, the average quality of the remaining issuers of commercial paper would decrease

and assuming that investors could not tell quality difference between the remaining

issuers they would further increase their required interest rates further, which would then

prompt even more issuers to drop out. If this cycle continued, it could lead to a complete

market freeze (Akerlof, 1970).

       It is surely plausible that adverse selection can explain some of the decline in the

commercial paper market; nonetheless, it is difficult to test for its presence in the

commercial paper market because adverse selection primarily amplifies existing



                                             -27-
substitution to other sources of financing. Notably, Covitz, Liang, and Suarez (2009)

analyze the type of asset-backed commercial paper issuers that were leaving the

commercial paper market. They find that in the first weeks of the 2007 crisis, almost all

issuers were affected by the difficulties in issuing such paper. Over time, however, it was

mostly the weaker conduits—as measured by the strength of the credit guarantees

provided by their sponsors—that left the market. Assuming that unobservable quality

measures are positively correlated with observable quality measures, this finding would

suggest that adverse selection was less important, especially during the later weeks of the

crisis in 2007.

       In comparison, preliminary results using data on commercial paper outstanding

around Lehman’s bankruptcy suggest that adverse selection was more important in 2008.

In our own work, we find that financial institutions with large drops in their share prices

continued to issue commercial paper after Lehman’s bankruptcy, while financial

institutions with stable share prices reduced or stopped issuing commercial paper.

Assuming that the decline in share prices is a good proxy for a financial institution’s

quality, this finding suggests that adverse selection may have amplified the decline in

commercial paper outstanding in 2008.




Institutional Constraints

       Money market funds are supposed to invest only in low-risk securities, and once a

security no longer fits into that category, money market funds stop buying that security.

This kind of constraint offers an alternative explanation for the decline in commercial

paper holdings by a group of institutional investors. Moreover, if other investors face



                                            -28-
fixed costs of entry into a given market—for example, because they have to invest in

technology and personnel to manage commercial paper investments—then a decrease in

demand by money market funds may not be offset by demand from other investors.

       Before the financial crisis many investors in money market funds paid little

attention to the holdings of their funds and instead relied on credit ratings to ensure that

money market funds invested in safe assts. Over time, as money market investors

searched for higher yields, money market funds responded by increasing their holdings of

commercial paper because commercial paper offered higher yields than Treasuries. After

the contraction of the asset-backed commercial paper market in 2007, money market

funds stopped rolling over asset-backed commercial paper because it became too risky.

For the same reason, money market funds stopped rolling over both asset-backed and

financial commercial paper after Lehman’s bankruptcy. This decrease in demand by

money market funds surely contributed to the decline in commercial paper.

       Overall, the decline in commercial paper from 2007 to 2009 probably arose

because the financial crisis triggered a reassessment of riskiness of commercial paper,

which then prompted issuers to substitute to other sources of financing. Adverse

selection and institutional constraints probably amplified this effect. More research needs

to be done to quantify the importance and the interactions of these explanations.




Conclusion

       The commercial paper market has long been viewed as a bastion of high liquidity

and low risk. But twice during the financial crisis of 2007-2009, the commercial paper

market nearly dried up, and ceased being perceived as a safe haven. Major interventions



                                             -29-
by the Federal Reserve, including large outright purchases of commercial paper, were

eventually used to support both issuers of and investors in commercial paper.

       Even though the commercial paper market has experienced a few disruptions in

the past, the financial crisis of 2007-2009 was by far the largest decline in commercial

paper, and in contrast to previous turbulent episodes, it mostly affected commercial paper

issued by financial institutions. This crisis has also shown that the Federal Reserve is

likely to respond aggressively to such a sudden decline of the commercial paper market.

In fact, the scale of the Federal Reserve’s response was unprecedented—including a

blanket guarantee of money market investment worth $3 trillion and direct purchases of

commercial paper of up to $370 billion. Such large-scale market interventions raise

concerns about future moral hazard of commercial paper issuers, independent of whether

these guarantees will remain implicit or not. Financial regulation will need to address the

negative incentives generated by the expectation of future government interventions,

either by directly regulating the risk of commercial paper issuers or by charging issuers

for the insurance provided by the government.

       The commercial paper market is far from being fully restored. At the time of our

writing, the Federal Reserve is still in the process of unwinding its purchases of

commercial paper, the amount of commercial paper outstanding is still quite low, and

ABCP spreads are still at their historical highs. Issuers of commercial paper will

remember for some time how commercial paper was much riskier than they had

originally believed. Investors in commercial paper will remember for some time that

commercial paper turned out to be much riskier than they had thought. The high level of




                                            -30-
skepticism on both sides of the market for commercial paper suggests that the market will

probably dwindle relative to its size before the financial crisis.




                                             -31-
References

Akerlof, George, 1970, “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty of the Market
Mechanism”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 84(3), pp. 488-500

Acharya, Viral, Philipp Schnabl, and Gustavo Suarez, 2009, “Securitization without Risk
Transfer”, Working Paper

Acharya, Viral and Philipp Schnabl, 2009, “Do Global Banks Spread Global Imbalances?
The Case of Asset-backed Commercial Paper during the Financial Crisis of 2007 to
2009”, Working Paper

Brunnermeier, Markus, 2009, “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-08”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(1), pp. 77-110

Calomiris, Charles, 1994, “Is the Discount Window Necessary? A Penn-Central
Perspective," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, May-June 1994, pp. 31-55

Calomiris, Charles, Charles Himmelberg and Paul Wachtel, 1995, "Commercial Paper,
Corporate Finance, and the Business Cycle: A Microeconomic Approach”, Carnegie-
Rochester Series on Public Policy, 42, pp. 203-250.

Cecchetti, Stephen, 2008, “Crisis and Responses: The Federal Reserve in the Early States
of the Financial Crisis”, Journal of Economics Perspectives 23(1), pp. 51-75

Covitz, Dan, Nellie Liang, and Gustavo Suarez, 2009, “The Anatomy of a Financial
Crisis: The Evolution of Runs in the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Market”, Working
Paper

Downing, Chris and Stephen Oliner, 2007, “The Term Structure of Commercial Paper
Rates”, Journal of Financial Economics 83, pp. 59-86

Fabozzi, Frank and Steven Mann, 2005, “The Handbook of Fixed Income Securities”,
McGraw-Hill Professionals

Federal Reserve Bank of NY, 2008, “Commercial Paper Funding Facility LLC”

FitchRatings, 2001, “Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Explained”, Asset-Backed Criteria
Report

Gatev, Evan and Phillip Strahan, 2006, “Banks’ advantage in supplying liquidity: theory
and evidence from the commercial paper market”, Journal of Finance 61(2), 867-92

Hahn, Thomas, Timothy Cook, and Robert Laroche, 1993, “Commercial Paper”, Chapter
9, in: Instruments of the Money Market. Richmond, VA: Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond, pp. 106-107



                                          -32-
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2005, “On the Industry
Concentration of Actively Managed Equity Mutual Funds”, Journal of Finance 60(4), pp.
1983-2011

Kacperczyk, Marcin, Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, and Laura Veldkamp, 2009, “Attention
Allocation over the Business Cycle”, NBER Working Paper 15450

Kahl, Matthias, Anil Shivdasani, and Yihui Wang, 2009, “Do Firms Use Commercial
Paper to Enhance Financial Stability”, Working Paper

Keogh, Bryan, John Detrixhe, and Gabrielle Coppola, 2009, “Coca-Cola Flees
Commercial Paper for Safety in Bonds”, Bloomberg, March 17

Mollenkamp, Carrick, Mark Whitehouse, Jon Hilsenrath, and Ianthe Dugan, 2009,
“Lehman's Demise Triggered Cash Crunch Around Globe – Decision to Let Firm Fail
Marked a Turning Point in Crisis”, Wall Street Journal, September 29

Moody’s Investor Service, 2003, “The Fundamentals of Asset-Backed Commercial
Paper”, Special Report

Moody’s Investor Service, 2007a, “Portfolio Management Activities of Large Prime
Institutional Money Market Funds”, Special Report

Moody’s Investor Service, 2007b, “2007 Review and 2008 Outlook: US Asset-Backed
Commercial Paper”, Special Report

Philippon, Thomas and Philipp Schnabl, 2009, “Efficient Recapitalization”, NBER
Working Paper 14929

Saunders, Anthony and Marcia Cornett, 2008, Financial Institutions Management: A Risk
Management Approach, New York, McGraw-Hill

Stecklow, Steve and Diya Gullapalli, 2008, “A Money-Fund Manger’s Fateful Shift”,
Wall Street Journal, December 8

Standard and Poor’s, 2009, “S&P Commercial Paper Index”, FactSheet
U.S. Department of Treasury, 2008, “Treasury Announces Temporary Guarantee
Program for Money Market Funds”, Press Release, September 29

Stigum, Marcia and Anthony Crescenzi, 2007, “Stigum’s Money Market”, 4th edition,
New York, McGraw-Hill




                                        -33-
                                                                           Figure 1
                                                    Commercial Paper Outstanding: January 2004- October 2009
                                                                              ABCP Market                   Lehman's
                                    1,200
                                                                              Collapse                      Bankruptcy


                                    1,000



                                     800
  Paper Outstanding (in billions)




                                     600



                                     400



                                     200



                                       0
                                      1/7/2004   1/7/2005         1/7/2006           1/7/2007        1/7/2008            1/7/2009

                                                               Asset‐backed     Financial       Corporate

Note: Weekly commercial paper outstanding based on Federal Reserve Board data.




                                                                              -34-
                                                                  Figure 2
                                            Commercial Paper Issuances: January 2004- October 2009
                                120
                                                                                ABCP Market               Lehman's
                                                                                Collapse                  Bankruptcy

                                100



                                80
   Paper Issued (in billions)




                                60



                                40



                                20



                                  0
                                 1/2/2004   1/2/2005        1/2/2006              1/2/2007         1/2/2008            1/2/2009

                                                          Asset‐backed          Financial     Corporate

Note: Five-day rolling-window average of issuances based on Federal Reserve Board data.




                                                                         -35-
                                                                  Figure 3
                                          Overnight Commercial Paper Spreads (net of Fed Funds Rate):
                                                        January 2004-October 2009
                            350
                                                                       ABCP Market             Lehman's
                                                                       Collapse                Bankruptcy
                            300


                            250


                            200
 Spread (in basis points)




                            150


                            100


                             50


                              0


                            ‐50
                             1/8/2004   1/8/2005        1/8/2006            1/8/2007        1/8/2008        1/8/2009

                                                      Asset‐backed      Financial      Corporate

Note: Five-day rolling-window average based on Federal Reserve Board and New York Federal Reserve data.




                                                                     -36-
                                                                                                                                         Share (in percent)




                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                    25
                                                                                                                                           30
                                                                                                                                                     35
                                                                                                                                                              40
                                                                                                                                                                   45
                                                                                                                                                                                      50
                                                                                                              2‐Jan‐04
                                                                                                              2‐Mar‐04
                                                                                                              2‐May‐04
                                                                                                               2‐Jul‐04
                                                                                                              2‐Sep‐04
                                                                                                              2‐Nov‐04
                                                                                                              2‐Jan‐05
                                                                                                              2‐Mar‐05
                                                                                                              2‐May‐05
                                                                                                               2‐Jul‐05
                                                                                                              2‐Sep‐05




                                                                                           Treasury
                                                                                                              2‐Nov‐05
                                                                                                              2‐Jan‐06
                                                                                                              2‐Mar‐06
                                                                                                              2‐May‐06




-37-
                                                                                                               2‐Jul‐06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 4




                                                                                                              2‐Sep‐06


                                                                                           Commercial Paper
                                                                                                              2‐Nov‐06
                                                                                                              2‐Jan‐07
                                                                                                              2‐Mar‐07
                                                                                                                                                                        Collapse




                                                                                                              2‐May‐07
       Note: Authors’ own analysis using iMoneyNet data on money market funds’ holdings.
                                                                                           Other




                                                                                                               2‐Jul‐07
                                                                                                                                                                        ABCP Market




                                                                                                              2‐Sep‐07
                                                                                                              2‐Nov‐07
                                                                                                              2‐Jan‐08
                                                                                                              2‐Mar‐08
                                                                                                                                                                                           Money Market Funds’ Asset Shares in Total Holdings: January 2004- December 2008




                                                                                                              2‐May‐08
                                                                                                               2‐Jul‐08
                                                                                                                                                                         Lehman's
                                                                                                                                                                         Bankruptcy




                                                                                                              2‐Sep‐08
                                                                                                              2‐Nov‐08
                                                                                            Figure 5
                                                                 Holdings of Fed Funding Facilities: September 2008- October 2009
                                         400                                                                                        25.0%


                                         350

                                                                                                                                    20.0%
                                         300




                                                                                                                                            Federal Reserve Share of Market Total
Federal Reserve Holdings (in billions)




                                         250
                                                                                                                                    15.0%


                                         200


                                                                                                                                    10.0%
                                         150


                                         100
                                                                                                                                    5.0%

                                          50


                                           0                                                                                        0.0%




                                                                                     CPFF        AMLF         Fed Share
                                         Note: Based on Federal Reserve Board and New York Federal Reserve.




                                                                                                -38-
