                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      URBAN ECONOMICS AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP

                                          Edward L. Glaeser
                                          Stuart S. Rosenthal
                                          William C. Strange

                                         Working Paper 15536
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15536


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2009




The Kauffman Foundation supported this paper and all of the essays in this issue. In addition, we
are grateful to the Marcel Desautels Centre for Integrative Thinking and the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council of Canada for research support. We also thank Kristina Tobio and Jiashuo Feng
for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Edward L. Glaeser, Stuart S. Rosenthal, and William C. Strange. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Urban Economics and Entrepreneurship
Edward L. Glaeser, Stuart S. Rosenthal, and William C. Strange
NBER Working Paper No. 15536
November 2009
JEL No. J23,L26,M13,O31,R30

                                            ABSTRACT

Research on entrepreneurship often examines the local dimensions of new business formation. The
local environment influences the choices of entrepreneurs; entrepreneurial success influences the local
economy. Yet modern urban economics has paid relatively little attention to entrepreneurs. This essay
introduces a special issue of Journal of Urban Economics dedicated to the geography of entrepreneurship.
The paper frames the core questions facing researchers interested in assessing the local causes and
consequences of entrepreneurship, perturbs a core urban model to incorporate entrepreneurship, and
concludes by offering an agenda for future work on the spatial aspects of entrepreneurship.


Edward L. Glaeser                                  William C. Strange
Department of Economics                            Rotman School of Management
315A Littauer Center                               University of Toronto
Harvard University                                 105 St. George St.
Cambridge, MA 02138                                Toronto, ON M5S3E6
and NBER                                           CANADA
eglaeser@harvard.edu                               wstrange@rotman.utoronto.ca

Stuart S. Rosenthal
Syracuse University
Department of Economics
426 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
ssrosent@maxwell.syr.edu
I.       Introduction


        Can the economic history of Detroit be told without Henry Ford and Alfred
Sloan? Would Ford have achieved the same success if he had worked in Houston?
Would Silicon Valley have experienced its remarkable growth without Frederick Terman
and William Shockley? Entrepreneurs often seem to have been significantly influenced
by features of their local economies, and they have often influenced the fates of those
economies. Yet, urban economists have only infrequently looked directly at the local
causes and consequences of entrepreneurship.
        Urban economists have not been alone in paying little attention to entrepreneurs.
This is a common feature of economic research after World War II. The general
equilibrium models that came to dominate economics had little room for the
idiosyncrasies of the individuals who started firms. The primary role that Schumpeter
(1934) had assigned to entrepreneurs was largely ignored by mainstream economic
theory. Empirical economists focused more on aggregates and on patterns that held
throughout the economy. But over the past decade, entrepreneurship has become an
increasingly established field that has tried to understand business innovators. This
special issue of the Journal of Urban Economics brings together papers that specifically
focus on the local dimensions of entrepreneurship.
        While there has been relatively little formal work on cities and entrepreneurship,
the papers in this volume do not come out of a vacuum. Some urban economists,
notably Vernon and Chinitz, wrote directly about entrepreneurship (i.e., Vernon, 1960;
Chinitz, 1961). Moreover, urbanists from outside of economics, like Jacobs (1969) and
Saxenian (1994), have had important insights about the local roots of entrepreneurship.
In addition, some of the canonical work in urban economics can be interpreted as having
an entrepreneurial dimension. For example, in this paper, we will discuss the
entrepreneurial aspects of urban economic research on agglomeration in general and on
New Economic Geography (NEG) in particular. 1



1
 Research in agglomeration is surveyed by Duranton and Puga (2004), Rosenthal and Strange (2004),
while NEG is surveyed by Fujita et al (1999) and Ottaviano and Thisse (2004).

                                                                                                    1
           Section II of this essay reviews the role of entrepreneurship in urban economics.
Since entrepreneurship has many dimensions, we begin by discussing the definition of
entrepreneurship. We then turn to early urbanists, who promoted a number of ideas about
entrepreneurship that can help systematize research in this area. Perhaps the most
important idea is that entrepreneurship is important for urban success. Smith (1776) and
Marshall (1920) both seemed to share this view, and it is the central lesson of the work of
Chinitz and Vernon. While this idea may now be a consensus opinion, there is still
surprisingly little statistical work that bears it out.
           The other ideas relate to the reasons that different places spawn different levels of
entrepreneurship. It is not at all surprising that economists have linked the level of
entrepreneurship to the returns to entrepreneurship: the supply of entrepreneurship slopes
up. While this idea has been around since Smith, there has been little work actually
measuring the response of entrepreneurship to these financial incentives. One version of
this idea, properly credited to Smith himself, is that large cities have more demand for
specialized products which makes them particularly attractive places for start-ups
creating new products. 2 This naturally moves the equilibrium up the entrepreneurial
supply curve.
           It is also not surprising that economists have looked for shifters of the
entrepreneurial supply function. There are many local characteristics that might be
responsible for such shifts. Chinitz, Marshall and others emphasized that the level of
entrepreneurship is related to the supply of inputs needed by entrepreneurs, including
material inputs, skilled labor and financing. Chinitz and Marshall both also emphasized
the spread of knowledge as forces that could encourage entrepreneurship. And the list of
entrepreneurial supply shifters should also include political and cultural forces, as well as
natural advantage.
           In Section III, we present a brief urban model that incorporates entrepreneurship.
We work with the production and consumption assumptions of Krugman (1991), a model
that shares important features with Abdel-Rahman (1988), Fujita (1988), Rivera-Batiz
(1988). We share with Rivera-Batiz (1988) the focus on a single small city in a large



2
    See also Duranton and Puga (2001), Duranton and Jayet (2009), and Waldfogel (2009) for related work.

                                                                                                           2
open economy. The key formal results in this section document both the impact that
entrepreneurs on local success and also the local factors that influence entrepreneurship.
        Section IV then uses this framework of the causes and consequences of
entrepreneurship to categorize the papers in this issue and relate them to other recent
research on entrepreneurship. Many of the papers here pay particularly close attention to
the supply of entrepreneurial people across space. Fewer touch on the effects of
entrepreneurship or the link between entrepreneurship and the returns to entrepreneurial
activity. Section V concludes and sets out the major questions for future research.


II.     Entrepreneurship in urban economics


        What is an entrepreneur? Webster’s Dictionary (1970, p. 467) defines an
entrepreneur as, “A person who organizes and manages a business undertaking, assuming
the risk for the sake of profit.” 3
        There are several distinct economic aspects of entrepreneurship. One is that that
entrepreneurs are their own bosses. In this conception of entrepreneurship, entrepreneurs
are self-employed. However, this approach misses the proprietary aspect of
entrepreneurship; entrepreneurs can also be thought of as owners, willing to assume risk
in exchange for returns (Cantillon, 1931; Knight, 1921). At least initially, the firms that
entrepreneurs create are small, so another dimension of entrepreneurship is its role in
small business. But entrepreneurship is not simply about a choice of occupation or about
ownership, it is also fundamentally dynamic. Thus, entrepreneurs can also be conceived
of as being the creators of new firms, and the study of entrepreneurship is the study of
entry. In this view, entrepreneurs are agents of change. That view leads to yet another
possible conception of entrepreneurs as innovators, agents of transformative change
(Schumpeter, 1939), and not simply entrants in a market that is fundamentally the same
year after year. There are, thus, five facets of entrepreneurship: self-employment, small
firms, ownership, entry, and innovation. 4


3
  Classical economists often used the word “undertaker” to mean essentially the same thing. The
alternative meaning of that word has caused it to disappear from use in the twentieth century.
4
  All of these aspects of entrepreneurship involve the entrepreneur exercising judgment, a point made by
Casson (1982).

                                                                                                           3
        Since all of these facets of entrepreneurship are important, it would be a mistake
to take the overly narrow view that an entrepreneur must have all of the five
characteristics listed above. Examining the various aspects of entrepreneurship is
logically sensible, and the overly narrow definition excludes important activities. In the
non-profit sector, for instance, entrepreneurs often cede ownership over the enterprise to
an external board. In the for profit sector, shares are typically sold to outsiders, which, in
principle, could lead to a separation of ownership and control. Entrepreneurs can also in
some cases work for someone else. For example, Michael Porter is both an employee of
Harvard University and a management consulting entrepreneur, as well as being a scholar
of entrepreneurship.
        Measuring these aspects of entrepreneurship is often difficult. In a sense, every
self-employed person is something of an entrepreneur, but using the self-employment rate
to capture the level of entrepreneurship does no weighting for the size of enterprises, or
the level of risk and innovation. After all, many of the self-employed own nothing but
their own human capital.     Measuring entrepreneurship instead with the number of newly
established firms does better at capturing size. At least initially, the firms that
entrepreneurs create are small, so in some cases, entrepreneurship is empirically linked to
an abundance of small firms. However, some conceptions of entrepreneurs conceive of
the entrepreneur as being more than just another business owner. In this view, true
entrepreneurs do more than just open another hot dog stand, they actually do something
new. All of this means that it is difficult for the researcher to capture all of the
potentially relevant aspects of entrepreneurship.
        The history of the Journal of Urban Economics allows us to look quantitatively at
the history of the entrepreneurship research in urban economics. An electronic search
brings up the word “entrepreneur” in 57 distinct articles in the Journal of Urban
Economics. 21 of these articles were prior to 1990. In many cases, the word
entrepreneur occurs only once, often in the citation list. The pre-1990 articles that
discuss entrepreneurs at any length generally focus on entrepreneurs who either build
housing or create entire cities, as in Henderson (1985). In the 1970s and 1980s, Journal
of Urban Economics published only two articles that focused primarily on private sector,
non-housing related entrepreneurship (Bates, 1978, Sveikauskas, 1979). The situation is

                                                                                             4
similar at Regional Science and Urban Economics, with 67 papers mentioning
entrepreneurs, 15 before 1990. 5
         The lack of attention to entrepreneurs is not merely a reflection of editorial
decisions of these two major urban field journals. The pioneering urban economists of
the 1960s, such as William Alonso, Richard Muth, Edwin Mills, and John Kain, rarely
addressed entrepreneurship outside of the housing sector. 6              The absence of
entrepreneurs in urban economic papers before 1990 reflects both forces that operated
throughout economics and factors specific to the field. Urban economics arose as a field
in part in response to the raging debates about American urban policy that took place in
the 1960s and 1970s. The field, therefore, tended to focus on problems of housing
markets and urban public policy and not so much on entrepreneurship.
         Moreover, the focus of many urban economists has been on creating formal
economic models of cities, following either in the linear programming tradition of
Beckman and Koopmans (1958) or the more continuous tradition of mainstream general
equilibrium models. In these models, entrepreneurs may be embedded in firms, but in the
embedding, much of what was interesting about entrepreneurship disappeared. The
lumpy, random nature of entrepreneurship fit poorly into an agenda aimed at creating
tractable models. Instead, assuming free entry of firms enabled modelers to work with
the powerful zero profit condition that could deliver powerful results. The mathematical
advantages of non-entrepreneurial economics were not unique to the urban field:
entrepreneurs are rarely encountered in models elsewhere in economics. 7
         For this reason, some of the most important early insights on entrepreneurship in
cities were written by urban economists who used prose rather than algebra. Perhaps the
most important set of insights were generated by the New York Metropolitan Region
Project of the 1950s that brought together, among others, Hoover, Vernon and Chinitz.
These authors’ work (i.e., Hoover and Vernon, 1962; Vernon, 1960; Chinitz, 1961) was
stylistically closer to modern business history, which has consistently focused on
entrepreneurship and place (e.g. Saxenian, 1994), than to formal urban economics. The

5
  The Science Direct files on the Journal of Urban Economics go back to 1974 and the journal’s founding;
the files on Regional Science and Urban Economics begin in 1975 with Volume 5 of that journal.
6
  In this statement, we distinguish between Mills’ research published in journals and his textbook, Mills and
Hamilton (1997). The latter does address entrepreneurship outside of the housing sector.
7
  See Baumol (1968) for a discussion of this issue. A prominent exception is Lucas (1978).

                                                                                                           5
incorporation of entrepreneurship into urban economics really started in the 1970s, with
the work of Sveikauskas and Henderson, who produced a long string of articles that relate
to entrepreneurship. Over the past 20 years, entrepreneurs have steadily become more
important in urban economics, as urban economists have increased their focus on city
economies, developed relevant models, and gotten access to data sets that are relevant to
empirical research on entrepreneurship and innovation.
       Yet despite the scarcity of papers with formal algebra or econometrics, the big
ideas about entrepreneurship were sketched long before the current surge in
entrepreneurial research. Perhaps the single most important idea that comes out of the
focus on entrepreneurship in cities is the claim that entrepreneurs play a critical role in
making cities economically dynamic. For example, in Smith’s (1776) discussion of the
rise of cities, dynamic burghers play a leading role. He describes the introduction of
“those manufactures which are fit for distant sale,” which can be interpreted as
technologically advanced goods and credits. He also discusses the benefits of “the
violent operation, if one may say so, of the stocks of particular merchants and
undertakers.” Marshall (1920) tied urban growth and entrepreneurship even more tightly,
writing that “localization and the growth of the system of capitalist undertakers were two
parallel movements, due to the same general cause, and each of them promoting the
advance of the other.” Localization enabled the creation of large quantities of
specialized, tradable products, but that production required “capitalist undertakers,” also
known as entrepreneurs.
       The work that grew out of the New York Metropolitan Region Project also
emphasized the importance of entrepreneurship for the success of New York. Chinitz
(1961) compared New York and Pittsburgh, and argued that New York’s greater success
was linked to a more abundant “supply schedule of entrepreneurship.” Likewise,
Hoover and Vernon (1962) depict New York City as an incubator of new business
activity, and connects the continuing strength of that city to its constant flow of new
businesses. Later business scholars such as Porter (1990) and Saxenian (1994) would
echo this message that local success depends on innovative entrepreneurs.
       More recently, the connection between entrepreneurship and urban success has
been embraced by a number of urban economists. For example, Duranton and Puga

                                                                                              6
(2001) use the term “nursery cities” to describe places that specialize in creating new
firms and succeed through this innovation. In a related vein, Helsley and Strange (2009)
adapt Lazear's (2005) model of balanced skills to establish that size is not everything. In
order to cultivate entrepreneurship, the entrepreneur's skills and the city's resources must
be in a sense complementary. Another theoretical approach to entrepreneurship is taken
by Forslid and Ottaviano (2002), who add "footloose" entrepreneurs to a New Economic
Geography model. These agents are in fixed supply, and their human capital is required
to form firms. The focus here is not on entrepreneurs per se, but instead on how
including this sort of mobile and scarce human capital in the NEG model can improve
tractability. On the empirical side, Glaeser et al. (1992) documents the connection
between small firms and urban success, and interpret these results as reflecting the
benefits of competition and entrepreneurship. Miracky (1992), Rosenthal and Strange
(2003, 2009) and Glaeser and Kerr (2009) provide similar research along these lines.
While it would be hard to imagine a world in which an abundance of entrepreneurs did
not strengthen the local economy, the literature documenting this effect is still in its
infancy.
       Establishing a causal connection between entrepreneurship and local success is
difficult because entrepreneurship, in contrast to the proximity to coal or a good harbor, is
unlikely to an exogenous local variable determined by nature. Those urban economists
who have focused on entrepreneurship, Chinitz and Vernon and Hoover, have seen
entrepreneurship as the reflection of other, deeper forces. Broadly, urban economists
have offered several hypotheses about why entrepreneurship differs across space: (1)
differential returns to entrepreneurship (movement along an entrepreneurial supply
curve), (2) differential availability of inputs to entrepreneurship, including
entrepreneurial human capital and (3) differential supplies of ideas; and (4) differences in
the local culture, political system, or endowments. The first hypothesis refers to a
movement along an entrepreneurial supply curve. Hypotheses (2)-(4) refer to a shift in
an entrepreneurial supply curve. It is worth remarking that this list is parallel to the well-
known list of explanations for the agglomeration of economic activity, a parallel to which
we will return later.



                                                                                               7
        Regarding the movement along an entrepreneurial supply curve, hypothesis (1)
above, Smith’s famous dictum that the “division of labor is limited by the extent of the
market,” suggested that certain entrepreneurial activities could only make financial sense
in large communities or places that had ready access to transportation. Smith’s
description foreshadows the modern description of agglomeration economies, where a
larger home market can increase the returns to introducing new products, as in Krugman
(1991). Chinitz, as well, argued that New York’s scale had some role in its
entrepreneurial nature, although he argued that scale alone was not enough to distinguish
Gotham from Pittsburgh.
        Nearly fifty years ago, Chinitz (1961) argued that economists ignored
entrepreneurship because “the implicit assumption, I suppose, is that the supply schedule
of entrepreneurship is identical at all locations.” The rest of the ideas in the list relate to
factors that would generate different supply curves for entrepreneurship across locations.
The second theory of local entrepreneurship emphasizes the importance of inputs into
entrepreneurship: some places have more venture capital or the right type of labor or
independent input suppliers.     For example, if the bulk of the firms in a region are
vertically integrated then a lack of independent suppliers may make it difficult for a new
firm to sprout. In some industries, skilled labor is vital and as a result a virtuous circle
can occur where entrepreneurs come to a place because of the workers and the workers
come to the place because of the entrepreneurs. Idiosyncrasies in firm outcome may
enhance the gains for entrepreneurs to locate in large cities, since statistical returns to
scale essentially help protect workers and lenders (Helsley and Strange, 1990). Workers
may be more willing to take on the risks of working for an entrepreneurial start-up in a
large city with plenty of alternative employers.
        The third hypothesis is that places may differ in the generation and transmission
of entrepreneurial ideas. Marshall (1920) emphasized the role of ideas in infrastructure
and argued that the flow of ideas from person to person was an external economy that
enhanced innovation in cities: “if one man starts a new idea, it is taken up by others and
combined with suggestions of their own; and thus it becomes the source of further new
ideas.” He described an entrepreneurial chain where “subsidiary trades grow up in the
neighborhood, supplying it with implements and materials, organizing its traffic, and in

                                                                                                  8
many ways conducing to the economy of its material.” One implication of Marshall’s
logic is that entrepreneurs will congregate next to one another to learn from each other.
Another implication is that we should expect to see chains of innovation where one big
idea is followed with many others.
           Jacobs (1969) is strongly associated with the view that new ideas are the well-
spring of entrepreneurship and new businesses make cities grow. Like Chinitz, she
admired small firms, which she saw as being conducive to innovation, and density, which
helps to speed the flow of ideas. She also emphasized industrial diversity, arguing that
some of the biggest innovations are the product of cross-industry fertilization. A modern
example of this phenomenon is Michael Bloomberg, who used his financial expertise
gained at Salomon Brothers to create an information technology firm that could cater to
traders.
           It is important to recognize that the inputs, skills, and ideas explanations for the
variation in entrepreneurship can arise endogenously. Regarding skills, Chinitz
suggested that the children of corporate managers might be less likely to become
entrepreneurs than the children of small business owners. In this way, historical
industrial specialization in small firm industries, like the garment trade, might lead to an
ongoing abundance of entrepreneurs, who then encourage their own spinoffs. Similar
stories of positive feedback can be told of inputs and of ideas.
           The fourth explanation is that local differences in political system, culture, or in
other local endowments have the potential to impact entrepreneurship. Smith notes that,
“Order and good government, and along with them the liberty and security of individuals,
were ...established in cities at a time when the occupiers of land in the country were
exposed to every sort of violence.” He argues that this security of property led city
residents to take on more business risks. Saxenian (1994) has emphasized local
difference in culture. Silicon Valley investors, for instance, did not blackball
entrepreneurs who had failed previously, a forgiving attitude that is credited with the
Valley's entrepreneurial culture. Finally, natural advantage may impact
entrepreneurship. Pittsburgh’s coal mines made it a center for steel which is inherently
less entrepreneurial while New York’s port gave it access to the world and attracted an
abundance of entrepreneurs

                                                                                                  9
       As noted above, explanations for differences in entrepreneurial activity parallel
common explanations for agglomeration. This parallel leads naturally to the conclusion
that entrepreneurship can be part of a virtuous circle, where entrepreneurial activity leads
to the circumstances that foster further activity. Of course, the flip side of this conclusion
is that the absence of entrepreneurship can lead to a vicious circle. This strongly suggests
that an improved understanding of entrepreneurship has the potential to help in the
understanding of poverty and urban decline.


II.    Entrepreneurship in an urban model


       This section will present a simple NEG model that incorporates entrepreneurs.
The model builds on Abdel-Rahman (1988), Fujita (1988), Rivera-Batiz (1988), and
Krugman (1991). None of these paper contains the word entrepreneur, but the NEG
analysis that they offer can be extended in a way that captures the connection between
entrepreneurship and local success and some of the causes of entrepreneurship.
       This extension is meant to accomplish three things. First, the analysis will help us
to better understand the equilibrium forces that can explain the spatial variation of
entrepreneurial activity and the impact of entrepreneurship on the larger economy.
Second, the analysis will provide context for the rest of the papers in this issue. Third, by
showing how entrepreneurs can be included in one important urban model, this section
suggests a program for introducing entrepreneurs into other lines of urban research,
pointing towards an agenda for future spatial research on entrepreneurs.


Exogenous entrepreneurs
       Following Krugman, individual utility is defined over an aggregate of separate
manufactured goods, each denoted       and land, denoted L. Denoting the elasticity of
substitution among the varieties of manufactured goods by σ and adopting Cobb-Douglas
utility, we have

       U=                      .                                                           (1)




                                                                                           10
We will focus on one small city within a large open economy. The city has a fixed total
supply of land denoted . The renters live in the city and spend their income there.
         The basic technological assumption is that to produce X units of a manufactured
good, a producer requires              units of labor. We assume that some manufactured
good varieties are traded, while others are not. We suppose that the price of traded
goods is normalized to            (which implicitly assumes that the price of labor external to

this city is normalized to one). The price of non-traded goods will be endogenous.
         Krugman critically assumes that there is free entry of firms to the point where
profits are zero. This is, implicitly, an assumption about entrepreneurship: the supply
schedule of entrepreneurs is everywhere the same, and indeed everywhere horizontal.
This assumption essentially takes entrepreneurship out of the model. Instead, we assume
that there are a fixed number of entrepreneurs, denoted        . These entrepreneurs produce
two sorts of goods. We suppose that a share         of the entrepreneurs produce traded
goods. The external demand for each traded good produced in the city is assumed to be
given by

                         ,                                                                  (2)

where P is the traded good's price. Let         denote the number of entrepreneurs in the
non-traded sector. The local demand for goods is determined endogenously. These
assumptions allow us to look at the city in isolation.
         Using this setup, we are able to characterize how entrepreneurship influences
market outcomes for a closed city:


Proposition 1 (Exogenous entrepreneurs in a closed city): If the population of the city is
fixed:
         (A) An increase in the number of entrepreneurs will increase wages and worker
         utility, decrease the number of workers per firm, and will have an ambiguous
         effect on land values.
         (B) An increase in the share of entrepreneurs who produce traded goods will
         increase wages, worker utility, and land prices, and have no impact on the number
         of workers per firm.


                                                                                            11
Proof: See Appendix.


       Most of the results in Proposition 1 are intuitive. A larger number of
entrepreneurs increase wages and the welfare of workers. An increase in the share of
entrepreneurs who sell on the global market has similar effects. Places with plenty of
entrepreneurs have a smaller average firm size. The ambiguous connection between the
number of entrepreneurs and land values is somewhat surprising. It reflects the fact that
an increase in the number of entrepreneurs can cause the profitability of firms to decline
if the fixed costs involved in each entrepreneurial activity are sufficiently high.
       The primary limitation of Proposition 1 is that it takes the population of the city as
fixed. The hallmark of urban economics is that population levels respond to changes in
parameters. We now, therefore, adopt a specification where, in spatial equilibrium, the
welfare of manufacturing workers in the city must equal a reservation utility level, and
population adjusts accordingly. If the other parameters in this model are fixed, then
worker utility declines with the population level because of competition for land.
       In this case, it follows that:


Proposition 2 (Exogenous entrepreneurs in an open city): In an open city:
       (A) An increase in the number of entrepreneurs will increase city population and
       land values and have an ambiguous effect on wages, the number of workers per
       firm, and profits of non-traded good entrepreneurs.
       (B) An increase in the share of entrepreneurs who produce traded goods will
       increase wages, city population, land prices and the number of workers per firm
       and will have an ambiguous effect on profits of non-traded good entrepreneurs.


Proof: See Appendix.


       In this case, more entrepreneurship and more traded good entrepreneurship make
the city larger and land in the city more expensive. Entrepreneurship may not, however,
increase wages, since entrepreneurs are making the city more attractive by creating a

                                                                                           12
wider range of goods that can be bought there. 8 While it is always true that an increase in
the share of entrepreneurship in traded goods increases firm size, the impact of
entrepreneurship on firm size in this case is ambiguous. It is possible that more
entrepreneurship will attract so many new workers that the number of workers per firm
will actually increase.
        The most interesting results connect the level of entrepreneurship with the return
to entrepreneurship. Proposition 2 illustrates that increases in the level of local
entrepreneurship have an ambiguous effect the returns to entrepreneurship. This suggests
the possibility for a virtuous circle where the presence of entrepreneurs increases the
returns for others to be entrepreneurial. The economics behind this ambiguity are
straightforward: more entrepreneurs mean higher wages, which increases costs, but more
entrepreneurship also means a larger market which increases the benefits to
entrepreneurship. Limited land ensures that wages will rise with entrepreneurship, which
helps drive wages up and pushes the returns to entrepreneurship down. If                  is
sufficiently high, then the land sector is less important, and entrepreneurship is more
likely to lead to a virtuous circle where more entrepreneurs increase the returns to
entrepreneurship.
        The main limitation of Proposition 2 -- which applies as well to Proposition 1 -- is
that we have treated the supply of entrepreneurs as being exogenous. Given the well-
documented variation in entrepreneurial activity across locations, we now relax this
assumption and extend the model to consider an endogenous supply of entrepreneurs. So
far we have asked about the implications of entrepreneurship for urban success. We now
turn to the causes of entrepreneurship. The model will show that a range of
circumstances can potentially be related to local entrepreneurial activity. These include:
density, skills, a tradition of entrepreneurship, human capital, and physical capital


Endogenous entrepreneurs
        So far, we have treated entrepreneurs as a fixed factor of production that
determines the success of the city. Yet a serious treatment of entrepreneurship in urban


8
 Entrepreneurs are acting as amenities in this setup. For recent work on amenities, see Rappaport (2007),
Berger, Blomquist, and Peter (2008), Chen and Rosenthal (2008).

                                                                                                        13
locations must endogenize the supply of entrepreneurs. The simplest way of
endogenizing entrepreneurship is to assume that a city has an upward-sloping supply
curve of entrepreneurs, defined by a distribution function so that the share of people
whose costs of entrepreneurship are less than X is denoted F(X). As such, the number of
entrepreneurs is defined as F(π), where π denotes the expected profits from becoming an
entrepreneur. 9 To simplify matters, we assume that entrepreneurs do not know whether
their product will serve only a local market or will become a traded good when they are
choosing whether or not to become active as entrepreneurs,. As such expected profits
equals     times the profits made by traded goods entrepreneurs plus 1                       times the
profits made by non-traded goods entrepreneurs. 10
         The previous section raised the possibility that entrepreneurial profits could be
increasing with the number of entrepreneurs. If that is the case, then it is at least possible
that there are multiple equilibria in entrepreneurship. In one equilibrium, the number of
entrepreneurs is high and so are the returns to entrepreneurship. In the other equilibrium,
the number of entrepreneurs is low and so are the returns to entrepreneurship. While we
do not wish to rule out the possibility of a global change between these two sorts of
equilibrium, in this section we will consider local comparative statics on the number of
entrepreneurs taken around a stable equilibria, which is defined so that
                           .                                                                              (3)

Equation (3) essentially means that an increase in entrepreneurship will not have a
destabilizing increase in the profits for each entrepreneur.
         With this assumption, the following proposition holds:

Proposition 3 (Endogenous entrepreneurship):




9
  This approach has obvious similarities to Lucas (1978). It is worth pointing out that it implicitly assumes
that entrepreneurs are risk neutral. In contrast, Kihlstrom and Laffont (1979) build a supply curve of
entrepreneurs from differential risk tolerances of economic agents.
10
   An alternate approach to endogenizing entrepreneurial activity in a given city is to adopt the Forslid-
Ottaviano (2002) "footloose entrepreneurs" model. In our approach, we have assumed immobile
entrepreneurs, an assumption that seems consistent with empirical work on entrepreneurship by Sorenson
and Audia (2000), Klepper (2007), Dahl and Sorenson (this issue) and others.

                                                                                                           14
         (A) In a closed city, the level of entrepreneurship is increasing with city
         population and decreasing with fixed cost (α) and has an ambiguous relationship
         with the share of traded goods and demand (Q).
         (B) In an open city, the level of entrepreneurship is increasing with demand (Q)
         and land area ( ), is decreasing with fixed cost (α), and has an ambiguous
         relationship with the share of traded-goods producers.


Proof: See Appendix.


         Many of these results are intuitive. Smaller fixed costs of starting a business
always lead the level of entrepreneurship to rise. 11 Higher fixed costs both reduce
profits directly and increase the wage. An increase in city population reduces wage and
increases demand, both of which make entrepreneurship more attractive. In the open city
model, an increase in available land, , causes the population to rise which then indirectly
increases the amount of labor.
         The least intuitive results concern the parameters             and Q. The first of these
parameters makes it more likely that the entrepreneur will produce a high-value traded
good; the second parameter increases the returns to producing such a traded good.
Intuitively, it would seem that either variable should increase the returns to
entrepreneurship and the number of entrepreneurs. That is exactly what happens in the
case of the open city when Q rises. However, for Q in the closed city case, and for the
variable     in either case, the results are ambiguous. These variables cause wages to rise
and it is possible that higher values of Q or          can actually drive entrepreneurship down
by pushing wages up so much. While this does not seem likely, these results capture
perhaps the flavor of Detroit after World War II, when the success of the automobile
industry may have crowded out other entrepreneurial activities.
         How do these results relate to the core theories about the heterogeneity of
entrepreneurship across space? The variable              can be interpreted as reflecting the inputs

11
   It is worth observing that the population is mobile, but entrepreneurs are not. Changes in the equilibrium
amount of entrepreneurship come from the activation of local entrepreneurs. This seems to us to be
consistent with the evidence of entrepreneurial stickiness in Michelacci and Silva (2007) and in Klepper
(this issue).

                                                                                                          15
needed for entrepreneurship. If those inputs are abundant, perhaps because of large
numbers of input suppliers or venture capitalists, then entrepreneurship will be more
common. The variables N and         connect entrepreneurship to the size of the market. In
bigger areas, there will be more entrepreneurs, but in this model there is no assurance that
the level of entrepreneurship will rise by more than one-to-one. This could be assured by
assuming a sufficiently elastic supply of entrepreneurs. The variables of Q or        reflect
exogenous factors in the place that increase the potential returns to entrepreneurship.
Historically, perhaps, New York’s port might have been seen as causing an increase in
the value of Q.
        This framework illustrates the impact on entrepreneurship of market size, returns
to entrepreneurship and input costs. It also illustrates the impact of entrepreneurship on
local economic performance. A virtuous circle arises through market size. One could
similarly add entrepreneurs to models that emphasize inputs, skills, or ideas to obtain a
parallel sort of circularity (see, for instance, Strange et al, 2006).
        The framework does not address the Chinitz (1961) intuition that the supply of
entrepreneurs might be different across space. To capture this possibility, we can simply
assume that the number of entrepreneurs equals                 , where shifts the supply
schedule across space. This would capture the possibility that some places just have
more entrepreneurial people. Alternatively, urban density might act as a multiplier so
that the supply becomes          , where       1, because each entrepreneur spreads ideas to
others. Unsurprisingly, then it follows that the level of entrepreneurship is rising with
either or     (so long as           1 . While all of our other comparative statics caused
the level of entrepreneurship to increase by increasing the net returns to entrepreneurship,
an increase in these variables will cause the net returns to entrepreneurship to fall, at least
if the conditions needed for the returns to entrepreneurship to be declining in the level of
entrepreneurship hold. However, it is possible, since the returns to entrepreneurship can
actually increase with the number of entrepreneurs, that this increase in supply may
actually be associated with an increase in the returns to entrepreneurship.


IV.     The Causes and Consequences of Entrepreneurship



                                                                                                16
         We now turn to the papers in this issue and the literatures from which they
emerge. The section will largely be devoted to discussing how both this body of research
fits with the causes and consequences of entrepreneurship framework laid out in this
paper.


The Impact of Entrepreneurship
         Both in this issue and more widely, there has been relatively little literature on the
broad impacts on entrepreneurship on urban economies. 12 We suspect that this reflects
two problems. First, the vast majority of entrepreneurship researchers, and indeed
probably most of the academic community, rarely question the positive benefits of
entrepreneurship for the local community. After all, real world examples abound of
entrepreneurs who have helped their cities economically. Second, the ability to find a
causal link between entrepreneurship and urban success would require exogenous
variables that increase entrepreneurship but have no other impact on the local economy.
As Section III's model illustrates, most of the candidate variables that explain
entrepreneurship, such as market size, could easily have a direct impact on city growth.
         The piece of evidence that is most suggestive of the positive benefits of
entrepreneurship on city growth is the strong connection between small average firm size
and subsequent growth (see Glaeser et al., 1992; Rosenthal and Strange, 2003 and 2009;
and Glaeser et al, this issue). This correlation is certainly suggestive. Small firms are
likely to be newer and more entrepreneurial, but after all, this correlation has many
interpretations. Small average firm sizes also means more competitive labor markets, or
perhaps fewer regulatory barriers to growth. 13,14
         Audretsch and Keilbach (2004) have used an alternative measure of
entrepreneurship—the rate of new start-ups. This variable is strongly correlated with the
economic output of West German Counties. The start-up rate in the high tech sector is
particularly associated with success. Just as in the case of the firm size results, these

12
   There has been a larger body of work on entrepreneurship and economic success at the country level, as
in Audretsch and Thurik (2001) and Audretsch et al (2006).
13
   The self-employment rate also, far more weakly, predicts urban employment growth (Glaeser, 2007).
14
   The result that Wal-Mart has negative impacts on the local economy (Neumark et al, 2008)) can be seen
as complementary to the small firm effect. See Haltiwanger et al (this issue) for an analysis of big box
firms more generally. See Basker (2005) for evidence that Wal-Mart's effects are not necessarily negative.

                                                                                                        17
correlations cannot be conclusively interpreted as causal results showing the benefits of
entrepreneurship, since start-up rates are unlikely to be exogenous.
       As discussed above, another aspect of entrepreneurship is the independence of
entrepreneurs. Rosenthal and Strange (2003) consider this directly by distinguishing
between firms that are subsidiaries of another corporate entity from those that are not.
No consistent relationship is found between the presence of non-subsidiary firms and
growth. This preliminary evidence suggests that in thinking about the impacts of
entrepreneurship, the ownership dimension might not be as important as the size
dimension.
       Economists have thought, at least since Solow (1956), that technological
innovation is associated with growth. At the local level, Porter (1990) has argued that the
innovativeness of certain clusters accounts for their growth. Moreover, the history of
technological innovations, such as the assembly line and software, suggest a significant
role for entrepreneurs, such as Henry Ford and Bill Gates. Yet there is surprisingly little
formal econometric work at the city level that has quantified the relationship between
local innovation and other outcomes. This is presumably explained by the two points
raised above: no one doubts such a relationship, and identification is difficult to achieve.
       Kolko and Neumark (this issue) present an alternative means of assessing the
benefits of different forms of entrepreneurship. Instead of looking at economic growth or
level of output, they focus on the behavior of firms in response to shocks. Many local
leaders would like firms that keep employment steady even during a downturn, and in
principle, local entrepreneurship could provide a cushion against recession. Indeed,
many communities have specifically tried to protect locally owned businesses from
externally owned competitors (such as Big Box retailers) with the idea that locally owned
businesses are more likely to provide stable employment for local workers.
       Kolko and Neumark find mixed evidence for this claim. Company headquarters
are more stable than other establishments. Locally owned single establishment firms are
actually more sensitive to downward industry shocks, but less sensitive to downward
regional shocks. Likewise, among smaller firms there is some tendency of local
ownership to mute the response to regional shocks. However, among larger firms, local
ownership has no impact in the response to shocks.

                                                                                            18
The Sources of Entrepreneurship
           There has been more research that bears on the sources of entrepreneurship than
on its impact. The line of research in urban economics that has the most to say regarding
the sources of entrepreneurship is the literature on agglomeration. As noted above, this
literature has identified inputs, skills, and ideas as being involved in the process
generating agglomeration economies. 15 The literature has also looked at political and
cultural forces and also natural advantage as explanations for agglomeration.
           Many themes in this literature relate to entrepreneurship. Fallick et al (2006) and
Freedman (2008) consider the relationship between agglomeration and job hopping.
They show that mobility increases with industrial concentration. This relates to both the
self-employment and change dimensions of entrepreneurship. Holmes (1999) shows a
relationship between vertical integration and agglomeration in the U.S. Li and Lu (2009)
show a similar relationship in China. A large literature has shown a relationship between
agglomeration and innovation. Recent contributions include Agrawal et al (2008),
Gerlach et al (2009), and Simonen and McCann (2008).
           In this issue, most of the papers deal with the factors that explain why
entrepreneurship might differ across space. One of these factors is differences in the
returns to entrepreneurship. The only paper in this volume that directly addresses returns
to entrepreneurship is Glaeser et al (this issue). This paper specifically looks at whether
the value of shipments per employee, a proxy for the returns to entrepreneurship, are
higher in places with abundant small firms where there are lots of entrepreneurs. No
correlation is found. This suggests that these clusters of entrepreneurship are not being
created by the presence of unusually high returns to entrepreneurial activity. This clearly
calls for looking at supply shifters.
           Chinitz’s (1961) seminal work on entrepreneurship emphasized the importance of
inputs to entrepreneurship, which seemed to be far more prevalent in New York than in
Pittsburgh. He argued that a competitive economy, made up of small independent firms,
would make it much easier for entrepreneurs to find independent suppliers. Certainly, no
input is more important for new entrepreneurs than finance itself, so the availability of

15
     See the recent literature reviews in Duranton-Puga (2004) and Rosenthal-Strange (2004).

                                                                                               19
venture capital should surely be one of those variables that could impact the rate of
entrepreneurship.
        Chen et al (this issue) look specifically at the geography of the venture capital
industry. They find that this industry is overwhelmingly located in three cities: New
York, San Francisco and Boston. This might seem to give a great advantage to
entrepreneurs working in those locations. However, they also find that these firms
frequently invest outside of their cities and actually earn higher returns from spatially
distant investments. This may, of course, reflect a selection process. If it were more
expensive to invest in distant projects, venture capitalists would tend to invest in only the
most promising of such projects, and this would elevate the return on investments outside
of the firms’ immediate locations, on average. In any case, venture capitalists seem to be
capable of making wise investments away from their home towns, which suggests that
the availability of capital might not be as geographically concentrated as the venture
capitalists.
        However, these findings still continue to suggest that the agglomerations of
venture capitalists help create agglomerations of entrepreneurs. If investors only bother
to invest far away if they can get higher returns by doing so, then firms in Silicon Valley
can obtain venture capital for worse projects than firms in Idaho, and the Silicon Valley
firms consequently enjoy an advantage. Somewhat paradoxically, the presence of high
returns elsewhere actually supports the idea that entrepreneurs enjoy an advantage from
being close to the clusters of venture capital.
        The paper by Agrawal et al (this issue) takes a different angle in examining the
geography of innovation by looking at the advantage of competition vs. monopoly. Just
as large vertically integrated firms might not sell goods to new start-ups, such large firms
might not provide as many intellectual spillovers if they are more closed to outsiders.
This paper looks at the patenting activity of firms in “company towns” that are dominated
by a single large enterprise and compares that activity with innovation in more
competitive environments.
        The main conclusion of Agrawal et al is that the dominant firms in company
towns are, indeed, more inward looking. They are more likely to cite their own patents
than comparable firms elsewhere. Yet these large companies do not seem to reduce the

                                                                                            20
tendency of their smaller neighbors to cite broadly. Moreover, the patents invented in
these company towns have just as much impact as patents invented elsewhere. These
findings could be interpreted as evidence that the creative myopia associated with the
presence of large firms in company towns does not necessarily deter productivity and
innovation.
       The paper by Glaeser et al (this issue) also looks at the connection between local
industrial structure and employment growth. They find that an abundance of small firms
strongly predicts new establishment births. As noted above, this relationship does not
appear to stem from an effect of nearby small firms on the returns to entrepreneurship.
Rather, the relationship depends on the supply of entrepreneurs.
       A different perspective on the interaction between large and small firms is
provided by Haltiwanger et al (this issue). They examine the degree to which big-box
stores – both retailers and restaurants – displace employment at local smaller, mom and
pop stores. They find that the presence of big box stores adversely affects employment at
smaller firms, primarily by causing smaller firms to exit. Importantly, this effect is
concentrated among small firms that are in the same industry as the big-box competitor.
In addition, this effect attenuates sharply with distance, and is much less pronounced just
a few miles away. The very local geographic nature of the effects of competition from
big box retailers parallels previous research showing that the spillover effects of nearby
agglomerations of employment attenuate rapidly with distance (e.g. Rosenthal and
Strange (2003, 2008), Andersson et al (2009)).
       Entrepreneurs are often educated, so an increase in the share of educated workers
can be seen as an increase in the supply of entrepreneurs. An abundance of educated
workers may also increase the returns to entrepreneurship by providing skilled labor, a
necessary input into many firms. The paper by Doms et al (this issue) examines the
connection between the education level of workers themselves and of the workers'
communities and entrepreneurship. It draws on several different surveys, each with its
strengths and weaknesses. This includes a new and unique panel of several thousand
newly established small businesses that are followed for four years (the Kauffman Firm
Survey, or KFS). The paper also utilizes individual-level cross-section data from the
voluminous 5 percent Public Use Micro Sample of the 2000 decennial census.

                                                                                             21
       Based on these and other sources, Doms, Lewis and Robb (this issue) first
document a strong positive correlation between the average level of education in a
metropolitan area and the level of education among the area’s community of business
owners and self-employed. This is not surprising, but reinforces the importance of
distinguishing between the influence of individual versus metropolitan-wide levels of
education. Indeed, the paper further shows that while entrepreneurial activity and
business turnover, as measured by new business formation and deaths, is more prevalent
in educated cities, the relationship appears to be most closely associated with individual
rather than city-wide levels of education. Based on the census data, more highly
educated individuals are more likely to be self-employed, and conditional on individual
education, there is no additional positive association between self-employment and
metropolitan area college share.
       Are these relationships between education and the propensity for entrepreneurship
mirrored in the returns to entrepreneurship? Doms, Lewis, and Robb (this issue) provide
evidence on this point as well. Specifically, in both the KFS and census surveys, they
find that entrepreneurs with more education enjoy improved business outcomes, and that
this relationship is highly non-linear: there is a strong positive premium for having a
college degree. However, conditional on the individual’s own level of education, the
association between local area education and business outcomes is less clear. In the KFS,
this latter relationship is positive, but not distinguishable from zero. In the census data, a
clear positive relationship emerges: self-employed individual earn more when operating
in more highly educated locations, even after controlling for an extensive array of
industry-metro area fixed effects, the individual’s own level of education, and many other
individual-level controls. Moreover, from both data sources, and especially from the
census, there is suggestive evidence that it is primarily high-skilled sectors that benefit
from the presence of nearby college educated workers. These findings complement
Glaeser et al (this issue) who show that labor-intensive firms are particularly more likely
to form in high human capital areas. They are also related to Bacolod et al (2009) who
find that the returns to skills rise with city size. More generally, these findings confirm
that education plays a crucial but complicated role in contributing to a successful
entrepreneurial environment.

                                                                                              22
       Since the location of skilled workers and technical expertise seems to be so
important, it is natural to focus on the mobility of technical workers and innovative
activity. Kerr (this issue) and Dahl and Sorenson (this issue) each shed light here. Kerr
examines the speed with which innovative activity migrates across cities in the United
States. He demonstrates that development of breakthrough technologies tends to be
followed by subsequent intensive research and development that refines the initial
innovation. This process attracts additional scientists and engineers to the location where
the breakthrough occurs, and contributes to movement of innovative activity across cities.
The speed with which such adjustments occur depends in part on the mobility of
technical workers. Kerr demonstrates this by focusing on immigrant scientists and
engineers, a group thought to be particularly mobile and footloose. Evidence confirms
that industries reliant on immigrant technical workers exhibit faster migration of
innovative activity towards locations where breakthroughs occur.
       Kerr’s (this issue) work highlights both the dynamics of breakthroughs, as well as
the impact of worker mobility on the speed with which innovative activity and technical
ability spreads across cities. This relates to prior work on the dynamics of industry
migration of across cities. Duranton (2007) and Findeisen and Sudekum (2008) show
that the size distribution of cities in a given country tends not to change much over time,
and that the relative size of individual cities changes only very slowly. However, the
industrial composition of employment within individual cities changes at a comparatively
rapid pace as industries migrate across locations. Kerr’s results highlight factors that
contribute to such migration.
       The paper by Dahl and Sorenson (this issue) also considers the mobility of
scientific and technical workers, in this case in Denmark. A key finding is that scientific
and technical workers in Denmark are heavily drawn to locations close to family and
friends. While economic incentives matter – and especially for older workers – Dahl and
Sorenson provide compelling evidence that Danish scientists and technical workers are
willing to trade off substantial income for the opportunity to locate closer to their parents,
high school friends, and other important social contacts. Such ties tend to create
geographic frictions within high-skilled labor markets, and may serve to slow the rate at
which innovative activity would migrate across cities. In many respects, these findings

                                                                                            23
complement the evidence offered by Kerr (this issue) in which mobile workers accelerate
the migration of innovative activity.
        The causes of entrepreneurship considered thus far do not come close to forming
an exhaustive list. There are many additional factors, many relating to government
policies, especially regulations that increase the costs of entrepreneurship. Becker and
Henderson (2000) and List et al (2003) both show that air quality regulations reduce firm
birth in the relevant industries. Bertrand and Kramarz (2002) show that French zoning
regulation reduces new firm entry in the retail sector. On the other hand, inaction in the
face of urban problems such as congestion seems to be negatively associated with growth
(Hymel, 2009).
        Rosenthal and Ross (this issue) consider a different urban problem, the local rate
of violent crime. Pope (2008) and Linden and Rockoff (2008) show that the fear of crime
can have a large impact on housing prices. Rosenthal and Ross consider the relationship
of crime to entrepreneurship. The paper deals with the sorting of sectors of the economy
into high- and low-crime neighborhoods depending on a sector’s relative sensitivity to
crime. The paper illustrates this by comparing retail industries to wholesale sectors and
high-end restaurants to low-end eateries. Because retail industries rely on pedestrian
shoppers, they will be especially sensitive to violent crime. Because high-end restaurants
do a disproportionate amount of their business in the evening, they should be especially
sensitive to violent crime over the prime dinner hours. Using data for five U.S. cities,
Rosenthal and Ross obtain evidence consistent with these priors: higher levels of violent
crime reduce the share of retail trade in an area relative to wholesale trade, and higher
local rates of violent crime during peak dining hours reduce the presence of high-end
restaurants relative to lower-tier eateries.
        Many of the papers in this issue have dealt with the supply of entrepreneurs. Of
course, the local supply of entrepreneurs only matters if entrepreneurs are tied to a local
area. Klepper (this issue) offers a further perspective on this topic by examining the
history of spinoffs in Detroit – with the auto industry – and in Silicon Valley – with the
integrated circuit or semi-conductor industry. Remarkably, the paper draws upon data for
the entire history and lineage of modern day auto makers and producers of integrated
circuits.

                                                                                             24
       Klepper documents that early in the auto industry’s history, several locations were
thriving centers of production, as was also the case for integrated circuits. However,
spinoffs from unusually successful founding (parent) companies were themselves more
likely to be unusually successful, and these spinoffs tended to locate close to their parent
firms. Klepper argues that this tendency for overachieving parent companies to spawn
nearby overachieving spinoffs accounts for the eventual dominance of Detroit in the auto
industry, and the corresponding dominance of Silicon Valley for integrated circuits. The
evidence presented by Klepper is compelling and speaks directly to the important role
that unusually talented and innovative entrepreneurs may have on an industry, and the
role of spinoffs in fostering agglomerations of both innovation and industrial activity.
       It is less clear why these spinoffs remained in such close proximity to their parent
companies. Was it because of the desire to remain close to family and friends, as in Dahl
and Sorenson (this issue)? Was there or some other aspect of the technical labor force
that might have deterred migration (which would contrast to the role of immigrant
workers as in Kerr, this issue)? Or perhaps it was the traditional role of agglomerative
spillovers in the form of input sharing, labor pooling, and the opportunity to learn from
one’s neighbors, as emphasized in the agglomeration literature. These are issues that
bear further study, but which do not change the important implication of Klepper (this
issue) that any assessment of the impact of entrepreneurship on local urban economies
must take seriously the role of spinoffs and “organizational reproduction.”


V.     Conclusion: directions for future research


       We believe that the essays in this issue contribute to our understanding of the
major questions about entrepreneurship and economic geography. Yet economic
research is still just beginning to understand the key topics laid out in this paper. Our
ability to model and estimate the creative sparks of Henry Ford and Alfred Sloan remains
limited. In conclusion, we will lay out some of the most important open questions. We
hope that this may guide future research in this area.
       First, and perhaps most importantly, what is the impact of entrepreneurship at the
local level? We still lack compelling evidence on the impact of entrepreneurship on

                                                                                            25
cities and regions. The biggest handicap to work in this area is the absence of exogenous
variation in entrepreneurship that is independent of other sources of economic success.
Both basic research and public policy have a great need for definitive work in this area.
       Second, what are the causes of spatial variations in entrepreneurial activity?
While there has been much more written about the causes of entrepreneurship than about
its effects, there are still many unanswered questions. To what extent are differences in
entrepreneurship results of differences in entrepreneurial returns? There is evidence that
entrepreneurship increases with the availability of relevant inputs, but we do not know
which inputs are most important. For many specific inputs, we still lack well identified
estimates of the impact of input availability on entrepreneurship. We know more about
how skills and entrepreneurial types impact entrepreneurship. Still, there are many
unanswered questions in this area as well. To what extent do social interactions in a place
create a local multiplier in entrepreneurship? To what extent does events early in an
individual’s career influence the propensity to become an entrepreneur? Finally, how do
government policies and culture impact entrepreneurial activity. Overall, although we
know that the supply curve of entrepreneurs slopes up, we do not understand in a general
way the slope of the entrepreneurial supply curve or how it differs across metropolitan
areas. This remains a crucial area for future research.
       Third, whether one considers the local causes of entrepreneurship or the local
effects, it is unclear at what geographic scale the spatial mechanics of entrepreneurship
operate. The papers in this issue have all considered the local dimensions of
entrepreneurship. In most cases, the spatial issues operate at the city level. In this spirit,
several papers consider the city-level conditions that lead to the creation of self-
reinforcing entrepreneurial clusters. In other cases, the spatial issues operate at larger
(regional) or smaller (neighborhood) levels of geography. The research question that is
suggested by these differences in approaches is clear: at what spatial scale do these
entrepreneurs operate? Are the effects highly local, or do they impact entire regions?
       Fourth, although the papers in this issue have largely focused on business creation
and economic growth, it is almost certainly true that entrepreneurship has much broader
impacts. Which suggests the fourth question: how does entrepreneurial activity impact
key urban issues? For instance, new business creation has taken place disproportionately

                                                                                             26
at the edges of most cities in recent years. This suggests a link between entrepreneurial
patterns and spatial decentralization and sprawl. Similarly, some areas within cities have
robust business sectors. Some areas do not. How do the factors determining
entrepreneurship impact spatial patterns of inequality and ghettoes? Finally, the
competition among local governments discussed by Tiebout (1956) is itself a sort of
entrepreneurship. How does fiscal entrepreneurship impact cities? Such
entrepreneurship has the potential to be particularly important in developing countries
(Lichtenberg and Ding, 2009). There are fine examples of research on all these
questions, but definitive answers have eluded us.
       These four large open questions quite naturally suggest a fifth: what are
appropriate policies towards spatial entrepreneurship? Clearly, with only tentative
answers to the first four questions, it is difficult to argue for a comprehensive and
intrusive program. But given the current evidence that entrepreneurship matters and that
there are a range of factors that impact entrepreneurial activity, it would be a grave
mistake to simply ignore entrepreneurship.
       Entrepreneurship is rooted in a place, even in the industries that are most
technologically advanced. Few people would doubt that Silicon Valley or New York or
Bangalore have special characteristics that help make them centers for entrepreneurship
in different sectors. Few people would also doubt that entrepreneurs have often played a
major role in forging local economies. For these reasons, the returns are high to bringing
entrepreneurship more squarely into urban economics.




                                                                                            27
References
Abdel-Rahman, H.M., 1988, Product differentiation, monopolistic competition, and city
size, Regional Science and Urban Economics 18, 69-86.

Agrawal, A., Cockburn, I., Rosell, C., 2009. Not invented here: Creative myopia and
company towns, Journal of Urban Economics, this issue.

Agrawal, A., Kapur, D., McHale, J., 2008. How do spatial and social proximity influence
knowledge flows? Evidence from patent data, Journal of Urban Economics, 64.

Andersson, R., Quigley, J., Wilhelmsson, M., 2009, Urbanization, productivity, and
innovation: Evidence from investment in higher education, Journal of Urban Economics,
66, 2-15.

Audretsch, K., Keilbach, M., Lehmann, L., 2006. Entrepreneurship and Economic
Growth, Oxford University Press.

Audretsch, D. B., Keilbach, M. Entrepreneurship capital and economic
performance, Regional Studies 38.8 (Nov 2004): 949(11).

Audretsch, D., Thurik, R, 2002. Linking entrepreneurship to growth, OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Working Papers, 2001/2, OECD Publishing

Bacolod, M., Blum, B., Strange, W., 2009. Skills in the city, Journal of Urban
Economics 65, 136-153.

Basker, E., 2005. Selling a cheaper mousetrap: Wal-Mart's effect on retail prices, Journal
of Urban Economics 58, 203-229.

Bates, T., 1978. Profitability in traditional and emerging lines of black business
enterprise, Journal of Urban Economics 5, 154-171.

Baumol, W.J., 1968. Entrepreneurship in economic theory, American Economic Review
58, 64-71.

Becker, R., Henderson, V., 2000. Effects of air quality regulations on polluting industries,
Journal of Political Economy 108, 379-421.

Berger, M., Blomquist, G., Peter, K., 2008. Compensating differentials in emerging labor
and housing markets: Estimates of quality of life in Russian cities, Journal of Urban
Economics 63, 25-55.

Bertrand, M., Kramarz, F., 2002. Does entry regulation hinder job creation? Evidence
from the French retail industry, Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1369-1413.



                                                                                         28
Cantillon, R., 1755/1931. Essai sur la nature cu commerce en general, ed. H. Higgs,
MacMillan, London.

Casson, M. C., 1982. The Entrepreneur:An Economic Theory, Edward Elgar, London.

Chen, H., Gompers, P., Kovner, A., Lerner, J., 2009. Buy local? The geography of
successful and unsuccessful venture capital expansion, Journal of Urban Economics, this
issue.

Chen, Y., Rosenthal, S., 2008. Local amenities and life-cycle migration: Do people move
for jobs or fun?, Journal of Urban Economics 64, 519-537.

Chinitz, B.J., 1961. Contrasts in agglomeration: New York and Pittsburgh, American
Economic Review 51, 279-89.

Dahl, M., Sorenson, O., 2009. The migration of technical workers, Journal of Urban
Economics, this issue.

Doms, M., Lewis, E., Robb, A., 2009. Local Labor Market Endowments, New Business
Characteristics, and Performance, Journal of Urban Economics, this issue.

Duranton, Gilles, 2007, Urban evolutions: The fast, the slow, and the still, American
Economic Review 91, 197-221.

Duranton, G., Jayet, H., 2009. Is the division of labour limited by the extent of the
market? Evidence from French cities. Unpublished mimeo.

Duranton, G., Puga, D., 2001. Nursery cities: Urban diversity, process innovation, and
the life-cycle of products, American Economic Review 91, 1454-1477.

Duranton, G. and Puga, D., 2004. Micro-foundations of urban agglomeration economies,
in: Henderson, J.V., Thisse J.-F. (Eds.), Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics,
Vol. 4, Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 2063-2118.

Fallick, B., Fleischman, C. and Rebitzer, J.B., 2006. Job hopping in the Silicon Valley:
The micro-foundations of an industry cluster, Review of Economics and Statistics 88,
472-481.

Findeisen, S., Sudekum, J. 2008. Industry churning and the evolution of cities: Evidence
for Germany, Journal of Urban Economics 64, 326-339.

Forslid, R., Ottaviano G.I.P., 2002, An analytically solvable core-periphery model,
Journal of Economic Geography 3, 229-240.

Freedman, M.L., 2008. Job hopping, earnings dynamics, and industrial agglomeration in
the software publishing industry, Journal of Urban Economics 64, 590-600.


                                                                                           29
Fujita, M., 1988. A monopolistic competition model of spatial agglomeration, Regional
Science and Urban Economics 18, 87-124.

Fujita, M., Krugman, P., and Venables, T., 1999, The Spatial Economy: Cities, Regions,
and International Trade, MIT Press, Cambridge.

Gerlach H., Ronde, T., Stahl, K., 2009. Labor pooling in R&D intensive industries,
Journal of Urban Economics 65, 99-111.

Glaeser, E.L, Kallal, H. D., Scheinkman, J. A., Shleifer, A., 1992. Growth in cities,
Journal of Political Economy 100, 1126-1152.

Glaeser, E.L., 2007. Entrepreneurship and the city. National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 13551.

Glaeser, E.L. Kerr, W.R., 2009. Local industrial conditions and entrepreneurship: How
much of the spatial distribution can we explain?, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Working Paper 14407.

Glaeser, E., Ponzetto, G., Kerr, W., 2009. Geographic amenities and the agglomeration of
innovation entrepreneurship, Journal of Urban Economics, this issue.

Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R., Krizan, C.J., 2009. Mom & Pop meet big box: Complements
or substitutes? Journal of Urban Economics, this issue.

Helsley, R. W., Strange, W. C., 1990. Agglomeration economies and matching in a
system of cities, Regional Science and Urban Economics 20, 189-212.

Helsley, R.W., Strange, W.C., 2009. Entrepreneurs and cities: Complexity, thickness,
and balance, Working Paper.

Henderson, J. V., 1985. The impact of zoning policies which regulate housing quality,
Journal of Urban Economics 18, 302-312.

Holmes, T. J., 1999. Localization of industry and vertical disintegration,
Review of Economics and Statistics 81, 314-25.

Hoover. E., Vernon, R., 1959. Anatomy of a Metropolis, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge.

Hymel, K., 2009. Does traffic congestion reduce employment growth?, Journal of Urban
Economics 65, 127-135.

Jacobs, J., 1969. The Economy of Cities, Vintage, New York.




                                                                                        30
Kerr, W., 2009. Breakthrough inventions and migrating clusters of innovation, Journal of
Urban Economics, this issue.

Kihlstrom, R. E., Laffont, J.-J., 1979. A general equilibrium entrepreneurial theory of
firm formation based on risk aversion, Journal of Political Economy 87, 719-48.

Klepper, S., 2007, Disagreements, spinoffs, and the evolution of Detroit as the capital of
the U.S. automobile industry, Management Science 53, 616-631.

Klepper, S., 2009. The original and growth of industry clusters: The making of Silicon
Valley and Detroit, Journal of Urban Economics, this issue.

Knight, F. H., 1921. Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit, Houghton-Mifflin, Boston.

Kolko, J., Neumark, D., 2009. Does local business ownership stabilize employment?
Journal of Urban Economics, this issue.

Koopmans, T.C., Beckmann, M., 1957. Assignment problems and the location of
economic activities, Econometrica 25, 53-76.

Krugman, P., 1991. Increasing returns and economic geography, Journal of Political
Economy 99, 483-499.

Lazear, E.P., 2005. Entrepreneurship. Journal of Labor Economics 23, 649-680.

Li, B., Lu, Y., 2009. Geographic concentration and vertical disintegration: Evidence from
China, Journal of Urban Economics 65, 294-304.

List, J.A., Millimet, D.L., Fredriksson, P.G., McHone, W.W., 2003. Effects of
environmental regulations on manufacturing plant births: Evidence from a propensity
matching score estimator, Review of Economics and Statistics 85, 944-952.

Lichtenberg, E., Ding, C., 2009. Local officials as land developers: Urban spatial
expansion in China, Journal of Urban Economics 66, 57-64.

Linden, L., Rockoff, J.E., 2008. Estimates of the impact of crime risk on property values
from Megan's Laws, American Economic Review 98, 1103-1127.

Lucas Jr., R.E., 1978. On the size distribution of business firms, The Bell Journal of
Economics 9, 508-523.

Marshall, A., 1890/1920. Principles of Economics, MacMillan, London.

Michelacci, C., Silva, O., 2007. Why so many local entrepreneurs?, Review of Economics
and Statistics 89, 615-633.



                                                                                          31
Millimet, D.L., Fredriksson, P.G., McHone, W.W., 2003. Effects of environmental
regulations on manufacturing plant births: evidence from a propensity score matching
estimator, Review of Economics and Statistics 85, 944-952.

Mills, E.S., Hamilton, B.W., 1997. Urban Economics, 6th ed., Prentice Hall, New York.

Miracky, W.F., 1992. Technological spillovers, the product cycle, and regional growth,
Working paper.

Neumark, D., Zhang, J., Ciccarella, S., 2008. The effects of Wal-Mart on local labor
markets, Journal of Urban Economics 63, 405-430.

Ottaviano, G.I.P. and Thisse, J.-F., 2004. Agglomeration and economic geography, in:
Henderson, J.V., Thisse J.-F. (Eds.), Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics, Vol.
4, Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 2564-2608.

Pope, J.,C., 2008. Fear of crime and housing prices: Household reactions to sex offender
registries, Journal of Urban Economics 64, 601-614.

Porter, M., 1990. The Competitive Advantage of Nations, The Free Press, New York.

Rappaport, J, 2007. Moving to nice weather, Regional Science and Urban Economics, 37,
375-398.

Rivera-Batiz, F.L., 1988. Increasing returns, monopolistic competition, and
agglomeration economies in consumption and production, Regional Science and Urban
Economics 18, 125-153.

Rosenthal, S. S., Strange, W.C., 2003. Geography, industrial organization, and
agglomeration, Review of Economics and Statistics 85, 377-393.

Rosenthal, S. S., Strange, W.C., 2004. Evidence on the nature and sources of
agglomeration economies, in: Henderson, J.V., Thisse J.-F. (Eds.), Handbook of Urban
and Regional Economics, Vol. 4, Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 2119-2172.

Rosenthal, S. S., Strange, W.C., 2008. The attenuation of human capital spillovers,
Journal of Urban Economics 64, 373-389.

Rosenthal, S. S., Strange, W.C., 2009. Small establishments / big effects:
Agglomeration, industrial organization, and entrepreneurship, in: E.L. Glaeser, ed.,
Agglomeration Economics, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, in press.

Ross, A., Rosenthal, S., 2009. Violent crime, entrepreneurship and vibrant cities, Journal
of Urban Economics, this issue.

Saxenian, A., 1994. Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and
Route 128, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.

                                                                                         32
Simonen, J., McCann, P. 2008. Firm innovation: The influence of R&D cooperation and
the geography of human capital inputs, Journal of Urban Economics 64, 146-154 .

Schumpeter, J. A., 1934. The Theory of Economic Development, Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA.

Schumpeter, J. A., 1939, Business Cycles, McGraw-Hill, New York.

Smith, A., 1776/2001. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations,
Bartleby, New York.

Solow, R. M., 1956. A contribution to the theory of economic growth, Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 70, 65-94.

Sorenson, O., Audia, P.G., 2000, The social structure of entrepreneurial activity:
Geographic concentration of footwear production in the United States, 1940-1989,’
American Journal of Sociology 106, 424-62.

Strange, W., Hejazi, W., Tang, J., 2006. The uncertain city: Competitive instability,
skills, innovation, and the strategy of agglomeration, Journal of Urban Economics, 59,
331-351.

Sveikauskas, L., 1979. Interurban differences in the innovative nature of production,
Journal of Urban Economics 6, 216-227.

Tiebout, C, 1956. A pure theory of local expenditures, Journal of Political Economy 64,
416-424.

Vernon, R., 1960. Metropolis 1985, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Waldfogel, J., 2008. The median voter and the median consumer: Local private goods
and population composition, Journal of Urban Economics 63, 567-582.

Webster’s New World Dictionary, Second College Edition, 1970, G.C. Merriam & Co.,
Springfield, MA.




                                                                                         33
Appendix: Proofs.


Proof of Proposition 1:
       If there are N workers in the city each of whom earns a wage of W, and if total
entrepreneurial profits equal           , then the price of land will equal
                      . The assumption of iso-elastic demand ensures that prices will equal

        , where       denotes the wage. Total labor earnings plus entrepreneurial profits in

the city will equal              , so the price of land is      times this amount. Total wealth

including renter income in city equals                  . If       0, total welfare for a

manufacturing worker in the city equals:

                                                                                             (A1)

If     0, the city is a closed economy, wages can be normalized to one, and worker
welfare equals

                                                    .                                        (A2)

Total consumption of each non-traded or non-traded good in the city equals

                  , where Y denotes the wealth of the relevant individual. The total

consumption of each good in the city is                        and consumption of all

domestically produced goods in the city equals                         . Demand for each traded

good outside the city is          , so total exports in this sector equals              . Total
labor demand equals

                                                                                             (A3)

Setting this equal to labor supply gives

                      =                         .                                            (A4)

       The total profits of each non-traded goods entrepreneur equals

                             ,                                                               (A5)

and the total profits of each traded good entrepreneur equal

                                                                                                  34
                                                .                                                  (A6)

       From (A4), we have:
                =                                                                                  (A7)

Differentiating (A7) with respect to        yields

                                                0.                                                 (A8)

Using the notation                 , (A8) can be rewritten


                                                                   0.                              (A9)

Differentiating the equation with respect to              yields

                                        =            0.                                        (A10)

       The numbers of workers per firm equals                  which is obviously declining with

when N is fixed and independent of . Worker welfare equals

                                                                             ,                 (A11)

Substituting in

                       =                    ,                                                  (A12)

we obtain

                                                                         .                     (A13)

The derivative of the logarithm of (A13) with respect to                yields

                                   1                          ,                                (A14)

which is positive if

            2              1        2       1                                              0   (A15)

The inequality (A15) always holds.
       The derivative of the logarithm of (A13) with respect to                  yields:

                               ,                                                               (A16)




                                                                                                     35
which is positive if and only if

                                       1.                                                       (A17)

(A17) always holds.

       The cost of land equals:                        . It is increasing in   since wages are

increasing in   . The derivative of the logarithm of land costs with respect to            is

                                            ,                                                   (A18)

which is positive if and only if                .


Proof of Proposition 2:
       The spatial equilibrium requires that worker welfare equals the constant

reservation utility. This implies that                                                or

                                            .       are constant with respect to changes in the
parameters      and .
       Standard notions of stability require that welfare be declining with N (taking into
account the impact that N has on wages). Differentiating the labor equilibrium equation
with respect to N yields:

                                                     =                                          0

                                                                                                (A19)
Since wages are always declining with population it is sufficient to ascertain that

                                   .                                                            (A20)
is always declining with W. Differentiating the logarithm of (A20) yields:

                                   1                     .                                      (A21)

For this quantity to be always positive, it must be that

                               1                             0.                                 (A22)

Rearranging and simplifying, the condition becomes
                              2        1 1                        0,                            (A23)
which must hold.

                                                                                                    36
         Differentiating the logarithm of (A23) with respect to           yields:

            1                                         1                                                 0.

                                                                                                  (A24)
This implies that:

                                                                                                  (A25)

The denominator is positive. The numerator, 2 1                       1
 1              1      , is obviously positive as long as 2 1                1        . If   is
sufficiently close to one, it will be negative. Note that if          1, then

     .     must be constant with respect to changes in          which ensures that wages will
fall as entrepreneurship rises.
         Differentiating the logarithm of (A23) with respect to           yields:

                1                                      1                             0,           (A26)

which implies

                                                       0.                                         (A27)

         The cost of land equals a constant times                     , yet we know that

                                             is constant. This implies that

                                  will be constant, and that                     will rise if and only
if

                                                                                                  (A28)
rises. The derivative of the logarithm of this expression with respect to             yields:

                                    =                             ,                               (A29)

which is always positive, so land values are always rising with .

         The derivative of the logarithm of                                  with respect to       is

                                                          .                                       (A30)

(A31) is positive if




                                                                                                        37
                   1
                              2 1                  1                           1                 1
                                                                                                           0
                                    2           1 1
                                                                                                           (A31)
(A31) can be rewritten as

                                                                                                           (A32)

which is always positive.

        To find the effect of      on N, it is enough to note that
                       must be constant, so N will rise if

                                                                                                           (A33)
rises. The derivative of the logarithm of this expression with respect to                       is

                                                                                                           (A34)

which is always positive.
        To find the effect on N of          , we first note that                       is rising with        , so
if increases in   lower W, it must be that N rises. As such we need only concern
ourselves with the cases where increases in                 increase W. Next differentiating

                            with respect to            yields:

                                                        ,                                                  (A35)

which must be positive if           0, which means that                        must increase.

        Workers per firm is isomorphic to                         /       yet we know

that                                                  must be constant when            or       changes.

Differentiating the logarithm of                         with respect to           yields

                                        =                                                   ,              (A36)

which is positive if and only if            1           0. If         1              0, then

                  is increasing with            and                       is decreasing with            so




                                                                                                               38
           must rise as        rises. If         1             0, then                               is decreasing with


     and                       is increasing with                so           must rise as               rises.

Differentiating the logarithm of                                      with respect to             yields:

                 1                                     =                                                                   . (A37)


If          1             0, then                          is decreasing with                 and                      is

decreasing with                 , so as        rises           must fall. However, if                      1           0 it is

possible that                              may still be decreasing with                  if              1 1
 1                   2      1               , which would hold, for example for high enough levels
of . In which case, the comparative static would be reversed.
           Finally, we turn to the profitability of the non-traded good entrepreneurs which

equals                               . The derivative of this with respect to                       is

                           1     2         1                          ,                                                (A38)

or

                                                                                         .                             (A39)

If         0, this expression is positive if and only if
           2                                   1 1                        1      2            1                        (A40)
which will always hold if             is sufficiently close to one. Conversely if                          is distinctly
below one, then a large enough value of                    ensures that the inequality will fail.
           The derivative of non-traded entrepreneur profit with respect to                                 is

                                     2                     ,                                                           (A41)

which equals:

                                                                                     .                                 (A42)

This expression will be positive if                  is small and 1
1 1               , which will always hold if              is sufficiently close to one. However, for
large values of          the derivative must negative everywhere.

                                                                                                                            39
Proof of Proposition 3:

       The expected profit of each non-traded goods entrepreneur equals

                 , so the equilibrium is that

                                                          .                               (A43)

For any exogenous variable, Z, we can write:
                       ,
                                            ,                  ,            ,             (A44)

and totally differentiate the quantity with respect to Z to get:




         2                                                              ,                 (A45)

where we mean                                                 to signify the derivative of the

expression with respect to Z, not counting any indirect effects working through          or      .

Grouping terms together, this yields that       equals:




                                                                                          (A46)

The expression

                           2                                                              (A47)

represents the complete impact of      on profits and since we have assumed that

       , we are assuming that 1                    and so the denominator is positive. As
such the sign of the derivative is the same as the sign of the numerator, or the sign of the
terms in parentheses since           0, which we refer to as M.


Case 1: Closed City
       In the closed city case, wages are determined by the equality


                                                                                                 40
                        =                           ,                                            (A48)

so the variable N, impacts wages but nothing else in the equation. Differentiating gives

                                                             < 0,                                (A49)

so entrepreneurship is rising with city size.
             We will also investigate ,        and Q, and it helpful to note that in the closed city
case:

                                                              0

                                                        0,                                       (A50)

                                                         0.

In the case of , it is easy to see that the value of M is negative, since the wage effect is
positive and the direct effect on wages is also positive.

             In the case of       or Q, the value of M equals either           or           times

     times                        minus

 2           1

This can be rewritten as



              2               1                                                                  (A51)

If     is small and W<2 (which will occur if                        +   2           2           . then

this will hold. Alternatively, it will hold if           is close enough to one. If     is sufficiently
large, then wages will explode and all of the terms can be negative.


Case 2: Open City
      In the open city case, wages are pinned down by the spatial equilibrium

                                                                                                 (A52)




                                                                                                       41
This means that         0, so the number of entrepreneurs is again declining with , and

      0, so the number of entrepreneurs is rising with Q. Also:

                                                             0,                         (A53)

so entrepreneurship is rising with .

       The derivative                                                 0, so the value of M

is

                                  -


                                                                                        (A54)

This becomes:

                                                   *

                                       1 1                        1        +
                         .
                                                                                        (A55)

As   approaches one, the value of M approaches                           which is

unambiguously positive. Conversely if        gets sufficiently high, then wages explode and
all of the terms are negative.




                                                                                             42
