                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE STATE OF CORPORATE GOVERNANCE RESEARCH

                                       Lucian A. Bebchuk
                                       Michael S. Weisbach

                                       Working Paper 15537
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15537


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2009




We would like to thank Léa Stern for her diligent help in preparing this paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Lucian A. Bebchuk and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The State of Corporate Governance Research
Lucian A. Bebchuk and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 15537
November 2009
JEL No. G34

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper, which introduces the special issue on corporate governance co-sponsored by the Review
of Financial Studies and the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), reviews and comments
on the state of corporate governance research. The special issue features seven papers on corporate
governance that were presented in a meeting of the NBER’s corporate governance project. Each of
the papers represents state-of-the-art research in an important area of corporate governance research.
For each of these areas, we discuss the importance of the area and the questions it focuses on, how
the paper in the special issue makes a significant contribution to this area, and what we do and do not
know about the area. We discuss in turn work on shareholders and shareholder activism, directors,
executives and their compensation, controlling shareholders, comparative corporate governance, cross-border
investments in global capital markets, and the political economy of corporate governance.


Lucian A. Bebchuk
Harvard Law School
1545 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu

Michael S. Weisbach
Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
weisbach_2@fisher.osu.edu
This special issue of The Review of Financial Studies presents seven papers that were presented

at a meeting of the corporate governance project of the National Bureau of Economic Research

(NBER). The papers, which subsequent to the conference went through the usual review process

of The Review of Financial Studies, represent cutting-edge research in important areas of

corporate governance research. This special issue thus provides a good opportunity for taking

stock of the state of corporate governance research in these areas.

       Interest in corporate governance has been rapidly growing, both inside and outside

academia, together with recognition of its importance. In the academic world, the interest in

corporate governance has been truly interdisciplinary, with much work being undertaken by

researchers not only from economics and finance but also from law, management, and

accounting. The term “corporate governance” appears as a key word in the abstract of 987 papers

over the past year on SSRN, and, given the huge amount of research being done in the area,

SSRN in 2009 started the Corporate Governance Network (CGN) with 21 different subject-

matter electronic journals.

       Shleifer and Vishny (1997) define corporate governance as referring to the way in which

suppliers of finance assure themselves a return on their investment. Because returns to suppliers

of finance depend on myriad legal and contractual arrangements, the operation of various

markets, and the behavior of different types of players, corporate governance has evolved into

various sub-literatures (e.g., Zingales, 1998; Becht, Bolton, and Röell, 2003; Hermalin, 2009).

       Below we discuss in turn seven important areas of corporate governance research, each of

which is represented by a paper in this special issue. For each of these areas, we discuss the

importance of the area and the questions that it poses for researchers, how the paper in the

special issue and other recent research advance our understanding of the area, and the questions




                                                 1
that future research may do well to examine. Throughout, we stress questions concerning

corporate governance that public and private decision-makers face; research that can shed light

on these questions will have substantial implications and payoffs.

       Section 1 focuses on shareholders and shareholder activism — the actions that

shareholders may take to protect their interests. Section 2 focuses on corporate directors, while

Section 3 turns to executives and their compensation. Whereas Section 1-3 focus on companies

without a controlling shareholders, Section 4 considers companies with such shareholders.

Sections 5 and 6 focus on international corporate governance, with Section 5 considering cross-

country comparisons and Section 6 discussing cross-border investments by foreign investors.

Finally, Section 7 focuses on the political economy of corporate governance.



1. Shareholders

Berle and Means (1932) identified what appeared to be a fundamental contradiction in the

corporate form of organization: While dispersed shareholders collectively have incentives to

monitor the management of the firms for which they own stock, individually, the free-rider

problem can ruin such incentives, leading to a lack of shareholder involvement in firms. Given

that the distribution of stock ownership is important because of these free-riding considerations,

Shleifer and Vishny (1986) pointed out that large percentage block shareholdings are more

prevalent in the United States than previously thought (no one doubted their existence outside the

U.S.). Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1988) and many follow-up studies have documented a

robust empirical relation between these large shareholdings and corporate performance, holding

in a wide variety of samples spanning a number of countries and time periods.




                                                2
       The underlying reasons, however, for this relation between ownership structure and firm

performance are not clear. The main explanation discussed in the Shleifer and Vishny (1986)

article is through the possibility of hostile takeover, because such takeovers can be more

profitable for a shareholder who already owns a large block of shares than for one who does not

(see also Grossman and Hart, 1980). Yet, the empirical relation between ownership and

performance appears to be too robust to be explained by hostile takeovers alone, since the same

relation exists in countries and time periods in which there is no possibility of a hostile takeover.

       Another possibility is that the relation could occur because of other actions taken by

blockholders. Most shares of U.S. firms are held by informed, sophisticated institutional

investors, many of whom have non-negligible stakes. And some outside shareholders pursue

active and sometimes aggressive strategies — proxy fights and takeover bids in the past, and

hedge fund activism in the past decade.

       Financial economists have accordingly been increasingly looking at the effects of

shareholder actions. There have been a number of studies that have examined the effect of public

pension funds and other institutional investors on the firms in which they invest [see Del Guercio

and Hawkins (1999), Gillan and Starks (2000), Hartzell and Starks (2003), as well as Karpoff

(2001) and Gillan and Starks (2007) for surveys]. In recent years, the most important players in

the activism landscape have been activist hedge funds. The activities and payoffs of such hedge

funds, which are willing to make substantial investments in engagement with companies, are the

subject of recent studies by Brav, Jiang, Thomas, and Partnoy (2008), Greenwood and Schor

(2009), and Klein and Zur (2009).

       One key question on which research has focused is the effect of activism on profitability

Are activists producing value for firms and their fellow shareholders? Or are they hurting their




                                                  3
fellow shareholders? Such questions have been asked in the past about shareholders mounting

proxy fights and takeover bids and have been more recently asked about hedge fund activists.

The resolution of these questions has important policy implications for debates on the optimal

scope of shareholder rights in public companies (e.g., Bebchuk, 2005, 2007; Bainbridge, 2006;

Strine, 2006; Lipton and Savitt, 2007). Whereas a conclusion that activism is beneficial provides

support for strengthening shareholder rights, the opposite conclusion provides support for

constraining them.

       Unlike activist shareholders who mounted proxy fights and takeover bids in the past, the

activist hedge funds that attracted the limelight in the past decade do not commonly seek to

acquire the company themselves. Instead they try to affect the way in which the company is run

or to get the company to be acquired by someone else. Importantly, they most commonly contact

companies privately, so it is difficult to gauge the magnitude of their intervention using publicly-

available data. It also is not clear what the net effect of institutional activism is. Are activists

producing a collective good, which is still under-provided and whose actions should be

encouraged? Or are they destroying value at the expense of other investors? [see Kahan and

Rock (2007) for a survey and discussion of this issue].

       Unfortunately, informal contact between institutional investors and firms is by its nature

private and difficult to quantify. Consequently, there has historically been only one study of such

activism: Carleton, Nelson, and Weisbach (1998) gather a sample of letters between TIAA-

CREF (a large U.S. pension fund) and companies. They find that TIAA-CREF typically does not

ask firms to make large operational changes but are usually successful at inducing firms to make

the relatively small changes they ask for (such as having a shareholder vote before adopting

‘Blank-Check Preferred Stock,’ or having women or minority representatives on their board of




                                                 4
directors). Yet, it is impossible to know exactly how representative TIAA-CREF is of other U.S.

(or international) institutions in terms of its activism.

        Becht, Franks, Mayer, and Rossi (2009), a study included in this special issue, utilizes

privately obtained data from Hermes, the fund manager owned by the British Telecom Pension

Scheme, on engagements with management in companies targeted by its U.K. Focus Fund

(HUKFF) between 1998 and 2004. This fund has been highly involved with activism and also

has been unusually successful, earning abnormal annual returns net of fees of 4.9%.

Becht,Franks, Mayer, and Rossi have complete access to the records of all activism by Hermes,

including private interventions that would be unobservable in studies purely relying on public

information. Becht, Franks, Mayer, and Rossi document the way in which Hermes frequently

seeks and achieves significant changes in the company's strategy, including refocusing on the

core business and returning cash to shareholders, as well as changes in the executive

management such as the replacement of the CEO or chairman. These authors estimate that

around 90% of the abnormal fund returns is due to the activism program.

        Becht, Franks, Mayer, and Rossi (2009) is a significant study because it provides a

window into the nature of ‘behind the scenes’ activism and shows that such activism can be

important. The study suggests that financial institutions can increase in value not just by buying

and selling securities strategically, but also by creating value inside of firms by providing

monitoring services. It provides an example of the way in which it is possible to learn a great

deal from the details of the actions of a single (particularly interesting) financial institution.

        There are some questions that future research should try to address. If activism produces

such large returns, why has Hermes not done it on a larger scale? Is the ability to produce such

results unique to Hermes or a few such players or is it something that has been done, or can be




                                                   5
done, by other U.K. players with similar success? Note also that the large returns that the study

shows raise the question of why more capital does not flow into this work, reducing returns, and

in the process also possibly reducing slack in the economy. We need to understand better what

the barriers are to entry if any into activism. Interestingly, large returns from activism do not

indicate that a system is working well. The fact that activism can generate such large returns

might indicate that a high level of slack exists prior to activist intervention.

       It will also be important to understand the extent to which the findings are due to the

particular legal and institutional features of the U.K. system. As Becht, Franks, Mayer, and Rossi

(2009) note, legal rules in the U.K. give shareholders much more power than U.S. shareholders

have. Understanding the ways in which the payoffs and effects of activism depend on legal rules

is an important question for financial economists to investigate.

       The financial crisis has intensified the ongoing debate about the role that shareholders

should play in corporate governance. To some, increasing shareholder power and facilitating

shareholder intervention when necessary is part of the necessary reforms. To others, activism by

shareholders who potentially have short-term interests is part of the problem, not a solution. To

what extent (and when) can shareholder activism improve firm value and performance? To what

extent (and when) can shareholder activism produce distortions that make matters worse?

Research by financial economists that seeks further light on these questions will provide valuable

input to the questions with which decision-makers are wrestling.



2. Boards of Directors

An alternative to direct monitoring by shareholders is governance through the board of directors,

who are elected by shareholders. Yet, as has been recognized at least since Smith (1776) and




                                                   6
Berle and Means (1932), directors’ interests may not fully overlap with those of shareholders.

The complex three-way relationship among shareholders, boards, and top management has been

the subject of a large literature [see Hermalin and Weisbach (2003) and Adams, Hermalin, and

Weisbach (2009) for surveys].

       How do we make boards work better? One recipe that has been increasingly suggested by

public and private decision-makers is to have independent boards [see Gordon (2007) on the rise

of independent directors]. Indeed, a common policy response to observed ‘governance crises’ has

been to adopt reforms designed to strengthen the independence of boards. For example,

following the Enron and WorldCom scandals in 2002, the exchanges increased independence

requirements, and the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 required the independence of audit

committees. The financial crisis has similarly led to the consideration of legislation aimed at

bolstering the independence of compensation committees.

       Why impose regulatory limits on the composition of the board? Hermalin and Weisbach

(1998) present a model in which directors imposed on the firm by regulations are likely to be less

effective than those picked through the endogenous selection process that would occur in the

absence of regulation. At the same time, regulators are typically concerned that, without

regulation, opportunism by insiders might lead to insufficient independence of directors.

       Nonetheless, given the growing importance of independent directors, whether due to

regulation or to choices made by firms, it is important to study empirically the effects of director

independence. Initial work on the subject failed to find a link between board independence and

higher firm value (Hermalin and Weisbach, 1991; Bhagat and Black, 1999, 2002). However,

there is a growing body of empirical research indicating that director independence is associated

with improved decisions with respect to some specific types of decisions (e.g., Byrd and




                                                 7
Hickman, 1992; Shivdasani, 1993; Brickley, Coles, and Terry, 1994; Cotter, Shivdasani, and

Zenner, 1997; Dann, Del Guercio, and Partch, 2003; Gillette, Noe, and Rebello, 2003). In

particular, it has been shown that director independence has an impact on CEO turnover (e.g.,

Weisbach, 1988), executive compensation decisions (e.g., Core, Holthausen, and Larcker, 1999;

Chhaochharia and Grinstein, 2008), the incidence of fraud (e.g., Beasley, 1996; Dechow, Sloan,

and Sweeney, 1996; Beasley, Carcello, Hermanson, and Lapides, 2000), and on the incidence of

opportunistic timing of stock option grants (e.g., Bebchuk, Grinstein, and Peyer, 2009). 1

        An important, and necessary, condition for directors to be able to be effective is the

amount and nature of information that they have. If directors only have access to publicly-

available information, it is hard to imagine that they will be able to evaluate management better

than an outside shareholder. In addition, the mere fact that directors do not have superior

information would in itself likely be the consequence of a strained relationship with

management, since presumably no information of value would have been transmitted during

board meetings. The informational advantage of directors over outsiders thus presumably

provides a measure of the potential for these directors to add value.

        Ravina and Sapienza (2009), in this special issue, adopt a novel strategy to estimate the

magnitude of this informational advantage. These authors compare the trading performance of

independent directors and other officers of the firm. Their interesting finding is that independent

directors earn positive and substantial abnormal returns when they purchase their company stock

and that the difference with the same firm's officers’ personal trading returns is relatively small

at most horizons. Executive officers and independent directors both earn higher returns in firms

with the weakest governance. In addition, independent directors who sit on the audit committee

1
  Recent work (Chhaochharia and Grinstein, 2006) also documents that reforms requiring some firms to
increase their use of independent directors were associated with increases in the firm value of such firms.


                                                    8
earn higher returns than other independent directors at the same firm. Finally, independent

directors earn significantly higher returns than the market when they sell the company stock in a

window before bad news and around earnings restatements. The authors view their results as

consistent with the view that independent directors have an informational advantage over

outsiders and thus can perform their job well.

       While Ravina and Sapienza (2009) stress the implications of their findings for the ability

of independent directors to perform their role well, one could also draw inferences from it

concerning their incentives to do so. In particular, to the extent that independent directors rely on

management for the receipt of information, independent directors who made larger trading

profits might have been individuals that were close to management or whose performance of the

oversight function might have been more favorable to management. Bebchuk, Grinstein, and

Peyer (2009) find that independent directors have been recipients of opportunistically timed

stock option grants, and they show that the directors’ benefits from such lucky timing were

associated with substantial benefits to the CEO. In particular, they find that, for any given firm

and CEO, the odds of a CEO grant being lucky were significantly higher when the independent

directors of the firm received grants on the same date; and that director grant events not

coinciding with awards to executives were more likely to be lucky when the CEO received a

lucky grant in the same or prior year.

       The Ravina and Sapienza (2009) study, and the other recent works discussed in this

section, highlight the value of the work by financial economists on independent directors, who

play a major role in corporate decision-making. Financial economists should not generally

assume that independent directors seek to maximize shareholder value; rather, the decisions of

independent directors, like those of other economic agents, might well be influenced by their




                                                 9
incentives, which in turn are a product of various features of the environment in which they

operate. The information that independent directors have should be similarly recognized to be

endogenously determined by corporate structures and processes, rather than to be exogenously

given. Additional work on the incentives and information of independent directors would be

worthwhile.



3. Executive Compensation

In the ordinary course of events, public firms are managed by executives, not directors or

shareholders. Executives’ decisions are influenced by the directors’ oversight, as well as by

shareholders’ monitoring. Executives’ decisions are also affected, however, by the incentives

provided to them by their executive compensation arrangements. These compensation

arrangements have become the subject of a large literature [see Murphy (1999) and Core, Guay,

and Larcker (2003) for surveys].

       There are at least two views of executive compensation in the literature. One view (“the

optimal contracting view”) sees executive pay arrangements as the product of arm’s length

contracting between boards and executives, which leads to contracts that provide efficient

incentives for reducing agency problems as much as possible (e.g., Holmstrom, 1979). An

alternative view (“the managerial power view”) questions whether pay arrangements are the

product of arm’s length contracting and sees such pay arrangements as part of the agency

problem itself rather than as a solution to it (Bebchuk and Fried, 2003, 2004).

       One part of the debate on executive compensation concerns compensation levels (Kaplan

2008). Are the levels of executive compensation, which have grown considerably relative to

rank-and-file compensation in recent years (Jensen, Murphy, and Wruck, 2004; Bebchuk and




                                                10
Grinstein, 2005), a reflection of supply and demand in the labor market for executives? Or do

they reflect rent-seeking by powerful managers? Given the attention that pay levels receive from

the media, the public, and policy-makers, a better understanding of the factors affecting them is

clearly an important research topic.

       The second dimension to the debate concerns the structure of pay arrangements. Under

the optimal contracting view, the design of pay arrangements is presumed to be (second-best)

efficient. In contrast, the managerial power view allows for the possibility that pay arrangements

will be structured sub-optimally in ways that lead to diluted or even perverse incentives. While

Jensen and Murphy (1990) argued that pay is insufficiently tied to performance due to outside

social pressures, the managerial power view suggests that sub-optimal pay-performance

sensitivity could itself be a product of executive influence. To financial economists, the question

of incentives, and in particular the extent to which incentives provided by pay arrangements

should be presumed to be optimal, is of significant importance.

       Some recent work by financial economists, including the work by Kaplan and Rauh

(2009) in this special issue, seeks to explain the growth of executive pay within the arm’s length

contracting paradigm by suggesting that it reflects an increase in the value of executives’

marginal contributions and improvements in their outside options. Murphy and Zabojnik (2007)

suggest that the growth in pay reflects a shift in the importance of "managerial ability" (skills

transferable across companies) relative to "firm-specific human capital" (valuable only within the

organization), which operated to strengthen executives’ bargaining position by improving their

outside options. Gabaix and Landier (2008) develop a model in which the marginal product of an

executive of a given quality is proportional to the market capitalization of the firm, and argue

that the growth of pay has been due to the increase in the market capitalization of firms. The




                                                11
extent to which these theories can explain the time-series variation in executive compensation is

questioned on empirical grounds by Dew-Becker and Gordon (2007), Cremers and Grinstein

(2009), and Frydman and Saks (2009).

        Kaplan and Rauh (2009) examine the question of whether the growth of pay can reflect

market forces in a creative way. The idea is that if executive pay reflects market forces, then its

growth should parallel that of other high paid professions. Kaplan and Rauh gather data on

compensation from high paying fields such as financial service sector employees from

investment banks, hedge funds, private equity funds, and mutual funds (Wall Street), as well as

corporate lawyers, professional athletes, and celebrities.

        The estimates of Kaplan and Rauh (2009) lead them to conclude that non-financial public

company CEOs and top executives do not represent more than 6.5% of any of the top AGI

brackets (the top 0.1%, 0.01%, 0.001%, and 0.0001%). Individuals in the Wall Street category

comprise at least as high a percentage of the top AGI brackets as non-financial executives of

public companies. Kaplan and Rauh argue that this evidence suggests that the growth of

executive pay is not reflective of suboptimal contracting, but rather is most consistent with

theories of superstars, skill biased technological change, greater scale, and the interaction of

these effects.

        Although Kaplan and Rauh (2009) suggest that the growth of pay levels could be

consistent with the optimal contracting view, they do not attempt to test directly whether

compensation is indeed the product of arm’s length contracting. A full defense of this view

would have to address the empirical evidence that compensation levels are higher (as well as less

sensitive to performance) when governance is weaker [see Bebchuk and Fried (2004, Chapter 6)

for a survey]. Among other things, there is evidence that CEO pay is higher when outside




                                                 12
directors serve on multiple boards, when the board has interlocking directors, when more of the

outside directors have been appointed under this CEO, when there are no large outside

blockholders, when a smaller percentage of shares is held by institutional investors, and when

antitakeover protections are more significant (e.g., Borokhovich, Brunarski, and Parrino, 1997;

Hallock, 1997; Core, Holthausen, and Larcker, 1999; Cyert, Kang, and Kumar, 2002; Hartzell

and Starks, 2003). 2

        Whereas Kaplan and Rauh (2009) defends the optimal contracting view against claims

that pay levels have been excessive, some other recent work seeks to defend this view against

claims that compensation structures have been inefficiently designed.. In particular, Edmans,

Gabaix, and Landier (2009) present a model in which optimal pay lines up closely with empirical

observations on actual executive compensation. And while many public officials expressed

concerns that standard pay arrangements provide excessive incentives to focus on the short-term

[an argument stressed in Bebchuk and Fried (2004, Chapter 14)], Fahlenbrach and Stulz (2009)

argue that there is no empirical evidence that such incentives have played a role in the run-up to

the financial crisis.

        Although interest in executive pay has been high for quite some time, the Financial Crisis

of 2008-2009 has further intensified this interest. Public attention to the compensation levels of

top officials appears to be at an all-time high. Regulators around the world are examining

measures to improve the structure of compensation, and not to make things worse through ill

thought out provisions. And authorities in the U.S. and elsewhere are considering measures to

improve the corporate governance processes that produce pay arrangements. The examination of

2
 There is also evidence that weaker corporate governance is associated with lower sensitivity of pay to
performance (Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2001) and opportunistic compensation practices such as those
manifested by option backdating (Bebchuk, Grinstein, and Peyer, 2009; Bizjak, Whitby, and Lemmon,
2009).


                                                  13
pay arrangements and the pay-setting processes by public and private decision-makers, we hope,

will be informed from the ongoing and future research of financial economists.



4. Controlling Shareholders

The nature of governance problems differs greatly between public companies with and without a

controlling shareholder (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 1999; Bebchuk and Hamdani,

2009). With controlling shareholders, the market for corporate control that plays such an

important role in the analysis of companies without a controller, cannot provide a source of

discipline. With a controlling shareholder, the fundamental governance problem is not

opportunism by executives and directors at the expense of public shareholders at large but rather

opportunism by the controlling shareholder at the expense of the minority shareholders.

       The Becht, Franks, Mayer, and Rossi, Ravina and Sapienza, and Kaplan and Rauh papers

in this issue all focus on companies without a controlling shareholder — the common structure

among publicly traded firms in the U.S. and the U.K. and the one on which most research has

focused. But as the work on comparative corporate governance has shown (Becht and Röell,

1999; La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 1999; Franks and Mayer, 2001), companies with

a controlling shareholder are the dominant form among publicly traded firms in most countries.

Holderness (2009) shows that controlling shareholders are more common even in the U.S. than is

usually assumed.

       One important type of controlling shareholders are those labeled “controlling minority

shareholders” by Bebchuk, Kraakman, and Triantis (2000). These are shareholders who own

only a minority (and sometimes a small minority) of the company’s cash flow rights but control a

majority of the votes and thus have a lock on control. An owner of minority of the cash flow




                                               14
rights can control a majority of the votes when cash flow rights and votes are separated due to

the use of dual-class stock, corporate pyramids, or cross-holdings. Such structures are quite

common in many countries (Claessens, Djankov, and Lang, 2000; Faccio and Lang, 2002).

Bebchuk, Kraakman, and Triantis (2000) show that such structures have the potential to create

very large agency costs that are an order of magnitude larger than those associated with

controlling shareholders who hold a majority of the cash flow rights in their companies.

Bertrand, Mehta, and Mullainathan (2002) present evidence about the significant amount of

tunneling that takes place in such firms.

       In the U.S., controlling minority shareholder structures commonly occur through the use

of dual-class shares. In such firms, multiple classes of stocks will trade, typically with the same

dividend rights but different voting rights. This arrangement ensures that control is kept in the

hands of a small group of individuals, usually the founder and/or his family, even though the

company can be traded publicly with many shareholders. The wedge between the prices of the

different classes of stock reflects the private benefits of control enjoyed by the high-vote

shareholders. There have been a number of papers documenting the patterns of ownership, the

prices of dual class stocks, and the value of voting rights in such firms both in the U.S. and

internationally (e.g., Zingales, 1994, 1995; Nenova, 2003). Yet, these studies have typically had

relatively small samples that limit their ability to answer important questions about dual class

firms, such as the incremental effect of dual class ownership on valuation.

       Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2009), in this issue, consider the issue of governance when

cash flow rights and voting rights are separated. They assemble a comprehensive list of dual-

class firms in the U.S. and use this list to investigate the relationship between insider ownership

and firm value. Their data (which is available at the Review of Financial Studies website) has




                                                15
two useful features for this valuation analysis. First, since dual-class stock separates cash-flow

rights from voting rights, they can separately identify the impact of each. Second, they address

endogeneity concerns by using exogenous predictors of dual-class status as instruments.

       In single-stage regressions, Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2009) find strong evidence that

firm value is increasing in insiders' cash-flow rights and decreasing in insider voting rights. In

instrumental-variable regressions, the point estimates remain the same sign and magnitude, but

the significance levels are lower. This work illustrates the importance of ownership structure for

valuation. Because of its instrumental variable approach, it has a relatively clean way of

measuring the impact of controlling shareholders that can appropriate private benefits from

minority ones.

       The Gompers, Ishii and Metrick (2009) paper thus makes a contribution to the

accumulating empirical evidence that controlling minority shareholder structures are associated

with increased agency costs and reduced firm value. The question then arises why such

structures develop and are maintained, and what should be the public policy toward them. Given

the importance of companies with controlling minority shareholders in many countries around

the world, these questions should be part of the research agenda of financial economists.



5. International Comparisons

Until the mid-1990s, most of the work on corporate governance has been in the context of U.S.

firms. But the influential work of La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999) and La Porta,

Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997, 1998, 2000a, 2000b, 2002) has stimulated a large

body of work on international comparisons [see Levine (2005) and La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,

and Shleifer (2008) for surveys].




                                               16
       Much of this work has focused on differences between countries’ legal systems

(including their systems of enforcement), and has studied how such differences relate to

differences in how economies and capital markets perform. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer,

and Vishny (1997, 1998) put forward an anti-director index for measuring the legal protection

accorded to investors, and this index has been subsequently used by more than one hundred

studies (Spamann, 2009). How best to measure the extent to which a particular country’s legal

system protects the rights of public investors is an active area of research in which recent work

seeks to provide improved indices for this purpose (Hail and Leuz, 2006; Djankov, La Porta,

Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 2008; Jackson and Roe, 2008).

       While research on comparative corporate governance has in the past mainly focused on

cross-country differences in governance, a substantial body of research about U.S. firms has been

showing that cross-firm differences in governance have substantial effect on firm value and

performance. Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003) have shown that a governance index (the G-

index) based on 24 provisions is negatively correlated with firm value. Bebchuk, Cohen, and

Ferrell (2009) point out that six of these provisions fully drive the Gompers-Ishii-Metrick results

and propose an alternative entrenchment index based on them (the E-index). A particularly

important component of the G-index and the E-index is whether boards are staggered (Bebchuk,

Coates, and Subramanian, 2002; Bebchuk and Cohen, 2005). A significant number of subsequent

studies have identified many ways in which the G-index, the E-index, and the existence of

staggered boards are associated with firm performance and behavior (e.g., Masulis, Wang, and

Xie, 2007; Kedia and Philippon, 2008).

       Given the magnitude of firm-level differences in governance, it is a natural next step for

the literature on international comparisons to try to look beyond cross-country and incorporate




                                                17
into the investigation firm-level differences. Aggarwal, Erel, Stulz, and Williamson (2009), in

this issue, take this step using a new database of firm-level governance provisions put together

by RiskMetrics, a global shareholder advisory firm. 3 Bruno and Claessens (2007) and

Chhaochharia and Laeven (2007) also use this dataset to investigate the subject.

        With data on both country-level and firm-level governance, an important question

investigated by Aggarwal, Erel, Stulz, and Williamson (2009) is how these two types of

governance choices interact. Does having a good legal system act as a substitute for firm-level

choices? Or does it facilitate firm-level governance, making the two types of governance

complements? Theoretically, either is possible, so the question can only be answered by

examining data on firm and country level governance.

        Given that the U.S. is known for its high economic development and strong investor

protection, the authors examine whether comparable non-U.S. firms choose higher or lower

levels of protection than similar U.S. firms. They construct a firm-level governance index that

increases with minority shareholder protection. Compared to U.S. matching firms, only 12.68%

of foreign firms have a higher index. The value of foreign firms falls as their index decreases

relative to the index of matching U.S. firms, implying that the governance attributes examined in

the study are relevant for shareholder value. The authors view these findings as consistent with

the “complements” view under which lower country-level investor protection make it suboptimal

for foreign firms to invest as much in governance as U.S. firms do.

        As done by Aggarwal, Erel, Stulz, and Williamson (2009), future research on

comparative corporate governance should strive to take firm-level governance into account. The

use of the RiskMetrics dataset for this purpose, however, has some limitations. Bebchuk and

3
 At the time of the study, the database was owned by I.S.S. and is consequently referred to as the I.S.S.
database by Aggarwal, Erel, Stulz, and Williamson (and other authors).


                                                   18
Hamdani (2009) point out that the RiskMetrics dataset is U.S.-centric in that it focuses on

features that are important for the companies without controlling shareholder that are dominant

in the U.S. capital market but not in most other capital markets around the world. Indeed, the

finding of Aggarwal, Erel, Stulz, and Williamson (2009) that firm-level governance is better in

U.S. firms than in firms from other countries is likely to be at least partially due to the U.S.-

centric nature of the dataset used by this study.

       The Bebchuk and Hamdani (2009) analysis suggests a direction that would be worth

pursuing by work on international comparisons. Much of the work thus far has sought to develop

and employ a single global governance standard for making either country-level or firm-level

comparisons around the world. However, governance arrangements that are optimal for investor

protection in companies without a controlling shareholder could be suboptimal for companies

with such a controller, and vice versa. Consequently, the quest for a single global governance

standard should be replaced with separate standards for evaluating governance in firms with and

without a controlling shareholder. The development and application of such standards is

potentially an important task for future research.



6. Cross-Border Investing

A substantial part of the work on international comparisons abstracts from the movement of

firms and capital across borders. It takes as given that each country has a given set of firms and a

given amount of capital invested in these firms, and it focuses on how firms in different countries

vary in how they are governed. In our increasingly globalized world, however, there is in fact

much movement across borders, and there is some research that seeks to understand the causes

and consequences of such movement.




                                                    19
       One important element of cross-border movements concerns decisions by firms

headquartered and operating in a given country to subject themselves to the governance rules of

other countries. Coffee (1999) and Stulz (1999) have suggested that firms can therefore “bond”

themselves to good governance by incorporating in another country or by listing on a foreign

exchange. There is a significant line of work examining why firms “migrate” to foreign

governance systems and the extent to which such migration is due to a desire by firms to “bond”

themselves to governance arrangements that provide tighter protection to public investors (Reese

and Weisbach, 2002; Pagano, Röell, and Zechner, 2002; Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2004;

Siegel, 2005; Doidge, Karolyi, Lins, Stulz, and Miller, 2009). 4

       Another important element of global capital markets is cross-border movement of capital.

In contrast to classical portfolio theory, investors tend to have a “home bias” in favor of

investing in firms of the investor’s country of residence. Recently, however, investors have been

increasingly allocating part of their equity investments to foreign companies. As it is natural to

ask how the migration of firms across borders is influenced by governance considerations, it is

also natural to ask how cross-border investing flows are influenced by such considerations.

       The level of investor protection is likely to be particularly important for investors

considering purchasing securities issued by a company from another country. Foreign investors

tend to have less information about companies they invest in than domestic investors and also

tend to have fewer political connections, or long-term relationships with the firm that can

potentially substitute for governance. Under this hypothesis, the quality of governance in a firm

should be correlated with the foreign stockholders in a company. In particular, since strong



4
  This work is naturally related to the substantial literature on regulatory competition among states
seeking to attract incorporations (Romano, 1985; Bebchuk, 1992; Romano, 1997; Daines, 2001; Bebchuk
and Hamdani, 2002; Bebchuk and Cohen, 2003; Kahan, 2006; Bar-Gill, Barzuza, and Bebchuk, 2006).


                                                 20
governance makes a firm relatively more attractive to foreigners than to domestic investors,

foreigners should have a higher percentage ownership in firms where investors are better

protected.

        The study by Leuz, Lins, and Warnock (2009), in this issue, tests this hypothesis. There

has been much work documenting that increased disclosure makes a firm more attractive to all

investors [see Hermalin and Weisbach (2009) and the references therein], and Leuz, Lins, and

Warnock show that such openness is particularly important in attracting foreign investors. The

authors study 4,409 firms from 29 countries to assess whether and why concerns about corporate

governance result in fewer foreign holdings. Their results suggest that foreigners invest less in

firms that reside in countries with poor outsider protection and disclosure and have ownership

structures that are conducive to governance problems. This effect is particularly pronounced

when earnings are opaque, indicating that the information asymmetry and monitoring costs faced

by foreign investors likely drive the results.

        The findings of Leuz, Lins, and Warnock (2009) confirm that governance problems

impede firms’ ability to attract capital from foreign investors even more than it impedes their

ability to raise capital domestically. Poor governance can thus limit capital flows and the

integration of capital markets in the global economy. These findings are especially important

given that some of the countries whose investor protection is especially weak are also those

countries for whom capital investment from abroad is especially significant. Thus, governance

reforms in such countries might produce considerable benefits for their economies. Whether such

reforms will in fact occur depends in part on the political economy of governance reforms, which

is the subject of the next section.




                                                 21
7. Politics

Corporate governance is in part a product of legal systems put in place and the legal

infrastructure accompanying them. And throughout the earlier discussion we have talked about

the potential significance of differences among systems of corporate governance in different

countries. Such systems differ considerably around the world and, for any given country, over

time.

        There is a lot of research that either takes the legal rules as given and examines how

agents make choices given them, or asks what legal arrangements are desirable assuming that

public officials generally seek to adopt whatever rules are optimal. But why then would countries

that are in a similar stage of their economic development have legal rules that are so different

and why do so many countries persist in having systems that seem to provide patently

insufficient legal protection to public investors?

        One important strand seeks to relate cross-country differences to some innate, long-

standing differences among countries. This line of work suggests that a country's level of

investor protection may be influenced by long-standing factors such as the country's legal origin

(La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1998; Glaeser and Shleifer, 2002; La Porta,

Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 2008), its culture and ideology (Bebchuk and Roe, 1999; Roe,

2003; Allen, 2005), or the religion of its population (Stulz and Williamson, 2003), all of which

lie outside the realm of current political choices.

        But given that countries do change their investor protection arrangements considerably

over time, the level of such protection at any given point in time may also result at least partly

from recent decisions by public officials. And the question is how these decisions are

determined. The theory of regulatory capture (Stigler, 1971) suggests that the decisions by public




                                                  22
officials might be influenced and sometimes distorted by the influence activities of rent-seeking

interest groups. What can be said about the way in which interest group politics is played out in

the area of corporate governance politics? In a recent Journal of Economic Literature survey,

Morck, Wolfenzon, and Yeung (2005) stress the importance of developing formal political

economy models of corporate governance arrangements and view this task as “a fascinating

uncharted territory for creative theorists.”

       Bebchuk and Neeman (2009), in this issue, try to help fill this void and develop a formal

political economy model of how lobbying by interest groups affects the level of investor

protection. In their model, three groups — insiders in existing public companies, institutional

investors (financial intermediaries), and entrepreneurs who plan to take companies public in the

future — compete for influence over the politicians setting the level of investor protection. The

authors identify conditions under which this lobbying game has an inefficiently low equilibrium

level of investor protection.

       Factors pushing investor protection below its efficient level include the ability of

corporate insiders to use the corporate assets they control to influence politicians, and the

inability of institutional investors to capture the full value that efficient investor protection would

produce for outside investors. The interest that entrepreneurs (and existing public firms) have in

raising equity capital in the future reduces but does not eliminate the distortions arising from

insiders' interest in extracting rents from the capital that public firms already possess. The

entrepreneurs prefer an efficient level of investor protection, and their introduction into the

Bebchuk and Neeman (2009) model therefore moderates, but is shown not to eliminate, the bias

in favor of excessive private benefits of control. While entrepreneurs do internalize the interests

of those public investors who buy IPO shares when they take their firms public, they do not




                                                  23
internalize, and neither does anyone else at the lobbying table, the interests of individuals who

directly or indirectly hold shares in existing public firms and who are not at the table.

        The essential point is that, in an economy with existing public firms, choices of investor

protection levels affect not only the allocation of cash flows from the capital to be raised from

public investors in the future but also the allocation of rents from the capital that public firms

already have (Bebchuk and Roe, 1999). When those lobbying on behalf of insiders and outside

shareholders do not fully internalize the costs and benefits of their choices on outside investors,

the fight over these rents produces suboptimal investor protection levels even in the presence of

entrepreneurs lobbying for efficient rules.

        The insights generated by the Bebchuk and Neeman (2009) model complements those

developed by Rajan and Zingales (2003, 2004) and Perotti and Volpin (2008), who argue that

incumbent firms seeking to retain market power lobby for weak investor protection that would

make it difficult for other firms to raise capital to enter. Bebchuk and Neeman focus on another

conflict among interest groups — the struggle between public firms’ corporate insiders, who

seek to extract rent from the capital under their control, and the outside investors who provided

them with capital. 5

        One important pattern established by the evidence is the positive correlation between

high levels of investor protection and good economic outcomes such as well-developed stock

5
  Note that both the Bebchuk and Neeman (2009) and the Rajan, Zingales, Perotti, and Volpin (2009) line
of work focus on lobbying by interest groups, in contrast to earlier work that has focused on how investor
protection is shaped by the citizens’ voting decisions and the preferences of the median voter (e.g.,
Pagano and Volpin ,2005a, 2005b; Perotti and Von-Thadden, 2006). Bebchuk and Neeman argue that, in
the ordinary course of events, most corporate issues are intensely followed by the interest groups with
sufficient stake and expertise but are not sufficiently understood and salient to most citizens. But they
recognize that the ordinary pro-insider operation of interest group politics can sometimes be interrupted
by pro-investor reforms resulting from corporate scandals or a stock market crash that makes voters more
attentive to corporate governance problems, and they allow for this possibility in their model.



                                                   24
markets and higher levels of economic growth (e.g., La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and

Vishny, 1998, 2000; La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 1999). One possible interpretation

of this correlation is that higher levels of investor protection bring about such good economic

outcomes. The results generated by the Bebchuk and Neeman (2009) model indicate, however,

that some of the causality may go in the opposite direction: a high level of investor protection

may be, at least partly, the product — rather than the cause — of high economic growth, a

developed stock market, or an advanced-stage economy.

       The model provides predictions relating differences in investor protection (both over time

and around the world) to the structure of political and legal decision-making, the developmental

stage of the economy, the corporate structures dominant in the economy, as well as to scandal

waves and stock market crashes. While some of these results can help explain patterns identified

by a number of existing empirical studies, it also provides new predictions that future empirical

work may seek to test.

       More generally, to improve the understanding of existing governance arrangements and

how they could be improved, it is important for future work to take into account and study how

such arrangements are influenced by interest group politics and how it can impede governance

reforms. The framework offered by the Bebchuk and Neeman (2009) model might be helpful for

such work.



8. Conclusion

This issue of The Review of Financial Studies contains seven papers that were presented in a

meeting of the NBER’s corporate governance project. Each of the papers makes a significant

contribution to an important area of corporate governance. For each of these areas, we discuss its




                                               25
importance and current state of research, how the paper in this special issue makes a

contribution, and some of the work that remains to be done. We hope that the papers in the

special issue, and the additional work that will follow, will advance our understanding about

these important areas.




                                             26
References

Adams, R., B. E. Hermalin, and M. S. Weisbach. The Role of Boards of Directors in Corporate
Governance: A Conceptual Framework & Survey. Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming.

Aggarwal, R., I. Erel, R. M. Stulz, and R. Williamson. 2009. Differences in Governance
Practices between U.S. and Foreign Firms: Measurement, Causes, and Consequences. Review of
Financial Studies 2009: this issue.

Allen, F. 2005. Corporate Governance in Emerging Economies. Oxford Review of Economic
Policy 21:164–77.

Bainbridge, S. 2006. Directory Primacy and Shareholder Disempowerment. Harvard Law
Review 119:1735–49.

Bar-Gill, O., M. Barzuza, and L. A. Bebchuk. 2006. The Market for Corporate Law. Journal of
Institutional and Theoretical Economics 162:134–71.

Beasley, M. S. 1996. An Empirical Analysis of the Relation between the Board of Director
Composition and Financial Statement Fraud. Accounting Review 71:443–55.

Beasley, M., J. V. Carcello, D. R. Hermanson, and P. D. Lapides. 2000. Fraudulent Financial
Reporting: Consideration of Industry Traits and Corporate Governance Mechanisms. Accounting
Horizons 14:441–52.

Bebchuk, L. A. 1992. Federalism and the Corporation: The Desirable Limits on State
Competition in Corporate Law. Harvard Law Review 105:1435–510.

Bebchuk, L. A. 2005. The Case for Increasing Shareholder Power. Harvard Law Review
118:833–917.

Bebchuk, L. A. 2007. The Myth of the Shareholder Franchise. Virginia Law Review 93:675–732.

Bebchuk, L. A., J. Coates, and G. Subramanian. 2002. The Powerful Antitakeover Force of
Staggered Boards: Theory, Evidence & Policy. Stanford Law Review 54:887–951.

Bebchuk, L. A., and A. Cohen. 2003. Firms’ Decisions Where to Incorporate. Journal of Law
and Economics 46:383–425.


                                            27
Bebchuk, L. A., and A. Cohen. 2005. The Costs of Entrenched Boards. Journal of Financial
Economics 78:409–33.

Bebchuk, L. A., A. Cohen, and A. Ferrell. 2009. What Matters in Corporate Governance. Review
of Financial Studies 22:783–827.

Bebchuk, L. A., and J. Fried. 2003. Executive Compensation as an Agency Problem. Journal of
Economic Perspectives 17:71–92.

Bebchuk, L. A., and J. Fried. 2004. Pay without Performance. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Bebchuk, L. A., and Y. Grinstein. 2005. The Growth of Executive Pay. Oxford Review of
Economic Policy 21:283–303.

Bebchuk, L. A., Y. Grinstein, and U. Peyer. Lucky CEOs and Lucky Directors. Journal of
Finance, forthcoming.

Bebchuk, L. A., and A. Hamdani. 2002. Vigorous Race or Leisurely Walk? Yale Law Journal
112:553–615.

Bebchuk, L. A., and A. Hamdani. 2009. The Elusive Quest for Global Governance Standards.
University of Pennsylvania Law Review 157:1263–317.

Bebchuk, L. A., R. Kraakman, and G. Triantis. 2000. Stock Pyramids, Cross-Ownership, and
Dual Class Equity. In: R. Morck (eds.), Concentrated Corporate Ownership. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.

Bebchuk, L. A., and Z. Neeman. 2009. Investor Protection and Interest Group Politics. Review of
Financial Studies, this issue.

Bebchuk, L. A., and M. Roe. 1999. A Theory of Path Dependence in Corporate Ownership and
Governance. Stanford Law Review 52:127–70.

Becht, M., and A. Röell. 1999. Blockholding in Europe: An International Comparison. European
Economic Review 43:1049–56.




                                              28
Becht, M., P. Bolton, and A. Röell. 2003. Corporate Governance and Control. In George M.
Constantinides, Milton Harris, and René M. Stulz (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance,
Amsterdam: North Holland.

Becht, M., J. Franks, C. Mayer, and S. Rossi. 2009. Returns to Shareholder Activism: Evidence
from a Clinical Study of the Hermes U.K. Focus Fund. Review of Financial Studies, this issue.

Berle, A. A., and G. C. Means. 1932. The Modern Corporation and Private Property. New York,
NY: MacMillan.

Bertrand, M., P. Mehta, and S. Mullainathan. 2002. Ferreting Out Tunneling: An Application To
Indian Business Groups. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117:121–48.

Bertrand, M., and S. Mullainathan. 2001. Are CEOs Rewarded for Luck? The Ones Without
Principals Are. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116:901–32.

Bhagat, S., and B. S. Black. 1999. The Uncertain Relationship between Board Composition and
Firm Performance. The Business Lawyer 54:921–63.

Bhagat, S., and B. S. Black. 2002. The Non–Correlation between Board Independence and Long-
term Firm Performance. Journal of Corporation Law 27:231–73.

Bizjak, J. M., R. Whitby, and M. Lemmon. 2009. Option Backdating and Board Interlocks.
Review of Financial Studies 22:4821–47.

Borokhovich, K. A., K. R. Brunarski, and R. Parrino. 1997. CEO Contracting and Anti–
Takeover Amendments. Journal of Finance 52:1495–517.

Brav, A., W. Jiang, R. S. Thomas, and F. Partnoy. 2008. Hedge Fund Activism, Corporate
Governance, and Firm Performance. Journal of Finance 63:1729–75.

Brickley, J. A., J. L. Coles, and R. L. Terry. 1994. Outside Directors and the Adoption of Poison
Pills. Journal of Financial Economics 35:371–90.

Bruno, V., and S. Claessens. 2007. Corporate Governance and Regulation: Can There Be Too
Much of a Good Thing? ECGI Working Paper Series in Finance 142.

Byrd, J. W., and K. A. Hickman. 1992. Do Outside Directors Monitor Managers? Evidence from
Tender Offer Bids. Journal of Financial Economics 32:195–221.


                                               29
Carleton, W. T., J. M. Nelson, and M. S. Weisbach. 1998. The Influence of Institutions on
Corporate Governance through Private Negotiations: Evidence from TIAA–CREF. Journal of
Finance 53:1335–62.

Chhaochharia, V., and Y. Grinstein. 2006. Corporate Governance and Firm Value: The Impact of
the 2002 Governance Rules. Journal of Finance 62:1789–825.

Chhaochharia, V., and Y. Grinstein. 2008. Executive Compensation and Board Structure.
Working Paper, Cornell University.

Chhaochharia, V., and L. Laeven. 2007. The Invisible Hand in Corporate Governance. CEPR
Discussion Paper 6256.

Claessens, S., S. Djankov, and L. H. P. Lang. 2000. The Separation of Ownership and Control in
East Asian Corporations. Journal of Financial Economics 58:81–112.

Claessens, S., and L. Laeven. 2003. Financial Development, Property Rights and Growth.
Journal of Finance 58:2401–36.

Coffee, J. 1999. The Future as History: The Prospects for Global Convergence in Corporate
Governance and its implications. Northwestern Law Review 93:641–708.

Core, J., W. R. Guay, and D. F. Larcker. 2003. Executive Equity Compensation and Incentives:
A Survey. Economic Policy Review 9:27–50.

Core, J., R. W. Holthausen, D. F. Larcker. 1999. Corporate Governance, CEO Compensation,
and Firm Performance. Journal of Financial Economics 51:371–406.

Cotter, J. F., A. Shivdasani, and M. Zenner. 1997. Do Independent Directors Enhance Target
Shareholder Wealth During Tender Offers? Journal of Financial Economics 43:195–218.

Cremers, M., and Y. Grinstein. 2009. The Market for CEO Talent: Implications for CEO
Compensation. Yale ICF Working Paper 09–11.

Cyert, R. M., S.–H. Kang, and P. Kumar. 2002. Corporate Governance, Takeovers, and Top–
Management Compensation: Theory and Evidence. Management Science 48:435–69.




                                             30
Daines, R. M. 2001. Does Delaware Law Improve Firm Value? Journal of Financial Economics
62:525–58.

Dann, L., D. Del Guercio, and M. Partch. 2003. Governance and Boards of Directors in Closed–
end Investment Companies. Journal of Financial Economics 69:111–48.

Dechow, P. M., R. G. Sloan, and A. P. Sweeney. 1996. Causes and Consequences of Earnings
Manipulation: An Analysis of Firms Subject to Enforcement Actions by the SEC. Contemporary
Accounting Research 13:1–21.

Del Guercio, D., and J. Hawkins. 1999. The Motivation and Impact of Pension Fund Activism.
Journal of Financial Economics 52:293–340.

Dew–Becker, I., and R. J. Gordon. 2007. Selected Issues in the Rise of Income Inequality.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2:169–90.

Djankov, S., R. La Porta, F. Lopez–de–Silanes, and A. Shleifer. 2008. The Law and Economics
of Self–Dealing. Journal of Financial Economics 88:430–65.

Doidge, C., G. A. Karolyi, K. V. Lins, R. M. Stulz, and D. P. Miller. 2009. Private Benefits of
Control, Ownership, and the Cross–listing Decision. Journal of Finance 64:425–66.

Doidge, C., G. A. Karolyi, and R. M. Stulz. 2004. Why are Foreign Firms Listed in the U.S.
Worth More? Journal of Financial Economics 71:205–38.

Edmans, A., X. Gabaix, and A. Landier. A Multiplicative Model of Optimal CEO Incentives in
Market Equilibrium. Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Faccio, M., and L. H.P. Lang. 2002. The Ultimate Ownership of Western European
Corporations. Journal of Financial Economics 65:365–95.

Fahlenbrach, R., and R. M. Stulz. 2009. Bank CEO Incentives and the Credit Crisis. Charles A
Dice Center Working Paper 2009-13.

Franks, J. R., and C. Mayer. 2001. Ownership and Control of German Corporations. Review of
Financial Studies 14:943–77.

Frydman, C., and R. Saks. Executive Compensation: A New View from a Long–Term
Perspective, 1936-2005. Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.


                                              31
Gabaix, X., and A. Landier. 2008. Why Has CEO Pay Increased so Much? Quarterly Journal of
Economics 123:49–100.

Gillan, S. L., and L. T. Starks. 2000. Corporate Governance Proposals and Shareholder
Activism: The Role of Institutional Investors. Journal of Financial Economics 57:275–305.

Gillan, S. L., and L. T. Starks. 2007. The Evolution of Shareholder Activism in the United
States. Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 19:55–73.

Gillette, A. B., T. H. Noe, and M. J. Rebello. 2003. Corporate Board Composition, Protocols,
and Voting Behavior: Experimental Evidence. Journal of Finance 58:1997–2032.

Glaeser, E., and A. Shleifer. 2002. Legal Origins. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117:1193–
229.

Gompers, P. A., J. Ishii, and A. Metrick. 2003. Corporate Governance and Equity Prices.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118:107–155.

Gompers, P. A., J. Ishii, and A. Metrick. 2009. Extreme Governance: An Analysis of Dual-Class
Firms in the United States. Review of Financial Studies, this issue.

Gordon, J. N. 2007. The Rise of Independent Directors in the United States, 1950-2005: Of
Shareholder Value and Stock Market Prices. Stanford Law Review 59:1465–568.

Greenwood, R., and M. Schor. 2009. Investor Activism and Takeovers. Journal of Financial
Economics 92:362–75.

Grossman, S., and O. Hart. 1980. Takeover Bids, the Free-Rider Problem, and the Theory of the
Corporation. The Bell Journal of Economics 11:42–64.

Hail, L., and C. Leuz. 2006. International Differences in the Cost of Equity Capital: Do Legal
Institutions and Securities Regulation Matter? Journal of Accounting Research 44:485–531.

Hallock, K. F. 1997. Reciprocally Interlocking Boards of Directors and Executive
Compensation. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 32:331–44.

Hartzell, J. C., and L. T. Starks. 2003. Institutional Investors and Executive Compensation.
Journal of Finance 58:2351–74.


                                             32
Hermalin, B. E. Corporate Governance: A Critical Assessment. In Robert Gibbons and John
Roberts (eds.), Handbook of Organizational Economic. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, forthcoming.

Hermalin, B. E., and M. S. Weisbach. 1991. The Effects of Board Composition and Direct
Incentives on Firm Performance. Financial Management 20:101–12.

Hermalin, B. E., and M. S. Weisbach. 1998. Endogenously Chosen Boards of Directors and
Their Monitoring of Management. American Economic Review 88:96–118.

Hermalin, B. E., and M. S. Weisbach. 2003. Boards of Directors as an Endogenously Determined
Institution: A Survey of the Economic Literature. Economic Policy Review 9:7–26.

Hermalin, B. E., and M. S. Weisbach. 2009. Information Disclosure and Corporate Governance.
Working Paper, Ohio State University.

Holderness, C. G. 2009. The Myth of Diffuse Ownership in the United States. Review of
Financial Studies 22:1377–408.

Holmstrom, B. 1979. Moral Hazard and Observability. The Bell Journal of Economics 10:74–91.

Jackson, H. E., and M. J. Roe. 2008. Public Enforcement of Securities Laws: Resource-Based
Evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 93:207–38.

Jensen, M., and K. Murphy. 1990. Performance Pay and Top–Management Incentives. Journal
of Political Economy 98:225–64.

Jensen, M. C., K. J. Murphy, and E. Wruck. 2004. Remuneration: Where We’ve Been, How We
Got to Here, What Are the Problems, and How to Fix Them. ECGI Working Paper Series in
Finance 44.

Kahan, M. 2006. The Demand for Corporate Law: Statutory Flexibility, Judicial Quality, or
Takeover Protection? The Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 22:340–65.

Kahan, M., and E. Rock. 2007. Hedge Funds in Corporate Governance and Corporate Control.
University of Pennsylvania Law Review 155:1021–93.

Kaplan, S. 2008. Are U.S. CEOs Overpaid? Academy of Management Perspectives 22:5–20.



                                            33
Kaplan, S. N., and J. Rauh. 2009. Wall Street and Main Street: What Contributes to the Rise in
the Highest Incomes? Review of Financial Studies, this issue.

Karpoff, J. M. 2001. The Impact of Shareholder Activism on Target Companies: A Survey of
Empirical Findings. Working Paper, University of Washington.

Karpoff, J. M., P. H. Malatesta, and R. A. Walkling. 1996. Corporate Governance and
Shareholder Initiatives: Empirical Evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 42:365–95.

Kedia, S., and T. Philippon. 2009. The Economics of Fraudulent Accounting. Review of
Financial Studies 22:2169–99.

Klein, A., and E. Zur. Hedge Fund Activism. Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer. 1999. Corporate Ownership Around the
World. Journal of Finance 54:471–517.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer. 2006. What Works in Securities Law?
Journal of Finance 61:1–32.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer. 2008. The Economic Consequences of Legal
Origin. Journal of Economic Literature 46:285–332.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny. 1997. Legal Determinants of
External Finance. Journal of Finance 52:1131–50.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny. 1998. Law and Finance.
Journal of Political Economy 107:1113–55.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny. 2000a. Agency Problems and
Dividend Policies Around the World. Journal of Finance 55:1–33.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny. 2000b. Investor Protection and
Corporate Governance. Journal of Financial Economics 58:3–27.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny. 2002. Investor Protection and
Corporate Valuation. Journal of Finance 57:1147–70.



                                              34
Leuz, C., K. V. Lins, and F. E. Warnock. 2009. Do Foreigners Invest Less in Poorly Governed
Firms? Review of Financial Studies, this issue.

Levine, R. 2005. Law, Endowments, and Property Rights. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
19:61–88.

Lipton, M., and W. Savitt. 2007. The Many Myths of Lucian Bebchuk. Virginia Law Review
93:733–58.

Masulis, R. W., C. Wang, and F. Xie. 2007. Corporate Governance and Acquirer Returns.
Journal of Finance 62:1851–89.

Morck, R., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny. 1988. Management Ownership and Market Valuation:
An Empirical Analysis. Journal of Financial Economics 20:293-315.

Morck, R., D. Wolfenzon, and B. Yeung. 2005. Corporate Governance, Economic Entrenchment
and Growth. Journal of Economic Literature 43:657–722.

Murphy, K. J. 1999. Executive Compensation. In Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (eds.),
Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Murphy, K. J., and J. Zabojnik. 2007. Managerial Capital and the Market for CEOs. Working
Paper, Queen's University.

Nenova, T. 2003. The Value of Corporate Votes and Control Benefits: A Cross–country
Analysis. Journal of Financial Economics 68:325–51.

Pagano, M., A. Röell, and J. Zechner. 2002. The Geography of Equity Listing: Why do
Companies List Abroad? Journal of Finance 57:2651–94.

Pagano, M., and P. Volpin. 2005a. The Political Economy of Corporate Governance. American
Economic Review 95:1005–30.

Pagano, M., and P. Volpin. 2005b. Workers, Managers, and Corporate Control. Journal of
Finance 60:841–68.

Perotti, E., and E.-L. von Thadden. 2006. The Political Economy of Corporate Control and Labor
Rents. Journal of Political Economy 114:145–74.



                                             35
Perotti, E., and P. Volpin. 2008. Politics, Investor Protection and Competition. ECGI Working
Paper Series in Finance 162.

Rajan, R., and L. Zingales. 2003. The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial Development in
the 20th Century. Journal of Financial Economics 69:5–50.

Rajan, R., and L. Zingales. 2004. Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists: Unleashing the Power
of Financial Markets to Create Wealth and Spread Opportunity. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

Ravina, E., and P. Sapienza. 2009. What Do Independent Directors Know? Evidence from Their
Trading. Review of Financial Studies, this issue.

Reese, W., and M. S. Weisbach. 2002. Protection of Minority Shareholder Interests, Cross–
listings in the United States, and Subsequent Equity Offerings. Journal of Financial Economics
66:65–104.

Roe, M. 2003. Political Determinants of Corporate Governance. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Romano, R. 1985. Law as a Product: Some Pieces of the Incorporation Puzzle. Journal of Law,
Economics and Organization 1:225–67.

Romano, R. 1997. State Competition for Corporate Charters. In J. Ferejohn and B. Weingast
(eds.), The New Federalism: Can the States be Trusted? Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press.

Shivdasani, A.1993. Board Composition, Ownership Structure and Hostile Takeovers. Journal of
Accounting and Economics 16:167–98.

Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny. 1986. Large Shareholders and Corporate Control. Journal of
Political Economy 94:461–88.

Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny. 1997. A Survey of Corporate Governance. Journal of Finance
52:737–83.

Siegel, J. 2005. Can Foreign Firms Bond Themselves Effectively by Renting U.S. Securities
Laws? Journal of Financial Economics 75:319–59.




                                              36
Smith, A. 1776. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Indianapolis,
IN: Liberty Press.

Spamann, H. The ‘Antidirector Rights Index’ Revisited. Review of Financial Studies,
forthcoming.

Stigler, G. 1971. The Theory of Economic Regulation. Bell Journal of Economic and
Management Science 2:3–21.

Strine, L. E. Jr. 2006. Toward a True Corporate Republic: A Traditionalist Response to
Bebchuk’s Solution for Improving Corporate America. Harvard Law Review 119:1759–83.

Stulz, R. M. 1999. Globalization of Equity Markets and the Cost of Capital. Journal of Applied
Corporate Finance 12:8–25.

Stulz, R. M., and R. Williamson. 2003. Culture, Openness, and Finance. Journal of Financial
Economics 70:313–49.

Weisbach, M. S. 1988. Outside Directors and CEO Turnover. Journal of Financial Economics
20:431–60.

Zingales, L. 1994. The Value of the Voting Right: A Study of the Milan Stock Exchange
Experience. Review of Financial Studies 7:125–48.

Zingales, L. 1995. What Determines the Value of Corporate Votes? Quarterly Journal of
Economics 110:1047–73.

Zingales, L. 1998. Corporate Governance. In P. Newman (ed.), The New Palgrave Dictionary of
Economics and the Law, New York, NY: MacMillan.




                                             37
