                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               VALUING ThE GOVERNMENTt S TAX CLAIM
                   ON RISKY CORPORATE ASSETS


                           Saman Majd
                        Stewart   C. Myers



                     Working Paper No. 1553




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                          February 1985




An early version of this paper was presented at the NBER Tax
Program Meeting, October 1983. We are grateful to Alan Auerbach
for helpful comments. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research programs in Taxation and Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics and project in Government Budget. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #1553
                                                   February 1985




                      Valuing the Government's Tax Claim
                          on Risky Corporate Assets


                                   ABSTRACT


        This paper explores the effects of tax asymmetries on the value of

risky capital investments made by corporations.   The government's claim on

the firm is shown to be equivalent to a portfolio of options on the firm's

revenues. The tax law's provisions for carrying tax losses forward and

backward   are introduced, necessitating a numerical solution for the value of

the government's claim. The results show that asymmetric taxation of

operating gains and losses can significantly affect the after—tax net present

value of corporate investment opportunities.



Sainan Majd
                                                    Stewart C. Myers
The Wharton School                                  M.I.T.
University of Pennsylvania                          Sloan School of Management
Department of Economics                             50 Memorial Drive
Philadelphia, PA 191014
                                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
1. Introduction


   The corporate tax law is asymmetric in its treatment of
operating gains and losses: income is taxed at the statutory

tax rate only when positive.   Although losses up to the
amount of taxes paid in the previous three years qualify for
an immediate credit against current taxes, losses in excess
of that must be carried forward to be credited against
future gains.     The 'effective tax rate' on these carry
forwards is less than the statutory rate for two reasons:
(1) the tax losses expire after fifteen years of carry
forward, and (2) carry forwards do not earn interest."


    Conventional capital budgeting rarely recognises this
asymmetry. Tax shields are sometimes discounted at a higher
rate to account for the risk of not having sufficient
taxable income to make full use of the shields, but as a
practical matter any adjustment to the discount rate is just
a fudge factor. Since the tax paid is a nonlinear function
of income, the tax liability cannot in general be valued by

discounting its unconditional expectation at any single
risk—adjusted rate. It has the properties of a contingent
claim and must be valued accordingly.
                                                            —4—



    Formal analysis of the impacts of asymmetric taxation is
just beginning to appear in the literature.          Cooper and
Franks [1983] recognise that under asymmetric taxation with
carry forward privileges, the firm's tax rate is not
exogenous.     Using a linear programming framework         they
analyse the interaction        between   present    and   future
investment and financing decisions: induced by the tax
system.      They discuss some of the factors that limit
financial transactions designed to offset tax losses, and
conclude that real investment        by corporations can be
distorted.


    In estimating the marginal tax benefits from interest
payments on debt, Cordes and Sheffrin 11983] explicitly
accOunt for the possibility that firms may not be able to
make full use of their interest tax shields.       They discuss
some of the provisions of the tax law, other than imperfect

offset of operating gains and losses, that can cause the
firm's marginal tax rate to differ from the statutory rate.

They also provide some interesting estimates of tax loss
carry forwards. For example they estimate that the fraction
of tax credits accounted for by carry forwards from pre'&ious

tax years for different industries ranged from 11 to 64
percent in 1976. This suggests that carry forward provisions
are important to many firms.
                                                          —5—



      Galai (1983] extends the contingent claim formulation of

the firm's capital structure to include the government's tax

claim on the firm. He recognises the option characteristics
of the government's tax claim and uses a one—period model
without carry privileges to examine the value of debt and
equity under both full loss—offset and no loss—of fset tax

systems.2'

      In their investigation of the hedging policies of firms,
Smith and Stulz [1983] also note that the government holds a

call option on the pre—tax value of the firm. Thus the tax

law     creates   a hedging motive even      for   widely—held

corporations.

      The public finance literature has long recognised the
asymmetry in the tax system. In their classic paper, Domar
and     Musgrave 119441 analyse the effect of        imperfect
loss—offsets on risk—taking by individuals.         Using the
'expected loss' (i.e., the expectation of negative returns)
as the measure of risk, they conclude that proportional
taxation can reduce risk—taking in the absence of full
loss—offsets. (They also examined the case of known and
constant partial loss—offset with similar conclusions.)3'
More recently, Green and        Talmor (19831 formulate the
government's tax claim as a call option and, using a
one—period model without carry privileges, analyse the
                                                           —6—



effect of the asymmetry on corporate risk—bearing.

    Much of this literature has used effective tax rates
(defined as the ratio of post— and pre—tax internal rates of

return) as a measure of the tax burden on investment.4" For
example, Hulten and Robertson [1983] report that asymmetric
taxation causes differences in the effective tax rates on
risky assets. However, internal rates of return (IRR5) have
no meaning for contingent claims, so these effective tax
rates make little sense. Since investment decisions are (or
should be) made on the basis of present values, evaluation
of tax burdens should also be based on present values.


    Although Auerbach [1982] supports the use of such
effective tax rates in evaluating tax neutrality, he points
out (in Auerbach [1981]) that when effective tax rates are
state dependent (e.g., because of asymmetric taxation of
gains and losses), the simple expectation of the effective
tax rates across states is •an inappropriate measure of the

tax burden.   An additional adjustment for risk is required,

and he proposes using a "risk adjusted effective tax rate".
But risk adjusted IRRs are not much better than unadjusted
ones, and we are back to the problem of calculating the
impact of the asymmetry on present values.


    Auerbach C [1983a]   and [1983b] )   has   also studied the
effects of tax asymmetries on finns' short— and long—term
                                                           —7—



investment incentives. We discuss these papers in Section
5, but mention here that he concludes that real investment
can be distorted. Specifically, he concludes that carry
forwards can lead to over—investment by firms with a surplus
of tax losses.


    None of the papers referred to develops a general
procedure for calculating the impact f tax law asymmetry on
the after—tax values of real assets. Such a procedure would
be a valuable aid to managers making capital budgeting
decisions. It would also allow us to ask some interesting
questions about tax policy. For example, the Tax Equity and
Reform Act of 1982 more than doubled the carry forward
period from seven to fifteen years. At first glance this
seems very generous, but it is hard to evaluate just how
generous it is without knowing how to calculate its impact
on present values.


    The next two sections show how option pricing concepts
can be applied to value the government's tax claim on risky
assets. Since no closed—form option pricing formulas apply,
values must be computed by numerical methods.       Section 4
describes our calculations in mote detail and presents
after—tax values for a reasonably realistic   'standard
project'    under arious      assumptions   about      project
profitability, risk and the tax position of the firm   owning
                                                          —8—



it. Section 5 investigates the interaction between the new
project and the existing assets of the firm, and section 6
offers some concluding comments.




2. Taxes As Contingent Claims


    In the absence of tax loss carry backs or      -
                                                        carry
forwards, the government's tax claim is equivalent to a
portfolio of European call options, one on each year's
operating cash flow. The heavy line in Figure 1 shows taxes
paid as a function of taxable income in a given year, and
has the same shape as a call option's payoff at exercise.


    This option payoff function also describes the taxes
paid on the income of a stand—alone project (i.e., taxes

paid by a firm undertaking only •one project).         But in
general the taxes paid on a project's income depend on the
tax position of the firm owming it. Suppose the project is
owned by IBM. It seems safe to say that IBM will not have
tax loss carry forwards at any time in the foreseeable
future, and will pay taxes at the margin at the full
statutory rate.    Thus, any project losses can be offset
against IBM's other income.     The tax system is symmetrical
for IBM when it considers an incremental capital investment

project.
                                                            —9—



    We can express these option analogies more formally.
Consider a project that is the firm's only asset. Let the
pre—tax operating cash flow and depreciation allowance at
time t be y     and d        respectively.   Ignore for now the
           t            t
investment tax credit (ITC), and assume that the project is
all equity financed. In the absence of tax loss carry
forwards or carry backs, the projec's after—tax cash flow
at time t is:

                =
                    yCl_t)    + rd — max[r (d—y); 0].

The first two terms are the cash flow under a system of
symmetrical taxation (such as 1814 effectively enjoys on

margirral projects).        The additional term represents the
effect of the asymmetry: the government has a put option on
the operating cash flow.

    We can rewrite this as:

    =    — t maxi yt—dt, 0].

The after—tax cash flow is the difference between the
pre—tax operating cash flow and the government's claim on
it. The government's claim is equivalent to          r   European
call options on the operating cash flow with exercise price
equal to the depreciation allowance.

    Since the government taxes the firm's total income, the
                                                                     —10—



incremental impact of a new project on the value of the firm

will depend on the operating cash flows of the firm's
existing assets and on their correlation with those of the
project. The after—tax cash flow for the firm with the new

project will be:

       c = (y
        t       tt
                +z )    — . maxE (y +z )—       (d +d
                                                 t   zt   ),   0],

where z is the operating cash flow and d the depreciation
         t                                      zt
allowances for the firm      without    the new project. Because
the government's claim is an option, the value of the tax

claim on the sum     of yt and z t     is not the sum   of     the values

of   the tax claims on each taken separately.             Hence value
additi'vity does not hold strictly.


     Tax carry privileges do not change the shape of the
contingent tax payment drawn in Figure 1. But the firm does

not begin paying taxes until that year's taxable income
exceeds cumulative tax losses carried forward from up to

fifteen previous years.         In other words, the vertical
dividing line shifts to the right. Carry backs shift the
horizontal dividing line down from zero by the sum of taxes
paid over the last three years.


     Again we can state this formally. Consider the case of
unlimited carry forwards (but without any carry backs). The
tax loss carried forward to time t from the previous period
                                                                        —11—




is:
              A   t—i. =    max[At,..j + d     — 't—i   '
The   carry forward depends on the carry forward in the
previous   period which in turn depends on the still—earlier
carry forward, and so on.                    The carry forward at the
beginning of         the project (time zero)                is given.    The

after—tax cash flow becomes:

                           =     —t max( y_d_Ae 0].

Since A     depends on all realised incomes prior to time t,
the payoff to the government (i.e., the tax paid) also
depends on the realised incomes. It is straight forward to
introduce the ITC and carry backs, and to limit the length
of time allowed for carry forwards.

      Thus carry privileges do not break the correspondence
between the government's tax claims and a series of call
options. But the carry privileges rule out use of any
closed—form option pricing formulas, because any particular
year's tax payment to the government depends on the sequence
of income for up to fifteen prior years. The payments are
path—dependent, and numerical methods are required to value
them. We discuss these methods in the next section.


      Note, however, that the rules for computing taxes are
                                                         —12—



exogenous. Future tax payments are always unknown, but
there are no decisions to be made about taxes. If the firm
has the opportunity to use carry backs or carry forwards, it
does so at the first opportunity.5" As far as taxes and
carry privileges are concerned, the firm faces only an event

tree, not a decision tree.

    However, the future tax position of the firm can affect
the future operating cash flows.      Our numerical procedure

must take project and firm cash flows as exogenous. We do
not consider whether a future tax loss on a project
undertaken today will affect future investment decisions.
We also rule out cases in which today's project is managed
differently, depending on its (or the finn's) tax position.
This is undoubtedly unrealistic.    For example, an otherwise

profitable firm might find it less painful to stick with a
losing project than a firm already     surfeited with carry
fbrwards.      Or the profitable firm might sell the losing
project in order to establish an immediate tax loss, for the

same reason that investors in securities often find it
worthwhile •to realise capital losses before the end of the
tax year.6'1


    This, however, is just one of many ways a firm can
compensate for tax asymmetries.     Four additonal examples
are: (1) The firm may change its accounting policies to
                                                    -
                                                          —13—




shift taxable income over time; (2) The firm may seek to
acquire another firm that has taxable income; (3) The firm
may choose to 'sell' its tax shields to another firm by
means of a leasing arrangement; (4) The firm may issue
equity and buy bonds in order to generate taxable   income.7'

These transactions are not costless, however, and in many
cases fall far short of exhausting the entire tax loss.


    Our analysis, since it assumes operating cash flows are
exogenous, gives a lower bound on after—tax project value.
It also shows     the   potential gain from financing or
investment decisions which shift taxes over time or between
firms.   We do not analyse these tax—shifting decisions

specifically.




3. valuing The Government's Claim On The Project


    This section describes the numerical procedure used to
calculate the present value of the taxes paid on a risky
project. Our discussion will be restricted to finding the
present value of the taxes paid on the operating cash flow
in year t, y, in the presence of unlimited carry forwards.
The present value of the taxes paid on the stream of
operating cash flows is simply the sum of the values of the
claims on each future year's operating income. Extension of
                                                        —14—




the procedure to include carry backs and to limit the carry
forward period is straightforward.       The value of the
goverrunents claim on y will depend on the distribution of
the carry forward at t, which in turn depends on the
realised values of the prior income.    To see how this path

dependency complicates the solution to       this   problem,

consider the Cox—Ross technique for taluing options: If the
payoff to the option can be replicated by a portfolio
strategy using traded securities, the present value of the
option is the expected payoff (conditional on the current
values of the relevant state variables) discounted at the
risk free rate.8" In other words, the option can be valued
as if both it and the underlying asset are traded in a risk

neutral world.    The difficulty here is in deriving a
closed—form solution for the expected payoff conditional on
the realisations of income between now and the payoff date.


    When closed—form solutions do not exist, the alternative

is to solve the problem numerically. Path dependencies can
make some numerical techniques cumbersome.     However, our
problem has features that allow us to employ a simple Monte

Carlo simulation technique to approximate the distribution
of the payoff conditional on the prior sequence of operating
cash flow.9" The rule determining the carry forward at any
time (the path dependent feature in this problem) is
specified exogenously, and depends only on past realisations
                                                                —15—




of the operating cash flow. Hence, although future tax
payments are always uncertain, the rules for determining
them (once the cash flows are known) are not.            The Monte

Carlo simulation technique exploits this feature of the
problem by simulating the sequence of operating cash flow up
to the payoff date. Each time a value is generated from the
distribution of an operating cash flow, the tax liability
and the carry forward to the next period are completely
determined.

    The simulation must also update the distributions of
future operating cash flows         every     time     a value is

generated.    Different assumptions         about the stochastic
process generating the time series of operating cash flow

are possible.    In the calculations reported in the next
section, we     break down operating cash flow into two
components:

  operating cash flow =    net     revenues —        fixed   costs,

                           =
                               x   —   F,

where 'net revenues' means revenues less variable costs. We
assume F is known with certainty, and that the stochastic
processes generating each year's net revenue are perfectly
correlated lognormal diffusionsJ°'' That is, the forecast
error in any one year's net revenue causes the same
                                                           —16-




proportional change in the expectations of all future net
 revenues, and the same proportional change in the present
value of each      year's   future net revenues.      If this
assumption seems unduly restrictive, note that it is the
usual justification for using a single risk—adjusted rate to
discount a stream of cash flows.         Thus it implicitly
underlies standard practice.1"


    By generating a large number of simulated cash flows, an
aproximate distribution for the government's tax payment in
each year is obtained. The expected value is    computed and
discounted at the riskless rate to obtain the present value

of the payment. The present value of the government's claim
on the project is the sum of the present values of the
claims on individual cash flows.




4. Numerical ResultsFr The Standard Pro3ect


    This section describes the valuation of a standard
project under a variety of assumptions about   profitability
and risk. The incremental impact of the      project on the
value of the firm depends on the operating cash flows of the

firm. In particular, it depends on their level and on their
correlation with those of the new project.     In the next
section we model the existing assets of the firm   explicitly
                                                            —17—




and investigate the combined impact of profitability and
correlation. In this section we focus on the new project,
and examine the impact of existing assets only in two
extreme cases.

     The pre—tax cash flows of the standard project are
described in Table 1. We assume the project costs $100 at t
=   0. Its expected net revenues (revenues net of variable
costs) decay at a constant rate 6 ,          until   expected net
revenues equal fixed costs F, when the project expires.12"
There is no salvage value.

     The base—case project parameters are shown at the bottom

of the Table.         Pre—tax NPV = 0 when initial net revenue is
     =   29.53.   Note that fixed costs are discounted separately

at the risk—free rate r

     The discount rates r and rf are expected real rates of

return demanded by equity investors.          They are calculated

without deducting any personal income taxes.

         Suppose the project is owned by Penn Central, or some
other firm with such large tax loss carry forwards that we
may assume a zero effective tax rate on new projects. We
will use 'Penn Central or 'PC' as a label for the extreme
case when the firm does not pay taxes. For Penn Central,
pre—tax and after—tax NPV are the same
                                                                                     —18—




    At   the other extreme, we can imagine the standard
 project undertaken by a firm that is sure to                         pay taxes at
 the margin at the full statutory rate                       r =      0.46. We label
 this case 'IBM'.            There          are     no     tax asymmetries on
 incremental projects undertaken by IBM. Thus, the after—tax
value of the standard project is:
                                                                 T
  NPV(IBM)= —100 +          ITC       +           td         +       xjl.-r)_
                                                                                T
                                                                                X   ____
                     (1+rf) (l+i)         tl[(l+rf) (1+1)1       t1(1+r)t t1(1+rf)t
where ITC is the investment tax credit and                              d the tax
depreciation (in dollars) in year t. We use the 5—year ACRS
schedule, so that d = 0 for t > 5.                      Since ITC and dt are


                                                    l
safe nominal flows, they should be discounted                           at a safe
nomindl rate,        (1 +    rf){].   +    i)   —        where i       is expected
inflation. However, we set I = 0 for the calculations shown
belowJ3' Note that we have used the pretax safe nominal
rate to discount the safe flows.. A strong case can be made

for discounting depreciation tax shields, and possibly the
fixed costs as well, at the after—corporate—tax nominal
riskiess rate.  Ruback (19831 shows that the                            appropriate
discount rate for riskless cash flows is                             the after—tax
riskless rate. Hi argument is based on a hedging strategy
undertaken by the firm:               by        adjusting its portfolio of
riskless bonds, the firm                  can exactly offset any future
riskless cash flow. If the firm can make                     full use of its
interest tax shields, this                      strategy implies that the
                                                                      —19—



discount rate to be used for safe cash flows is the
after—tax riskless rate.


    Note, also, that the same rate r is use to discount both
before—tax and after—tax net revenues. Since x (1 — r
                                                       t
                                                                  )    is
a constant proportion of Xt, the present value of xt(l —t
must always equal (1 — r   )   times   the present value of Xt.


    The project's values to Penn Central and IBM provide two
extreme cases. Our third case occurs when the firm and the
project are one and the same. Tax asymmetries have their
maximum impact for stand—alone projects. Of course, carry
backs and carry forwards mitigate the effects of the
asymmetry. We examine the stand—alone  project  under
different assumptions about tax loss carry provisions: Cl)
no carry provisions, (2) unlimited carry forwards but                 no
carry backs, and (3) three—year carry backs and fifteen—year
carry forwards (i.e., the current system).           We label them
'PROJ', 'PROJC', and 'PROJFB' respectively.

    Table 2 shows after—tax       NPVs for the standard project,
calculated for several levels      of profitability (measured by
x1). The first panel of the        Table reports results for the
base case. The NPVs for Penn           Central (PC) are pre—tax
project values, and those for IBM are project values under
full loss—offset. The NPVs for          PROJFB are project values
for the stand—alone project under the current provisions for
        -                                                    —20—




carrying tax losses.   The differences between the NPV5 for
IBM and the stand—alone project without any carry privileges

(PROJ) show the maximum impact of tax asymmetries. The NPVs
for PROJC show the maximum extent that unlimited carry
forwards can mitigate the impact of tax asymmetries for the
stand—alone project.

    The other panels in Table 2 report NPVs under different
assumptions about project risk and project life.             The
relations between these NPVs are more easily seen in Figures

2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. Figure 2 simply plots the numbers given
in the first panel of Table 2. Figures 3 and 4 show how the
NPVs change when the standard deviation of the rate of
change of present value of net revenue, a1          is raised or
lowered from the base case.'4" Figures 5 and 6 show how the
NPVs change when the project life is increased and decreased
(the rate of decay of net revenues, 6   ,   is   also changed to
be consistent with the project life).


   These numerical results establish that tax asymmetries
can have a substantial impact on after—tax project NPV.
However, the extent of the impact depends on project risk
and on whether carry provisions apply. In Figure 2, for the
base case, tax asymmetries reduce project present value by
about one fifth of required investment.           For example,
compare NPV(IBM) and NPV(PROJ) at the breakeven point where
                                                         —21—



pre—tax NPV =    0.   Introducing unlimited tax loss carry
forwards cuts the asymmetry's impact on value about in
half. For low risk projects (see Figure 3, where a = 0.05)
the impact of tax asymmetries is somewhat reduced with no
carry, but essentially eliminated with unlimited carry
forwards. Increased project risk (see Figure 4, where      =

0.45) increases the impact of tax aSymmetries, and carry
forwards are little help.

    Under the current system of three—year carry backs and

fifteen—year carry forwards, the carry back provision seems
to be more valuable. For example, compare the curves for
PROJC and PROJFB: in all cases the project is more valuable
with carry backs and limited carry forwards than with
unlimited carry forwards but no carry backs. This is true
even when the project life is extended to 30 years (Figure
6). The carry backs are more valuable because, to the extent
that the firm uses them, it faces loss—offset at the
statutory rate. Hence carry backs an not subject to the
same penalties as carry forwards.

    Of course the simulations could be repeated for endless
combinations of assumptions about project life, cash flow
patterns, discount rates, etc., but Figures 2, 3,   4, 5, and
6 establish that tax asymmetries are a first—order problem.


    We would like to have a tax system under which all fins
                                                              —22—



value the same investment in the same way.          Our results
indicate that tax asymmetries may be a more important
distortion than the firm's current tax position.              For

example, IBM and Penn Central would calculate similar values

for projects with zero, or moderately positive, pre—tax
NPVs.      Penn Central's advantage over. IBM increases for
highly profitable projects, but this would not be too
serious since good projects would be accepted by either
firm.      However, stand—alone projects always have lower
after—tax Nfl than the same project taken by either Penn
Central or IBM, even when carry backs and carry forwards are
allowed.        It appears that undiversified firms, or projects
forced     to     stand alone, are at      a   significant    tax

disadvantage. This disadvantage is particularly severe .for
high—risk assets.


    It is difficult to express these results in terms of any
'effective tax rate'. Internal rates of return have no
meaning for assets with contingent payoffs, so ratios of
post—tax to pre—tax rates of return make no sense. However,
Figure 7 shows the ratio of the present value of the
government's tax claim to the pre—tax present value (not
NPV) of the base case project described in Table L.          This
ratio switches        from negative to positive for IBM as
profitability increases, and is always positive for the
stand—alone project. Although Figute 5 does not show it
                                                        —23—



clearly, the stand—alone project's 'tax ratio' approaches
IBM's tax ratio as project profitability becomes very large,
both approaching   =   0.46.

    This ratio may be interesting, but it is an inadequate
guide when we think about tax policy. What matters for tax
policy   is whether the tax system changes        investment

decisions. For that question, it is more useful to examine
pre— and post—tax NPVs.




5. Extending the Simple Model




5.1. Modelling the Firm's Eiisting Assets Explicitly



    The calculations reported above represent some extreme
cases. For example, we did not distinguish between 'large'

and 'small' projects. For small projects, the firm's future
tax position is exogenous: whether or not the firm     pays
taxes in any period depends entirely on the performance of
the existing assets. The Penn Central and IBM examples
effectively assumed the standard project to be small. Large
projects are those whose performance affects the overall tax
status of the firm. Here the stand—alone project is the
extreme case.
                                                         —24—



    But there are many interesting cases between these
extremes. In general, the impact of the new project will
depend on the combined effects of the size and profitability
of existing assets, as well as on the correlation between

them and the new project. By modelling the existing assets
explicitly, we can make the future tax status of the firm
endogenous (i.e., to depend on the performance of both the
project and the existing assets). In this section this is
accomplished by simulating the operating cash flows of the

existing     assets together with those of the       standard

project.

    Imagine the firm having reached a steady state level of

• investment in its existing business.   Each year the firm
invests    in a unit that is expected to produce level annual
operating cash flows for fifteen years, after which it
expires worthless.     Although the net revenue from each unit

is uncertain, all units produce identical cash flows in any
period.15" We assume, as in the case of the standard project

above, that the net revenues are generated by perfectly
correlated lognormal diffusions.

     As before, we take project and firm cash        flows as
 exogenous, and do not consider cases where future investment
 decisions may change as a result of changes in the firm's

 tax position. For example, we ignore the option to forego
                                                         —25—




investment in a new unit in any year, and assume the firm is

committed to its steady state level of investment.      This
assumption is likely to be most questionable in the case of
a new project that is 'large' relative to the existing
assets.


    Because of the known investment in a new unit each year,
the finn receives a known and constant total depreciation
allowance and ITC each year.       Table 3 summarises the
characteristics of the firm's existing assets, and gives the
base—case values for the parameters. The new project to be
added to the existing assets of the firm is the standard
project described in section 4 (see Table 1), and has net
revenues that are correlated with those of the existing
assets.


    Our simulations require a finite horizon, whereas we
view the firm's existing business as a (stochastic) steady
state perpetuity. We choose a terminal horizon at 60 years;
even though we assume unlimited carry forwards. Given our
assumption of exogenous pre—tax cash flows, the impact of a
15—year new projedt on the tax position of the finn in year

15 will almost certainly be negligable by the end of     60
years.


    Table 4 shows how the incremental value of the      new
project depends on the relative profitabilities of      the
                                                           —26—


 project and existing assets.     The first column of entries
 gives the net present value of the stand—alone    project for
 different levels of profitability. As before, the project's
 profitability is measured by its expected initial          net
 revenue, x   •   The marginal impact of the new project on the
 value of the firm is presented for different levels bf the

 firm's profitability (measured by the expected         annual
operating cash flow per unit, Y). We compute the value of
 the project as the difference between the present value of
the firm's assets with and without the     project, less the
cost of aquiring it (this is labeled 'NPV(COMBINED)' ).    The
three panels in Table 4 show the effect         of varying the
correlation between the new        project and the existing
assets.


    The results for the case P =     0 are displayed in Figure

8. The incremental value of the project is      plotted as a
function of its profitability, for three different levels of

profitability of existing assets.      Also plotted is the net
present   value of the project when stand—alone          (with
unlimited carry forwards).

    Again we see that tax asymmetries have      a significant
impact on project value, even when unlimited carry forwards
are allowed. As Figure 6 shows, the project is always more
valuable to a firm that has other       assets, although the
                                                         —27—




difference   in   value   depends    on     their   relative

profitabilities. For example, a very unprofitable project
(e.g., x1=20) has the same value stand—alone as when combined

with low—profitability assets (Y=lOO). In the limit of low
firm and project profitability, the addition of the project
does not change the tax position of the firm, and it
continues to be untaxed at the margin.    However the same
project is more valuable to a very profitable firm (Y=l000)
because the project's losses will shield some of the firm's
gains. The extra value is in part due to the increase in
present value of the project's depreciation tax shields, and
in part due to the ability to deduct operating losses.


   As the profitability of the project is increased, both
its stand—alone value and its valde when combined with other

assets increase. But the difference between its value to
the very profitable firm and relatively unprofitable firm
diminishes. That is, the curves marked 'YlOO' and 'Y=lOOO'
in Figure 6 approach each other as x1       increases.   The

project is now beginning to show some gains, so there are
fewer losses to shield the profitable firm's gains.      The
unprofitable finn's losses can now be used to shield the
project's gains. Hence the value of the project to the
unprofitable firm increases relative to its value to the
profitable firm. At approximately x1= 32, the value of the
project to the two firms is equal.
                                                           —28—




    As the project becomes very profitable (e.g., x1        50)

its stand—alone value approaches its value to the very
profitable firm (y=1000).   In this limit, the project does
not change the tax position of the firm, and it continues to

be fully taxed at the margin.         The project is now most
valuable to the unprofitable firm because the project. gains
can be used to shield some of the firm's losses.


    Of course the strength of these effects depends on the
covariance between project and firm cash flows. As Tables 4
and 5 show, the value of a given project to a firm that has
other assets increases with decreasing correlation between
them (i.e., diversification helps).




5.2. Intertemporal Effects of Carry Porwards


    The assumption that the distributions of pre—tax cash

flows are exogenous ignores some interesting intertemporal
effects of carry forward provisions.         The firm has an
incentive to use its carry forwards as soon as possible, but
some of the ways in which it can do so also alter the future

pre—tax cash flow distributions.      In particular, the change
in the firm's future investment policy due to its level of
carry forwards will make future cash flow distributions
endogenous.
                                                         —29—



   Auerbach [1983a] examines the effect of carry forwards
on the steady state level of investment by the firm.      He

interprets the asymmetry as a way for the government to
avoid subsidising poorly performing firms.'6" Carry forwards
are thus a way of allowing firms that invest in risky assets
and occasionally have a bad year to obtain some benefi from
their tax shields.    But although imperfect loss offsets
discourage inefficient finns from investing exante, once
such a firm has accumulated carry forwards it has an
incentive to overinvest in order to use them up.


    In Auerbach's model, the firm receives a one—period
investment opportunity each period.   In deciding whether or

not to invest in the current opportunity, the firm must
consider how the investment changes the value of future
opportunities through its effect on future carry forwards.
Hence carry forwards couple current and future investment
opportunities, and the firm must solve a stochastic dynamic
program that is made difficult by the complicated stochastic

process for the carry forwards. He uses simulation to solve
for the firm's steady state probability of investment, and
finds that inefficient firms indeed have an incentive to
overinvest relative to efficient ones.     Auerbach (1983b]
also deals with this issue. He fits a simple first—order
process to the level of carry forwards reported by firms and
calculates the long run distribution for carry forwards. He
                                                       —30—



finds that inefficient firms indeed have an incentive to
overinvest relative to efficient ones.     Auerbach t1983b1

also deals with this issue. He fits a simple first—order
process to the level of carry forwards reported by firms and
calculates the long run distribution for carry forwards. He
integrates this numerically to derive the        conditional

probability of a tax loss in any given year:. Then, by
assuming a given pre—tax IRR, he uses these probabilities to
obtain expected tax payments, the expected after tax IRR,
and the effective tax rate. He finds that, depending on the
recent earnings history of the firm, the asymmetry can raise
or lower the effective tax rate on new investment by the
firm.


    Finally, Cooper and Franks fl983] explicitly include the
effect of the asymmetries on future investment and financing
decisions in their linear programming model.      Thus they
capture both the effect of the current tax position on
future decisions and the interaction of investment and
financing decisions. However, their procedure is difficult

to apply in practical capital budgeting situations.




6. Conclusions
                                                        —31—



    This paper examines the impact of asymmetric taxation of

operating gains and losses on the value of new investment by

corporations. The government's tax claim on the firm is
modeled as a series of contingent claims on the pre—tax cash

flows of the firm.      Assuming that the distributions of
pre—tax cash flows are exogenous, a simulation proced'ure is
used to arrive at the distributions of after—tax cash
flows.   The Cox—Ross risk neutrality argument is then
invoked to find the present value of the government's tax
claim on the pre—tax cash flows.

    The assumption that the distributions of pre—tax cash
flows are exogenous and independent of the future tax
position of the firm is important in our analysis. Although
it precludes analysis of the intertemporal effects of the
tax asymmetries described above, it allows us to use the
simulation procedure to approximate the distributions of
after—tax cash flows. Since the distributions of future
carry forwards and carry backs depend on the entire sequence
of pre—tax cash flows, simulation allows us to value the
government's tax claim under the ié€äál provisions for
carrying tax losses forward and back.


    Our calculations show that tax asymmetries can have a
significant impact on project values, even when carry
forwards and carry backs are allowed.     This distortion is
                                                                   —32-




    particularly severe for high risk assets that stand alone or
    that are part of an undiversified firm.    Many large scale
    energy projects fit this description.           The      procedure
    presented in this paper allows us to calculate after tax
    values for such projects, and is therefore useful in         many
    capital budgeting problems.

         We have not formally addressed issues of public policy
    arising from asymmetric taxation.    Further research will
    include analysing more realistic projects in order to better
    understand the effects of tax asymmetries on project values
    and investment decisions. We will then be in           a better
    position to address the issues of public policy.

•
         Apart from diversification within the firm, we did not
    explicitly analyse other transactions designed to offset tax
    losses.    However, the magnitude of the impact of the
    asymmetry on asset value can be interpreted as an estimate
    of    the value of pursuing these     costly     tax—motivated
    transactions.


         The procedure for calculating after—tax    project value
    can also be applied to valuation of the firm               under
    regulation. Since the allowed rate of return is       a maximum
    allowed return, the government "taxes"     any return above
    that. Hence the government's claim on the regulated firm is
    similar to the tax claim on the firm           without     carry
                                                         —33—




privileges.   Of course this simple analogy ignores important
features of the regulatory process, but it can easily be
adapted to handle more realistic cases. The key assumption
remains that the pre—regulation cash flows are exogenous.
                                                        —34—




                           FOOTNOTES


1. Also, since losses are carried forward in nominal terms,
    inflation further reduces the value of carry forwards.

2. Brennan and Schwartz (1978] also explicitly account for
    the risk of interest tax shields in their Snalysis of
    the optimal capital structure problem.  However, they
     focus on the risk of losing the tax shields due to
     bankruptcy, rather than  the  risk   due to having
     insufficient operating income.

3. See also Atkinson and Stiglitz [1980], chapter 4, and
     Stiglitz (1969]
4. For example, see Auerbach [1982]. Like most of the
    literature dealing with this problem, he uses the
     Hall—Jorgenson "user cost of capital" model.

5. Since the value of a call option is convex in the
     exercise price (see Merton [1973]), and no interest is
     paid on carry forwards, it is always optimal to use tax
     losses as soon as possible.
6. Constantinedes [1983] sets forth the conditions for a
    tax—paying entity to realise tax losses immediately and
     to defer gains as long as possible.

7.   Issuing equity to buy bonds will only be effective under
     certain assumptions about debt and taKes. See Cooper
     and Franks 1983 for a discussion of some of the
     financial transactions designed to exploit the firm's
     tax losses.

8. See Cox and Ross [1976] for a discussion of this
     technique.    Brennan   11979]  discusses   alternative
     conditions under which such a 'risk—neutral' valuation
     procedure is valid. One result is that options can be
     valued by such procedures in the traditional framework
     of the Capital Asset Pricing Model provided that asset
     returns are multivariate normal and that there is a
     representative investor who exhibits constant absolute
     risk aversion. See also Rubinstein (1976].
        -                                               —35—



9. Boyle (1977] first used   a Monte Carlo simulation
   technique to value  a   European call option on a
   dividend—paying stock.
10. Remember that, to use the risk—neutrality technique, we
     must value the option as if both it and the underlying
     asset are priced in a risk neutral economy. Hence the
     diffusions generating the present values of        net
     revenues have an expected return equal to the riskiess
    rate.

11. See Myers and Turnbull (19771 and Fama (19771.

12. This is not realistic, as project life j5; generally
     endogenous to the valuation procedure. See Myers and
     Majd [1983].
13. Inflation reduces the present value of nominal flows
     such as depreciation tax shields. Also, carry forwards
     are fixed in nominal terms. Hence, inflation reduces
     the exercise price of the government's options on the
     stand—alone    project's    operating    cash    flows.
     Incorporating the effects     of   inflation  in    the
     simulations is generally complex.     For example, we
     would have to model the stoähastic interaction between
     inflation and project revenues. However, to obtain a
     simple measure of the effect of inflation, we ran the
     base case with an inflation rate of 8%, assuming no
     correlation between it and project revenues.        The
     present value of the project to IBM was reduced by
     about 10 for any level of profitability. The present
     value of the stand—alone project was reduced by much
     less, but the effect increased with higher levels of
     profitability.
14. We hold constant the discount rate used to calculate
     the present values of pre—tax net revenues despite the
     shift in   .  This assumes the shifts in risk affect
     diversifiable   risk   only.   We do this    to   make
     comparisons of Figures 2, 3 and 4 easier. Adjustments
     to discount rates would not change our qualitative
     conclusions about the effect of tax asymmetries.

15. This   does  not   rule  out      the   possibility   of
    diversification within the      firm.    Diversification
     within each unit will be reflected in a1
16. This is not the only possible view.    Atkinson and
    Stiglitz [1980, p.115] suggest that limited loss
    offsets are a way for the government to distinguish
     between   investment    and   consumption   activities.
                                               —36—


Investment activities are interpreted as those that
make a profit    (and  are  taxed) and consumption
activities as those that make a loss (and are not
subsidised).  The two views   are, of course, not
mutually exclusive.
                                                         —37—




                          REFERENCES


Atkinson, A., and 3. Stiglitz, 1980, Lectures on Public
    Economicá, McGraw—Hill, Inc.

Auerbach, A., 1981, "Evaluating tje Taxation       of Risky
    Assets", NBER Working Paper #806;
Auerbach, A., 1982, "Tax Neutrality and the Social Discount
    Rate", Journal of Public Economics, 355—372.

Auerbach, A., 1983(a), "The Dynamic Effects of Tax Law
    Asymmetries", NBER Working Paper #1152.
Auerbach, A., 1983(b), "Corporate Taxation in the U.S.",
    mimeo.

Boyle', P., 1977, "Options: A Monte Carlo Approach", Joüritàl
    of Financial Economics, 323—338.

Brennan, M., 1979, "The Pricing of Contingent Claims in
    Discrete Time Models", Journal of Finance, 53—68.

Brennan, M., and E.Schwartz, 1978, "Corporate Income Taxes,
    Valuation, and    the   Problem   of   Optimal   Capital
    Structure", Journal of Business, Vol.51, No.1, 103—114.
Constantinedes, C., 1983, "Capital Market Equilibrium With
    Personal Tax", Econometrica, 611—636.
Cooper,   I., and J.Franks, 1983, "The Interaction    of
    Financing and Investment Decisions When the Firm Has
    Unused Tax Credits", Journal of Finance, 571—583.

Cordes, J., and S. Sheffrin, 1983, "Estimating the Tax
                                                   -
   Advantage of Corporate Debt", Journal of
    95—105.
                                              Einañé,

Cox, J., and S. Ross, 1976, "The Valuation of Options for
    Alternative Stochastic Processes", Joâhài6 ELi
    Economics, 145—166.
                                                          —38—


Doinar, E., and R. Musgrave, 1944, 'Proportional Income
    Taxation  and   Risk—Taking", Quarterly Journal  of
    Economics, p.288—422.
Fama, E., 1977, "Risk Adjusted Discount Rates and Capital
    Budgeting Under Uncertainty",   Journal of Financial
    Economics, 3—24.
Galai, D., 1983,      Corporate Income Taxes and the Valuation
    of Claims on the Corporation", UCLA Working Paper
    #9—83.

Green, R.C., and E.Talmor, 1983, "On The Structure and
    Incentive Effects of Tax Liabi]4ties", Carnegie—Mellon
    University Working Paper 11—83—84.
Hall, R., and D. Jorgenson, 1967, "Tax Policy and Investment
    Behaviour", American Economic ikes'iew, Vol. 57, No. 3.

Hulten, C., and J. Robertson, 1983, "The Taxation of High
    Technology Industries", The    Urban Institute (Wash.
    D.C.) Discussion Paper #3306—01.

Merton, R.C., 1973, "Theory of Rational Option Pricing",
    Bell Journal of Economics and Management         Science,
    141—183.

Myers, S., and S. Turnbull, 1977, "Capital Budgeting and the
    Capital Asset Pricing Model: Good News and Bad News",
    Journal of Finance, 321—333.

Myers, S., and S. Majd, 1983, "Calculating Abandonment Value
    Using Option    Pricing   Theory",   Sloan   School   of
    Management, MIT Working Paper #1462—83.
Ruback, R., 1983, "Calculating the Present Value of Riskless
    Cash Flows", Sloan School of Management, MIT Working
    Paper #1348—83.

Rubinstein, M., 1976, "The Valuation of Uncertain Income
    Streams and the Pricing of Options", Bell Journal of
    Economics, 407—425.

Smith, C., and R. Stulz, 1983, "The Determinants of Firm's
    Hedging Policies", University of Rochester Working Paper
    IMERC 83—15.

Stiglitz, J., 1969; "Effects of Wealth, Income, and Capital
    Gains Taxation on Risk—Taking", Quarterljr Journal of
    Economics, 263—283.
                                                                             9—


                           Taxable
 Taxes                     income=O
                                                                       Taxes
  paid
                                                                       paid by
                                                                       firm
                                                                     (heavy line)




                                                             = statutory
                                                                  tax rate

                             Taxes paid
                            by stand-
                      alone project




     0
                                                        Taxable
                                 Taxes paid
                                                        income
                                 by IBM on the
                                 same project




Figure 1. Taxes paid as a function of taxable income.
                                                                                       —40—




                    Table 1: The Standard Project



       1. Cash flows


  Expected
   pre-tax
cash flows




    initial
net revenue




                                                        Rate of decay, 6



          F.




                                                                                          Time
                    1                                                   Project life


                         variable               fixed
   cash flow = revenue —
                                     cost       cost

                = revenue —        variable   cost

              F =   fixed   cost

              r =   opportunity      cost of capital for


          rf =      risk—free      rate


              a =   standard deviation of the rate of change of the present value
                    of future Xt's


               6 = decay rate of


     Project = time at which forecasted X equals fixed cost
        Ii fe
                                                                                                         —41—




Table 1: (Continued)



  2. Base case values


      Investment = $100

      Fixed Costs (real) = $10

      Initial revenue net of variable cost (real)

                 =       : several values are simulated

      Decay rate (real) = 5 = .04

      Discount rate (real) =              r    =   .06

      Risk-free rate (real)                   rf =      .02
      Standard deviation =        a       =    .15

      Inflation rate =    I   =   0


   3. NPV of pre-tax flows


      Assume X1 = 29.53:


                                                   15         X             45
                                                                                         F
                     NPV=_l00+ Z _____
                                 (1 + r)
                             t=l                                            t=l   (1 +
                                                                                             rf)

                                  -15                     ,
                                                   29.53.96
                                                                  \t1   —
                                                                            15
                                                                                    10             = 0
              NPV = —100 +            E                                     E
                                  t=l               (1.06)                  t=1   (1.02)
                                                                           —42—



TABLE 2: Project NPVs for base case and sensitivity analysis.
             BASE CASE (see Table 1)
     xl.      NPV(PC)    NPV(IBM) NPV(PROJFB) NPV(PROJC)      NPV(PROJ)
     24.00     —42.42      —18.03        —43.51      —45.84      —53.44
     25.92     —27.55      —10.00        —29.71      —32.83      —.41.27
     27.84     —12.68       —1.97        —16.36      —20.47      —29.39
     29.76       2.19        6.06         —3.92       —8.77      —17.80
     31.68      17.06       14.09          7.70        2.26       —6.50
     33.60      31.93       22.12         18.23       12.68        4.50
     33.52      46.80       30.15         27.79       22.67       15.19
     37.44      61.67       38.18         36.90       32.30       25.58




             STANDARD DEVIATION = 0.03
     xl      . NPV(PC)   NPtJ(IBM) NPV(PROJFB) NPV(PROJC)     NPV(PROJ)
                 -.

     24.00     —43.0.9     —18.38        —43.09      —43.11     —50.41
     25.92     —28.27      —10.38        —28.27      —28.50     —38.15
     27.84     —13.45       —2.38        —13.45      —14.42     —26.12
     29.76       1.37        5.62          1.19       —1.49     —14.27
     31.68      17.06       14.09          7.70        2.26      —6.50
     33.60      31.93       22.12         18.23       12.68       4.50
     35.52      46.80       30.15         27.79       22.67      15.18
     37.44      61.67       38.18         36.90       32.30      25.58




             STANDARD DEVIATION = 0.45
     xl      NPV(PC)     NPV(IBM) NPV(PROJFB) NPV(PROJC) NPV(PROJ)
     24.00     —44.49      —19.14        —63.14     —66.55    —72.08
     25.92     —29.78      —11.20        —51.84     —55.60    —61.24
     27.84     —15.08      —3.26         —40.84     —44.91    —50.60
     29.76      —0.37       4.68         —30.68     —34.42    —40.13
     31.68      14.33      12.52         —20.42     —24.17    —29.84
     33.60      9.04       20.56         —10.27     —14.11    —19.70
     35.52      43.74      28.50          —0.34      —4.22     —9.71
     37.44     58.45       36.44           9.45       5.54      0.15
——
                                                                       —43-.



TABLE 2 (contd.)
           PROJECT LIFE = 8 YEARS (delta =    0.08)
   xl      NPV(PC)   NPV(IBM) NPV(PROJFB) NPV(PROJC)           NPV(PROJ)

   29.76    —34.73      —13.87       —34.99           —35.76      —39.98
   33.60    —16.87       —4.23       —17.98           —19.60      —24.68
   35.52     —7.93        0.60       —10.23           —11.98      —17.29
   37.44      1.00        5.42        —2.91            —4.72      —10.09
   39.36      9.93       10.25         3.95             2.18       —3.08
   41.28     18.87       15.07        10.45             8.73        3.73
   45.12     36.73       24.72        22.52            20.91       16.72
   48.96     54.60       34.36        33.35            32.14       28.86
   52.80     72.46       44.01        43.70            42.74       40.29




           PROJECT LIFE = 30 YEARS (delta = 0.02)
   xl      NPV(PC)   NPV(IBtl) NPV(PROJFB) NPV(PROJC)          NPV(PROJ)
   24.00    —51.19     —22.76        —56.26           —62.30      —73.00
   25.92    —29.41     —11.00        —37.44           —44.97     r56.01
   27.84     —7.64       0.76        —20.24           —28.54      —39.43
   29.76     14.13      12.51         —3.64           —12.92      —23.29
   31.68     35.90      24.27         10.94             2.04       —7.56
   33.60     57.68      36.03         24.25            16.48        7.79
   35.52     79.45      47.79         36.84            30.46       22.75
   37.44    101.22      59.54         49.36            44.06       37.38
                                                                            —44—



                       Figure 2: base case NPVs.
                                  (standard deviaflon = 0.15)
         70

         60

         50

         40

         30
 a
 J
         20
 U
>
.4..
         10
C

m
0         0
S.
0
. —10
z
        —20


        —30


        -40

        —50


        —60

              24       26    28         30        .32         34    36   38


       a PC        +   IBM    o     PROIJEB          '
                             Expected initial profitability (xl).
                                                          PROJC     xPROJ
                                                                          —45—




                     Figure 3: tow risk project.
                             (standard deviaflon       0.05)
       70

       60


       50

       40

       30
Ii
J
       20
U
)
+1     10
C
4;

4;      0
L.

U.

4J    —10
4,
z
      —20


      —30


      —40


      —50


      —60

            24       26    28        30         32          34    36   38

                           Expected initial profitability (xl).
     C PC        +   IBM    o PROJFB               a    PROJC     xPROJ
                                                                      —46—




                   Figure 4 high risk project.
                           (standard deviab'on = 0.45)
       60

       50

       40

       30

       20


3      10
a
>       0
.4J
c
      —10


0     —20


ii;   —30
z
      -40

      —50


      —60


       —70


       —80

             24     26    28        30         32          34    36   38


                          Expected initial profitability (xl).
      o PC        t IBM    ,    PROJFB                 PkOJC     xPROJ
                                                                                       -47—




                      Figure 5; shorter project life.
      •
                                       (8 years, delta = O.08)
            40




            30




            20




            10
0
>
+1
C
w            0

II.
0.

4J_jQ
w
z

           —20




           -30



           —40

                 29    31     33        35       37       39       41     43     45

                                   Expected Initial profitability (xl).
          a PC        + IBM         o PROJIB              a PROJC              xPROJ
                                                                         —48—




                       Figure 6: long project life.
                                 (30 years, delta = 0.02)
        60

        50

        40

        30

        2Q

hi
J       10
a
>        0
4-.
C
       —10
 II.
 0.    —20

•'     —30
z
       -40

       —50


       —60


       —70


        —80

              24          26           28              30       32       34


                               Expected initial profitability
       a PC        +    IBM     oPROJFB                              xPROJ
                    Figure 7: base case "tax rates"
       0.4


       0.3


       0.2


       0.1


—U
-Id        0
0
L
x
0     —0.1
1-

      —0.2

      —o

      —0.4

      —0.5
               20             4-0                   60                    80              100
                                                                                                0
                                    Expected initial profitability (xl)
               0    IBM   +         PROJFB           0    PROJC                a   PROJ
                                                                           —50—



Table 3: The Firm's Existing Assets

             Each year the firm invests in a unit that lasts 15 years. Hence
in the steady state, the firm consists of 15 units. This table summarizes
the characteristics of each unit and gives the basic case values, where
appropriate.



      V =    expected annual pretax cash flow for epch unit
             (several values simulated)

    1000 =   investment cost of each unit

    950 =    total   annual depreciation for the firm (5 year-ACRS,
             totalled over the 15 units)

    100 = annual ITC

        =    :15 = standard deviation of rate of change of present
             value of each future V

      p =    correlation   coefficient between pretax cash flows for the
             existing assets and the new project (V and Xt)

      r = .06 =      opportunity    cost of capital for V (real)

        = .02 =      riskless   rate (real)

      I = 0 =    inflation   rate
TA8LE 4z Firm and project combined (see Tables 1 and 3).
                                                                    —51—



                   NPV(COMBINED), correlation = 0
          NPV
  xl     (PROJC)      Y100     Y200 Y1000 Y5000 Y10000
 19.20   —83.49      —81.56   —50.28   —39.78     —39.74   —39.74
 28.80   —18.61       —9.74     2.77    —0.38      —0.40    —0.40
 38.4b    32.99       62.07    55.75    39.03      38.93    38.93
 48.00    76.36      133.87   108.63    78.43      78.26    78.26
 57.60   116.86      205.77   161.41   117.84     117.59   117.59
 67.20   156.56      277.38   214.06   157.24     156.93   156.93
 96.00   274.85      492.33   371.45   275.44     274.92   274.92
960.00 3814.81 6647.46 4778.43 3819.51 3814.81 3814.81




                   NPV(COMBINED), correlation =   +0.9
          NP')
  xl     (PROJC)      Y100     Y200 Y1000 Y5000 Y10000
 19.20    —83.50     —83.03   —57.90   —39.58     —39.71   —39.71
 30.72     —7.22       2.15     2.01     7.38       7.50     7.50
 38.40     33.36      58.88    41.89    38.86      38.98    38.98
 96.00    274.97     483.31   339.48   275.01     275.04   275.04
960.00 3815.98 6433.81 4562.77 3817.08 3815.98 3815.98




                   NPV(COMBINED), correlation = —0.9
          NPV
  xl     (PROJC)      Y100     Y200 Y1000 Y5000 Y10000
 19.20    —82.71     —79.84   —42.55    38.93     —39.24   —39.24
 30.72     —6.61       7.56    24.56     8.87       8.25     8.25
 38.40     33.95      65.82    69.24    40.73      39.92    39.92
 96.00   277.32  502.44  402.31  279.60   277.40  277.40
960.00. 3839.56 6900.70 5049.51 3848.21 3839.56 3839.56
                                                                             —52—




        Figure 8: incrementa value of project
                                to the firm (corre!ction=0).
      140


      120


      100


       80



a      60
J
U
>      40
4J
£
       20
II
L
U.      0
4J
'V
z    —20


     —40


     —60


     —80


     —100

            18   22        26        30       34          38      42    46

                           £xpootod liillJat profltablity ( I).
       a PROJC        •1    '(=100               '(=200           A Y1000
                                                                         —53—




Table 5:    Firm and Project Combined

                  =   38.40,      =    = 0.45,   NPV(PROJC)   6.52)
            (X1




                                   NPV(COMBINED)
            .2.
                               V100              1000            5000

           +0.9                21.08             27.98           37.15

           +0.6                33.17             29.30           34.52

           +0.3                45.16             37.21           35.41

            0                  55.96             49.13           40.06

           —0.3                66.80             62.26           47.20

           —0.6                76.60             77.15           60.12

           —0.9                87.40             93.41           73.84
