                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    FOREIGN CURRENCY DEBT, FINANCIAL CRISES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH:
                          A LONG RUN VIEW

                                          Michael D. Bordo
                                       Christopher M. Meissner
                                            David Stuckler

                                        Working Paper 15534
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15534


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2009




Comments on an early draft from Pedro Elosegui are greatly appreciated as are those from Mark Spiegel,
Galina Hale, Jim Lothian, Andy Rose, and participants at the JIMF, Santa Cruz Center for International
Economics conference. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Michael D. Bordo, Christopher M. Meissner, and David Stuckler. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Foreign Currency Debt, Financial Crises and Economic Growth: A Long Run View
Michael D. Bordo, Christopher M. Meissner, and David Stuckler
NBER Working Paper No. 15534
November 2009
JEL No. F34,F36,F43,N10

                                               ABSTRACT

Foreign currency debt is widely believed to increase risks of financial crisis, especially after being
implicated as a cause of the East Asian crisis in the late 1990s. In this paper, we study the effects of
foreign currency debt on currency and debt crises and its indirect short and long run effects on output
between 1880-1913 and 1973-2003 for 45 countries. Greater ratios of foreign currency debt to total
debt are associated with increased risks of currency and debt crises, although the strength of the association
depends crucially on the size of a country’s reserve base and its policy credibility. We find that financial
crises, driven by exposure to foreign currency, resulted in significant permanent output losses. We
evaluate our findings by looking at the risk posed by high levels of foreign currency liabilities in eastern
Europe in late 2008.


Michael D. Bordo                                      David Stuckler
Department of Economics                               Christ Church
Rutgers University                                    Oxford, OX1 1DP
New Jersey Hall                                       UK
75 Hamilton Street                                    David.Stuckler@Aya.Yale.Edu
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

Christopher M. Meissner
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
cmmeissner@ucdavis.edu
1 Introduction


        Foreign currency liabilities are often perceived as a financial weakness in
emerging markets. It is widely believed that these debts exacerbated the severity of the
Mexican tequila crisis (1994), the Russian ruble crisis (1998) and the East Asian crisis in
the late 1990s (Eichengreen and Hausmann, 1999). As a result, unhedged exposure to
debts denominated in foreign currency have substantially diminished. Instead, borrowing
governments tend to issue local-currency denominated debt on international markets
while lenders increasingly participate in domestic bond markets (Burger and Warnock,
2006 ).1 Improved liquidity and depth have expanded interest in local financial markets
while the accumulation of reserves, especially in East Asia, has offered significant
insurance against potential future instability.
        Nonetheless, foreign currency debt contracts and their potential financial risks
have not been eliminated. Exchange rate policy is crucial for managing these debts. Soft
pegs, carrying implicit guarantees for exchange rate stability, could lead to complacency
and ‘excessive’ borrowing in foreign currency. Recommendations for reforming
exchange rate policy to reduce these risks after the East Asian crisis have focused on two
options. First, free-floating exchange rates would help diminish incentives to borrow in
foreign currency, and second, monetary unions could eliminate currency mismatches
altogether.
        Despite progress in implementing these exchange rate reforms in many countries,
some nations have been slower to reform (e.g., certain countries in eastern Europe), and
the global financial crisis of 2008 has exposed these weaknesses. Thus far large reserves
have helped maintain stability in East Asia. However, the situation facing countries in
eastern Europe, particularly the Baltic states, which established pegged exchange rates of
intermediate hardness post-1997 and built up significant proportions of private debt and




1
 The GEMLOC project launched in 2008 at the World Bank’s IFC aims to track the investibility in
domestic local currency denominated asset markets and to support these markets. They report that as of
2008 70 percent of emerging market debt was denominated in local currency debt.


                                                    2
other liabilities payable in euro, dollars and Swiss francs, was widely regarded to be a
‘perfect storm’.2
         Can financial crises be avoided in these countries despite high proportions of
foreign currency debt? Are there other vulnerabilities besides foreign currency debt? Our
analysis based on the experience of over 1,700 country years spanning two periods of
open international financial integration, 1880 to 1913 and 1973 to 2003, suggests the
answers may be affirmative on both accounts. 3 Despite such conclusions, foreign
currency debt, combined with other financial weaknesses remain a vulnerability.
         We first investigate the empirical relationship between financial crises and foreign
currency debt, economic growth and output. All else equal, we find robust evidence that
foreign currency debt increases the likelihood of currency and debt crises. The risks of
crisis are the greatest when borrowing in foreign currency is rapid and large, banking
systems are prone to crisis, and international reserves are low.4 Currency and debt crises
lead to significant short term losses in economic growth and to permanent output losses.
         We highlight the following additional points:
         1) Risk of a crisis can be small even when liabilities are payable in hard currency
if financial systems are solid and countries have good reputations in international capital
markets. This implies that intermediate pegs can be a viable strategy
         2) Minimizing foreign currency financing is not a sufficient condition to eliminate
financial crises.




2 Foreign Currency Financing in Two Periods of Globalization: Policy, Observations and
Implications




2
  Amongst many others see Gros (2009) Gligorov and Landesmann (2009) or Stokes (2009).
3
  Goldstein and Turner (2004) call attention to the mismatch issue. A currency mismatch is measured as the
value of foreign currency obligations relative to foreign currency assets and streams of revenues. Financial
development and prudent borrowing are other routes to avoiding these costs as we will illustrate.
4
  Other forms of insurance besides reserve accumulation may be less costly and just as effective, but we do
not control explicitly for these below.


                                                     3
2.1 Policy and International Financial Architecture with Foreign Currency Debt


       Close analysis of the East Asian and Latin American crises of the 1990s led
Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999) to conclude that external borrowing in foreign
currency was a major reason for the severity of these financial crises. In several South
East Asian countries and Mexico in 1994 and Argentina in 2001/2002 pegged exchange
rates provided an implicit guarantee of exchange rate stability. Households, domestic
banks, and non-financial firms built up significant short-term debt denominated in US
dollars. Many local banks also borrowed short in dollars and lent long into the domestic
economy, expecting payments in local currency,.
       Those borrowers involved seemed to dismiss, ignore or discount the possibility
that dollar liabilities might increase due to a sharp depreciation. They also appear to have
overestimated the capacity or willingness of their governments to maintain fixed
exchange rates. Yet repeatedly after 1990 in Mexico, Thailand, South Korea, Indonesia,
Malaysia, Russia and Argentina, among many others, governments failed to uphold these
pegs against sudden stops to capital inflows. This wreaked havoc on the balance sheets of
domestic financial and non-financial firms, leading to successive credit crunches and
output losses.
       Many policy prescriptions emerged from this era of financial turbulence, with a
few key options for mitigating risks associated with foreign currency debt. One option
involved enhancing or initiating local currency markets. It was argued that as liquidity
rose foreign participation in these markets would increase enabling LDCs to tap surplus
country wealth but with local currency debt. Another option was to self-insure through
accumulating reserves, an option taken by many of the East Asian counties. However,
such policies limited net capital inflows and unsustainable net foreign asset positions.
       A related pair of options involved reforming exchange rate policies. A free float
would discourage the policy-induced moral hazard thought to be at play in the 1990s
(Eichengreen, 2002), and develop markets for domestic debt. There is no doubt that
expanding domestic debt markets has alleviated some of the seemingly excess reliance on
foreign currency debt. However, having floating exchange rates is a less viable option for
most small open developing economies (Calvo and Reinhart, 2002). The second option



                                             4
was for the country to get rid of the exchange rate altogether, instead establishing hard
peg currency boards or monetary unions. Unfortunately, abolishing exchange rates is a a
politically risky strategy. As Argentina’s experience showed, when an economy is
vulnerable to shocks and lacks the capacity to make necessary quick adjustments, ‘ultra-
credible’ currency policies can change suddenly. Thus, forming monetary unions, as in
Europe, was the remaining option. So far, relatively few countries in the world have
taken the option to ‘dollarize’ or ‘euroize’. The European Monetary Union (EMU) is
expanding eastwards but only slowly. Still, there the 2008-09 financial crisis has
revitalized interest in joining EMU. Still there are observers who are betting that
membership in the EMU may not be permanent, especially for the members with the the
largest imbalances or those who face other political challenges (Feldstein, 2009).


2.2 The Origins of Foreign Currency Debt


       Foreign debt has historically been denominated in only a handful of key
currencies like the US dollar, the Japanese yen, the British pound sterling, or the German
mark. A high ratio of foreign currency liabilities to total international liabilities was
called ‘original sin’ by Eichengreen and Hausmann because the currency denomination
aspect of the contract was ostensibly unrelated to fundamentals. Rich and poor countries,
institutionally weak nations, and even countries with strong property rights issue much,
or all, of their debt on international markets in foreign currency (Flandreau and Sussman
2005 and Bordo and Meissner 2007a).
       As it turns out, domestically issued liabilities have historically carried indexation
or foreign currency clauses. The assumption that the international market is the only one
of interest is misplaced. Exchange rate indexation clauses in domestic debt can generate
distributional consequences when the exchange rate depreciates or inflation rises. These
matter whenever capital market imperfections exist, as detailed in long-run evidence of
Bordo and Meissner (2006, 2007a). In the rest of our study, we look at total, not just
international, debt outstanding whenever possible.
       Before 1914, in the first wave of financial globalization, most countries financed
themselves with foreign currency debt. Like today, most debt issued in external markets



                                               5
(e.g., London, Paris, and Berlin) was denominated in the currency of the financial
leaders. Private and sovereign debt contracts often demanded repayment in a fixed weight
of precious metal such as gold.
         However this was by no means the rule within this period. Many emerging
markets managed to place significant amounts of long term debt payable in local
currency; and although the ‘emerging’ countries were commonly regarded as possessing
underdeveloped or weak financial systems and dubious institutional foundations they still
managed to have significant amounts of domestic currency debt.5 Foreign investors were
not always shy of holding such debt in their portfolios (Flandreau and Sussman, 2005).
These countries included Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Italy, Russia, Spain, Portugal. By
contrast, other countries maintained heavy exposure to hard currency debt. These were
the countries that would eventually become mature industrialized economies, and which
were already leaders in terms of the quality of their institutions, their financial
development, their protection of creditors, and the degree of structural change. These
markets included the Australasian colonies, Canada, the United States, and Scandinavia.6
         For this paper we rely on high quality data on the currency denomination of total
public debt for 18 countries prior to 1914. These include bonds issued both domestically
and externally, and in some respects these data have better coverage than current data
which have been used to explore the question.7 For the recent past (1973-2003) we rely
on data for internationally issued obligations only.
         New evidence from the recent decades of financial integration also shows that
developing country governments are quite able to market substantial proportions of their
total debt in local currency (Burger and Warnock, 2006 and Reinhart and Rogoff, 2008).
It appears also that foreign investors may be increasingly willing to hold developing
country local currency debt.
         These facts and the history of capital flows in the 1990s lead to the following
questions: Are countries with the lowest exchange rate exposure guaranteed the most
financial stability? Are their other necessary factors which need to accompany a break

5
  Reinhart and Rogoff (2008) reach a similar conclusion.
6
  Debt was often denominated in dollars in the United States in the nineteenth century. But nearly all debt
(corporate, sovereign, state and municipal) had a gold clause which meant repayment in a fixed quantity of
gold was expected.
7
  Reinhart and Rogoff (2008) have also improved the twentieth century data for domestic debt.


                                                     6
away from foreign currency debt to ensure financial stability? Can countries manage
foreign currency debt with alternative financial development strategies? Is foreign
currency debt imposed by financial markets on the countries that are expected to perform
poorly or is such debt generally endemic to most debt issues on global capital markets?




2.3 Original Sin? A Long Run View Of Hard Currency Debt’s Consequences and Origins


           Theoretical models are generally ambiguous about the effect of exchange rate
depreciation when foreign currency debt is present. In sticky price macroeconomic
models, nominal depreciation in the face of hard currency debt is likely to be
contractionary as debt repayments increase.8 This traditional view is that the
expansionary effect of depreciation on increased exports and decreased imports can offset
this impact.
           Cespedes, Chang and Velasco (2004) study an open economy IS-LM model with
capital market frictions and find that the net impact of a surprise devaluation on income
depends on the degree of capital market imperfections, the share of home goods in total
consumption, the fraction of total debt denominated in hard currency and the ratio of debt
to net worth. Krugman (1999) and Aghion, Bachetta and Banerjee (2000) also derive
conditions under which real depreciation can be contractionary.
            Jeanne (2000) argues that when foreign currency debt solves a moral hazard
problem it may be an efficient solution, but when there is adverse selection it is sub-
optimal. Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2003) show that when there is financial under-
development agents opt for inefficiently high levels of foreign currency debt. The
theoretical ambiguity in the predicted effects and rationale for foreign currency debt
stands in stark contrast to the policy paradigm developed after 1997 and a general
tendency to applaud minimizing foreign currency debt.
           What does the empirical work show? Previous work in a long-run comparative
vein (e.g., Bordo and Meissner, 2006) finds that foreign currency debt alone does not



8
    Similar outcomes are possible in real models with tradable and not-tradable sectors.


                                                       7
always generate a higher likelihood of a financial crisis.9 Several countries like Canada,
the US, Australia, and the Scandinavian countries in the nineteenth century, did not have
severe financial instability or debt defaults even with significant foreign currency
liabilities relative to their total obligations; on the other hand, many countries with low to
intermediate ratios of hard currency debt to total debt did have frequent and severe
financial crises.
           In the late twentieth century, our research documents that many advanced
countries exhibited significant amounts of hard currency debt outstanding relative to their
total external debt liabilities, but most have avoided being plagued by severe crises. On
the other hand, emerging markets which also had a high percentage of their external debt
denominated in foreign currency were highly susceptible to debt crises and had high
financial instability. Bebczuk, Galindo and Panizza (2006) find that foreign currency debt
is directly associated with lower growth rates when the real exchange rate depreciates.
Arteta (2003) uses data on currency denomination of deposits and private sector credit
and finds that dollarized banking systems are not significantly more prone to crises.
Bleakley and Cowan (2008), in a sample of Latin American countries, found no evidence
that firms’ investment decisions are affected by hard currency debt even in the face of
depreciation.
           The lesson appears to be that sound debt management at the micro or macro level,
financial development, and sustainable fiscal positions have allowed countries to escape
financial turmoil even in the presence of a high percentage of debt denominated in
foreign currency. Financial development includes many aspects, amongst them are:
increasing the attractiveness of holding the domestic currency abroad, deepening liquidity
in local financial markets, sound and credible government finances and strong financial
intermediation services. Reserve accumulation and strong export capacity can also help
avoid the volatility associated with foreign currency debt. Thus, even if countries have
not yet developed the foundations of good finances, they can minimize instability by
limiting their currency mismatches. This does not imply, however, that only countries
with weak finances end up with foreign currency debt, as shown clearly in Eichengreen,
Hausmann and Panizza (2005).

9
    This paper uses information on public debt only.


                                                       8
3 International Financial Flows, Hard Currency Debt, Crises and Economic Growth: A
Brief Conceptual Framework


         Our framework for the empirical analysis is designed to evaluate the associations
of foreign currency debt with financial crises and, indirectly, with economic growth.
Following the approach of Mishkin (2003) and Jeanne and Zettlemeyer (2005),10 our
analysis integrates a balance sheet view of the credit channel transmission mechanism
with the open-economy. In this framework, balance sheets, net worth and informational
asymmetries are key ingredients, as is the development of the financial system.
         Based on our review of the literature, the basic framework for an emerging market
suggests the following (also see Figure 1):
             •    Sudden stops or reversals in capital inflows are more likely when the
                  capital account is liberalized or a country receives a surge in capital
                  inflows. The likelihood of a sudden stop is exacerbated by high levels of
                  foreign currency debt relative to total borrowing and low levels of
                  internationally tradable production relative to total output.11
             •    Large capital inflows, sudden stops and current account turnarounds are
                  often subsequently associated with a speculative attack on the currency or
                  sharp currency drops. Currency crises are especially likely when policy
                  makers have low credibility or low reserve positions. If foreign currency
                  exposure is heavy, expectations that debt might not be repaid in the case of
                  a depreciation may lead to a self-fulfilling liquidity crisis and a credit
                  crunch.
             •    All else equal, foreign currency debt exposure in the face of a sudden and
                  large depreciation of the exchange rate makes private and public debt
                  default more likely. Private agents’ balance sheets are impaired. A credit
                  crunch based on widespread insolvencies ensues. The economy sinks

10
   Mishkin’s informal analysis follows a stream of literature from the late 1990s on the links between net
worth, exchange rate depreciation, and crises.
11
   Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia (2004) and Bordo, Cavallo and Meissner (2008) find direct empirical
evidence for this proposition.


                                                     9
               deeper into recession and revenues fall giving rise to a further round of
               disintermediation and so forth. Governments and private agents become
               more likely to default in such a scenario. Growth is slow until the financial
               system is repaired and investment recovers.


       [Insert Figure 1 here]


4 Empirical Evidence: The Potential Costs of Hard Currency Debt


       The goal of this section is to provide a rough test of the logic proposed above.
These empirical tests then provide a gateway for measuring the impact of hard currency
debt on economic growth via its impact on crises. We present evidence that large capital
inflows have often contributed to the likelihood of a currency crisis. These sharp and
sudden depreciations were also likely to give way to debt crises when foreign currency
debt was a significant percentage of the outstanding total and other pre-existing
weaknesses were present. A higher propensity to have a crisis depends on these other
controls that proxy for financial development and management.
       This is the crux of our evidence that hard currency debt alone is not to blame for
financial crises. Hard currency debt, combined with good financial development, is
associated with a relatively low propensity to experience debt crises in both periods of
globalization. Strong financial development limits the probability of a currency crisis and
the likelihood of a default in the event of a sharp currency drop.
       On the other hand, when other weaknesses in fundamentals are present, even
relatively low exposure to foreign currency debt with a sharply depreciating exchange
rate is associated with a substantial risk of a crisis. Decreasing dependence on foreign
currency debt may not be sufficient to lead to financial stability.
       We then focus on the economic costs of hard currency debt. We discuss how
original sin and poor financial development together are often indirectly associated with
temporarily lower economic growth and negative level effects on income because they
hasten financial crises. These factors combined appear to contribute to significantly lower




                                             10
standards of living in countries relying on foreign currency denominated capital inflows
to spur development.




4.1 The Association between Foreign Capital Inflows and Financial Crises


         The first step in testing the above framework is to see whether foreign capital
flows are associated with greater risks of currency crises. We hold constant several
factors identified as significant by previous research.12 We control for international and
year-specific factors using the short term discount rate at the Bank of England (1880-
1913) and later the yield on short-term US treasury bills (1973-2003). We also condition
on the lagged level of the ratio of net capital inflows to GDP measured as the (negative)
of the change in the ratio of the net international investment position to GDP, the ratio of
hard currency government debt outstanding to total government debt (1880 - 1913) or the
within country average ratio of foreign currency debt to total debt issued on international
markets (this is based on the Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza data covering 1973-
1992).13,14 Following Eichengreen and colleagues, we call the latter variable original sin.
The ratio of gold reserves to monetary notes in circulation (1880-1913) or foreign
currency reserves to the money supply (1973-2003), and the presence of a banking crisis
in the previous year are also included.




12
  Previous work (e.g., Bordo and Meissner, 2006) has used other determinants. Many of these are not
significantly associated with crises in probit estimations hence we exclude them. All data used in the
following exercises are described in the data appendix.
13
   The Eichengreen et. al. average based on data from 1973-1992 is then used for the years beyond 1992
under the assumption that the ratio does not change much over time. The available data for 1972-1992
suggest this variable is very persistent. Comparable data have not been compiled systematically for the
1993-2003 period to the best of our knowledge. Data from the Bondware data series exist but these data do
not extend backwards far enough and the coverage of the liabilities is different. Results below appear stable
when restricting the sample to 1973-1992 and letting the original sin variable vary by year. Again, this is
true because the original sin variable is highly persistent.
14
  The composition of capital flows (portfolio equity or debt or FDI) may matter for crisis probabilities.
Ultimately we proceed to growth regressions with all capital inflows which what much of the literature on
growth and capital flows in the last five years has analyzed.



                                                     11
        In column 1 and 4 of Table 1, we estimate a probit model where the dependent
variable is one if there was a currency crisis and zero otherwise.15 Column 1 is for the
period 1880-1913 and covers the experience of 18 countries listed below Table 1 while
column 4 covers 45 listed countries between 1973 and 2003. Columns 1 and 4 of Table 1
show that a large inflow of capital relative to GDP has a positive association with
currency crises—this marginal effect is statistically significant at the 95 percent level pre-
1913 and the 90 percent level post-1973. The coefficient on the ‘original sin’ variable is
not statistically significant in the first period, but it is positive and statistically significant
in the second period. Higher interest rates in the financial centers are associated with a
higher chance of a currency crisis. Lower levels of reserves predict higher probabilities of
a currency crash in both periods, but this result is only statistically significant in the first
period. Finally, between 1973 and 2003 there is some evidence that a banking crisis in
the previous year is associated with crises in the current year.
                                         [Insert Table 1 here]
4.2 Debt Crises and Hard Currency Debt


        The next link in our framework in Figure 1 relates currency depreciation, liability
“dollarization” and the other fundamentals to debt default. Results from a pair of probit
models are shown (column 2 and column 5 in Table 1) which use an indicator for the first
year in which a country defaulted (partially or in whole) on its sovereign debt obligations
as a dependent variable. Here we also find evidence consistent with our framework.
        First we see that the marginal impact of a higher ratio of hard currency debt to
total debt outstanding, without a currency crash, is associated with a higher probability
of having a debt crisis only after 1972 (Columns 2 and 5 of Table 1). In both periods,
having a currency crisis amplifies the positive association between hard currency debt
and a debt default. We illustrate the impact on predicted probabilities below in Table 2.
The interpretation is that real depreciation increases the real burden of foreign currency
debt making default more likely.



15
  Currency crises are defined using an exchange market pressure index as in Bordo et. al. See the
appendix for details.


                                                    12
                                           [Insert Table 2 here]


          The following conclusions can be made based on these regressions: foreign
currency debt is likely to be associated with debt crises after large foreign capital inflows.
Such inflows would be associated with significantly increased external debt burdens, and
these are seen in column 1 and 4 to heighten the possibility of a currency crisis. The
interaction in columns 2 and 5 of Table 1 of the hard currency debt ratio and the currency
crisis indicator shows these inflows limit the “sustainability” of a high ratio of hard
currency debt outstanding to total debt.
         In terms of proxies for financial development, we have several findings. First, a
banking crisis in the previous year is a positive and statistically significant determinant of
debt crises.16 Low reserves relative to the money stock are also related to a higher
likelihood of having a debt crisis, but in neither period is this coefficient statistically
significant.17 We find strong support that original sin and balance sheets matter, but we
also find evidence that strong financial systems are important for explaining the (lack of)
incidence of major financial meltdowns.


4.3 Interactions between Fundamentals and Hard Currency Debt on the Likelihood of a
Debt Crisis


In Table 2 we illustrate the impact of hard currency debt ratios on predicted probabilities
of debt crises. We also probe into the interactions between hard currency debt and other
fundamentals. Table 2 presents predicted probabilities of a crisis using the estimated
coefficients from the models of Table 1, a 100 percent hard currency debt ratio and a
range of values for the other included covariates which are associated with financial
development and financial robustness. These results indicate that the fragility induced by
hard currency debt can be overcome to some extent with better fundamentals.



16
   Banking crises could also be endogenous to financial turmoil as balance sheets implode. Such fragility
however suggests weak regulatory regimes or vulnerabilities in the first place.
17
   Currency crises are associated with a lower likelihood of a debt crisis in the second period until the ratio
of hard currency liabilities is sufficiently high.


                                                      13
       We define the following fundamental conditions: “excellent fundamentals” as an
observation with the sample average reserve to money stock ratio, no banking crisis in
the previous year, and no currency crisis this year; “good fundamentals” as a country that
has “excellent fundamentals” but falls victim to a currency crisis; “bad fundamentals” has
a banking crisis in the previous year and no international reserves; and finally the “worst
fundamentals” situation occurs with no reserves and a twin banking and currency crisis.
Across all scenarios we set the level of net capital inflows and the short-term interest rate
at the sample mean.


       The following conclusions are evident from Table 2:


       1) Scenario 1 “Excellent fundamentals” shows that a 100 percent hard currency
debt to total debt ratio is associated with a small likelihood of a debt crisis in both
periods.


       2) Scenarios 2 and 4, which allow for currency crises, demonstrate that
depreciation with hard currency liabilities significantly raises the predicted likelihood of
having a debt crisis above that of scenario 1. This is the case both for countries with good
fundamentals and bad fundamentals. The predicted probability of a debt crisis in the
recent period is 0.18 or 0.63 in the earlier period with the “worst fundamentals”. Having
strong reserves and no banking crisis reduces these probabilities by 2/3 as seen in
Scenario 2.


       3) Scenario 3 shows that avoiding currency crises is crucial. Even with weak
fundamentals and 100% of debt denominated in foreign currency, the predicted
probability of a debt crisis is roughly 0.08 post 1972.


       3) A 100 percent ratio of hard currency debt relative to total debt (or international
debt post-1972), combined with a move from the best to the worst fundamentals (a move
from scenario 1 to scenario 4), raises the predicted probability of suffering a debt crisis
by over 70 times in the first period and nearly six fold in the second period.



                                              14
4.4 Robustness of Crisis Determinants


       In this section, we test whether our crisis models are robust to several potential
data limitations and alternative explanations, including possible endogeneity of the
foreign currency debt variable (e.g., worst countries borrow more in foreign currency)
and the robustness to the sample (i.e., the G-7 could be driving the positive relationship
between crises and foreign currency debt).
       In terms of endogeneity, the proportion of foreign currency debt could depend on
unobservable factors that are associated with risks of crisis. One possibility is that
choosing to borrow in foreign currency is positively related to other factors which
heighten the likelihood of crises, such as moral hazard. If moral hazard is a key issue,
then creditors may demand that countries borrow in hard currency so as not to ‘inflate
away’ their debt. Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003) argued that original sin was a
symptom of deeper flaws in the ability to repay debt. On the other hand, as discussed
above, the origins of foreign currency debt also seem to involve market issues such as
liquidity. Small countries in Scandinavia, and even the US until 1933, suffered from
original sin while in Tsarist Russia, a country not known for its international reputation
for solid monetary affairs, had a significant amount of rouble debt held in London
(Flandreau and Sussman 2005).
       We attempt to control for potential endogeneity using the size of an economy,
measured as the logarithm of GDP, as an excluded instrumental variable. Economic size
is mostly related to geography, geopolitics and military factors over the centuries, and it
is likely to be uncorrelated with current unobservables such as debt sustainability or
exchange rate peg credibility. Still, size is correlated with original sin. Eichenegreen,
Hausmann and Panizza (2006) observed that size was about the only thing that could
explain variations in original sin during the recent period. This observation seems to fit
the facts with Russia in the nineteenth century as well (Flandreau and Sussman, 2005).




                                             15
         Table 3 reports results from one-step maximum likelihood instrumental variable
probit regressions, parallel to those in Table 1.18 The results for both the currency and
debt crisis specifications in the first wave suggest no statistically significant relationship
with crises. However, a Wald test for the first wave of globalization suggests we cannot
rule out the exogeneity of the foreign currency debt ratio in either specification. This is
not wholly at odds with the historical empirical observations about the origins of original
sin.


                                          [Insert Table 3 here]


         In the second period, the coefficient on original sin in the currency crisis model is
positive, small but not statistically significant. This suggests that our finding of a positive
statistically significant coefficient in Table 1 was due to endogeneity. On the other hand,
in the probit model for debt crises, we find a positive and statistically significant
coefficient. It was not feasible to test directly for an interaction between currency crises
and original sin in the debt crisis model as in Table 1. However, the coefficient on the
control for a currency crisis is large, positive and statistically significant, so the marginal
impact of the original sin variable would become stronger in the face of a currency
crisis.19 In both specifications post-1972, we reject the exogeneity of the original sin
variable. Our bottom line is that endogeneity may be a cause for concern in currency
crises since expected currency depreciation may naturally lead to hesitancy of creditors to
lend in local currency. Still, once we control for these factors in the debt crisis model
with a currency crisis indicator, it appears that original sin can heighten the probability
itself of a debt crisis.
         We also test robustness to the sample.20 In Table 4 we drop G7 countries plus
Switzerland. This leaves plenty of advanced but small countries with high levels of

18
   We are unable to include an interaction between original sin and currency crises in the debt crises
models. Using the interaction of a currency crisis and the hard currency debt ratio made estimation
unfeasible. Still since the probit models carry a non-linearity in their marginal effects one can see evidence
of interaction between original sin and depreciation.
19
   This is due to the non-linearity of the probit model.
20
   Prior to the late 1980s private capital flows to many emerging markets were low and mainly from official
sources. Unreported probits for a sample that begins in 1988 finds qualitatively similar results to those
reported in Table 1.


                                                     16
original sin but drops almost the universe of countries in the world that have the lowest
levels or original sin.21 This results in a lack of variance in the original sin variable, and it
is perhaps one reason that column 1 (currency crises) and column 2 (debt crises) show no
statistically significant relationship between such crises and original sin. Once we
instrument for original sin as before, we find an unintuitive negative and statistically
significant coefficient on original sin for currency crises and a positive statistically
significant coefficient on original sin for debt crises. In the latter case, we cannot reject
the exogeneity of original sin. Our bottom line here is that plenty of advanced countries
‘suffer’ from original sin but they manage to avoid crises that are related to variables for
which we do not or cannot control. Weaker or ‘less credible’ countries have difficulty
carrying such debt.
                                         [Insert Table 4 here]


5 Economic Growth, Output and International Capital Flows


5.1 Foreign Currency Debt, Financial Crises, and Economic Growth


        We have now established that a high proportion of debt in foreign currency can
under certain circumstances be associated with a greater risk of financial crisis. In this
section, we examine whether such forms of debt have an impact on per capita output via
financial crises. This chain of logic will allow for a measure of the growth and output
losses implied by foreign currency liabilities via their impact on crises.
        We follow closely Bordo and Meissner (2007b) who investigate the relation
between financial flows and growth and Loayza and Ranciere (2005) who investigate
financial liberalization and growth in the short and long-run.22 Specifically we first
present a series of cross-country growth regressions for five-year periods which include
as key explanatory variables net capital inflows and episodes of financial crisis. By

21
   The data show that only nine countries are below 90 percent and above 47 percent (Portugal, Australia,
Spain, New Zealand, Netherlands, South Africa, Hong Kong, Denmark, Belgium). Austria is the next
lowest at 90 percent followed by 11 countries with ratios of 93 to 99.7. The next 16 countries have 100
percent ratios.
22
   Ranciere, Tornell and Westerman (2006) also examine the short and long run impacts of financial
liberalization


                                                    17
including financial crises we can recursively track the impact on growth of hard currency
debt via the crisis variable. Our second set of results uses annual data to look at long and
short-run impacts on output of capital flows and financial crises.




5.2 Multivariate Growth Regressions: Tracking the Growth costs of Liability
Dollarization


         We explore growth in real per capita GDP in non-overlapping five year periods
for the sample 1880-1913 and then for the 1973-2003 sample. Between 1880 and 1913
we use a set of twelve countries for which we have savings data and then a set 19
countries (the same twelve as before plus seven other countries) when we drop the
savings variable from our regressions.23 For the period 1973-2003 we look at the
experience of 49 countries.
         Our key control variables are the level of net capital inflows/GDP and the average
number of years that witnessed a financial crisis during the five year period.24 Based on
evidence from our probit models above, hard currency debt--the focus of this study—is a
key determinant of crises. If so, then such variables may have an indirect effect on
growth.
         To capture the direct impact of global capital market integration, we used the
average of the ratio of the net capital inflows to GDP in the five year period. Of course, in
an open economy, investment is the sum of two components: net foreign borrowing and
net national saving. Hence we also include the five year average of the ratio of domestic
savings to GDP.25


23
   The set of twelve countries includes: Argentina, Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, Norway, Spain, Sweden, United States. The sample of 19 adds in Austria, Brazil, Egypt, India, New
Zealand, Portugal, Uruguay.
24
   We take the sum of indicators for the first years of a currency, debt or banking crises during a five year
period and average this value within the five-year period. Multiple types of crises in one year are counted
as one event.
25
   Where we do include savings, we do not adjust the savings variable downward for countries with capital
outflows because the main capital suppliers are already excluded form the data set. Also the current account
data are not directly comparable with the Stone data which would make a proper adjustment difficult. Data
on saving are from Taylor (2002) who calculated the ratio of saving to GDP as the current account surplus
divided by GDP plus the ratio of investment to GDP. We also used the investment ratio instead of


                                                     18
         The other explanatory variables are standard and based on Mankiw, Romer and
Weil (1992) and later papers that study economic growth empirically. We include the
following controls in Table 5: the logarithm of GDP per capita in the initial year of the
five year period, the five year average of the population growth rate, the five year average
of the percentage of the population enrolled in primary school, and the level of exports
divided by GDP or imports plus exports divided by GDP in the latter period.


         Regressions are of the form


                            ForeignK                        Saving 
      Growthit = α 0 + α 1            + α 2 crisisit + α 3          + α 4 ( Enrolit ) +
                            GDP  it                         GDP  it                                      (1)
          Exports                                         GDP 
      α5           + α 6 (Δ ln( Population) )it + α 7 ln             + μ i + δ t + ε it ,
          GDP  it                                         population  i 0

where all variables are averaged over non-overlapping five year periods themselves
indexed by t, Growth is the average annual growth of real per capita output, Δ
ln(population) represents the (five-year average) of the annual log differences in
population levels, the 0 subscript on GDP per capita stands for the initial year of the five
year period, μi is a set of country “fixed effects,” δ is a vector of quinquennial period
indicators, and ε is an idiosyncratic error term for each country within each five year
period.26
                                          [Insert Table 5 here]


         In columns I to IV of Table 5, we present results from regressions of the growth
equation above for 1880-1913 and 1973-2003. Columns I and III leave out national
saving which slightly expands the sample in the first wave of globalization.
         The results on the standard growth controls (especially initial GDP and schooling)
are in line with expectations from the rest of the empirical growth literature. Domestic
saving is positive and statistically significant only in the second period. School enrolment


borrowing and domestic saving and found that the investment ratio was not statistically significant in the
growth regressions.
26
   We correct the standard errors for heteroscedasticity by using robust standard errors. We also cluster
these at the country level.


                                                     19
and trade exposure are positively related to growth in both periods. Initial GDP has a
negative coefficient and it is statistically significant implying conditional convergence;
population growth rates are not statistically significant.
         Turning to our results on capital flows, we find no evidence of any association
between international capital inflows and economic growth. The coefficient on net capital
inflows is never statistically significant. It does appear that the inflows variable is
negatively correlated with savings since when savings is omitted the point estimate of
this variable is negative. When savings is included, the point estimate on inflows
becomes positive.
         The weight of the evidence from Table 5 is that periods plagued by crises are bad
for growth within the five year periods in which they occur. The point estimate of the
coefficient for the average number of years in the five year period spent in crisis suggests
average growth falls by one to two percentage points during crises. The average annual
growth rate is 1.73 suggesting a loss of at least a full year’s growth for one year crisis
events. Crises represent significant temporary negative shocks to growth which are likely
to have a long-run negative level effect on income per capita.27


5.3 Long and Short-run Output Effects of Capital Flows and Crises


         The preceding specifications did not look at whether crises have a permanent or
transitory impact on output per capita. Our results suggest that crises leave economies at
lower levels of output in each and every year after a crises, but Calvo, Izquierdo and
Talvi (2006) argued that economies suffering sudden stops and crises recovered quickly
making phoenix comebacks. This was evinced by showing nations reached pre-crisis
output levels within 2 or three years of an event which ignores that, absent a crisis, output
would have been even higher. Also Loayza and Ranciere (2005) and Ranciere and
Tornell (2009) analyze empirically and theoretically (respectively) short and long-run
impacts of financial liberalization and economic growth.28 Liberalization often yields


27
   Further unreported growth regressions show that lagged crisis indicators are not associated with above-
average growth rates. There is little evidence of phoenix miracle recovery.
28
   In Ranciere, Tornell, and Westermann (2008) countries with more negative skewness of credit growth
(i.e., more crises) grow faster on average. We do assess this hypothesis in this paper.


                                                    20
more volatile growth but also offers faster growth than staying closed. We investigate
whether financial flows in both periods of globalization have permanent or short-run
impacts on the level of output per capita and whether crises have a similar impact.
         Specifically Table 6 implements an ARDL (p, q) fixed effects panel regression in
error correction form. We look at both short-run changes in output per capita and long-
run determinants of output per capita so our model is in error correction form. Our
estimating equation is
                                p −1              q −1
                       Δyit = ψ j Δyit − j +  δ j ΔX it − j + ϕ [ yit −1 − (β X it −1 )] + ε it .    (2)
         .                      j =1              j =0


         The dependent variable in equation (2) is the annual change (denoted by Δ) in the
logarithm of GDP per capita (y). Short-run or transitory associations are analyzed by
using annual changes in the explanatory variables (X) used in Table 5. Lags in these
changes yield an indication of the medium run impact of such variables. We also include
one lag of growth. Long-run relationships between output per capita are isolated in the
error correction term in square brackets by including lagged levels of the explanatory
variables and the level of the dependent variable (i.e., the lagged level of GDP per
capita). The error term is a composite error term consisting of year dummies, country
fixed effects and country-time idiosyncratic errors.
         The methods we use in this section are discussed theoretically in Pesaran and
Smith (1995).29 Our specification is comparable to that of Loayza and Ranciere (2005)
who investigated the short and long-run impacts of financial development on growth.
However, we did not find it feasible to allow for country specific short-run coefficients,
so we assume slope homogeneity throughout. A benefit of the ARDL approach is that
inclusion of sufficient lags of the variables of interest can mitigate endogeneity problems.
We include one lag of the growth rate of GDP per capita, contemporaneous changes, and


29
   If there is a unique vector defining the long-run relationship between the variables and the lag orders are
appropriately chosen, then the auto-regressive distributed lag model provides consistent estimates of the
parameters, regardless if the variables are stationary only after first differencing. The ‘Nickell bias’ arises
when the lagged dependent variable and the error term are correlated due to the inclusion of country fixed
effects. The bias diminishes as the length of the panel increases. In our case, since we have over thirty years
of observations, the bias is minimal. Other specifications such as the pooled mean group estimator and the
mean group estimator would allow for heterogeneous dynamics. These specifications were infeasible so we
report only the pooled dynamic fixed effects estimator which may contain bias is the adjustment coefficient
vary by country.


                                                         21
up to a second lag, in capital flows and for the crisis indicator up to two lags and the
contemporaneous change. For other variables we only include the contemporaneous
annual changes to conserve on degrees of freedom. Our results appear robust to
alternative lag structures on the crisis and capital flows variables.
         Table 6 shows our results for both periods. First, surges in capital inflows seem to
raise output in the short term. In the first wave of globalization, permanent changes to
capital inflows seem to raise output. In the second period, even after controlling for
crises, they seem to be associated with slightly lower levels of output per capita.
                                            [Insert Table 6 here]
           For both samples, crises bring output down but in different ways. In the first
wave, crises seem to have a permanent negative effect on output. In the latter period the
onset of crises brings output down while recovery would be associated with a rise.30 This
is consistent with a phoenix type recovery. However, such catching up is not sustained
long enough to fully recover to where the pre-existing trend would have taken a country
in terms of levels. The evidence in the second period is that crises are associated with
long-term loss in output equivalent to the original fall or on average 1.5%. In the first
wave of globalization the permanent output losses are larger at about 4%.
         The point estimates on the other long-run coefficients roughly support the
predictions of a human capital augmented neoclassical growth model. Overall, these
models suggest, as before, that crises bring growth down in the short term and also lead
to long-term output losses. Capital flows increase growth in the short-run but in the
second period run they seem to be bring permanent output losses. We are somewhat
sceptical of the latter finding. Perhaps this is evidence of the fact that relatively poor
countries receive the largest capital inflows. But even here, this is at odds with findings
from the recent period that capital has been flowing ‘uphill’. In any case, the connection
between crises and growth and output losses comes out clearly in both periods of
globalization. We now look at the impact of hard currency debt on overall economic
performance via financial crises.



30
  The change in the crisis indicator would be 1 in the first year of a crisis and -1 in the year after the crisis
ends.


                                                       22
5.4 The Quantitative Impact of Foreign Currency Debt on Growth


           The combined evidence from Tables 1 through 4 suggests that foreign currency
debt, by triggering financial crises, could be responsible for significant temporary
reductions in economic growth and permanent output losses arising from those crisis
events. How much of a role does foreign currency debt play in all of this? We first look at
the predicted probabilities of having a debt crisis at various values of fundamentals. We
focus on debt crises since evidence is strongest here for the connection between such debt
and crisis.
           In Table 2 we exhibit the predicted probabilities of debt crises based on the probit
models of Table 1 columns 2 and 5. A country with “excellent fundamentals” would not
have a crisis with predicted probability of 0.98 but would have a debt crisis with a
predicted two percent chance.31 Now look at the predicted values of growth, as a function
of predicted crisis probabilities and using the following equation from our first set of
growth regressions. One can write


                                                            { ( ) (               ( ))}
     E (Growth | X ) = αˆX + αˆ 2 E (crisis ) = αˆX + αˆ 2 1 ⋅ Φ βˆz + 0 ⋅ 1 − Φ βˆz =               (3)
                 ( )
     αˆX + αˆ Φ βˆz ,
             2




where Φ(.) is the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal used in the
probit model (i.e., the predicted probability of having a debt crisis at given levels of the
covariates z and estimated coefficients) and the variables in X are the controls used in the
growth regressions besides the crisis variable.
           Suppose a country has “excellent fundamentals” (n.b., this kind of country has
100 percent hard currency debt). Using the estimated coefficient on the crisis variable,
α̂ 2 , from column IV of Table 5 (i.e., the 1973-2003 period), and the predicted probability
of a crisis from column 2 of Table 2, the contribution to the predicted growth rate from a




31
  This assumes one crisis per five year period that lasts one year. The effects will be larger if crises last
longer or crises are serially correlated as the raw data suggest.


                                                       23
crisis is a decline of 0.03 percentage points (-0.03 = -1.37*.02). In this case, hard
currency debt hardly seems injurious.32
         Next we look at how hard currency debt interacts with other control variables to
form a volatile combination of fundamentals and low growth. A high ratio of hard
currency debt to total debt, combined with poor fundamentals, is in fact associated with
significantly lower growth.
         Consider a country with the “worst fundamentals.” In the first and second periods
respectively, our models predict a loss in growth of just over two percentage points (-1.78
= -2.84*0.63) and 0.28 percentage points (-0.28 = -1.37*0.21). Both of these impacts are
economically significant given mean growth rates of per capita income are 1.33 and 1.7
in the respective time periods.
         Consider also a thought experiment that raises hard currency debt from 50 percent
of the total to 100 percent of the total. Let fundamentals be the “worst” (i.e., hold reserves
at zero, with the country experiencing a currency crisis this year and a banking crisis in
the previous year). Next calculate the predicted probabilities of a debt crisis under these
two debt ratios using the probit model of column V of Table 1. Finally use the
coefficients on the crisis variable in the growth regressions of columns II and IV in Table
5.
         In the case of this doubling of hard currency debt, we find the growth rate would
drop by 0.91 percentage points in the first period and 0.28 percentage points in the
second period.33 A doubling of the reliance on hard currency debt when accompanied by
weak fundamentals is associated with significant losses in economic growth although the
impact is stronger in the first period of globalization.
         Another way of looking at this result is available. Between 1973 and 2003 a
halving of the hard currency debt ratio, assuming “worst fundamentals”, could eliminate
much of the reduction to expected growth we found above and which we attributed to
hard currency debt. On the other hand, in the first wave of globalization, we find that
such a reduction in the hard currency debt ratio only eliminates half of the lower


32
  Other covariates in the probit are defined at the sample means.
33
  To arrive at this number, subtract the predicted probability of crisis with a 50 percent ratio of hard
currency debt (0.31 or 0) from that when there is a 100 percent hard currency ratio (0.63 or 0.21). Then
multiply this difference by the crisis coefficient in the growth regression (i.e. -2.84 or -1.37).


                                                    24
expected growth that arises from 100 percent hard currency debt. Even though the
expected negative growth impact is lower in the second period, hard currency debt plays
a much stronger role in accounting for the poor growth performance associated with
crises in the second wave of globalization.
        Another thought experiment is to look at the long-run level effects implied by the
results in Table 6. Here crises are associated with a long-run decline in the level of output
per capita of 1.5 percent in the second period and 4 percent in the first period.34 Suppose
that a crisis event was a once in a lifetime event and that a country had the worst
fundamentals. The expected present discounted value of the income losses, with a
constant discount factor of 0.95 and assuming a loss of $75 of income per year post-
crisis (roughly 4 percent and 1.5 percent less than the average income per capita in each
respective sample) would be roughly $945 (i.e., 945 = [0.63*75] ÷.05) in the first wave
and $315 (i.e., 315 = [.21*75] ÷ .05) in the second wave. As Ranciere and Tornell (2009)
show, more information about the exact costs of crises and the level of completeness of
financial markets would need to be known to make a more explicit welfare calculation,
but these costs do not seem totally trivial. Moreover, many countries face an ongoing
threat of crisis in subsequent years so that these costs can be compounded. The sample
average for frequency of crises in Bordo and Meissner (2006) is 6 and 14 percent
respectively. These imply crises every 16 or 7 years. The average person living 70 years
in an economy exposed to such frequencies would see between 5 and 10 crises per
lifetime. From an ex ante perspective, the costs indicated above could be increased
significantly due to the fact that crises are recurring events in many emerging market
economies.
        Our results from the second period generate a strong non-linearity in the debt
crisis model (but not in the currency crisis model). With the worst fundamentals and a 50
percent hard currency debt ratio, the predicted probability of a debt crisis is nearly zero.
The predicted probabilities of a debt crisis do not rise above 0 until hard currency debt
ratios rise above 90 percent. This is due to the fact that most countries have in fact had in



34
  Unreported regressions show that contrary to the theoretical argument in Ranciere and Tornell (2009)
there is no evidence of higher growth rates associated with permanent rises in foreign financing.


                                                   25
the past 100 percent ratios of hard currency debt to total international debt and currency
crisis before defaulting.
       We turn now to an out of sample forecast for Eastern Europe. The non-linearity
above turns out to be somewhat crucial in understanding why our models predict that
countries in Eastern Europe (in our subsample) should be relatively safe from a debt
default associated with their foreign currency debt exposure. However, currency crises
may be a problem and other systemic features of the international financial landscape
may yet lead to a debt crisis outcome.


6 Eastern Europe and the Global Credit Storm of 2008-2009.


       The global credit crunch in 2008 has put many countries in Eastern European on
the radar screen of global capital market analysts looking for the next financial crisis.
Significant and persistent current account deficits since 1998 seen in Figure 2 are seen as
one potential weakness. Commentators have also pointed out that national balance sheets
are increasingly composed of foreign currency obligations. Households in Hungary
favored mortgages in Swiss francs due to the lower interest rates, and overall foreign
currency exposure of private borrowing may be up to 70 or 80 percent of all liabilities in
Estonia and Latvia.


                                         [Insert Figure 2 here]
       Optimists who would demonstrate that Eastern Europe is not likely to suffer a
financial crisis like in East Asia in 1997 cite the fact that overall exposure by developing
country creditors to Eastern Europe is relatively small as a percentage of source
countries’ GDP. For this reason one potential channel for contagion or a self-fulfilling
blowout may be restricted since maximum losses should be relatively small. Sovereign
debt is also not deemed to be excessive, and some countries as of 2008 have floating
exchange rates (e.g., Poland, Czech Republic and Hungary) which has dampened the
build up of foreign currency liabilities as their currencies have slid and wobbled in the
past two years. Slovakia has also just joined the Euro and so its currency mismatches may
be more limited. Still, particular countries are on the shortlist for the next financial crisis



                                              26
headline due to their exchange rate policies and external debt positions. The Baltic
nations and Bulgaria have intermediate to hard pegs for instance and significant foreign
currency liabilities.35 Specific financial institutions based in Austria and Italy are cited as
precariously exposed to Eastern Europe. This makes for the potential that eastern troubles
inflict damage on western European economies as these losses get mopped up by
domestic authorities via bailouts.


6.1 Out of Sample Forecast: Is Foreign Currency Debt a Problem for Growth in the East?


         Using recent data for 2008 and our models from Tables 1 and 5, we attempt to
gauge the risk of debt and currency crises in several Eastern European nations and the
expected growth impact of such a crisis. Table 7 lists the values of explanatory variables
inserted into the probit models of Table 1 for several Eastern European countries (Czech
Republic, Slovakia, Poland, Romania, Bulgaria, Lithuania, Hungary, Estonia and Latvia),
the predicted probability of a debt default and a currency crisis, the average growth rate
of per capita GDP from 2003 to 2008, the expected reduction in growth in percentage
points (equal to the growth losses of 1.37 percentage points from Table 5 multiplied by
the predicted probability of having a debt crisis), and the expected loss relative to average
growth between 2003-2008 in percentage terms.
         Table 7 shows the forecast risks of debt crises are low and for currency crises the
risks are moderate to low. In this way, expected growth should be near trend. What
accounts for this rosy scenario?
                                          [Insert Table 7 here]
         Since no country is reported to have above a 90 percent ratio of hard currency
debt to total debt, predicted probabilities of debt crises are near zero. Currency crises are
predicted to be somewhat likely in the following countries: Bulgaria (0.04), Lithuania
(0.04), Hungary (0.04), Estonia (0.07) and Latvia (0.09).36 To the benefit of many of

35
   Even if countries avoid financial crises, they may have to sacrifice domestic balance for external balance
and could suffer significant output losses. As in the analysis above, we focus on the cost of crises below.
36
   The ratio of foreign currency debt to GDP is roughly 70 percent in Latvia and Estonia (Rosenberg, 2008).
This could be cause for alarm as well. Also our earlier measure’s denominator was international liabilities.
No evidence on the proportion of total foreign liabilities denominated in foreign currency was readily
available. This is the measure used in the probit models of Table 1. If we assume that all foreign debts were


                                                    27
these countries, international interest rates are also much lower than their long-run
average and reserve positions are fairly strong.
         Table 7 shows Estonia and Latvia are most at risk of a currency crisis and are
consequently forecast to lose the most in terms of economic growth due to such a crisis.37
These countries have the highest levels of foreign currency financing, have built up large
negative international investment positions and have quasi-currency board systems that
may not withstand the pressures of adjustment. Still, in expectation, growth rates should
be down by less than 2 percent (not percentage points).
         The largest countries in this subsample, the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Poland
have low ratios of foreign currency debt to the total (c. 12-14%) and overall net external
indebtedness is fairly low. All of these countries are also floating their currencies which
may help speed the adjustment process. Indeed, Poland’s central bank was able to cut
interest rates during the global crisis. Contrast this with the Baltic states where interest
rates jumped upwards and liquidity disappeared. Floats may also have limited the amount
of build-up of large foreign currency liabilities unlike in the Baltic countries where pegs
have been the long-standing policy. It would appear that some of the larger countries
examined here have learnt from the past by limiting currency mismatches and floating
their exchange rates sufficiently to obviate moral hazard. Moreover, ECB and Federal
Reserve monetary policies have been extremely loose which is contrary to previous
events when center country interest rates in the 1980s and in the 1990s exacerbated
financial stringency.
         Still, if the recent past has taught us anything, fundamentals are not the only factor
in generating crises. Contagious spillovers and sudden stops of inflows, perhaps arising
from margin calls on already weakened western European banks, are not fully accounted
for in these models. Hence the likelihood of a crisis may be somewhat higher than is
reflected in our calculations and further turmoil could be possible.38


denominated in foreign currency predicted probabilities would be: 0.13 (Czech Republic), 0.11 (Slovakia),
0.12 (Poland), 0.18 (Romania), 0.2 (Bulgaria), 0.14 (Lithuania), 0.11(Hungary), .01(Estonia), 0.29 (Latvia).
37
   The Baltics seem intent on maintaining their pegs. Latvia has entered into an IMF program as of early
2009 but has not been forced to devalue. Lithuania still is aiming to join the European Monetary Union in
2010.
38
   As of 31July, 2009 Latvia, Hungary and Romania had turned to the IMF for financial support. Hungary
however managed to place 1 billion euro in bonds after their original demand of 500 million was
oversubscribed. It would appear that a credible commitment by the ECB and the fiscal authorities within


                                                    28
7. Conclusions and Comparisons over Two Periods of Financial Globalization:
Implications for International Financial Architecture


        We have compared long-run associations of foreign currency debt with financial
crises and economic growth in two periods, 1880-1913 and 1973-2003. We found strong
evidence that both hard currency debts and capital inflows are associated with crises that
lower growth temporarily and permanently reduce output compared to the long-run trend.
        The remedies and lessons from the East Asian and Latin American crises in the
1990s have been either to reinforce domestic debt markets and reserves and to float or
choose a hard peg and cope with hard currency debt. Both options would diminish the
currency mismatch. Globally, net foreign currency exposure has not been totally
eliminated since 1997, but it appears to be declining. Indeed, the data show, and our
model supports the idea that several eastern European countries have done much to
mitigate the potential risks of crisis by limiting exposure to foreign currency debt. Still,
the Baltic nations have not been so fortunate and have found the adjustment process
extremely contractionary. International conditions and political forces may still result in a
sudden stop, causing currencies to depreciate and a high risk of default.
        Our analysis also shows that hard currency debt is only a partial explanation of
the risks of financial crisis. Countries in our sample have demonstrably been able to
complement foreign currency debt with stronger financial development and a large
reserve base to mitigate risks of major financial crises. The US, Australia, Canada and the
Scandinavian countries had significant currency mismatches throughout the nineteenth
century but avoided major economic disasters. Today a large set of small but developed
countries (Iceland perhaps being an exception due in part to its lax financial regulation)
appear to have done the same.
        Finally, although countries have now started to minimize currency mismatches,
uneven development, mis-guided and unregulated credit booms, sudden stops and


the Eurozone has managed to help stabilize expectations in this region. Few emerging markets in the past
have had such support in the midst of a systemic crisis.


                                                   29
contagion continue to pose threats of crisis. In other words, reducing reliance on foreign
currency debt has been one, albeit small, step towards improving international financial
stability. However, remaining issues from the debate on international financial
architecture include: establishing an international lender of last resort, balanced
liberalizations in environments of best-practice financial regulation, sovereign debt
restructuring mechanisms, and implementing standard accounting principles to increase
transparency.
       Thus far, the credit crunch of 2008 and the ensuing financial turmoil have mainly
affected high-income countries, but there are prospects for further turbulence in the
developing world both immediately and in the future. As global capital flows – and their
risks – remain prominent, the risks to stability arising from the absence of a durable and
complete international financial architecture will likely become more evident .




                                             30
Data Appendix


Most of the data underlying this paper was used in our previous work (Bordo and
Meissner 2007a and 2007b and Bordo and Meissner 2006) and is explained thoroughly in
those sources. The bulk of the macro historical data set is that used in Bordo et. al.
(2001). Even more expansive data descriptions and sources are listed in the working
paper versions of our earlier work on crises in NBER working papers 11173 and 11897
and available upon request from the authors.
Country Sample:
Countries included in Empirical Samples, First Wave
Set 1. Growth Regressions    n=19 countries include Argentina, Australia, Austria,
                             Brazil, Canada, Chile, Denmark, France, Germany,
                             Greece, India Italy, Japan, Norway, Portugal, Russia,
                             Sweden, Spain, United States.
Set 2. Crisis Regressions    n=18, countries include Argentina, Australia, Austria,
                             Brazil, Canada, Chile, Denmark, France, Germany,
                             Greece, Italy, Japan, Norway, Portugal, Russia,
                             Sweden, Spain, United States.


Countries included in Empirical Samples, Second Wave
Set 1. Growth Regressions    n=49, countries include Argentina, Australia, Austria,
                             Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China,
                             Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt,
                             Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hong
                             Kong, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
                             Jamaica, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, Netherlands, New
                             Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru,
                             Philippines, Portugal, Senegal, South Africa, Spain,
                             Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom,
                             United States, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zimbabwe
Set 2. Crisis Regressions    n=45, countries include Argentina, Australia, Austria,
                             Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia,
                             Costa Rica, Denmark, Ecuador, Finland, France,
                             Germany, Ghana, Greece, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
                             Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Malaysia,
                             Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
                             Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, South Africa,
                             Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United
                             Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, Venezuela,
                             Zimbabwe



                                             31
Crisis Dating:
As in Bordo et. al ( 2001) we date currency and banking crises using both qualitative and
quantitative evidence. For all countries besides Austria-Hungary, Russia, New Zealand,
South Africa, Mexico, Turkey, Egypt, Uruguay and India we have relied on the dates of
Bordo et. al. in both periods. We have tried to date currency crises for the 19th century,
when possible, by using an approach based on the exchange market pressure (EMP)
methodology which looks at changes in reserves, the exchange rate and the interest rate.
Currency crises past 1997 have been updated using the dates from Kaminsky (2006).
Banking crises are listed in Bordo et. al. and updated past 1997 from Caprio and
Klingebiel (2003).

         Debt crisis dates are based on Beim and Calomiris (2001). Only private lending to
sovereign nations is considered when building those default dates. Not every instance of
technical default is included in the chronology, the authors identified periods (six months
or more) where all or part of interest/principal payments were suspended, reduced or
rescheduled. Some of those episodes are outright debt repudiations, while others were
reschedulings agreed upon mutually by lenders and borrowers. Additional data are from a
spreadsheet underlying Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003). Post-1997 we code the
following as debt crises: Pakistan (1999), Ecuador (1999) Indonesia (1999), and
Argentina (2001).


Capital Inflows
         Our measure of international capital market integration for the 1880-1913 period
is based on Stone’s (1999) total capital calls on the London market which includes public
and private issues of debt purged of any refinancing issues.39 The conventional wisdom
for the period is that these gross flows were roughly equal to net flows for the capital
importers (cf. Obstfeld and Taylor, 2004).40



39
   We also carried out tests (which are left unreported), using the current account relative to GDP as a
measure of the net inflow or outflow of capital.
40
   The correlation between Stone’s flows and the current account deficits is 0.69.


                                                     32
        The data for 1973-2003 are based on Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006). We use the
change in the net economic position (NEP) as a measure of net inflows of foreign capital.


Ratio of International Reserves to Money
Source: International financial statistics IMF.


Hard Currency Debt Ratios

        For the 1880-1913 period, we collected data from various national sources on
hard currency debt for domestic governments (cf. Bordo and Meissner, 2007a) and
augmented and compared this with similar data made available by Flandreau and Zúmer
(2004). What we refer to as hard currency debt (or original sin) is debt that carried a gold
clause or was made payable at a fixed rate in a foreign currency issued domestically or
externally.41 Our measure of original sin, OS, is the ratio of this quantity to total public
debt outstanding:
                              Securities issued in currency i by country i 
                  OS i = max1 −                                          ,0  .
                                    Securities issued by country i            



For the current period we rely on data underlying Eichengreen, Hausman and Panizza
(2005) and thank the authors for making these data available to us. These data reflect
public and private obligations issued on external or international markets only and
exclude domestic debt issues. Note that these data are within country averages for the
period 1972-1997.

Data for Table 7

Foreign Currency Debt/Total Debt is calculated as the percentage of total household loans
denominated in foreign currency as of January 2008. Source: Fitch Ratings see
"Emerging Europe's Current Account Deficits: Mind the Gap!" (2008);

Short term interest rates are the yields on 6 month US treasury bills as of March 20,
2009.


41
  The data appendices and the text in our previous work on crises has more to say about the structure of
this debt.


                                                    33
Data on the net international investment position (NIIP) come from the statistical
services and central banks of the respective countries listed in the table. The following
applies: NIIP for Czech Republic is for June 2008 and June 2007; NIIP for Slovakia is
year end 2007 and 2008. growth rate for GDP between 2007 and 2008 was extrapolated
as 8 percent since final 2008 figures for GDP were not yet available. NIIP for Poland is
for 2006 and 2007; NIIP for Romania is for year end 2007 and 2008; NIIP for Bulgaria is
as of June 2007 and 2008; NIIP for Lithuania is as of year end 2007 and 2008; NIIP for
Hungary is year end 2006 and 2007; NIIPs for Estonia and Latvia are year end 2007 and
2008.

The ratios of reserves/money come from International Financial Statistics January 2009
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Country specific notes:
Czech Republic: Notes: Reserves and M2 as of Oct. 2008;
Slovakia: Reserves and M2 as of August 2008;
Poland: Reserves and M2 as of September 2008
Romania: Reserves, M2,as of October 2008;
Bulgaria: Reserves, M2, as of October 2008;
Lithuania: Reserves, money as of October 2008
Hungary: Reserves, M2, exchange rate as of October 2008;
Estonia: Reserves, M2, exchange rate as of October 2008;
Latvia: Reserves, M2 exchange rates as of October 2008.




                                           34
                                       References


Aghion, P., Bachhetta, P., and Banerjeee, A., 2000. A Simple Model of Monetary Policy
and Currency Crises. European Economic Review 44 (4-6), 728-738.

Arteta, C., 2003. Are Financially Dollarized Countries More Prone to Costly Crises?
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion
Papers no. 763. Washington, D.C.

Bebczuk, R., Galindo, A., and Panizza, U., 2006. An Evaluation of the Contractionary
Devaluation Hypothesis Inter-American development bank working paper no. 582.
Washington, D.C.

Bekaert, G., Campbell H., and Lundblad, C., 2005. Does Financial Liberalization Spur
Growth? Journal of Financial Economics 77 (1), 3-55.

Beim, D. O., Calomiris, C.W., 2001. Emerging Financial Markets MacGraw-Hill, New
York.

Bleakley, H., and Cowan, K., 2008. Corporate Dollar Debt and Depreciations: Much Ado About
Nothing? Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (4), 612-626.

Bordo, M.D., Eichengreen, B., Klingebiel. D., Martinez-Peria, M.S., 2001. Is the Crisis
Problem Growing More Severe? Economic Policy 32 pp. 51-75.

Bordo, M.D., Cavallo, A. Meissner, C.M., forthcoming. Sudden Stops: Determinants and Output
Effects in the First Era of Globalization, 1880-1913 Journal of Development Economics.

Bordo, M.D., Meissner, C.M., 2007a. Financial Crises, 1880-1913: The Role of Foreign Currency
Debt. In: Edwards, S., Esquivel, G., Márquez, G. (Eds.), The Decline of Latin American Economies:
Growth, Institutions, and Crises, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 139-194.

Bordo, M.D., Meissner, C.M., 2007b. Foreign Capital and Economic Growth in the First Era of
Globalization NBER Working Paper 13577. Cambridge, Mass.

Bordo, M.D., Meissner, C.M., 2006. The Role of Foreign Currency Debt in Financial Crises: 1880-
1913 vs. 1972-1997. Journal of Banking and Finance 60, 3299-3329.

Bordo, M.D., Meissner, C.M., Redish, A., 2005. How ‘Original Sin’ was overcome: the
evolution of external debt denominated in domestic currencies in the United States and
the British Dominions 1800-2000. in Eichengreen, B., Hausmann, R. (Eds.), Other
People’s Money University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 122-153.




                                           35
Burger, J.D., Warnock, F.E., 2006. Local Currency Bond Markets. IMF Staff Papers 53,
115-132.

Caballero, R.J. and Krishnamurthy,A., 2003. Excessive Dollar Debt: Financial
Underdevelopment and Underinsurance. Journal of Finance 58 (2), 867-893.

Calvo, G. A., Izquierdo, A. Mejia, L.F., 2004. On the Empirics of Sudden Stops: The
Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper Series No. 10520, Cambridge, Mass.

Calvo, G.A., Reinhart, C., 2002 Fear Of Floating. Quarterly Journal of Economics 107
(2,May), 379-408.

Calvo, G., Izquierdo, A., Talvi, E., 2006. Sudden Stops and Pheonix Miracles in
Emerging Markets. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 96 (2), 405-
410.

Caprio G, Klingebiel, D., 2003. Episodes of Systemic and Borderline Financial Crises.
World Bank: Washington D.C. Available at
http://econ.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/EXTRESEARCH/0,,content
MDK:20699588~pagePK:64214825~piPK:64214943~theSitePK:469382,00.html.

Céspedes, L. F., Chang, R., Velasco, A., 2004. Balance Sheets and Exchange Rate
Policy. American Economic Review 94 (4), 1183-1193.

Clemens, M.A., Williamson, J.G., 2004. Wealth Bias in the First Global Capital Market
Boom, 1870-1913. Economic Journal 114, 304-337

Cottrell, P. L., 1975. British overseas investment in the nineteenth century. Macmillan,
London.

Eichengreen, B., 2002. Financial Crises: And What to do About Them. Oxford
University Press, New York.

Eichengreen, B., Hausmann, R., 1999. Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility. New
Challenges for Monetary Policy Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 329-368.


Eichengreen, B., Hausmann, R., Panizza, U., 2003. Currency Mismatches, Debt
Intolerance, and Original Sin: Why they are not the Same and Why it Matters. NBER
working paper 10036, Cambridge, Mass.

Eichengreen, B., Hausmann, R. Panizza, U., 2005. The Pain of Original Sin, In:
Eichengreen, B., Hausmann, R. (Eds.), Other People’s Money. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, pp. 13-47.



                                            36
Feldstein, M., 2009. Reflections on Americans’ views of the Euro ex ante. vox EU
       http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/2867


Fitch Ratings, 2008. Emerging Europe’s Current Account Deficits: Mind the Gap! Fitch
       Research: New York.

Flandreau, M., Zúmer, F., 2004. The Making of Global Finance. OECD: Paris.

Flandreau, M., Sussman, N., 2005. Old Sins. In: Eichengreen, B. and
Hausmann, R. (Eds.), Other People’s Money, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp
154-189.

Gligorov, V., Landesmann, M.A., 2009. The crisis in Eastern Europe: What is to be
done? VOX EU web portal. 16 March, 2009.
http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/3274.

Goldstein, M., Turner, P. 2004. Controlling Currency Mismatches in
Emerging Market Economies. Institute of International Economics: Washington.

Gros, D., 2009. Collapse in Eastern Europe? The rationale for a European Financial
Stability. Roubini Global Monitor. 1 March, 2009
http://www.rgemonitor.com/globalmacro-
monitor/255737/collapse_in_eastern_europe_the_rationale_for_a_european_financial_sta
bility

Jeanne, O., 2000. Foreign Currency Debt and the Global Financial Architecture.
European Economic Review 44, 719-727.

Jeanne, O. Zettlemeyer, J., 2005. Original Sin, Balance Sheet Crises and International
Lending. In: Eichengreen, B. and Hausmann, R. (Eds.), Other People’s Money,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 95-121.

Kaminsky, G., 2006. Currency crises: Are they all the same? Journal of International
Money and Finance. 25 (3), 503-527.

Krugman, P., 1999. Balance Sheets, the Transfer Problem and Financial Crises. In: Isard,
P. Razin, A., Rose, A., International Finance and Financial Crises. Kluwer, New York.

Lane, P.. Milesi-Ferretti, G.M., 2006. The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised
and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970–2004. IMF working
paper no. 06/69. Washington, DC.

Mankiw, G. Romer, D., Weil, D.N., 1992. A Contribution to the Empirics of Economic
Growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (2), 407- 437.




                                           37
Mauro, P., Sussman, N. Yafeh, Y., 2006. Emerging Markets and Financial Globalization:
Sovereign Bond Spreads in 1870-1913 and Today. Oxford University Press, New York.

Mishkin, F. S., 2003. Financial Policies and the Prevention of Financial Crises in
Emerging Market Countries. In: Feldstein, M. (Ed.) Economic and Financial Crises in
Emerging Markets. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 93-130.

Obstfeld, M., Taylor. A.M., 2004. Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and
Growth. Cambridge University Press, New York.

Pesaran, M.H. Smith, R. 1995. Estimating Long-Run Relationships from Dynamic
Heterogeneous Panels. Journal of Econometrics 68, 79–113.

Rancière, R. Tornell, A. Westerman, F., 2006. Decomposing the Effects of Financial
Liberalization: Growth vs Crises. Journal of Banking and Finance 30 (12), 3331-3348.

Rancière, R. Tornell, A. (2009) “Financial Liberalization, Boom-Bust Cycles and
Production Efficiency” unpublished working paper, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.

Reinhart, C., Rogoff, K., 2008. The Forgotten History of Domestic Debt,” unpublished
working paper, University of Maryland, ***.

Reinhart, C., Rogoff, K., Savastano, M., 2003. Debt Intolerance.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 1-74.

Rosenberg, C., 2008. Foreign Currency Borrowing More Risky for Eastern Europe. IMF
website http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/survey/so/2008/car102808a.htm

Rousseau, P. Sylla, R., 2003. Financial Systems, Economic Growth, and Globalization.
In: Bordo, M. D., Taylor, A., Williamson, J.G., (Eds.) Globalization in Historical
Perspective. University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research,
Chicago, pp. 373-413.

Stokes, M., 2009. Eastern Europe: On Crisis Watch Roubini Global Monitor.
http://www.rgemonitor.com/euro-monitor/255488/eastern_europe_on_crisis_watch

Stone, I., 1999. The Global Export of Capital from Great Britain, 1865-1914. St-Martin’s
Press, New York.

Svedberg, P., 1978., The portfolio direct composition of private foreign investment in
1914 Revisited. Economic Journal 88, 763-777.

Taylor, A.M., 2002. A Century of Current Account Dynamics. Journal of International
Money and Finance, 21 (6), 725-748.




                                           38
Williamson, J.G., 1964. American Growth and The Balance of Payments University of
North Carolina Press Chapel Hill.




                                        39
             Figure 1 Framework for Balance Sheet Crises




                                                   Real shock, declines in net worth,
                                                         banking insolvencies,
                                                        localized banking panic



                                                       International liquidity falls,
                                                           reserve depletion

                                                                                            Lender of last resort,
                                                    (expected) currency depreciation        Deep financial markets,
                                                       Pegged exchange rate fails           Credible peg,
                                                                                            Fiscal probity,
                                                                                            Any or all maintain market confidence.
                                                                                            Turbulence ends.
                                                          Sudden stop and/or
                                                        current account reversal
                                                                                            Low original sin.
                                                                                            Expansionary depreciation
                                                 liability dollarization + depreciation =
                                                   more balance sheet deterioration


                                                                                            - Low currency mismatch
              Lending dries up completely                                                   - Lender of last resort
              Markets lose confidence                                                       - Deep financial markets
              (low credibility in the markets)                                              - Credibility
                                                                                            - Cooperation
                                                                                            - Smaller financial frictions
                                                                                            Investment maintained
Presidential systems:                    PR systems                                         `
Default probability HIGH                 Fiscal consolidation
                                         Default probability LOW




                                                                       40
Figure 2 Average Current Account/GDP Ratios for Selected Eastern European
Nations, 1998-2008




                                                          Czech                          country
                                                Poland   Republic   Slovakia   Romania   Hungary   Lithuania   Bulgaria   Estonia   Latvia
                                           0
 Average Current Account/GDP, 1998-2007




                                           -2


                                           -4


                                           -6


                                           -8


                                          -10


                                          -12


                                          -14




                                                                                    41
                             Table 1 Determinants of Financial Crises, Full Sample
                               First Wave of Market Integration          Second Wave of Market Integration
                                         1880-1913                                 1973-2003
Covariates                                                  (3)                                          (6)
                                 (1)            (2)                        (4)             (5)
                                                           Avg.                                         Avg.
                             Currency          Debt                     Currency          Debt
                                                          valuea                                       valuea
Lag of Level of Net          0.003***                                    0.0018
                                                 –         1.79                             –           0.75
Inflows/GDP                   (0.001)                                  (0.0011)*
                             -0.00008      -0.00006                    0.0013***       0.00054*
Original Sin                                              52.46                                         78.4
                            (0.00022)      (0.00005)                   (0.00040)       (0.00016)
Original Sin x Currency                     0.0003*                                      0.0020
                                  –                        2.05             –           (0.0033)        5.69
Crisis                                      (0.0002)
Lag of Short term real        0.021**       -0.0020                      0.0031            0.0025**
                                                           2.75                                            6.6
UK/US Interest Rate           (0.009)       (0.0013)                    (0.0018)           (0.0011)
                            -0.0004**       -0.0002                    -0.000053         -0.000075
Lag of Reserves/Money                                     48.46                          (0.000069)       57.97
                             (0.0002)       (0.0001)                   (0.000100)
                                0.04         0.03**                    0.054***           0.014**
Lag of Bank Crisis                                         0.05                           (0.010)          0.12
                               (0.06)         (0.02)                    (0.024)
                                             -0.003                                        -0.029
Currency Crisis                   –                        0.04             –                            0.059
                                             (0.005)                                       (0.041)

Country-Years                     508            508                         1252               1252
Countries                          18            18                           45                 45
Obs. P                            0.04         0.012                         0.06               0.03
Pred. P (at x-bar)                0.03         0.005                         0.04               0.01
Pseudo-R2                         0.11          0.22                         0.08               0.13
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by country; Marginal effects of explanatory variables on
the probability of a crisis are shown, not coefficients. Countries included in the first wave sample are
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan,
Norway, Portugal, Russia, Sweden, Spain, United States. Countries included in the second wave sample are
Argentina, Australia, Austria, ,Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark,
Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines,
Portugal, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay,
Venezuela, RB, Zimbabwe
 a
   – based on currency crisis sample
Significance at * - p<0.10, ** - p<0.05, *** - p<0.01




                                                    42
Table 2 Likelihood of Debt Crises: First and Second Waves
                                                        Pr(Debt Crisis)
Economic Conditions                              First Wave       Second Wave
                                                 1880-1913          1973-2003
Scenario #1: Excellent Fundamentals
 Original Sin = 100
 Original Sin x Currency Crisis = 0
 Gold Coverage Ratio = Average                     <0.01             0.03
 Currency Crisis = 0
 Bank Crisis Last Year = 0
Scenario #2: Good Fundamentals
 Original Sin = 100
 Original Sin x Currency Crisis = 100
                                                    0.20             0.08
 Gold Coverage Ratio = Average
 Currency Crisis = 1
 Bank Crisis Last Year = 0
Scenario #3: Bad Fundamentals
 Original Sin = 100
 Original Sin x Currency Crisis = 0
                                                    0.08             0.07
 Gold Coverage Ratio = 0
 Currency Crisis = 0
 Bank Crisis Last Year = 1
Scenario #4:Worst Fundamentals
 Original Sin = 100
 Original Sin x Currency Crisis = 100
                                                    0.63             0.18
 Gold Coverage Ratio = 0
 Currency Crisis = 1
 Bank Crisis Last Year = 1




                                                  43
                         Table 3 Determinants of Financial Crises, Instrumental Variables
                               First Wave of Market Integration         Second Wave of Market Integration
                                         1880-1913                                1973-2003
Covariates                                                  (3)                                         (6)
                                 (1)           (2)                         (4)           (5)
                                                           Avg.                                        Avg.
                             Currency         Debt                     Currency         Debt
                                                          value                                        value
Lag of Level of Net          0.06***                                    0.03**
                                                –          1.79                           –            0.75
Inflows/GDP                    (0.02)                                    (0.01)
                              -0.003         -0.002                      0.002         0.02**
Original Sin                                              52.46         (0.007)        (0.009)         78.4
                              (0.008)         (0.01)
Original Sin x Currency
                                 –              –            –             –                   –           –
Crisis
Lag of Short term real         0.29**         -0.14                       0.03                0.08***
                                                            2.75                                         6.6
UK/US Interest Rate            (0.13)        (0.12)                      (0.02)                (0.02)
                              -0.005*         -0.01                     -0.0009             -0.002*
Lag of Reserves/Money                                       48.46                           (0.002)     57.97
                              (0.003)        (0.01)                     (0.001)
                                0.49         0.93**                     0.59***               0.21
Lag of Bank Crisis                                          0.05                             (0.18)      0.12
                               (0.48)        (0.48)                      (0.13)
                                             1.08**                                          0.39**
Currency Crisis                  –                          0.04           –                 (0.19)     0.059
                                              (0.47)

Country-Years                   503           503                        1252                1252
Countries                       18            18                          45                  45
Wald test for exogeneity
                                0.74          0.96                     0.001***              0.05**
(p-value)
Chi-squared test for zero
                             0.000***        0.04**                    0.0001***            0.000***
slopes (p-value)

Notes: Estimation is by one-step maximum likelihood for probit models with endogenous regressors. Probit
coefficients are shown. Excluded instruments for original sin in the first wave are the logarithm of GDP
and an indicator for being in the British Empire. In the second wave the excluded instrument is the
logarithm of GDP. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by country; Countries included in the
samples are those listed in Table 1.
Significance at * - p<0.10, ** - p<0.05, *** - p<0.01




                                                       44
     Table 4 Determinants of Financial Crises, Robustness to Sample Changes with and without Instrumental
                                              Variables, 1973-2003
                                 Dropping G-7 + Switzerland                Dropping G-7 + Switzerland
                                                                          (with Instrumental Variables)
Covariates                                                  (3)                                          (6)
                                (1)            (2)                       (4)              (5)
                                                           Avg.                                         Avg.
                             Currency         Debt                   Currency            Debt
                                                           value                                        value
Lag of Level of Net           0.002*                                    0.02
                                                –          0.97                            –            0.97
Inflows/GDP                   (0.001)                                 (0.01)*
                               0.001        -0.0007                   -0.03**           0.04**
Original Sin                                               91.3        (0.01)           (0.02)          91.3
                              (0.001)       (0.0006)
Original Sin x Currency                       0.003
                                –                          6.8             –                –                6.8
Crisis                                       (0.005)
Lag of Short term real        0.005        0.004***                      0.02              0.08**
                                                           6.56                                             6.56
UK/US Interest Rate          (0.003)        (0.001)                     (0.02)             (0.02)
                            -0.00007        -0.0001                      0.001           -0.003*
Lag of Reserves/Money                                     66.75                          (0.001)            66.75
                            (0.0001)       (0.00009)                    (0.001)
                             0.07***        0.02**                      0.6***            0.13**
Lag of Bank Crisis                                         0.14                           (0.22)            0.14
                              (0.02)        (0.01)                      (0.15)
                                            -0.05                                         0.35*
Currency Crisis                 –                          0.07            –              (0.19)       0.07
                                            (0.08)

Country-Years                    1041          1041                        1040              1040
Countries                         37            37                          37                 37
Obs. P                           0.07          0.03                          –                  –
Pred. P (at x-bar)               0.06          0.02                          –                  –
          2
Pseudo-R                         0.04          0.10                          –                  –
Wald test for exogeneity
                                   –             –                       0.003***            0.12
(p-value)
Notes: Estimation in columns (1) and (2) are probit models. Estimation in columns (4) and (5) are by one-
step maximum likelihood for probit models with endogenous regressors. The excluded instrument for
original sin is the logarithm of GDP. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by country; Countries
included in the samples are those listed in Table 1 for the second wave with out the G-7 and Switzerland.
Significance at * - p<0.10, ** - p<0.05, *** - p<0.01




                                                     45
  Table 5 International Financial Integration and Growth, Five Year Periods,
                            1880-1910 and 1972-2003
    Dependent Variable: Average Five Year Percentage Growth Rate of GDP per
                         Capita in non-overlapping periods
                              First Wave of Market       Second Wave of Market
                                      Integration                Integration
 Covariates
                                      1880-1910                  1973-2003
                                  (I)            (II)      (III)            (IV)
 Avg. Net Capital              -0.022           0.11     -0.0038           0.014
 Inflows/GDP                   (0.118)         (0.12)    (0.033)          (0.036)
                                -0.91         -2.84**   -1.51***         -1.37***
 Avg. Years in Crisis‡
                                (0.67)         (1.15)     (0.41)           (0.37)
 Avg. Percentage School          0.24         0.64**      0.028            0.038
 Enrollment                     (0.24)         (0.22)    (0.029)          (0.032)
                                 0.02           0.02   0.049***           0.036**
 Avg. Exports/GDP
                                (0.04)         (0.14)    (0.018)          (0.017)
 Avg. Population Growth         -0.28           0.75      0.064            0.043
 Rate                           (0.80)         (0.97)     (0.41)           (0.42)
                                                -0.06        –            0.12***
 Average Saving/GDP                –
                                               (0.10)                     (0.043)
 Ln GDP per capita in first    -5.31*           -4.49   -4.79***         -5.90***
 year of 5 yr period            (2.96)         (4.96)     (1.41)           (1.51)
                               36.91*          27.15      43.33            51.33
 Constant
                               (20.35)        (38.19)    (12.78)          (13.53)

 Mean Country Growth
                                         1.33                           1.73
 Rate (% per year) (std.
                                        (1.69)                         (2.02)
 dev)
 Mean Years in crisis (std.              0.12                           0.18
 dev)                                   (0.20)                         (0.29)
 Number of country years          105            62            254            254
 Number of Countries               18            12             49             49
   2
 R -within                        0.26          0.43           0.30           0.33
Notes: Country fixed effects models with robust standard errors clustered by
country in parentheses. Models for each wave include dummies for years 1880,
1885, 1890, 1895, 1900, 1905, 1910 and 1973, 1978, 1983, 1988, 1993, and 1998,
respectively. ‡ - Average years of financial crisis is the average of the sum of
dummies for whether a country experienced a currency, banking, or debt crisis.
Hausman-Taylor χ2 = 10.68 (p<0.56) and 45.95 (p<0.001) for first and second
waves respectively, favors fixed effects over random effects for second wave.
Significance at * - p<0.10, ** - p<0.05, *** - p<0.01




                                         46
  Table 6 International Financial Integration, Crises and Growth, Long and Short-Run
                Impacts on Output per capita, 1880-1910 and 1972-2003

                                 First Wave of Market Integration   Second Wave of Market Integration
                                            1880-1913                          1973-2003
Covariates                        Short Run           Long Run        Short Run         Long Run
                                 Coefficients        Coefficients    Coefficients      Coefficients
                                (Change in X)       (Levels of X)   (Change in X)     (Levels of X)
Net Capital Inflows/GDP (t)          0.26*              0.19*           -0.03*           -0.07***
                                     (0.14)             (0.08)          (0.01)            (0.02)

Net Capital Inflows/GDP (t-1)        0.11                              0.04***                 –
                                                          –
                                    (0.14)                               (0.01)
Net Capital Inflows/GDP (t-2)                                           0.03**                 –
                                      –                   –
                                                                         (0.01)
Crisis (t)                          -0.01              -0.04*         -0.017***             -0.015***
                                   (0.01)              (0.02)          (0.004)               (0.004)
Crisis(t-1)                        -0.003                               -0.006                  –
                                                          –
                                   (0.01)                              (0.004)
Crisis (t-2)                                                             0.001                 –
                                      –                   –
                                                                       (0.003)
Percentage School Enrollment         1.45               0.11             -0.04               0.0002
                                    (1.82)             (0.25)          (0.004)              (0.0002)
Exports/GDP                          0.12               0.09             -0.02              0.0003**
                                    (0.32)             (0.22)            (0.03)             (0.0001)
Population Growth Rate               0.29              -0.44           -0.42                -0.001
                                    (0.53)             (0.60)          (0.36)               (0.002)
Saving/GDP                           0.25               0.1*              0.18              0.001***
                                    (0.13)             (0.06)         (0.06)***             (0.0004)
Growth GDP                          -0.28                                  0.1                  –
                                                          –
per capita (t-1)                    (0.05)                              (0.05)*
                                                       -0.03                                  -0.05
GDP per capita (t-1)                  –                                   –
                                                       (0.06)                               (0.01)***

Mean Country Growth Rate (%                  0.016                                 0.017
per year) (std. dev)                         (0.04)                               (0.037)

Number of country years                       376                                  1315

Number of Countries                            12                                   49

R2-within                                      0.3                                 0.18

     Notes: Country dynamic country fixed effects models with robust standard errors
     clustered by country in parentheses. Dependent variable is the annual change in the
     natural logarithm of GDP per capita. See text for more discussion. Models for each
     wave include time dummies. Short-run coefficients are for annual changes in the
     explanatory variables. Long-run coefficients are for levels of the variables.
     Significance at * - p<0.10, ** - p<0.05, *** - p<0.01




                                                 47
 Table 7 Eastern Europe, Predicted Probabilities of Crises and Expected Growth Losses as of March, 2009

                                                                          Czech Republic    Slovakia     Poland    Romania    Bulgaria Lithuania     Hungary     Estonia         Latvia

Capital Inflows/GDP (-1 x change in NIIP)                                            7.21       2.50        4.51      19.23      21.93       8.96        4.64       0.36         36.95
Foreign Currency Debt/Total Debt                                                       12         14         22          53         55         58         62          78            85
Original Sin x Foreign Currency Debt/Total Debt                                        12         14         22          53         55         58         62          78            85
Short term interest rate                                                             0.38       0.38       0.38        0.38       0.38       0.38       0.38        0.38          0.69
Reserves/M2                                                                         25.45      35.54      27.26       61.69      59.14      37.93      75.77       39.50         46.70
Banking Crisis (assumed)                                                                1          1          1           1          1          1          1           1             1
Currency crisis (assumed)                                                               1          1          1           1          1          1          1           1             1

Predicted probability of a debt crisis                                                 <0         <0          <0         <0         <0         <0          <0         <0            <0
Predicted probability of a currency crisis                                          0.008      0.008        0.01       0.03       0.04       0.04        0.04       0.07          0.09

Average growth rate GDP per capita 2003-2008                                         4.75       5.44        4.54       6.37       6.56       8.29        3.97       7.99          9.27

Expected growth loss = probability of DEBT crisis x -1.37                            0.00        0.00       0.00       0.00       0.00        0.00       0.00       0.00           0.00
Expected growth loss = probability of CURRENCY crisis x -1.37                       -0.01       -0.01      -0.01      -0.04      -0.05       -0.05      -0.05      -0.10          -0.12
  (percentage points)

Expected percentage drop in growth rate due to currency crisis                      -0.23       -0.20      -0.30      -0.65      -0.84       -0.66      -1.38      -1.20          -1.33
(Growth loss/Average Growth)

Notes: See the data appendix for sources and definitions of variables. Predicted probabilities are based on probit models in columns 4 and 5 of Table 1.
Original sin is calculated as the percentage of total household loans denominated in foreign currency as of January 2008. Source: Fitch Ratings see "Emerging Europe's Current
Account Deficits: Mind the Gap!" (2008); Short term interest rates are the yields on 6 month US treasury bills as of March 20, 2009.
Data on the net international investment position (NIIP) come from sources listed in the appendix.
The ratios of reserves/money come from International Financial Statistics January 2009 International Monetary Fund.
Czech Republic: Notes: Reserves and M2 as of Oct. 2008; Slovakia:Reserves and M2 as of August 2008; Poland; Reserves and M2 as of September 2008
Romania reserves, M2,as of October 2008; Bulgaria reserves, M2, as of October 2008; Lithuania reserves, money as of October 2008
Hungary reserves, M2, exchange rate as of October 2008; Estonia reserves, M2, exchange rate as of October 2008; Latvia reerves, M2 exchange rates as of October 2008




                                                                                     48
