                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




CASH-OUT OR FLAME-OUT! OPPORTUNITY COST AND ENTREPRENEURIAL STRATEGY:
     THEORY, AND EVIDENCE FROM THE INFORMATION SECURITY INDUSTRY

                                            Ashish Arora
                                          Anand Nandkumar

                                         Working Paper 15532
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15532


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2009




 This paper is based on a chapter of Anand Nandkumar's 2008 PhD dissertation at The Heinz School,
 Carnegie Mellon University. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
 reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2009 by Ashish Arora and Anand Nandkumar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
 exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
 © notice, is given to the source.
Cash-out or flame-out! Opportunity cost and entrepreneurial strategy: Theory, and evidence
from the information security industry
Ashish Arora and Anand Nandkumar
NBER Working Paper No. 15532
November 2009
JEL No. J4,L26,O3

                                              ABSTRACT

We analyze how entrepreneurial opportunity cost conditions performance. We depart from the literature
on entrepreneurship which identifies survival with performance. Instead, many entrepreneurs aim for
a cash-out (IPO or acquisition), especially in innovation based industries. Striving for a cash-out makes
mistakes more likely and increases the probability of failure. High opportunity cost entrepreneurs will
attempt to cash-out (IPO or friendly acquisition) quickly, even if it implies a higher risk of failure.
Entrepreneurs with fewer outside alternatives may tend to linger on longer. We formalize this intuition
with a simple model. Using a novel dataset of information security startups we find that entrepreneurs
with high opportunity costs are not only more likely to cash-out but they are also more likely to fail.
 As well, our results confirm the predicted role of venture quality in conditioning the relationship between
entrepreneurial opportunity cost and entrepreneurial performance.


Ashish Arora
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Box 90120
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
ashish.arora@duke.edu

Anand Nandkumar
Indian School of Business
Anand_Nandkumar@isb.edu
                                                                                                                       2



1    Introduction
        There is a significant difference between opening a new restaurant, a consultancy, or

even a car dealership, on the one hand, and starting a high-tech firm on the other. This

difference is widely appreciated by scholars yet some of the implications are not as widely

appreciated.2 For instance, firm survival is frequently used as a measure of performance.

Survivors are assumed to be superior performers, and, conversely, firms that leave the industry

are treated as failures. But whereas a dry-cleaning store owner probably aspires to a steady flow

of income, a modern high tech-entrepreneur may happily settle for a large payout after being

acquired by an established incumbent. Unlike the “steady as she goes” approach of the dry-

cleaner, the modern high-tech startup may often go for broke in trying for a big payout. While

this is a difference of degree rather than kind, we believe that the difference is large enough to be

consequential for the study of entrepreneurship.3

         Many entrepreneurs are very accomplished and have significant outside opportunities.

These high opportunity cost entrepreneurs are interested in ventures with substantial “upside”

potential. If this potential is not quickly realized, they may prefer to leave and try their hand at

something else (including perhaps a different startup), rather than linger on in a venture with

modest prospects. Survival for such entrepreneurs is rarely a goal.

         This type of entrepreneurship motivates our paper. We distinguish between two possible

outcomes for a startup. It can either fail (e.g., if is dissolved and its assets are acquired), or it can

cash-out (have an IPO or be acquired on favorable terms). Both of these outcomes are treated as

“absorbing states”; if neither happens, the firm merely survives for another period. We depart

2
  This distinction is sometimes mirrored in studies of entrepreneurship, with broad based studies using “self
employment” as a measure of entrepreneurship (e.g Hamilton, 2000), and more focused, industry cases studies
directly observing firm formation (e.g., Klepper, 2002)
3
  Of course, not all ventures in technology intensive industries are alike. An IT consultancy or a firm with a niche
software product is quite different from the prototypical Silicon Valley startups.
                                                                                                                      3


from the literature by treating survival (without an IPO) as not desirable in itself. Instead,

survival merely keeps alive the option of trying for a payday. However, the option of waiting is

more costly for entrepreneurs with higher opportunity cost and thus, higher opportunity cost

entrepreneurs are more likely to undertake strategies that increase the likelihood of cash-out even

if that entails a higher probability of failure.

         We develop a simple model formalizes this intuition. In our model, each startup or

venture is characterized by a quality level. In any period, the entrepreneur can undertake costly

actions, hereafter called “investment”, that increase the probability of a cash-out. But since

“haste makes waste”, striving for a cash-out can also increase the risk of failure. The firm may

run out of cash, may scale up too quickly and make mistakes in product design or market

positioning, or hire the wrong people. Thus, in our model, increasing the investment increases

the probability of a cash-out but also increases the probability of failure. If the firm does not

cash-out and does not fail either, it survives to try again. All else equal, an entrepreneur with a

higher opportunity cost will value the option embodied in survival less than an entrepreneur with

lower opportunity cost, and accordingly, will invest more. This results in higher hazards of both

cash-out and survival.4

         We test this intuition using a novel hand collected dataset of startups that entered the

information security market (ISM) from 1989 through 2004. This paper is organized as follows.

The following section provides a brief overview of the literature. In section 3, we develop a

formal model and develop testable implications. In section 4, we explain the data sources for our




4
  The investment made by the startup is analogous to the real world concept of “burn rate”. Increasing the burn rate
makes it more likely that a firm with an underlying good idea will attract attention and capital. It also increases the
likelihood that the firm will run out of cash and go under. Adding a cash constraint would not, we conjecture,
change our results.
                                                                                                    4


empirical analysis. Section 5 contains the results of the empirical analysis. We conclude in

section 6, with a discussion of the implications and possible extensions.


2   Literature and background
       Our paper builds on several streams of entrepreneurship research. The first stream

examines the role of entrepreneurial opportunity cost. Much of the research has focused on how

opportunity cost conditions selection into self-employment. The decision of an entrepreneur to

exploit an entrepreneurial opportunity depends on whether the expected value of entrepreneurial

profit is large enough to compensate for the opportunity cost of other alternatives (Shane and

Venkataraman, 2000). Amit, Muller, and Cockburn, (1995) show that entrepreneurs with higher

opportunity costs are less likely to select into entrepreneurship.

       In addition, several scholars have pointed out that higher opportunity cost will also

trigger exit. For instance, Gimeno et al. (1997) estimate a model of entrepreneurial performance

where entrepreneurial human capital increases both the quality of the enterprise as well as

opportunity cost, and increases the likelihood of exit. Their sample is a broad cross section

across a range of sectors. We focus on a single industry and control for different sub-segments

as well. Gimeno et al. use a self reported measure of “money taken out” per year as a measure of

performance, we use cash-out. The Gimeno et al. measure proxies for viability whereas our

measure proxies for a substantial potential upside. Further, Gimeno et al try to separately

measure specific and general human capital, with the former driving performance and the latter

driving opportunity cost. We use work experience to measure opportunity cost, and separately

control for whether the founder had worked in a related or unrelated sector. We control for

quality using patents, trademarks, and most importantly, use the initial size of the venture as a

summary measure of quality.
                                                                                                       5


        As we do in our model, Bates, (2005) distinguishes between exit and success. In a study

of small businesses created between 1989 and 1992, and then closed down between 1993 and

1996, he finds that owners often described their firms as “successful” when the closure decision

was made. Moreover, he finds that highly educated and skilled owners were more likely move to

other lines of work in many successful closure situations. In Bates’s study, success is a

subjective assessment by the entrepreneur, whereas we equate it with an IPO or favorable

acquisition.

        That high opportunity cost entrepreneurs are more likely to cash-out but also more likely

to fail links to two additional strands in the literature. First, it points to the potential confounding

effect of measures of opportunity cost and measures of human capital, and more broadly, of the

quality of the venture. There is a large literature that links entrepreneurial performance to

entrepreneurial experience. Broadly, it finds pre-entry experience is valuable and improves

performance, although there is less clarity on what types of experience is valuable and how it

improves performance. Much, though not all, of this literature uses survival as a measure of

performance. For instance, startups from related parents survived longer in automobiles

(Klepper, 2002) and shipbuilding industries Thompson, (2005). In lasers, spinoffs survived

longer due to technical and manufacturing experience that the founders had accumulated while

working for the parent (Klepper and Sleeper, 2005).

        Another reason to control for quality is that, as already noted, entrepreneurial opportunity

cost also conditions selection into entrepreneurship. All else constant, a high opportunity cost

entrepreneur will only enter if she believes the prospects of success to be high enough. This

implies that venture quality would be correlated with entrepreneurial opportunity cost. We

distinguish between quality and opportunity cost. Following the literature, we measure
                                                                                                      6


opportunity cost by the pre-entry experience of the entrepreneur, but independently control for

the quality of the startup. We control for the quality of the venture by the initial size. There is a

significant literature which holds that more capable entrepreneurs start larger firms. For

instance, Jovanic’s classic 1982 paper shows that more able entrepreneurs start larger firms.

Similarly, Cressy (2006) provides a model in which more able entrepreneurs start larger firms

and are less likely to fail. The empirical evidence supports this theoretical finding (cf. Mata and

Portugal, 1994; Agarwal and Audretsch, 2001). Colombo et al. (2004) find that in a sample of

391 young Italian high-tech firms, industry-specific professional knowledge and managerial and

entrepreneurial experiences was associated with initial firm size. Cassar, (2006) found that

among prospective entrepreneurs, more experienced ones intended to start larger firms and to

grow more rapidly. In addition, industry studies show that initial firm size is highly correlated

with firm performance, albeit typically measured as survival (Evans 1987a and 1987b; Dunne, et

al. 1988 and 1989; Phillips and Kirchhoff, 1989; Audretsch, 1991; Audretsch and Mahmood,

1994 and 1995; Mata et al. 1995; Audretsch, 1995b; Cabral and Mata, 2003).

       In our analysis we follow Heckman and Singer (1984) to further allow for unobserved

heterogeneity in quality across firms. Finally, as a robustness check, we also use variation in

macroeconomic conditions to identify the effect of opportunity cost. Boden and Nucci, (2000)

find that small business founded when the economy is weak tend to have more educated, more

experienced, and specifically had greater managerial experience, than those founded in better

economic times. Consistent with this, we find that firms founded shortly after the Internet

bubble burst, have lower hazards of failure and cash-out. Since we control for starting size and

pre-entry experience, this is consistent with the conjecture that the bursting of the Internet bubble

reduced opportunity cost of entrepreneurship. Note that if this had merely reduced the likelihood
                                                                                                                 7


of a successful IPO, there is no reason to expect a decrease in failure rates. Instead, we find that

this cohort had lower failure rates as well.

           A second potential link is with the literature on entrepreneurial optimism (and over-

optimism). The literature on entrepreneurial optimism is extensive. Broadly, it finds that

entrepreneurs tend to be optimistic than the general population (e.g., Cooper, Woo, and

Dunkelberg, 1988). This over-optimism or perhaps hubris is typically believed to result in

higher failure rates, although the causal mechanisms and empirical evidences are far from clear

(Camerer and Lovallo, 1999; Hayward et al., 2006).5 De Meza and Southey, (1996) note that in

the presence of financing constraints, more optimistic individuals select into entrepreneurship,

and in the presence of financing constraints, may enter at low initial scale. Fraser and Greene,

(2006), find empirical support for the idea that more optimistic entrepreneurs start larger firms.

Hmieleski and Baron, (2009) find that measures of optimism are negatively related to growth in

employment and revenues, after controlling for pre-entry experience.

           However, the evidence relating the degree of optimism within entrepreneurs to

experience also suggests that prior experience, particularly industry experience, reduces over-

optimism. Landier and Thesmar, (2008), find that entrepreneurs with higher opportunity cost

(measured as those with higher education levels) tend to be more optimistic about future

performance (relative to actual), but industry experience reduces over-optimism. Fraser and

Greene, (2006), find that experienced entrepreneurs are less over-optimistic. In our model, the

impact of over-optimism on firm outcomes is similarly mixed, as shown in proposition 2 below.

           An alternative formalization of this intuition could involve differences in entrepreneurial

risk preferences. Entrepreneurs willing to take on riskier projects would plausibly have higher

rates of failure but also cash-out rates. Without more detailed data, the risk based explanation
5
    Melmandier and Tate (2005) find that over-confident CEOs over-invest, thereby reducing the rate of return.
                                                                                                        8


cannot be ruled out. More to the point, it is not necessary either. Our story is simply that higher

opportunity cost entrepreneurs are impatient for success and willing to accept higher probability

of failure in return. This may involve riskier strategies, and a loose interpretation of our model

below is consistent with this idea.

       Finally, the interactions between investors and entrepreneurs has attracted a great deal of

attention in the literature. For instance, Thesmar and Landier (2008) show that that over-

optimistic entrepreneurs are more likely to enter into short term debt contracts, which leaves

potentially them more vulnerable to being failing in the short term. They do not observe failure

and cannot directly test their theory. We ignore the difference between investors and the

entrepreneur, although in the analysis, we separately control for VC financed firms. T


3 Model
We develop a simple model to guide the empirical analysis. Our intent is not to argue for the

applicability of this highly stylized model but rather to use it to formalize the intuition that high

opportunity cost entrepreneurs, unwilling to linger on, are likely to accept higher risk of failure

in return for a quicker cash-out.

3.1 Setup

       Let P, 0≤P≤1, represent the quality of a venture. One can think of P as a summary

measure of all factors that drive success, including the quality of the entrepreneur and of the idea

itself. In any period, the firm will cash-out with probability mP. A cash-out bestows a payoff of

J on the entrepreneur. Entrepreneurs can increase m by investing c(m) per period, where c(m) is

increasing and convex in m. One can think of c(m) as the “burn rate” in a startup. It is a

commonplace among practitioners that although a higher burn rate may be needed to get the firm

ready for acquisition or IPO, it also of increases the risk of failure. For instance, trying to
                                                                                                      9


succeed quickly could results in errors in hiring, product development or market positioning,

leading to failure.

        Failure results in a payoff of zero. The probability of failure in any period is (1-P)m, so

that increasing m also increases the chance of failure. All else constant, higher quality ventures

have lower probability of failure and higher probability of cash-out. Moreover, the marginal

increase in the probability of failure as m increases is lower for higher quality ventures.

Conversely, the marginal payoff of m in increasing the probability of cash-out is higher for

higher quality ventures.

        The probability that an entrepreneurs neither succeeds or fails is 1-mP-(1-P)m or simply

(1-m).The entrepreneur has an opportunity cost of α for every period the firm survives, and β (0≤

β≤1) is the discount factor.

        Finally, we assume stationarity. Specifically, the probability of cash-out and failure are

functions only of the current burn rate m and independent of past levels of m. It follows that

future value of a firm, V, is the same in every period that the firm survives. It also follows that a

firm will optimally choose the same m for each period it survives.

        For analytical tractability, we assume that c(m)≡m2/2. Thus the expected profits of an

entrepreneur with an opportunity cost of α in period t is given by

                                                               –                    (1)

Let m* denote value that maximizes (1). The first order condition for an interior optimum is

                                                                            (2)

        Rearranging terms in (1), we have


                                                                             (3)
                                                                                                      10


           Solving for V using equations (2) through (3) gives us values for V.


                                                                                       (4)

           In (4) above, only one feasible value of V guarantees that m is between 0 and 1. This is

                                                                                       (5)

           where

                                                                                       (6)

           The first order condition implies that the optimal burn rate, m, is

                                                          .6                           (7)

Note that A is increasing in α, and m* is increasing in A, so that m* is increasing in α.

Result 1: Entrepreneurs with higher opportunity costs have higher burn rates.

Opportunity costs and hazard of cash-out and failure

The hazard of cash-out – the probability that a firm cashes out in period t given that it survives

till t – is Φ≡m*P. Because m* increases with α, the hazard of a cash-out is also increasing in α.

Prediction 1: Entrepreneurs with higher opportunity costs have a higher hazard of cash-out.

The probability that a firm fails in period t, given it has survived till t, is Ω≡m*(1-P), which is

increasing in m*, so that the hazard of failure increases with α as well.

Prediction 2: Entrepreneurs with higher opportunity costs have a higher hazard of failure.

Quality of venture and hazard of cash-out




6
    Note that since 0 ≤ m ≤1, A1/2 is bounded between 1-β and 1. Moreover since V>0,           .
                                                                                                    11


The partial derivative of m* with respect to P, the quality of the venture, is J(1-β)A-1/2 > 0, so that

m* increases in P. Intuitively, a higher P raises the marginal product of m by increasing the

probability of cash-out and lowering the probability of failure.

Result 2: Higher quality ventures have higher investment rates, m.

This result implies that higher quality ventures are more likely to succeed. Since m* is increasing

in P, it follows that higher quality ventures, all else equal, are more likely to succeed.

Prediction 3: The hazard of cash-out is higher for higher quality ventures.

Interactions between venture quality and opportunity cost

       Thus far, the predictions of the model have been straightforward. A less obvious

prediction is about the interaction between venture quality and entrepreneurial opportunity cost.

Formally, we show in the appendix that              . This implies that high opportunity cost

entrepreneurs are more likely to succeed when they are in a better quality venture.

Prediction 4: The hazard of cash-out rises faster with entrepreneurial opportunity cost for a high

quality venture than a low quality one.

The effect of venture quality on failure is, however, not clear-cut. An increase in P has two

opposing effects. While a higher quality venture has a lower hazard of failure for a given rate of

investment, higher quality increases m*, which increases the hazard of failure. We show in the

appendix that for low values of P, the hazard of failure in increasing in P because the latter effect

dominates. For high values of P, the direct effect dominates.

Prediction 5: The average effect of venture quality on failure is ambiguous. For low values of

venture quality, the hazard of failure increases with venture, while for high values of venture

quality, the hazard of failure decreases with venture quality.
                                                                                                                     12



Although the average effects are ambiguous, we show in the appendix that                               . Thus, the

marginal effect of opportunity cost on failure is lower for higher quality ventures.

Prediction 6: The hazard of failure rises more slowly with opportunity costs for high quality

ventures than for low quality ventures.


4    Data and measures
       Our sample consists of 286 ISM startups, followed from the time of entry till 2004 or

their exit (cash-out or failure), whichever is earlier. From the Corptech directory, we obtained

names of all startups that entered ISM between 1989 and 2004. We augmented the dataset with

hand collected information about the founders (for up to 4 founders) from a variety of publicly

available data sources on the Internet such as ZoomInfo (www.zoominfo.com), LinkedIn

(www.linkedIn.com), Google Archives (www.archives.google.com) Internet Archive

(www.archive.org), EDGAR database and Zephyr databases. For firms with multiple founders,

the founder with the highest work experience was designated as the main founder and his or her

characteristics were then used to characterize the startup.

Failure: Firms in the sample exited either due to two reasons: the business was dissolved or

acquisition by another firm. We defined a startup as having failed if it ceases to exist but was not

acquired on favorable terms. Thus distress sales are treated as failures as are cases where the

business is simply dissolved.7 We identified the year of failure as the year in which the corporate




7
  We used two criteria to determine if an acquisition was a distress sale: (1) if the firm was sold for less than $1
million and (2) if the transaction was an asset purchase, determined from the press release of the acquisition. For
instance, if the press release stated that the merger was an “asset purchase”, we classified such mergers as a distress
sale e.g. Netopia acquisition of DoBox Inc http://www.bizjournals.com/sanfrancisco/stories/2002/04/01/daily4.html
(last accessed july 27, 2008), Contentwatch acquisition of NetNanny software see
http://www.manac.com.au/releases/44/Net_Nanny.pdf (last accessed July 27th 2008). Acquisitions that failed both
criteria were treated as a cash-out. A total, of 79 firms in our sample were acquired, of which 11 of the acquisitions
were classified as being distress.
                                                                                                                 13


web site was last available on archive.org, a site that contains historical archives of all Internet

web sites. The year of failures in the case of distress sale was year of the sale.

Cash-outs: We define cash-out as a favorable acquisition, or an Initial Public Offering (IPO),

whichever was earlier. The date of acquisition was identified using the Zephyr database, a

database that tracks all mergers and acquisitions from 1985.

Opportunity cost: To measure the opportunity costs of an entrepreneur, one would ideally need

to measure the discounted present value of future earnings in the entrepreneur’s next preferred

alternative. This is infeasible. We develop two proxies for opportunity costs. Our main measure

is the number of years of work experience (work experience, henceforth) of the most

experienced founder among all the founders of the focal firm. We developed this measure by

first calculating the number of elapsed years from the year of last graduation until the year of

founding of the focal startup, for every identified founder of the startup. This measure assumes

that greater work experience is associated with higher wage earnings. Bhide, (2000), for

instance, argues that entrepreneurs in an “established corporate track” are unlikely to start a

venture since they would have to give up a very lucrative job in order to startup a firm.

        We also experimented with a second measure, namely the total number of organizations

(previous jobs henceforth) that the main founder of the startup had worked for.8 Note however

that the two measures are highly correlated (corr – 0.64), and our results are very similar with the

second measure as well.

        Our measures of opportunity costs have obvious limitations. For instance the number of

previous jobs may also capture preference of entrepreneurs to move on from one job to another.

8
  We developed this measure using the following procedure: Using detailed founder histories in www.zoominfo.com
and www.linkedin.com, we first counted the number of organizations or previous jobs that each founder of the
startup worked in. We use the previous jobs of the founder that had the maximum number previous jobs held among
all founders of the startup as our measure of opportunity cost. Since founders that have held many previous jobs are
likely to have more alternatives they are also likely to have high opportunity costs of entrepreneurship.
                                                                                                                14


Such entrepreneurs, contrary to our assumption, could actually have been earning lower wages

and may also have lesser opportunity costs of entrepreneurship. Further this measure may not

measure other non-pecuniary benefits to stay on as entrepreneurs (Hamilton, 2000; Moskowitz

and Vissing-Jorgenson, 2002). Perhaps the most salient of the limitations is that both these

measures could also pick up differences in the underlying venture quality, P. For instance, more

experienced entrepreneurs may be more likely to enter with a better quality venture. In order

separate out any such confounding effects we use initial scale as a measure of venture quality.

Venture quality: We use the initial size at entry, (initial scale) measured as the number of

employees at the time of entry. The literature has argued that initial size of firms is a good proxy

for the quality of startups ( Mata and Portugal, 1994; Agarwal and Audretsch, 2001).9 In our

main analysis, we exclude 35 firms that do not report their initial size. However as a robustness

check we include these firms by assigning the minimum value of initial size (2 employees) to

firms that do not report their initial size.

Internet Bust years: This variable is =1 if the focal firm was founded after 2000, on the grounds

that 2000 was the year the Internet bubble burst. Arguably a greater fraction of such firms were

started by entrepreneurs that were unemployed after the bubble burst. These entrepreneurs would

have lower opportunity cost. Accordingly, we use this variable both as a control for the entry

cohort, and also as a robustness check of our theory.

Marketing Capability: We measure the marketing capability of startups using the number of IT

trademarks that the parent of the startup owned (parent trademarks, henceforth), at the time of




9
  These include 25 firms for which the founders could not be traced and 10 other firms for which the founders were
traced but did not report initial scale. For 4 firms that reported initial scale, we could not trace the founders.
                                                                                                                 15


entry.10 In cases where the startup had multiple parents, we use the number of IT trademarks of

the parent with the greatest number of IT trademarks.

Technical capability: We use the number of U.S. information security patents of the founders, as

well as any patents assigned to the startup when it was formed. Information security patents are

those in the US patent technological classes 705 subclass 50-79, 380 and 726. As is standard in

the literature, we weight each patent by forward citations, adjusting for year of grant.

Market Segment Fixed Effects: We distinguish 8 market segments: encryption products, network

security, authentication, firewalls, antivirus, spam control, hardware, and consulting. 11

Accordingly, we use both market 7 segment fixed effects, with consulting being the residual

category. The first four segments use encryption technology as an input. As discussed later, we

allow for unobserved heterogeneity, whose distribution is also allowed differ between firms that

use encryption technology as an input and firms that do not.

Firm age: This variable is measured as the number of calendar years from the year of entry until

the year of failure, cash-out or 2004, whichever is earlier. We use this measure to control for age

dependence ( Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson, 1988; Evans, 1987; Audretsch and Mahmood,

1995Mata and Portugal,1994;). To allow for non-linearities, we also include the square term.

Industry age: It is plausible that firm survival may vary as the industry grows and matures (e.g.,

Agarwal and Gort, 2002). We control for this using Industry age, which is simply the number of

years from 1970.



10
   We collected this variable by using a keyword search on the US PTO trademarks database (http://tess.uspto.gov).
We used the following search query on the trademark database. Trademark description includes ("computer") OR
("hardware") OR ("pixel") OR ("telecom") OR ("telecommunications") OR ("software") OR ("Wireless") OR
("computing") OR ("database") OR ("data base ") OR ("pixels") OR ("computer program") OR ("Network") OR
("LAN") OR ("Networking") OR (" computer protocol ") OR (" Internet ").
11
   Note that we only measure the segment of entry.
                                                                                                                           16


Entrant type: We classified startups into one or more of the following categories based on the

immediate prior experience of founders: related startups (founded by employees of computer

hardware, software, IT consultancies, or telecommunication firms or ISM firms), unrelated

startups (founders from defense, finance, aerospace and automobile industries), serial startups

(startups founded by serial founders) and other startups, with founders from universities or

hackers, or startups whose sources could not be traced.12

Source of capital dummies: In many of our specifications we also control for the source of

capital of startups. We distinguish between three funding sources – venture capital (VC dummy),

corporate venture capital (CVC dummy), and others, presumably self-funded. The funding is

measured at the time of entry and is self-reported.

Table 1 Description of measures used
Variable              Description                                             Source of          N       Mean      Std. Dev
                                                                              variation
Failure               =1 if the startup went into a distress sale or went     Firm               286     0.23
                      out of business completely.
Cash-out              =1 if the startup was acquired on favorable terms       Firm               286     0.20
                      or had an IPO
Work experience       Log (1+ # years of work experience) of the main         Firm               279a    1.27      1.63
                      founder. This is one of our proxies for
                      opportunity cost
Log (initial scale)   # employees of the startup at the time of entry.        Firm               251c    3.23      1.58
                      This is our proxy for the quality of the
                      opportunity.
Log (1+security       Log of 1+ # of forward citations weighted               Firm               286     0.32      0.74
patents)              security patents held by a firm at entry. This
                      variable proxies technical capability
Log(1+ parent IT      # trademarks held by the most prominent parent          Firm               286     1.07      1.89
trademarks)           of the startup at entry.
Industry age          Age of the industry measured from 1970                                     286     8.87      5.68
Firm age              Calculated as current year – ISM entry year                                286     6.88      4.94
Internet bust         Dummy variable that indicates if the startup                               286     0.45      -
years                 entered in post internet bubble era.
     a
       Founder histories for a total of 29 startups could not be traced. Of these 4 report initial scale.
     c
       A total of 35 startups do not report their initial size out of which, 25 were those for which the founders also were not
     traceable.




12
  A hacker was defined as a founder who was unemployed immediately prior to founding.
                                                                                                         17


Founding team education and experience controls: We also use four education dummies (a

degree in computer science or electrical engineering, and for non CS and non EE, whether there

is a PhD, a masters, or a bachelors), and 3 prior experience dummies (if founder has engineering,

sales, or top management experience).

       Table 1 summarizes the measures and provides descriptive statistics. Around a quarter of

the startups in our sample fail, and about a fifth succeeded in cashing-out. Slightly more than

half were still in existence at the time of analysis. Slightly less than half of the firms were

founded after 2000, and over a third of them received venture capital funding.



5   Empirical analysis
                                   Table 2- Sources of entry in ISM
                       Entrant type                 ISM              Mean work exp.(yrs)
                     Others                         18%                     2.69
                                                                           (1.05)
                     Related startups               52%                    12.70
                                                                           (0.98)
                     Unrelated Startups             26%                     4.52
                                                                           (1.25)
                     Serial entrepreneur             7%                     7.91
                                                                           (2.52)
       Notes: The total proportion adds up to more than 100% because many firms have multiple founders
       Related: Founder worked in ICT (hardware, software, Internet, telecom) sector
       Unrelated: Founder worked in non-ICT sector.
       Serial: Founder has done a startup earlier.
       Others: Includes hackers, or founders with no experience and university founders

       As table 2 shows, entrants into the ISM were of diverse origins, with a fair degree of

variation in prior work experience. Table 3 provides the share of cash-outs and failures, by

entrepreneurial opportunity cost and venture quality. Comparing columns (b) and (c) shows that,

as predicted, higher entrepreneurial opportunity cost increases the cash-out share (0.28 compared

to 0.19) as well as share of failure (0.30 compared to 0.19). The differences in both cases are

statistically significant. As predicted, higher venture quality increases the cash-out share from

0.12 to 0.33 (column a). The model did not have a clear prediction about how venture quality
                                                                                                              18


affects failure. Column (d) shows that venture quality decreases share of failure. This suggests

that our measure of venture quality, namely initial scale, is plausibly a good summary measure of

the overall quality of the venture, which includes both the quality of the idea, as well as the

quality of the founding team.

        Our model also had two other predictions. The first was that the share of cash-out would

increase with opportunity cost faster for higher quality ventures. In column (b-c) comparing row

(1) with row (2), we see that for high quality ventures the difference in cash-out probabilities is

0.16, whereas the difference is 0.05 for low quality ventures. Albeit statistically insignificant, the

“difference-in-difference” is 0.11. The second prediction was that the share of failure should

increase with opportunity cost more slowly for higher quality ventures. Once again comparing

rows (1) and (2), column (e-f) shows that the difference in failure share is 0.06 for high quality

ventures, whereas it is 0.14 for low quality, with the difference-in-difference being –0.08. Once

again note that this estimate is not statistically significant.

Table 3: Share of cash-out and failure, by entrepreneurial opportunity cost and venture quality.
                            Share of cash-out                                  Share of failure
               Overall    High opp.      Low opp.    (b-c)    Overall    High opp.        Low opp.   e-f
               (a)        cost (b)       cost (c)             (d)        cost (e)         cost (f)
 High            0.33         0.41         0.25       0.16      0.17           0.19          0.13    0.06
 Quality
                (0.04)       (0.06)        (0.05)    (0.08)    (0.03)          (0.05)       (0.04)   (0.06)
 (1)
 Low             0.12         0.16         0.11       0.05      0.33           0.39          0.25    0.14
 Quality(2)
                (0.03)       (0.05)        (0.04)    (0.07)    (0.04)          (0.07)       (0.05)   (0.09)
 (1)- (2)        0.21         0.25          0.14      0.11      -0.16           -0.20        -0.12    -0.08
                (0.05)       (0.08)        (0.07)    (0.10)    (0.05)          (0.09)       (0.07)   (0.11)
 Overall                      0.28          0.19      0.09                      0.30         0.19     0.11
                             (0.04)        (0.03)    (0.05)                    (0.04)       (0.03)   (0.05)
Notes:
High Quality: Startups with initial scale above the average
Low Quality: Startup with initial scale below average.
High Opp. Cost: Startups with entrepreneurial work experience above average.
Low Opp. Cost: Startups with entrepreneurial work experience above average.
The standard errors are provided in parentheses.
                                                                                                                  19


         Note that this table shows shares, rather than the per-period probabilities, and thus, does

not control for the differences in when different types of firms entered the industry. Further, this

table does not take into account that cash-outs and failures are mutually exclusive, and thus, not

independent outcomes. These issues are addressed by estimating a discrete time hazard

regressions that jointly estimates the hazard of failure and cash-outs. The results of this simple

cross-tabulation are nonetheless significant in that all the major predictions of our simple model

are borne out here, including the far from obvious predictions on the signs of the cross-partials.

         We now turn to discrete time hazard analysis. In the context of our data there are two

absorbing states that a startup can transition into, which are failure and cash-out or cash-outs.

Following Boyd et al., 2005 we implement a discrete time hazard regressions specification that is

widely used in the literature ( Martin and Mitchell, 1998King and Tucci, 2002;).13

         In our model, a firm i that is alive in a given year has a probability of cash-out given by

Pimi, of failure given by (1-Pi)mi, and of survival to the next period of (1- mi). This leads to a

straightforward nested specification, in which survival is decided first with probability (1- mi),

and conditional upon survival, the share of cash-out and failures is Pi/(1-Pi). However, the

nested specification depends critically on the assumption that an increase in venture quality

affects cash-out and failure in strict proportionality to m. A more general specification would

allow the probability of cash-out to be Pimi + uic, and similarly, the probability of failure to be (1-

Pi)mi + uif. This more general specification suggests a multinomial logit with unobserved

heterogeneity. Thus, in our baseline specification, the probability of cash-out for the ith firm is

                                  where Xi represents the observed characteristics of the entrepreneur

and venture, such as experience, startup size and market segment, and uic and uif represent firm
13
  Continuous time specifications yield qualitatively similar results. For instance Cox proportional hazard
specifications that estimates the hazard of exit and cash-outs separately, yield qualitatively similar results.
                                                                                                                       20


specific unobserved heterogeneity. The probability of failure and survival are analogously

specified. We follow Heckman and Singer, (1984) and Boyd et al., (2005) and assume that the

unobserved heterogeneity can be represented by a discrete distribution that we estimate non-

parametrically. We allow for the distribution to differ between the firms that use encryption

technology and firms that do not. Specifically, we assume that uic = a0ic+a1ic*encryption, where

encryption = 1 if the startup enters encryption products, network security, or authentication

markets, and = 0 otherwise, and similarly for the uif.14 Ignoring unobserved heterogeneity

altogether does not significantly alter our results.
                                                                               a
Table 4A –Competing hazard regressions of failure or cash-out
                                           Spec. 1                                                  Spec. 2
                                               Failure            Cash-out             Failure                Cash-out
                                                         ***               **                        ***               *
Log(1+ work exp.)                                 0.29              0.26                    0.28               0.25
                                                (0.02)            (0.13)                   (0.03)             (0.15)
                                                         ***               ***                       ***               ***
Log (initial size)                               -0.22              0.40                   -0.24               0.34
                                                (0.03)            (0.04)                   (0.04)             (0.03)
                                                                           *                                           *
Log (1+ patents)                                 -0.05              0.23                   -0.06               0.19
                                                (0.04)            (0.16)                   (0.04)             (0.12)
                                                         ***                                         ***
Log(1+parents IT TM)                             -0.20              0.17                   -0.21               0.14
                                                (0.05)            (0.11)                   (0.05)             (0.09)
                                                         *                 ***                       *                 ***
Related startup                                   0.54              0.82                    0.57               0.76
                                                (0.23)            (0.21)                   (0.25)             (0.19)
                                                         ***                                         **
Unrelated startup                                -0.26              0.11                   -0.28               0.15
                                                (0.07)            (0.50)                   (0.12)             (0.22)
                                                         ***               ***                       ***               ***
Serial entrep.                                    0.64              1.13                    0.61               1.08
                                                (0.18)            (0.30)                   (0.18)             (0.35)
                                                         *                 *                         *
Firm age                                         -0.04              0.11                   -0.05               0.12
                                                (0.02)            (0.07)                   (0.02)             (0.06)
            2                                            ***               **
Firm age                                          0.00                 0                    0.01               -0.01
                                                (0.00)            (0.00)                   (0.01)             (0.00)
                                                         *                 *                         ***
Industry age                                     -0.27             -0.25                   -0.29               0.28
                                                (0.15)            (0.16)                   (0.13)             (0.21)




14
     We get qualitatively similar results even if we do not include an encryption dummy.
                                                                                                                          21


                                                                                     a
Table 4A (cont) –Competing hazard regressions of failure or cash-out
                                           Spec. 1                                                     Spec. 2
                                              Failure             Cash-out                Failure                Cash-out
              2                                          ***                ***                         ***               ***
Industry age                                     -0.04              0.03                    -0.03                 0.03
                                                (0.00)            (0.00)                   (0.00)                (0.00)
                                                                                                        ***               **
VC dummy                                                                                    0.23                  0.85
                                                                                           (0.07)                (0.38)
CVC dummy                                                                                   0.13                  0.24
                                                                                           (0.08)                (0.08)
                                                         ***                ***                         ***               ***
Internet bust years                              -1.12             -0.86                    -1.11                 -0.82
                                                (0.20)            (0.23)                   (0.20)                (0.19)
                                                         ***                ***                         ***               ***
Constant                                         -2.78             -5.24                        -2.7              -5.07
                                                (0.10)            (0.90)                   (0.13)                (1.04)
LL                                            -393.09                                    -391.07
Location parameter 1                      -1.44, 1.75                              -1.32, 1.29
Location parameter 2                      -0.11, 0.13                              -0.51, 0.19
Variance                                  2.52, 0.01                                1.72, 0.10
Covariance                                   0.19                                        0.26
Probabilities                             0.55, 0.45                                0.51, 0.49
       ***                   **                     *                   a
Notes: Significant at 1%. Significant at 5%. Significant at 10%. Standard errors in parentheses cluster
corrected by firm. The unit of observation is firm, year. bFor 4 firms that report initial scale, we cannot trace
founders and 35 firms do not report initial scale. All specifications include 7 submarket dummies, 4 founder
education dummies, and 3 founder work history dummies. The number of observations is 1998 for 247 firms.

         We use 1998 observations, consisting of an observation per firm year from the year of

entry till year of failure, cash-out or 2004 whichever is earlier. In our baseline specification, we

exclude observations relating to 3915 firms since data on initial scale or, less frequently, on

founder characteristics, was missing. Including the dropped observations by including a dummy

variable indicating the missing measure for both initial size as well as experience leaves our

results unchanged.

         The results are shown under specifications 1 and 2 of table 4A and specifications 1 and 2

of table 4B. That the results of the specification 2 of table 4A, which includes VC and CVC

dummies, are qualitatively similar to those that exclude these dummies, suggests that any
15
  As noted earlier this comprises of 25 firms that did not reported initial size and were started up by founders that
could not be traced; 10 firms that did not report their initial size but for which we could acquire data on prior
experience; and 4 firms that reported initial size but for which prior work experience could not be traced.
                                                                                                     22


endogeneity on account of including these dummies, if any does not significantly bias the

coefficients of interest. It also indicates that our results on the effects of opportunity cost are not

driven by differences in funding sources. In particular, these results do not merely reflect the

plausible association between entrepreneurial experience and VC funding, and the desire of VCs

for quick exits. Specification 1 of table 4B, which includes the dropped observations with a

dummy variable that controls for the missing measures (no size dummy for firms that do not

report initial size and experience not found dummy for firms whose founders were not traceable)

yields results very similar to those in table 4A. Note that our results are consistent across these

specifications and in particular results of table 4B shows that dropping 39 firms does not

influence our principal results shown in specification 1 of table 4A.

       As in table 3, the results of specification 1 of table 4A, indicate that entrepreneurs with

higher opportunity costs are more likely to fail. For instance, from specification 1, a one standard

deviation increase in experience is increases the hazard of failure by about 21%. Initial scale,

however, reduces failure – the estimated coefficient is negative and statistically significant.

Results of the cash-out equation imply that entrepreneurs with higher opportunity costs are more

likely to cash-out as well: In specification 1, a standard deviation increase in work experience is

associated with about a 19% in the hazard. The coefficient of initial scale is positive and

significant suggesting that high quality ventures are more likely to succeed. The different effects

of initial scale on cash-out and failure, in contrast to the effects of entrepreneurial work

experience, are noteworthy. It suggests that our results are not driven by unobserved measures of

quality and that our attempts to control for enterprise quality by measuring initial scale and

allowing for unobserved differences across firms have not been in vain.
                                                                                                           23


        As further evidence, note that the coefficient for firms founded after 2000, the Internet

bust years, is negative and significant in both the cash-out and failure equation. After 2000, the

drying up of the IPO market would likely reduce cash-outs. However, it should also have

increased failure (rather than decreased it). The lower rates of failure are consistent with

improved venture quality as many low quality ventures that might have been launched earlier

were not started. However, increased quality ought to have resulted in higher cash-out rates. The

lower rates of failure and cash-outs are, however, consistent with the hypothesis that

entrepreneurs in IT sectors had fewer outside options after the Internet bubble ended. Thus, this

represents an additional test of our theory that entrepreneurial opportunity cost raises both cash-

outs and failures.

        In specification 1 of table 4B we also include startups that did not report their initial size

by assigning the minimum value of initial size (1.09) to startups that did not report their initial

size along with a dummy variable, size not reported=1, if the focal startup did not report initial

size. In addition we also include startup, for which none of the founders were traceable by

assigning zero to prior experience of the founder of such startups along with including prior

experience not traced dummy=1 for startups for which the founders could not be traced.

Dropping the observation with missing data does not appear to affect our results.
                                                                                                 a
Table 4B –Competing hazard regressions of failure or cash-out, no dropped observations
                                                                 Failure           Cash-out
                                                                              ***                    ***
Log(1+ work exp.)                                                      0.18               0.33
                                                                     (0.03)             (0.10)
                                                                                                     ***
Founder not traced                                                     0.13              -2.11
                                                                     (0.14)             (0.13)
                                                                              ***                    ***
Log (initial size)                                                    -0.21               0.36
                                                                     (0.03)             (0.11)
Size not reported                                                      0.03              -0.58
                                                                     (0.18)             (0.61)
                                                                                                                        24


                                                                                                                        a
Table 4B (cont.) –Competing hazard regressions of failure or cash-out, no dropped observations
                                                                  Failure            Cash-out
                                                                                                                  *
Log (1+ patents)                                                                     -0.09                 0.22
                                                                                    (0.08)               (0.12)
                                                                                               ***                ***
Related startup                                                                         0.55               0.46
                                                                                    (0.12)               (0.15)
Unrelated startup                                                                    -0.26                 0.13
                                                                                    (0.29)               (0.13)
                                                                                               ***                ***
Serial entrep.                                                                       -0.58                 0.81
                                                                                    (0.08)               (0.16)
                                                                                               *
Firm age                                                                             -0.03                 0.10
                                                                                    (0.01)               (0.06)
             2
Firm age                                                                                0.00               0.00
                                                                                    (0.00)               (0.00)
                                                                                               *                  *
Industry age                                                                         -0.25                -0.24
                                                                                    (0.15)               (0.15)
                 2                                                                             ***                ***
Industry age                                                                         -0.04                 0.03
                                                                                    (0.01)               (0.00)
                                                                                               ***                ***
Internet bust years                                                                  -1.23                -0.68
                                                                                    (0.10)               (0.16)
                                                                                               ***
Constant                                                                             -2.52                -4.76
                                                                                    (0.09)               (0.43)
N                                                                                       2809
No. of firms                                                                            286
LL                                                                                 -386.23
Location parameter 1                                                          -1.22, 1.80
Location parameter 2                                                          -0.18, 0.48
Variance                                                                      2.79, 0.01
Covariance                                                                       0.28
Probabilities                                                                 0.52, 0.48
       ***                   **                    *                      a
Notes: Significant at 1%. Significant at 5%. Significant at 10%. Standard errors in parentheses cluster
corrected by firm. The unit of observation is firm, year. b For 4 firms, that report initial scale, we cannot trace
founders and 35 firms do not report initial scale. All specifications include 7 submarket dummies, 4 founder
education dummies, and 3 founder work history dummies.

         In the final set of regressions, we test predictions that cash-outs should increase more

rapidly with opportunity cost for high quality ventures, but failures should increase more slowly.

We estimate separately for firms with above and below average initial scale. From table 5, when

the initial entry scale is low, a one standard deviation increase in work experience increases the
                                                                                              25


hazard of failure by 24%, whereas the same change increases failure by only 3% for high quality

ventures. The difference between “high” and “low” is -0.21, (standard error 0.1216; p-value

0.08).17 A one standard deviation increase in work experience increases cash-out hazard 7% for

low quality ventures, and 128% for high quality ventures. The differences is both large and

statistically significant (p-value = 0.00).




16
  Boot strapped standard error from 20 iterations.
17
  The standard errors are obtained by bootstrapping, based on 20 iterations..
                                                                                                                          26


                                                                                                        a
Table 5 –Competing hazard regressions of failure or cash-out by high and low quality
                                           Low Quality                    High Quality
                                      Failure        Cash-out        Failure        Cash-out
                                                ***                          **
Log(1+ work exp.)                        0.32          0.11            0.05            0.72 ***
                                                  (0.07)           (0.07)              (0.02)               (0.10)
                                                           ***                                                        *
Log (1+ patents)                                   -0.11             0.10               -0.03                 0.19
                                                  (0.03)           (0.06)              (0.11)               (0.12)
                                                           ***                                  ***
Log(1+parents IT TM)                               -0.28             0.15               -0.27                 0.14
                                                  (0.12)           (0.17)              (0.11)               (0.09)
                                                           ***              ***                                       ***
Related startups dummy                              0.73             0.80                0.21                 0.76
                                                  (0.04)           (0.01)              (0.21)               (0.19)
                                                           ***                                  ***
Unrelated startups dummy                           -0.39            -0.09               -0.44                 0.15
                                                  (0.09)           (0.10)              (0.04)               (0.22)
                                                                            ***                                       ***
Serial entrep. Dummy                                0.11             0.78                0.46                 1.08
                                                  (0.17)           (0.20)              (0.88)               (0.35)
                                                                                                **
Firm age                                           -0.03             0.09               -0.06                 0.12
                                                  (0.02)           (0.06)              (0.02)               (0.06)
                                                           **               **
Firm age2                                          -0.00            -0.00                0.01                -0.01
                                                  (0.00)           (0.00)              (0.01)               (0.00)
                                                           *                ***                 **
Industry age                                       -0.17            -0.31               -0.24                 0.28
                                                  (0.08)           (0.12)              (0.13)               (0.21)
                                                           ***              ***                                       ***
Industry age2                                      -0.04             0.03               -0.01                 0.03
                                                  (0.00)           (0.00)              (0.00)               (0.00)
                                                           ***              ***                 ***                   ***
Internet bust years                                -0.60            -0.88               -1.59                -0.82
                                                  (0.15)           (0.02)              (0.35)               (0.19)
                                                           **               ***                 *                     ***
Constant                                           -8.19            -8.04               -4.44                -5.07
                                                  (3.20)           (0.60)              (2.40)               (1.04)
N                                                  1076                                  922
No. of firms                                        132b                                 115
LL                                              -154.17                              -148.91
Location parameter 1                         -1.01, 2.75                          -1.46, 1.15

Location parameter 2                         -1.24, 0.03                          -0.78, 0.06

Variance                                      2.12, 0.03                            1.41, 0.19
Covariance                                       0.22                                  0.29
Probabilities                                 0.52, 0.48                            0.54, 0.46
Submarket dummies                                       7                                      6
       ***                  **                     *                      a
Notes: Significant at 1%. Significant at 5%. Significant at 10%. Standard errors in parentheses cluster
corrected by firm. The unit of observation is firm, year. b For 4 firms, that report initial scale, we cannot trace
founders and 35 firms do not report initial scale. All specifications 4 founder education dummies, and 3 founder
work history dummies. High quality = initial scale above average. Low quality = initial scale below average.
                                                                                                27


Robustness checks

A. Alternative measure of opportunity cost.

We replicated our results using the number of previous organizations the entrepreneur had

worked in, as a measure of opportunity cost (results shown below in tables 6A and 6B). Since

founders that have held many previous jobs are likely to have more alternatives they are also

likely to have high opportunity costs of entrepreneurship. However, it may also capture the

preference of entrepreneurs to move on from one job to another. Such entrepreneurs, contrary to

our assumption, could actually have been earning lower wages and may also have lower

opportunity costs of entrepreneurship. However, this measure is highly correlated with work

experience (coefficient of correlation = 0.64). Not surprisingly, we find that our principal

findings are unchanged (results shown in tables 6A and 6B).


Table 6A –Competing hazard regressions of failure or cash-out, number of jobs as alternative
measure of opportunity costa
                                                         Failure         Cash-out
                                                                   ***              **
              Log(1+ prev. jobs.)                          0.27              0.32
                                                         (0.05)            (0.15)
                                                                                    **
              Log (1+ patents)                            -0.12              0.21
                                                         (0.12)            (0.10)
                                                                   ***              *
              Log(1+parents TM)                           -0.13              0.16
                                                         (0.04)            (0.08)
                                                                   ***              ***
              Log (init. scale)                           -0.21              0.44
                                                         (0.02)            (0.11)
                                                                   ***              ***
              Related startups dummy                       0.50              0.85
                                                         (0.20)            (0.29)
                                                                   **
              Unrelated startups dummy                    -0.22              0.06
                                                         (0.12)            (0.32)
                                                                   ***              ***
              Serial dummy                                 0.63              0.81
                                                         (0.11)            (0.13)
                                                                   ***              ***
              Internet bust years                         -1.18             -0.81
                                                         (0.15)            (0.22)
                                                                   ***              ***
              Firm age                                    -0.13              0.20
                                                         (0.01)            (0.07)
                                                                   ***              *
              Firm age2                                    0.00             -0.00
                                                         (0.00)            (0.00)
                                                                   *
              Industry age                                -0.24             -0.20
                                                         (0.10)            (0.15)
                                                                                                                      28


Table 6A (cont.) –Competing hazard regressions of failure or cash-out, number of jobs as
alternative measure of opportunity costa
                                                                      Failure            Cash-out
                                2                                               ***
                  Industry age                                          -0.03                   0.01
                                                                       (0.00)                 (0.00)
                 Constant                                               -2.94 ***              -5.46 ***
                                                                       (0.15)                 (0.96)
                 N                                                      1998
                 No. of firms                                            247b
                 LL                                                -391.33
                 Location parameter 1                           -0.26, -0.10
                 Location parameter 2                            -0.07, 0.27
                 Variance                                        0.51, 0.17
                 Covariance                                         -0.30
                 Probabilities                                   0.22,  0.78
Notes: Significant at 1%. Significant at 5%. Significant at 10%. a Standard errors in parentheses cluster
       ***                   **                   *

corrected by firm. The unit of observation is firm, year. b For 4 firms, that report initial scale, we cannot trace
founders. All specifications include 7 submarket dummies, 4 founder education dummies, and 3 founder work
history dummies.
                                                                                                                           29


Table 6B –Competing hazard regressions of failure or cash-out by high and low quality, using
number of jobs as alternative measure of opportunity costa
                                                      “Low” quality                         “High” quality
                                                  Failure      Cash-out                Failure        Cash-out
                                                             ***             ***                  ***                  ***
Log(1+ prev. jobs.)                                  0.67             0.20                 0.17                0.51
                                                   (0.16)           (0.08)               (0.06)              (0.14)
                                                             ***                                                       **
Log (1+ patents)                                    -0.12             0.06                -0.12                0.15
                                                   (0.05)           (0.08)               (0.26)              (0.08)
                                                             ***                                  ***                  *
Log(1+parents IT TM)                                -0.38             0.25                -0.29                0.14
                                                   (0.17)           (0.18)               (0.14)              (0.08)
                                                             ***             ***                                       ***
Related startups dummy                               0.84             0.61                 0.20                0.61
                                                   (0.09)           (0.07)               (0.22)              (0.16)
                                                             ***                                  ***
Unrelated startups dummy                            -0.14            -0.06                -0.39                0.06
                                                   (0.06)           (0.14)               (0.05)              (0.14)
                                                                             ***                                       *
Serial entrep. dummy                                 0.54             0.84                 0.66                0.85
                                                   (0.68)           (0.25)               (1.12)              (0.45)
                                                                             *                    **                   *
Firm age                                            -0.01             0.06                -0.05                0.08
                                                   (0.02)           (0.03)               (0.02)              (0.05)
                                                             *               *
Firm age2                                           -0.00            -0.00                 0.01               -0.01
                                                     (0.00)          (0.00)               (0.01)              (0.00)
                                                             *                **                    *
Industry age                                          -0.18           -0.50                -0.23                0.29
                                                     (0.10)          (0.29)               (0.16)              (0.22)
Industry age2                                         -0.03 **         0.03 **             -0.01                0.02   ***

                                                     (0.00)          (0.01)               (0.00)              (0.00)
Internet bust years                                    0.90 ***       -0.83 ***            -1.29 ***           -0.82   ***

                                                     (0.16)          (0.17)               (0.23)              (0.19)
Constant                                              -7.90 **        -7.95 ***            -4.46 ***           -3.06   ***

                                                     (0.04)          (0.29)               (1.37)              (0.78)
N                                                     1076                                   922
No. of firms                                           132b                                  115
LL                                                 -166.31                              -158.22
Location parameter 1                           -1.15, 2.36                          -1.55, 1.12
Location parameter 2                           -1.34, 0.08                          -0.88, 0.13
Variance                                        2.64, 0.02                          1.54,  0.18
Covariance                                         0.29                                0.28
Probabilities                                   0.56, 0.44                          0.55, 0.45
Notes: ***Significant at 1%. ** Significant at 5%. * Significant at 10%. aStandard errors in parentheses cluster
corrected by firm. The unit of observation is firm, year. b For 4 firms, that report initial scale, we cannot trace
founders and 35 firms do not report initial scale. All specifications include 7 submarket dummies, 4 founder
education dummies, and 3 founder work history dummies.

B. Results excluding VC funded firms:

         Although we control the source of financing, VC funding firms may differ qualitatively

from others. Accordingly, we replicate our results that relate to cash-outs and failures using a

sample of 188 non-VC funded firms. The results shown in table 7 are similar to those in table
                                                                                                                 30


4A. Once again, entrepreneurs with high opportunity costs not only have higher failure hazards

but have higher cash-out rates as well. A standard deviation increase in work experience is

increases failure by about 18%, and cash-outs by 12%. Further, venture quality decreases failure

and increases cash-outs.
                                                                                                          a
Table 7 –Competing hazard regressions of failure or cash-out, non-VC funded firms only
                                                         Failure      Cash-out
                                                                  ***
                Log(1+ work exp.)                           0.25       0.18 ***
                                                                      (0.04)         (0.06)
                                                                               **             **
                    Log (1+ patents)                                   -0.09           0.14
                                                                      (0.11)         (0.06)
                                                                               ***            *
                    Log(1+parents TM)                                  -0.27           0.18
                                                                      (0.12)         (0.10)
                                                                               ***            ***
                    Log (init. scale)                                  -0.17           0.42
                                                                      (0.04)         (0.05)
                                                                               ***            ***
                    Related startups dummy                              0.56           0.31
                                                                      (0.32)         (0.13)
                    Unrelated startups dummy                           -0.08          -0.17
                                                                      (0.20)         (0.32)
                                                                               ***            ***
                    Serial dummy                                        0.64           1.05
                                                                      (0.12)         (0.42)
                                                                               *
                    ISM tenure                                         -0.03           0.09
                                                                      (0.02)         (0.06)
                                                                                              *
                    ISM tenure2                                         0.01          -0.01
                                                                          (0.01)        (0.00)
                    Internet bust years                                     -1.26 *** -1.19 ***
                                                                          (0.23)        (0.29)
                                                                                   *
                      Industry age                                          -0.25        -0.25 **
                                                                          (0.15)        (0.12)
                      Industry age2                                         -0.03 ***     0.01 **
                                                                          (0.00)        (0.00)
                                                                                   ***
                      Constant                                              -2.63        -5.36 ***
                                                                          (0.15)        (1.10)
                      N                                                     1087
                      No. of firms                                           151
                      LL                                               260.41
                      Location parameter 1                           -0.02, 0.08
                      Location parameter 2                           -0.11, 0.27
                      Variance                                       0.23, 0.62
                      Covariance                                        0.35
                      Probabilities                                  0.31, 0.60
Notes: ***Significant at 1%. ** Significant at 5%. * Significant at 10%. a Standard errors in parentheses, cluster
corrected by firm. The unit of observation is firm, year. All specifications include 7 submarket dummies, 4 founder
education dummies, and 3 founder work history dummies.

C. Nested multinomial logit
                                                                                                                      31


Our model implies a nested structure for the stochastic outcomes, with the first level being

survival or not, and conditional on survival, cash-out or success. As a robustness check, we

estimate a simple multinomial logit. The qualitative results, shown in table 8, are similar to those

reported above.
                                                                                               a
Table 8 –Nested logit specification, competing hazard of cash-out and failure
                                                        Failure                 Cash-out
                                                                ***                  ***
Log(1+ work exp.)                                       0.19                0.18
                                                       (0.03)             (0.03)
                                                                ***                  ***
Log (initial size)                                      -0.18               0.29
                                                       (0.06)             (0.06)
                                                                                     ***
Log (1+ patents)                                        -0.10               0.22
                                                       (0.08)             (0.07)
                                                                ***
Log(1+parents IT TM)                                    -0.19               0.06
                                                       (0.05)             (0.06)
                                                                *                    ***
Related startup                                         0.32                0.24
                                                       (0.10)             (0.10)
Unrelated startup                                       0.01                0.03
                                                       (0.08)             (0.13)
                                                                                     ***
Serial entrep.                                          -0.38               0.59
                                                       (0.16)             (0.21)
                                                                                     ***
Firm age                                                -0.03               0.24
                                                       (0.02)             (0.03)
             2                                                  *                    **
Firm age                                                0.00                0.01
                                                       (0.00)             (0.00)
                                                                ***
Industry age                                            -0.15              -0.23
                                                       (0.04)             (0.19)
                 2                                                                   *
Industry age                                            -0.00              -0.01
                                                       (0.00)             (0.00)
                                                                ***                  ***
Internet bust years                                     -1.90              -2.86
                                                       (0.46)             (0.29)
                                                                ***                  ***
Constant                                                -3.52              -3.80
                                                       (0.26)             (1.40)
LL                                                                    -354.35
Notes: Significant at 1%. Significant at 5%. Significant at 10%. aStandard errors cluster corrected by firm. The
       ***                   **                   *

unit of observation is firm, year. b For 4 firms, that report initial scale, we cannot trace founders and 35 firms do not
report initial scale. c 247 firms, 5994 obs. in all.d The first level nest is between survival and non survival. The
second level is conditional on non survival, and the alternatives are cash-out or failure. chi2(1) for IIA - 1.43;p-value
0.23, inclusive value is 0.11 (0.5). All specifications include 7 submarket dummies, 4 founder education dummies,
and 3 founder work history dummies.
                                                                                                    32


6   Discussion
      Our paper is motivated by a key characteristic of entrepreneurship common in technology

intensive industries, namely that entrepreneurial ventures are started with the expectation that

they have a high “upside” potential. The objective in founding a firm is often to have a sizable

initial public offering or be acquired by an established firm, so as to yield a significant financial

payoff to the entrepreneur (and other investors in the venture). Not all high-tech ventures share

this characteristic, and conversely, startups in other industries (Starbucks comes to mind) may

also be founded with the objective of being operated on a large scale. The operative point being

that survival of the startup is not the objective.

        It follow that the use of survival as a measure of performance, common in research in this

area, is problematic. The problematic nature of survival as a measure of performance is well

known to scholars. What is less well understood is that variations in survival may be

systematically related to entrepreneurial characteristics in ways that obscure the relationship

between entrepreneurial characteristics, strategy, and performance. Entrepreneurial opportunity

cost is a case in point. Whereas they raise the threshold for staying on, in our paper, they also

change the strategies of entrepreneurs. When the objective is to cash-out, we develop a simple

model in which striving for a cash-out is not just directly costly, but also raises the probability of

failure. High opportunity cost entrepreneurs put less value on surviving to try again, and hence,

care less about failure. We find that high opportunity cost entrepreneurs will invest more

aggressively, thereby increasing the chances of both cash-outs as well as failures. Although our

model is couched in terms of burn rates, the intuition is broader. Higher opportunity cost

entrepreneurs are in effect more impatient for success and willing to accept greater risks of

failure in return.
                                                                                                      33


       Our model can be extended to deal with other types of differences across entrepreneurs as

well. For instance, differences in time preference will yield similar results. All else held

constant, entrepreneurs who discount the future more heavily, perhaps because they are older,

will appear more impatient for success and more willing to tolerate failure. Similarly, although

we do not have measures of the degree of confidence or optimism for entrepreneurs, and thus do

not pursue this further, our model suggests that over-confident entrepreneurs will be willing to

accept greater risk of failure in return for greater chances of success.

       Our empirical results show that opportunity costs of entrepreneurship influences both

success and failures. Entrepreneurs with high opportunity cost of entrepreneurship are both more

likely to fail and more likely to succeed. Further, as predicted by our model, the impact of

opportunity cost is conditioned by the overall quality of the venture. For higher quality ventures,

the chances of success climb faster with opportunity cost than with lower quality ventures. But

the reverse is true for failure. The chances of failure rise less rapidly with opportunity cost for

higher quality ventures than for lower quality ventures.

       As we have noted earlier, our model is simple. It cannot do justice to the rich set of

strategies that entrepreneurs have. For instance, it ignores the interactions with investors, and

how their objectives are reflected in the startup’s strategies and objectives. Similarly our data are

from a single industry in the IT sector. Thus, we cannot claim generality. Instead, our

contribution is to show that understanding the implications of differences in entrepreneurial

opportunity cost is but one step in understanding the implications of differences in

entrepreneurial objectives for firm strategy and performance.
                                                                                             34


Reference:

Agarwal, R., and D. B. Audretsch. 2001. Does entry size matter? The impact of the life cycle and
       technology on firm survival. Journal of Industrial Economics: 21-43.
Agarwal, R., and M. Gort. 2002. Firm and product life cycles and firm survival. American
       Economic Review: 184-190.
Amit, R., E. Muller, and I. Cockburn. 1995. Opportunity costs and entrepreneurial activity.
       Journal of Business Venturing 10, no. 2: 95-106.
Audretsch, D. B. 1991. New-firm survival and the technological regime. The Review of
       Economics and Statistics: 441–450.
———. 1995. Innovation, growth and survival. International Journal of Industrial Organization
       13, no. 4: 441–457.
Audretsch, D. B, and T. Mahmood. 1994. The rate of hazard confronting new firms and plants in
       US manufacturing. Review of Industrial Organization 9, no. 1: 41–56.
Audretsch, D. B., and T. Mahmood. 1995a. New firm survival: New results using a hazard
       function. The Review of Economics and Statistics: 97-103.
———. 1995b. New firm survival: New results using a hazard function. The Review of
       Economics and Statistics: 97-103.
Bates, T. 2005. Analysis of young, small firms that have closed: delineating successful from
       unsuccessful closures. Journal of Business Venturing 20, no. 3: 343–358.
Bhide, A., Graduate School of Business Administration, Division of Research, and Harvard
       University. 2000. The origin and evolution of new businesses. Oxford University Press
       New York.
Boden, R. J, and A. R Nucci. 2000. On the survival prospects of men's and women's new
       business ventures. Journal of Business Venturing 15, no. 4: 347–362.
Boyd, Donald, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff. 2005. Explaining the
       Short Careers of High-Achieving Teachers in Schools with Low-Performing Students.
       The American Economic Review 95, no. 2 (May): 166-171. doi:10.2307/4132810.
Cabral, L. M.B, and J. Mata. 2003. On the evolution of the firm size distribution: facts and
       theory. American Economic Review 93, no. 4: 1075–1090.
Camerer, Colin, and Dan Lovallo. 1999. Overconfidence and Excess Entry: An Experimental
       Approach. The American Economic Review 89, no. 1 (March): 306-318.
       doi:10.2307/116990.
Cassar, G. 2006. Entrepreneur opportunity costs and intended venture growth. Journal of
       Business Venturing 21, no. 5: 610–632.
Colombo, M. G, M. Delmastro, and L. Grilli. 2004. Entrepreneurs'human capital and the start-up
       size of new technology-based firms. International Journal of Industrial Organization 22,
       no. 8-9: 1183–1211.
Cooper, A. C, C. Y Woo, and W. C Dunkelberg. 1988. Entrepreneurs’perceived chances for
       success. Journal of Business Venturing 3, no. 2: 97–108.
De Meza, D., and C. Southey. 1996. The borrower's curse: Optimism, finance and
       entrepreneurship. The Economic Journal: 375–386.
Dunne, T., M. J. Roberts, and L. Samuelson. 1988a. Patterns of firm entry and exit in US
       manufacturing industries. The RAND Journal of Economics: 495-515.
———. 1989. The growth and failure of US manufacturing plants. The Quarterly Journal of
       Economics: 671-698.
                                                                                               35


Evans, D. S. 1987a. Tests of alternative theories of firm growth. The Journal of Political
        Economy: 657–674.
———. 1987b. The relationship between firm growth, size, and age: estimates for 100
        manufacturing industries. The Journal of Industrial Economics: 567–581.
———. 1987c. The relationship between firm growth, size, and age: estimates for 100
        manufacturing industries. The Journal of Industrial Economics: 567-581.
Fraser, S., and F. J Greene. 2006. The effects of experience on entrepreneurial optimism and
        uncertainty. Economica 73, no. 290: 169–192.
Gimeno, J., T. B. Folta, A. C. Cooper, and C. Y. Woo. 1997. Survival of the Fittest?
        Entrepreneurial Human Capital and the Persistence of Underperforming Firms.
        Administrative Science Quarterly 42, no. 4.
Hamilton, B. H. 2000. Does entrepreneurship pay? An empirical analysis of the returns to self-
        employment. Journal of Political Economy 108, no. 3: 604-631.
Hayward, M. L.A, A. Shepherd, and D. Griffin. 2006. A hubris theory of entrepreneurship.
        Management Science 52, no. 2: 160.
Heckman, J., and B. Singer. 1984. A method for minimizing the impact of distributional
        assumptions in econometric models for duration data. Econometrica: Journal of the
        Econometric Society: 271-320.
Hmieleski, K. M, and R. A Baron. 2009. Entrepreneurs'Optimism and New Venture
        Performance: A Social Cognitive Perspective. The Academy of Management Journal
        (AMJ) 52, no. 3: 473–488.
King, A. A., and C. L. Tucci. 2002. Incumbent entry into new market niches: the role of
        experience and managerial choice in the creation of dynamic capabilities. Management
        Science: 171-186.
Klepper, S. 2002. The capabilities of new firms and the evolution of the US automobile industry.
        Ind Corp Change 11, no. 4 (August 1): 645-666. doi:10.1093/icc/11.4.645.
Klepper, S., and S. Sleeper. 2005. Entry by spinoffs. Management Science 51, no. 8: 1291.
Landier, A., and D. Thesmar. 2008. Financial contracting with optimistic entrepreneurs. Review
        of Financial Studies.
Martin, X., and W. Mitchell. 1998. The influence of local search and performance heuristics on
        new design introduction in a new product market. Research Policy 26, no. 7-8 (April):
        753-771. doi:10.1016/S0048-7333(97)00037-1.
Mata, J., and P. Portugal. 1994. Life duration of new firms. The Journal of Industrial Economics:
        227-245.
Mata, J., P. Portugal, and P. Guimaraes. 1995. The survival of new plants: start-up conditions
        and post-entry evolution. International Journal of Industrial Organization 13, no. 4: 459–
        481.
Moskowitz, T. J., and A. Vissing-Jorgenson. 2002. The Private Equity Puzzle. American
        Economic Review 92, no. 4: 745-778.
Phillips, B. D, and B. A Kirchhoff. 1989. Formation, growth and survival; small firm dynamics
        in the US economy. Small Business Economics 1, no. 1: 65–74.
Shane, S., and S. Venkataraman. 2000. The promise of entrepreneurship as a field of research.
        Academy of Management Review 25, no. 1: 217-226.
Thompson, Peter. 2005. Selection and Firm Survival: Evidence from the Shipbuilding Industry,
        1825–1914. Review of Economics and Statistics 87, no. 1 (February 1): 26-36.
        doi:10.1162/0034653053327531.
                                                                                        36


     Proof of propositions:

1. We first show that the derivation of V. Recall that we have two equations.


                              and             . Substituting for V in the first order


     condition, we have


     The only feasible solution                     where




     Using this value of V,

2. We now show the conditions for 0≤m*≤1.


        >0 implies                                   and


             implies

3. We now show the condition that ensures V>0.

     If V>0, we need                         and

4. We now show that

                        . Since,       ,


5.


6. We now show that


                       . Since
                                                                                             37


7. We now show that the effect of P on Ω is non-monotonic.

                             . Since




   Rearranging terms,


            if                             or when                            and

   otherwise. Thus for high values of P, Ω is decreasing in P, while for high values of P, it is

   increasing in P.

   Note that since               , it is             .


8. We now show that

   First,




   Since




9. We now show that


                                  . Also


   This implies that                       or


   Note that                      and
                                                 38



      With                               ,   =


      Since A<1 and β≤1. Since       ,

10.


      Recall that                .




      Since                      ,


11.
