                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE IMPACT OF NO CHILD LEFT BEHIND ON STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT

                                             Thomas Dee
                                             Brian Jacob

                                        Working Paper 15531
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15531


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2009




We would like to thank Rob Garlick, Elias Walsh, Nathaniel Schwartz and Erica Johnson for their
research assistance. We would also like to thank Kerwin Charles, Robert Kaestner, Ioana Marinescu
and seminar participants at the Harris School of Public Policy and at the NCLB: Emerging Findings
Research Conference for helpful comments. An earlier version of this work was also presented by
Jacob as the David N. Kershaw Lecture at the Annual meeting of the Association of Public Policy
and Management (November 2008). All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Thomas Dee and Brian Jacob. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Impact of No Child Left Behind on Student Achievement
Thomas Dee and Brian Jacob
NBER Working Paper No. 15531
November 2009
JEL No. H52,I20,I21,I28,J01,J08,J18

                                                ABSTRACT

The No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act compelled states to design school-accountability systems based
on annual student assessments. The effect of this Federal legislation on the distribution of student achievement
is a highly controversial but centrally important question. This study presents evidence on whether
NCLB has influenced student achievement based on an analysis of state-level panel data on student
test scores from the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP). The impact of NCLB is
identified using a comparative interrupted time series analysis that relies on comparisons of the test-score
changes across states that already had school-accountability policies in place prior to NCLB and those
that did not. Our results indicate that NCLB generated statistically significant increases in the average
math performance of 4th graders (effect size = 0.22 by 2007) as well as improvements at the lower
and top percentiles. There is also evidence of improvements in 8th grade math achievement, particularly
among traditionally low-achieving groups and at the lower percentiles. However, we find no evidence
that NCLB increased reading achievement in either 4th or 8th grade.


Thomas Dee
Department of Economics
Swarthmore College
Swarthmore, PA 19081
and NBER
dee@swarthmore.edu

Brian Jacob
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
bajacob@umich.edu
1. Introduction

       The No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act is arguably the most far-reaching education-

policy initiative in the United States over the last four decades. This legislation, which was

signed by President Bush in January of 2002, dramatically expanded Federal influence over the

nation’s more than 90,000 public schools. The hallmark features of this legislation compelled

states to conduct annual student assessments linked to state standards, to identify schools that are

failing to make “adequate yearly progress” (AYP) towards the stated goal of having all students

achieve proficiency in reading and math by 2013-14 and to institute sanctions and rewards based

on each school’s AYP status. A fundamental motivation for this reform is the notion that

publicizing detailed information on school-specific performance and linking that “high-stakes”

test performance to the possibility of meaningful sanctions can improve the focus and

productivity of public schools.

       On the other hand, critics charge that test-based school accountability has several

unintended, negative consequences for the broad cognitive development of children (e.g.,

Nichols and Berliner 2007). They argue that NCLB and other test-based accountability policies

cause educators to shift resources away from important but non-tested subjects (e.g., social

studies, art, music) and to focus instruction in math and reading on the relatively narrow set of

topics that are most heavily represented on the high-stakes tests (Rothstein et al. 2008, Koretz

2008). In the extreme, some suggest that high-stakes testing may lead school personnel to

intentionally manipulate student test scores (Jacob and Levitt 2003).

       Though the reauthorization of NCLB is currently under consideration, the empirical

evidence on the impact of NCLB on student achievement is, to date, extremely limited. There

have been a number of studies of NCLB that analyze national achievement trends. Interestingly,




                                                 2
however, different studies in this tradition come to starkly different conclusions (see, for

example, Fuller, Wright, Gesicki, and Kang 2007; Center on Education Policy 2008). A likely

explanation for these divergent results is that time series studies of NCLB lack a credible control

group that allows them to distinguish the effects of the Federal reforms from the myriad of other

factors taking place over the past 8 years. On the other hand, studies of school-level

performance during the post-NCLB era often focus on what one might consider the “partial

effects” of NCLB (e.g., comparing achievement gains across schools that make or miss AYP)

and frequently rely on “high-stakes” state assessment scores that may be susceptible to “teaching

to the test.”

         In this paper, we present new evidence on whether NCLB influenced student

achievement using state-level panel data on student test scores from the National Assessment of

Educational Progress (NAEP). This study identifies the impact of NCLB using a comparative

interrupted time series design that relies on comparisons of test-score changes across states that

already had school-accountability policies similar to NCLB in place prior to the implementation

of NCLB and those that did not. We consider not only average effects, but look at effects

separately by race, gender and free-lunch eligibility and at effects at various points on the

achievement distribution.

        This study builds on the existing literature in at least three critical ways. First, by using

state-year NAEP data instead of state or city-specific data, this study relies on consistent

measures of student achievement that are more nationally representative and that span the

periods both before and well after the implementation of NCLB. Second, by relying on the

“low-stakes” NAEP data rather than the “high-stakes” data from state assessments, the results we

present should be comparatively immune to concerns about whether policy-driven changes in




                                                   3
achievement merely reflect “teaching to the test” rather than broader gains in cognitive

performance. Third, the panel-based research design we use provides a credible way to

distinguish the impact of NCLB from other social, economic and educational changes that were

taking place over the same time period.

       We find that NCLB generated large and statistically significant increases in the math

achievement of 4th graders (effect size = 0.22 by 2007) and that these gains were concentrated

among white and Hispanic students, among students who were eligible for subsidized lunch, and

among students at all levels of performance. We find more moderate positive effects in 8th grade

math achievement. These effects are concentrated at lower achievement levels and among

students who were eligible for subsidized lunch. In contrast, our results suggest that NCLB had

no impact on reading achievement among either 4th or 8th graders.

       The mixed results presented here pose difficult but important questions for policymakers

questioning whether to “end” or “mend” NCLB. The evidence of substantial and almost

universal gains in math is undoubtedly good news for advocates of NCLB and school

accountability. On the other hand, the lack of any effect in reading, and the fact that NCLB

appears to have generated only modestly larger impacts among disadvantaged subgroups in math

(and thus only made minimal headway in closing achievement gaps), suggests that, to date, the

impact of NCLB has fallen short of its ambitious “moon-shot rhetoric” (Hess and Petrilli 2009).

       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the literature

on prior school-accountability policies and NCLB and situates the contributions of this study

within that literature. Sections 3 and 4 discuss the methods and data used in this study. Section 5

summarizes the key results and robustness checks. Section 6 concludes with suggestions for

further research.




                                                 4
2. NCLB and School Accountability

         The NCLB legislation was actually a reauthorization of the historic Elementary and

Secondary Education Act (ESEA), the central Federal legislation relevant to K-12 schooling. The

ESEA, which was first enacted in 1965 along with other “Great Society” initiatives and

previously reauthorized in 1994, introduced Title I, the Federal government’s signature program

for targeting financial assistance to schools and districts serving high concentrations of

economically disadvantaged students. NCLB dramatically expanded the scope and scale of this

Federal legislation by requiring that states introduce school-accountability systems that applied

to all public schools and students in the state. In particular, NCLB requires annual testing of

public-school students in reading and mathematics in grades 3 through 8 (and at least once in

grades 10-12) and that states rate schools, both as a whole and for key subgroups, with regard to

whether they are making “adequate yearly progress” (AYP) towards their state’s proficiency

goals.

         NCLB requires that states introduce “sanctions and rewards” relevant to every school and

based on their AYP status. However, NCLB also mandates explicit and increasingly severe

sanctions for persistently low-performing schools that receive Title I aid (e.g., public school

choice, staff replacement, and school restructuring). According to data from the Schools and

Staffing Survey, 54.4 percent of public schools participated in Title I services during the 2003-04

school year. However, it should be noted that some states applied these explicit sanctions to

schools not receiving Title I assistance as well. For example, 24 states introduced accountability

systems that threatened all low-performing schools with reconstitution, regardless of whether

they received Title I assistance (Olson 2004).




                                                 5
2.1 Theoretical Underpinnings of School Accountability

       A basic perception that has motivated the widespread adoption of school-accountability

policies like NCLB is that the system of public elementary and secondary schooling in the

United States is “fragmented and incoherent” (e.g., Ladd 2007). In particular, proponents of

school-accountability reforms argue that too many schools, particularly those serving the most

at-risk students, have been insufficiently focused on their core performance objectives and that

this organizational slack reflected the weak incentives and lack of accountability that existed

among teachers and school administrators. For example, Hanushek and Raymond (2001) write

that accountability policies are “premised on an assumption that a focus on student outcomes will

lead to behavioral changes by students, teachers, and schools to align with the performance goals

of the system” and that “explicit incentives… will lead to innovation, efficiency, and fixes to any

observed performance problems.”

       The theoretical framework implicitly suggested by this characterization of public schools

is a principal-agent model. The interests of parents and voters are viewed as imperfectly aligned

with those of teachers and school administrators. Furthermore, parents and voters cannot easily

monitor or evaluate the input decisions made by these agents. The performance-based sanctions

and rewards that characterize accountability policies are effectively output-based incentives that

can be understood as a potential policy response to this agency problem. Similarly, some of the

provisions in NCLB with regard to teacher qualifications can be construed as an “agent

selection” approach to a principal-agent problem.

       The principal-agent lens is also useful for understanding criticisms of accountability-

based reforms. The assumption that teachers and school administrators have misaligned self-




                                                 6
interest implies that they may respond to accountability policies in unintentionally narrow or

even counterproductive ways. For example, in the presence of a high-stakes performance

threshold, schools may reallocate instructional effort away from high and low-performing

students and towards the “bubble kids” who are most likely, with additional attention, to meet

the proficiency standard (e.g., Neal and Schanzenbach, in press). Similarly, concerns about

“teaching to the test” reflect the view that schools will refocus their instructional effort on the

potentially narrow cognitive skills targeted by their high-stakes state assessment at the expense

of broader and more genuine improvements in cognitive achievement. Schools may also

reallocate instructional effort away from academic subjects that are not tested or even attempt to

shape the test-taking population in advantageous ways.

       Our empirical analysis of NCLB provides evidence on whether this reform generated its

conjectured benefits as well as the hypothesized deleterious consequences. In particular, by

focusing on low-stakes NAEP scores rather than high-stakes state assessments, our analysis can

circumvent concerns about the construct validity of state assessment scores. Furthermore, in

addition to focusing on average test scores in subjects targeted by NCLB (i.e., mathematics and

reading), we also focus on NCLB impacts at different points in the test-score distributions, on

whether it influenced the exclusion of students from testing, and on its effects on performance in

other subjects.



2.2 Research on Pre-NCLB Accountability Reforms Adopted by States

       School-accountability reforms similar to those brought about by NCLB were adopted in a

number of states during the 1990s. Several research studies have evaluated the achievement

consequences of these reforms. Because of the similarities between the NCLB and aspects of




                                                  7
these pre-NCLB accountability systems, this body of research provides a useful backdrop against

which to consider the potential achievement impacts of NCLB. In a recent review of this diverse

evaluation literature, Figlio and Ladd (2008) suggest that three studies (Carnoy and Loeb 2002,

Jacob 2005, and Hanushek and Raymond 2005) are the “most methodologically sound” (Ladd

2007).

         The study by Carnoy and Loeb (2002), which was based on state-level achievement data

from the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP), found that the within-state

growth in math performance between 1996 and 2000 was larger in states with higher values on

an accountability index, particularly for Black and Hispanic students in 8th grade.1 Similarly,

Jacob (2005) found that, following the introduction of an accountability policy, math and reading

achievement increased in Chicago Public Schools, relative both to the prior trends and relative to

the contemporaneous changes in other large urban districts in the region. However, Jacob (2005)

also found that, for younger students, there were not similar gains on a state-administered, low-

stakes exam and that teachers responded strategically to accountability pressures (e.g., increasing

special-education placements).

         Hanushek and Raymond (2005) evaluated the impact of school-accountability policies on

state-level NAEP math and reading achievement measured by the difference between the

performance of a state’s 8th graders and that of 4th graders in the same state four years earlier.

This gain-score approach applied to the NAEP data implied that there were two cohorts of state-

level observations in both math (1992-1996 and 1996-2000) and reading (1994-1998 and 1998-

2002). Hanushek and Raymond (2005) classified state accountability policies as either “report-

card accountability” or “consequential accountability.” Report-card states provided a public

1
 The accountability index constructed by Carnoy and Loeb (2002) ranged from 1 to 5 and combined information on
whether a state required student testing and performance reporting to the state, whether the state imposed sanctions
or rewards and whether the state required students to pass an exit exam to graduate from high school.


                                                         8
report of school-level test performance. States with consequential accountability both publicized

school-level performance and could attach consequences to that performance. The types of

potential consequences states could implement were diverse. However, virtually all of the

accountability systems in consequential-accountability states included key elements of the

school-accountability provisions in NCLB (e.g., identifying failing schools, replacing a principal,

allowing students to enroll elsewhere, and the takeover, closure, or reconstitution of a school).

Hanushek and Raymond (2005) note that “all states are now effectively consequential

accountability states (at least as soon as they phase in NCLB).”

       Hanushek and Raymond (2005) find that the introduction of consequential accountability

within a state was associated with statistically significant increases in the gain-score measures.

The achievement gains implied by consequential accountability were particularly large for

Hispanic students and, to a lesser extent, White students. However, the estimated effects of

consequential accountability for the gains scores of Black students were statistically insignificant

as were the estimated effects of report-card accountability. The authors argue that these

achievement results provide support for the controversial school-accountability provisions in

NCLB because those provisions were so similar to the consequential-accountability policies that

had been adopted in some states.



2.3 Analyses of National Achievement Trends

       The broad interest in understanding whether NCLB has influenced the distribution of

student achievement, both overall and for key subgroups, has motivated careful scrutiny of the

most recent trend data. For example, in a report commissioned by the U.S. Department of

Education’s Institute of Education Sciences (IES), Stullich, Eisner, McCrary and Roney (2006)




                                                 9
note that achievement trends on both state assessments and the NAEP are “positive overall and

for key subgroups” through 2005. Similarly, using more recent data, a report by the Center on

Education Policy (2008) concludes reading and math achievement measures based on state

assessments have increased in most states since 2002 and that there have been smaller but similar

patterns in NAEP scores. Both reports were careful to stress that these national gains are not

necessarily attributable to the effects of NCLB. However, a press release from the U.S.

Department of Education (2006) pointed to the improved NAEP scores, particularly for the

earlier grades where NCLB was targeted, as evidence that NCLB is “working.”

       Other studies have taken a less sanguine view of these achievement gains. For example,

Fuller, Wright, Gesicki, and Kang (2007) are sharply critical of relying on trends in state

assessments, arguing that they are misleading because states adjust their assessment systems over

time. They also document a growing disparity between student performance on state assessments

and the NAEP since the introduction of NCLB and conclude that “it is important to focus on the

historical patterns informed by the NAEP.” Using NAEP data on fourth graders, they conclude

that the growth in student achievement has actually become flatter since the introduction of

NCLB. Similarly, an analysis of NAEP trends by Lee (2006) concludes that reading achievement

is flat over the NCLB period while the gains in math performance simply tracked the trends that

existed prior to NCLB.



2.4 Research on NCLB in Specific States and/or Districts

       Several more recent studies have directly assessed the achievement consequences of

NCLB through analyses of cross-sectional and panel data. Most of these studies have focused on

the distributional consequences of NCLB within particular cities and states and using data that




                                                10
are exclusively from the post-NCLB period. For example, Neal and Schanzenbach (in press)

present evidence that, following the introduction of NCLB in Illinois, the performance of

Chicago school students near the proficiency threshold (i.e., those in the middle of the

distribution) improved while the performance of those at the bottom of the distribution of was

the same or lower. Similarly, using data from the state of Washington, Krieg (2008) finds that

the performance of students in the tails of the distribution is lower when their school faces the

possibility of NCLB sanctions. However, in a study based on data from seven states over four

years, Ballou and Springer (2008) conclude that NCLB generally increased performance on a

low-stakes test, particularly for lower-performing students. Their research design leveraged the

fact that the phased implementation of NCLB meant that some grade-year combinations mattered

for calculating AYP while others did not.

         An earlier study by Lee (2006) evaluated the achievement effects using state-year panel

data and a research design similar to that used in this study. Specifically, the study by Lee (2006)

relied partly on comparing the pre/post changes in states that had “strong” accountability to the

contemporaneous changes in states that did not. Lee (2006) concluded that NCLB did not have

any achievement effects. However, these inferences might be underpowered both because the

study could only use the NAEP data through 2005 and because it failed to exploit the precision

gains associated with conditioning on state fixed effects.2 Furthermore, the definition of

“strong” accountability used by Lee (2006) was based on a study by Lee and Wong (2004) and

seems overly narrow in this context because it fails to identify multiple states that actually had

NCLB-like consequential-accountability polices (e.g., column (5) of Table 2). Furthermore, this

2
 In fact, like our study, Lee (2006, Table C-7) finds evidence for a positive NCLB effect on math scores among 4th
graders. Lee (2006, page 44) dismisses these results because they become statistically insignificant after
conditioning on additional covariates. However, the estimated NCLB effect actually increases by roughly 20 percent
after conditioning on these controls so the insignificance of this estimate reflects a substantial loss of precision in the
saturated specification.


                                                            11
taxonomy may also be subject to measurement error because it relies on aspects of accountability

(e.g., student-focused accountability) that are not actually a part of NCLB.



3. Research Design

        This section describes the empirical strategy we pursue to assess the impact of NCLB on

student performance. The national time trends in student achievement are a natural point of

departure for considering the impact of NCLB. Figure 1 presents national trends on the Main

NAEP from 1990 to 2007. The dashed horizontal line in 2002 visually identifies the point at

which NCLB was implemented. The trends shown in these figures suggest that NCLB may have

had some positive effects on 4th grade math achievement but, with a few exceptions, provide

little suggestion of impacts in the other three grade-subject combinations.3

        Given the myriad of other social, economic and educational factors occurring over this

time period, however, it is not clear that one should draw strong causal inferences from these

data. For example, the nation was suffering from a recession around the time NCLB was

implemented, which may have been expected to reduce student achievement in the absence of

other forces. Conversely, there were a number of national education policies or programs that

may have influenced student achievement at this time. For example, the National Council of

Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) adopted new standards in 2000, which likely shifted the

content of math instruction in many elementary classrooms over this period (NCTM website).

Similarly, the Reading Excellence Act of 1999 (the precursor to the Reading First program

within NCLB) provided more than $750 million to states and LEAs to adopt scientifically-based

instructional practices and professional development activities (Moss 2006).


3
 One exception is a noticeable improvement in 8th grade math scores among African-Americans. Data from the
Long-Term Trend NAEP tell a similar story for 9- and 13-year olds in math and reading.


                                                      12
3.1 Comparative Interrupted Time Series

       To circumvent these concerns, we rely on a comparative interrupted time series (CITS)

approach (also known as an interrupted time series with a non-equivalent comparison group).

Specifically, we compare the deviation from prior achievement trends among a “treatment

group” that was subject to NCLB with the analogous deviation for a “comparison group” that

was arguably less affected by NCLB, if at all. The intuition is that the deviation from trend in

the comparison group will reflect other hard-to-observe factors (e.g., the economy, other

education reforms) that may have influenced student achievement in the absence of NCLB. This

strategy has a long tradition in education research (see, for example, the discussion in Bloom

1999 and Shadish et al. 2002), and has been used recently to evaluate reforms as diverse as

Accelerated Schools (Bloom et al. 2001) and pre-NCLB accountability policies (Jacob 2005).

       One interesting and potentially important question is exactly which academic year we

should consider as the first one in which NCLB may have influenced school performance. NCLB

secured final Congressional approval (December 18, 2001) and was signed by President Bush

(January 8, 2002) in the middle of the 2001-02 academic year. Our preferred approach is to view

NCLB as first in effect during the next academic year (i.e., AY 2002-03). NCLB is often

characterized as having been implemented during this year, in part because states were required

to use testing outcomes from the prior 2001-02 year as the starting point for determining whether

a school was making adequate yearly progress (AYP) and to submit draft “workbooks” that

described how school AYP status would be determined (Palmer and Coleman 2003, Olson

2002). Furthermore, state data collected during the 2002-03 year also suggest that states had

moved quickly to adapt to NCLB’s new testing requirements and to introduce school-level




                                                13
performance reporting (Olson 2002). Interestingly, we also find evidence that this conventional

definition of NCLB’s start date is supported by how changes in measures of student achievement

during this period corresponded with prior trends.

        However, one could reasonably conjecture that the discussion and anticipation

surrounding the adoption of NCLB would have influenced school performance during the 2001-

02 school year. In particular, both major presidential candidates in the 2000 election had

signaled support for school-based accountability and President Bush sent a 26-page legislative

blueprint titled “No Child Left Behind” to Capitol Hill within days of taking office in January of

2001 (Hess and Petrilli 2006). Alternatively, it could also be argued that NCLB should not be

viewed as in effect until the 2003-04 academic year when new state accountability systems were

more fully implemented as well as more informed by guidance from and negotiations with the

U.S. Department of Education (Olson 2002, 2003). The flexible functional form of the CITS

specification we describe below actually allows for the kinds of dynamically heterogeneous

effects that this sort of phased implementation might imply. Nonetheless, as a check on the

robustness of our impact estimates, we also report the results of specifications where NCLB is

considered first in effect during the 2001-02 school year as well as during the 2003-04 school

year.

        As discussed in more detail below, there are several other important threats to causal

inference in a CITS design. One such example involves the endogenous student mobility, as

might occur if NCLB caused families to leave or return to the public schools. If this NCLB-

induced mobility were random with respect to characteristics influencing achievement, it would

not be a concern. On the other hand, if the most motivated parents pulled their children from

public schools at the onset of NCLB, the resulting compositional change may have decreased




                                                14
student achievement in the absence of any changes to the schools themselves. A similar concern

arises if NCLB induced states to selectively change the composition of students tested for the

NAEP (e.g., increasing exclusion rates). In the analysis that follows, we take particular care to

examine a variety of such potential concerns, and find no evidence that our findings are biased.

        However, it is worth noting that all NCLB-induced changes do not necessarily invalidate

our research design. For example, states may have responded to NCLB by increasing funding

for schools, or instituting kindergarten testing for early identification of at-risk students. In this

case, one could still interpret the estimates presented below as the causal, reduced-form effect of

NCLB, where funding and early identification are viewed as mediating mechanisms through

which the policy operated. We are exploring a variety of channels through which NLCB may

have influenced student achievement in ongoing work.

        The central challenge for any CITS design is to identify a plausible comparison group

that was unaffected by the intervention under study. In the case of NCLB, this is particularly

difficult. As noted earlier, the policy was signed into law on January 8, 2002 and implemented

nationwide during the 2002-03 school year. It simultaneously applied to all public schools in the

United States but with particularly explicit sanctions for schools receiving Federal Title I funds.

        One seemingly compelling comparison group is the set of Catholic schools in the U.S.

(Jacob 2008). Though students in Catholic schools are eligible to participate in a number of

major programs under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), the NCLB

reauthorization of ESEA left these prior provisions “largely intact” (U.S. Department of

Education 2007), implying that the NCLB reforms were comparatively irrelevant for Catholic

schools. However, just two days prior to President Bush’s signing of the NCLB legislation, the

Boston Globe (Carroll et al. 2002) began publishing the results of investigative reporting, which




                                                  15
indicated that the leadership of the Boston Archdiocese had continually reassigned priests known

to have sexually abused children and allowed those priests to continue working with children.

This scandal received extensive, nationwide coverage and ultimately led to similar revelations in

Catholic dioceses throughout the United States. In Appendix A, we present evidence that the

press coverage of this broad scandal coincided with large drop in Catholic-school enrollments.

Because the onset of NCLB was closely aligned with this large attrition from Catholic schools

(and its other unobservable effects on the quality of Catholic schools), we conclude that Catholic

schools do not constitute a convincing control group for evaluating the achievement

consequences of NCLB.



3.2 Consequential Accountability Prior to NCLB

       Instead, the research design emphasized in this study relies on comparing trends in

student achievement across states that had varying degrees of experience, prior to NCLB, with

state school-accountability policies similar to those brought about by NCLB. The intuition

behind this approach is that NCLB represented less of a “treatment” in states that had already

adopted NCLB-like school accountability policies prior to 2002. To the extent that NCLB-like

accountability had either positive or negative effects on measured student achievement, we

would expect to observe those effects most distinctly in states that had not previously introduced

similar policies.

       Here we are relying on the assertion that pre-NCLB school accountability policies were

comparable to NCLB – that is, the two types of accountability regimes are similar in the most

relevant respects. The fact that some state officials forcefully criticized NCLB, arguing that it

“needlessly duplicates” their prior accountability systems (Dobbs 2005), suggests the functional




                                                16
equivalence of earlier state consequential-accountability policies and state policies under NCLB.

To ensure that this is the case, we categorize states according to whether the features of their pre-

NCLB accountability policies closely resemble the key aspects of NCLB.

         While we relied on a number of different sources to categorize pre-NCLB accountability

policies across states (including studies of such policies by Carnoy and Loeb 2002, Lee and

Wong 2004, and Hanushek and Raymond 2005), the taxonomy developed by Hanushek and

Raymond (2005) is particularly salient in this context because it most closely tracked the key

school-accountability features of NCLB. The authors identified 25 states that implemented

“consequential accountability” prior to NCLB by coupling the public reporting of data on school

performance to the possibility of meaningful sanctions based on that performance.4 We

reviewed their coding with information from a variety of sources including the Quality Counts

series put out by Education Week (1999), the state-specific “Accountability and Assessment

Profiles” assembled by the Consortium for Policy Research in Education (Goertz and Duffy

2001), annual surveys on state assessment programs fielded by the Council of Chief State School

Officers (CCSSO), information from state Department of Education web sites, Lexis-Nexis

searches of state and local newspapers, and conversations with academics and state officials in

several states.

         Our review generally confirmed their coding for the existence and timing of these state

“consequential accountability” policies.5 Furthermore, our review indicated that these pre-

NCLB school-accountability systems closely resembled the state policies subsequently shaped

by NCLB in that they both reported school performance and attached the possibility of sanctions

4
  States that publicize information on school performance without attaching sanctions to that performance are
categorized as having “report card” accountability (Hanushek and Raymond 2005).
5
  However, there are also a few notable distinctions between our classification of consequential-accountability states
(Table 2) and the coding reported by Hanushek and Raymond (2005). These discrepancies are discussed more fully
in Appendix C.


                                                         17
to school performance (e.g., ratings, takeover, closure, reconstitution, replacing the principal

and/or allowing student mobility). The strong similarities between the pre-NCLB consequential-

accountability policies and post-NCLB state policies suggest that states with prior school

accountability policies may be a good comparison group.

       We also assessed, in a more data-driven manner, whether NCLB was effectively

irrelevant in consequential-accountability states. We relied on data from several recent studies

(Braun et al. 2008, NCES 2007, Bandeira de Mello et al. 2009) that have converted the test-

based proficiency thresholds in state assessment systems to a common metric benchmarked to

the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP). These studies calculate the NAEP

scale score that corresponds to the proficiency standard in a particular state, year, grade and

subject. In 2007, for example, the state proficiency standard in 4th grade mathematics in

Alabama corresponded to a NAEP scale score of 205 whereas the identical proficiency standard

in Arkansas was equivalent to a NAEP scale score of 229. The difference of 24 NAEP scale

score points in the proficiency levels across these states suggests that Arkansas had substantially

more rigorous standards at the time.

       Using these NAEP equivalence measures to compare the rigor of proficiency standards

across states, we found that the proficiency thresholds during the NCLB era were, on average,

similar across states with and without prior consequential accountability. Given the recent

evidence that some states lowered proficiency standards since the introduction of NCLB

(Bandeira de Mello et al. 2009), we also sought to examine changes in proficiency standards for

states with and without prior accountability. Unfortunately, it is difficult to do this in a

comprehensive manner because NAEP equivalence measures prior to NCLB are available for

only a limited number of states. In fact, these equivalence measures are available for only




                                                  18
slightly more than half of states in 2003 and 2005.6 Focusing on the states in our analysis

sample for which NAEP equivalence measures were available post-NCLB (roughly half of our

sample), we find that states that had pre-NCLB accountability policies did not lower proficiency

standards from 2003 to 2007. In contrast, we find that states with no prior school accountability

policies prior to NCLB did lower proficiency standards from 2003 to 2007.7

         Overall, these results suggest that the state-level policies catalyzed by NCLB were quite

similar to the first generation of state-level consequential-accountability policies. Furthermore,

the evidence that pre-NCLB school-accountability policies closely resembled NCLB and that the

states that adopted these earlier reforms did not change their proficiency standards after NCLB

was implemented, suggests that these states can serve as a plausible comparison group for

identifying the impact of NCLB. In the following section, we outline the specific models we use

to generate our impact estimates. Before doing so, however, it is worth considering exactly how

one should interpret the resulting estimates. First, it is important to realize that our estimates will

capture the impact of the accountability provisions of NCLB, but will not reflect the impact of

other NCLB provisions such as Reading First or the highly qualified teacher provision. Second,

our estimates will identify the impact of NCLB-induced school accountability provisions on

states without prior accountability policies. To the extent that one believes that states that

expected to gain the most from accountability policies adopted them prior to NCLB, one might


6
  Only about 20 states have NAEP equivalence measures prior to NCLB because of a combination of reasons,
including (i) many states did not administer state-representative NAEP prior to 2003, (ii) many states did not report
proficiency levels as part of their state testing regime, (iii) many states did not test at all the two NAEP grades (i.e.,
grades 4 and 8) and (iv) the authors of the report only calculated equivalence measures for a subset of states with
available data prior to 2003 because these early years were viewed as a “trial run” for developing the equating
procedures. Even in the years 2003, 2005 and 2007, NAEP equivalence measures are only available for a limited set
of states because (a) not all states tested 4th and 8th graders, and (b) there are were a handful of states that did not
have sufficient NAEP data in a given grade x year x subjects to justify the equivalence exercise.
7
  For example, our point estimates suggest that states without prior accountability lowered proficiency standards in
4th grade math by 8 to 10 NAEP scale points between 2003 and 2007, although these estimates are very imprecise
and not statistically different than zero.


                                                           19
view the results we present as an underestimate of the average treatment effect of school

accountability. Finally, based on the evidence presented above, it appears that our estimates will

indeed capture the full impact of NCLB-induced accountability provisions. In fact, to the extent

that states induced to implement school accountability by NCLB were lowering proficiency

standards over this period, one might consider the results presented below as an underestimate of

the true causal impact of school accountability.



3.3 Estimation

       Following the intuition of the CITS research design we have outlined, we estimate the

following regression model:


                                                                                                  (1)



where Yst is NAEP-based measure of student achievement for state s in year t, YEARt is a trend

variable (defined as YEARt – 1989 so that it starts with a value of 1 in 1990), and NCLBt is a

dummy variable equal to one for observations from the NCLB era. For the majority of our

analysis, we assume the NCLB era begins in the academic year 2002-03, which was effectively

the first year of full implementation since the legislation was signed into law in January 2002. In

sensitivity analyses, we confirm that assuming NCLB began in spring 2002 or even spring 2001

yields comparable results. YR_SINCE_NCLBt is defined as YEARt – 2002, so that this variable

takes on a value of 1 for the 2002-03 year, which corresponds to the 2003 NAEP testing. Xst

represents covariates varying within states over time (e.g., per pupil expenditures, NAEP test

exclusion rates, etc.). The variables, µs and εst represent state fixed effects and a mean-zero

random error respectively.



                                                   20
       Ts is a time-invariant variable that measures the treatment imposed by NCLB. For

example, in our most basic application, Ts is a dummy variable that identifies whether a given

state had not instituted consequential accountability prior to NCLB. This regression

specification then allows for an NCLB effect that can be reflected in both a level shift in the

outcome variable (i.e., β5) as well as a shift in the achievement trend (i.e., β6). Thus, the total

estimated NCLB effect as of 2007 would be                  .

       While this simple case highlights the intuition behind our approach, there are ways in

which it is probably more accurate to view the “treatment” provided by the introduction of

NCLB in the framework of a dosage model. In particular, slightly more than half of the states

that introduced consequential school accountability prior to NCLB did so just four years or fewer

prior to NCLB’s implementation. Given the number of states that implemented consequential

accountability shortly before the implementation of NCLB, the simple binary definition of Ts

defined above could lead to attenuated estimates of the NCLB effect. That is, the “control” group

includes some states for which the effects of prior state policies and NCLB are closely

intertwined. To address this concern, we report the results from some specifications that simply

omit data from states that adopted state accountability within several years of NCLB. However,

this approach has two important disadvantages: (1) it reduces our statistical power and (2) it

requires one to make largely arbitrary decisions about which states to omit from the analysis.

       As a preferred alternative, we also define Ts as the number of years during our panel

period that a state did not have school accountability. Specifically, we define the treatment as the

number of years without prior school accountability between the 1991-92 academic year and the

onset of NCLB. Hence, states with no prior accountability have a value of 11. Illinois, which

adopted its policy in the 1992-03 school year, would have a value of 2. Texas would have a value



                                                  21
of 4 since its policy started in 1994-95, and Vermont would have a value of 9 since its program

started in 1999-2000. Our identification strategy implies that the larger the value of this

treatment variable, the greater potential impact of NCLB.

       An alternative sense in which NCLB’s impacts may have been heterogeneous is that it

may have represented a more substantial treatment in states that had adopted relatively weaker

accountability provisions during the 1990s. To address this possibility, we also report as a

robustness check the results of specifications where Ts is defined in a manner that reflects the

weakness of a state’s prior accountability system (and, consequently the strength of the treatment

implied by NCLB). More specifically, we define Ts as the difference in the percent of students

attaining proficiency on the state test and the percentage attaining proficiency on the NAEP tests

in 2000 for math and 2002 for reading. In 2000, for example, 62 percent of Georgia 4th graders

attained proficiency on the Georgia state math exam while only 17 percent attained proficiency

on the NAEP math exam, yielding a difference of 45 percentage points in the proficiency rates.

In Arkansas, 14 percent of 4th graders were proficient in math according to NAEP compared with

37 percent according to the Arkansas state exam, yielding a difference of 23 percentage points.

Therefore, by this metric, Arkansas would have a substantially “tougher” pre-NCLB

accountability policy than Georgia. If a state did not have a consequential accountability policy

prior to NCLB, we assign the state a value of 100 percent on this measure. As in the other

strategies, larger values of Ts correspond with weaker pre-NCLB accountability and thus a

greater potential impact of NCLB.

       Unfortunately, this approach may be underpowered relative to our preferred definition of

Ts (i.e., years without prior school accountability) for at least two reasons. One is that, with this

definition of Ts, correcting for the downward bias implied by the late-adopting consequential




                                                  22
accountability states implies omitting data from some states. Second, because not all states

collected proficiency information on students prior to NCLB (e.g., a number of states used norm-

referenced exams that simply provided national percentile ranks), we are not able to calculate

this measure of treatment intensity for a subset of our analysis sample.8 Nonetheless, we report

the key results from specifications where Ts is based on these proficiency measures as a check on

our main results.

         A more fundamental concern with the inferences from our CITS approach involves the

reliability of the identifying assumptions it uses to estimate the impact of NCLB. In particular,

our approach assumes that the deviations from prior achievement trends within the “control”

states (i.e., those with lower values of Ts) provide a valid counterfactual for what would have

happened in “treatment states” if NCLB had not been implemented. The internal validity of this

identification strategy would be violated if there were unobserved determinants of student

achievement that varied both contemporaneously with the onset of NCLB and uniquely in either

the treatment or control states. For example, if the socioeconomic status of families deteriorated

during our study period but did so particularly in the states with prior consequential

accountability as well as during the implementation of NCLB, our CITS approach would

overstate the achievement gains associated with NCLB. While it is not possible to assess these

sorts of concerns definitively, we provide indirect evidence on this important question by

reporting the results of auxiliary regressions like equation (1) but where the dependent variables

are state-year measures of observed traits that may influence student achievement (e.g., parental



8
  Another limitation of this measure is the fact that it utilizes state proficiency results from the end of the pre-NCLB
period. Hence, a state that initially implemented a very stringent proficiency cutoff and realized substantial student
improvement would appear to have a very weak policy under this measure (insofar as NAEP scores did not rise as
quickly as state exam scores). More generally, state proficiency cutoffs are endogenous insofar as policymakers
determine them with an eye toward potential student performance and various other social, economic and political
factors.


                                                           23
education, poverty rate, and median household income). The estimated “effect” of NCLB on

these measures provides evidence on whether achievement-relevant determinants appear to vary

along with the adoption of NCLB in a manner that could confound our key CITS inferences. In

addition to this evidence and the previously discussed robustness checks, we also assess the

sensitivity of our CITS results to changes in the set of regression controls (e.g., introducing year

fixed effects and state-specific trend variables) and to alternative estimation procedures (e.g.,

weighted least squares).



4. The National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP)

       This analysis uses data on math and reading achievement from the state-representative

NAEP. There are several advantages to utilizing NAEP data for our analysis. First, it is a low-

stakes exam that is not directly tied to a state’s own standards or assessments. Instead, the

NAEP aims to assess a broad range of skills and knowledge within each subject area. Second, it

is viewed as a well-designed assessment from a psychometric perspective and is scaled to allow

for comparisons across time and between states. For these reasons, the NAEP data should be

relatively immune to concerns about accountability-driven test score inflation (Jacob 2005,

Fuller et al. 2007, Koretz 2009).

       One important factor to consider when using the NAEP data is that the rules regarding

the permissibility of test accommodations changed shortly before the introduction of NCLB.

Prior to the 2000 math administration (1998 for the reading administration), schools were not

allowed to offer test accommodations to students with special needs. In all subsequent years,

schools were permitted to do so. Test accommodations might influence aggregate achievement

levels in at least two different ways: (i) they may encourage schools to test students with special




                                                 24
needs who had previously been completed excluded from testing, which may lower scores on

average; (ii) they may allow students with special needs who had previously been tested without

accommodations to perform better on the exam, thus raising scores on average. In the year of the

switch (2000 for math and 1998 for reading), there were two different administrations of the

NAEP – one with and one without accommodations permitted. In our baseline specifications, we

use data from the 2000 math and 1998 reading administrations with accommodations permitted.

We later show that our results are not sensitive to using data from the alternative administration,

or to using data from all administrations.

         Because our identification strategy depends on measuring achievement trends prior to

NCLB, we limit our sample to states that administered the state NAEP at least two times prior to

the implementation of NCLB.9 Because so few states administered the 8th grade math exam in

1990, when looking at math we focus on the pre-NCLB years of 1992, 1996 and 2000. For

reading, we focus on 1994, 1998 and 2002. We chose to include 2002 as a pre-NCLB data point

in our analysis because, given the timing of the passage and implementation of the law, it seems

unlikely that Spring 2002 scores could have been substantially influenced by NCLB. All states

administered NAEP in 2003, 2005 and 2007.

         Our final sample includes 39 states (227 state x years) for 4th grade math, 38 states (220

state x years) for 8th grade math, 37 states (249 state x years) for 4th grade reading and 34 states

(170 state x years) for 8th grade reading. A complete list of states in our sample can be found in

Appendix Table B1. Since our estimates will rely on achievement changes across these states

over time, it is worth exploring how representative these states are with respect to the nation.


9
  In order to ensure that we are accurately capturing the pre-NCLB trends, in addition to requiring that a state have at
least two NAEP scores prior to 2003, we also require that states in our math sample participated in the 2000 NAEP
and states in our reading sample participated in both the 1998 and 2002 NAEP. However, as shown in Table 5, our
results are not sensitive to this sample restriction.


                                                          25
Table 1 presents some descriptive statistics that compare traits of our analysis sample to

nationally representative NAEP data. With a few exceptions, our analysis sample closely

resembles the nation in terms of student demographics (e.g., percent black and percent Hispanic),

observed socioeconomic traits (e.g., the poverty rate) and measures of the levels and pre-NCLB

trends in NAEP test scores.



5. Results

5.1 Achievement Trends by Pre-NCLB Accountability Status

       Before presenting formal estimates from equation (1), we show the trends in NAEP

scores by pre-NCLB accountability (Figures 2-5). These figures are meant to illustrate the

intuition underlying our research design, and to provide tentative evidence with regard to the

achievement effects of NCLB. In each case, we present trends for two groups: (i) states that

adopted school accountability between 1994 and 1998 and (ii) states that did not adopt school

accountability prior to NCLB. The dots reflect the simple mean for each group x year, and the

connecting lines show the predicted trends from the model described above.

       Consider first Figure 2a, which shows trends in 4th grade math achievement. We see that

in 1992, states that never adopted accountability scored roughly 5 scale points (0.18 standard

deviations) higher on average than states that adopted school accountability policies by 1998.

While all states made modest gains between 1992 and 2000, the states that adopted

accountability policies prior to 1998 experienced more rapid improvement during this period.

Indeed, this is the type of evidence underlying the conclusions in Carnoy and Loeb (2002) and

Hanushek and Raymond (2005). Mean achievement in both groups jumped noticeably in 2003,

although relative to prior trends, this shift was largest among the “no prior accountability” group.




                                                26
Interestingly, there was little noticeable change in the growth rate across period for the prior

accountability states. That is, the slope of the achievement trend before and after 2002 is roughly

equivalent for this group. In contrast, states with no prior accountability grew at a faster rate

from 2003 to 2007 than from 1992 through 2000, such that the growth rates after 2002 were

roughly equivalent across both groups of states. The trends for percent of students meeting the

basic standard, shown in Figure 13b, are similar. These figures suggest that NCLB had a

positive impact on 4th grade math achievement.

           The trends for 8th grade math (Figure 3) are similar to those for 4th grade math, but

somewhat less clear in showing a positive achievement effect. The level shift following the

introduction of NCLB was smaller than for 4th grade math scores, and neither group of states

experienced a substantial improvement in growth rates after 2002.

           The pattern for 4th grade reading in Figure 4 is much less clear. The pre-NCLB reading

trends for both groups are much noisier than the math trends. In particular, both groups

experienced a decline in achievement in 1994, little change in 1998 (relative to 1992) and then

very large gains in 2002.10 The prior accountability group experienced a drop in achievement

from 2002 to 2003, both in absolute terms and relative to trend. The other group experienced

very little increase following NCLB. Perhaps most importantly, however, a visual inspection of

the data in these plots indicates that the prior achievement trend was not linear, which is a central

assumption of the CITS model specified in equation (1). In the analysis that follows, we explore

alternative modeling strategies in an effort to identify the impact of NCLB on reading

achievement, none of which provides any indication of a positive impact. For example, if one

compares the four-year trend from 1998 to 2002 to the four-year trend from 2003 to 2007, there



10
     Note that the graph is scaled to accentuate what are really quite small absolute changes from year to year.


                                                            27
is no evidence of any NCLB effect. Similarly, Figure 5 provides no evidence of an NCLB effect

on 8th grade reading achievement.

5.2 Main Estimation Results

        Table 3 shows our baseline estimates of equation (1). The outcome measure in all cases

is the mean NAEP scale score for all students in a particular state x year. All models include

linear and quadratic terms for the state-year exclusion rate as well as state fixed effects.

Standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in parentheses. In Panel A, we define our

treatment group to include only states that did not adopt school accountability prior to NCLB.

We find that NCLB increased 4th grade math achievement by roughly 4.7 points by 2007 in

states with no prior accountability relative to other states. Given a standard deviation of 31, this

reflects an effect size of 0.15. We find no effect for 8th grade math or reading and a small but

statistically significant effect for 4th grade reading.

        As discussed earlier, the inclusion of these “late adopter” states may understate any

positive effects of NCLB. Hence, in panel B we estimate the same models but exclude states

that adopted school accountability policies between 1999-2001. Hence, the results shown in

Panel B correspond to the trends shown in Figures 2-5. In this specification, the impact of

NCLB on 4th grade math achievement is roughly 8.2 scale points (0.26 standard deviations) and

the effect on 8th grade math is 5.2 scale points (0.14 standard deviation). While this specification

does avoid confounding the impact of NCLB with the impact of a state’s own accountability

policy, it also reduces the precision of our estimates and relies on a somewhat arbitrary decision

of which states to exclude.

        Panel C presents results in which the treatment is defined as the number of years without

prior school accountability. The total effect we report is the impact of NCLB in 2007 for states




                                                   28
with no prior accountability relative to states that adopted school accountability in 1997 (the

mean adoption year among states that adopt prior to NCLB). The results suggest moderate

positive effects for 4th grade math (7.2 scale points or 0.23 standard deviations) and smaller

effects for 8th grade math that are not statistically different than zero at conventional levels (a

0.10 standard deviation effect with a p-value of 0.12). The effects for 4th and 8th grade reading

are small in magnitude and statistically indistinguishable from zero.

        In an effort to test our identifying assumption, Table 4 examines the impact of NCLB on

a variety of variables besides student achievement. The specification we use is identical to the

one shown in panel C from Table 3. Column 1 shows the “effect” of NCLB on NAEP exclusion

rates. A common concern with test-based accountability is that it provides school personnel an

incentive to exclude low-performing children from testing. In theory, this should not be a major

concern in our context because neither schools nor states are held accountable on the basis of

their NAEP scores. And, indeed, we find no significant association between the NCLB and test

exclusion. Columns 2-4 show the relationship between NCLB and state-year poverty rates and

median household income as measured by the Current Population Survey and Census and the

state-year employment-to-population ratio.11 The results of our auxiliary regressions indicate

that there are no statistically significant relationships between NCLB and any of these state-year

observables.12

        Column 5 reports the key results of an additional robustness check based on the fraction

of students in the state-year enrolled in public schools. These measures are based on grade-
11
   For poverty, median household income and employment rates, we use the state x year rates with the year prior to
the NAEP exam. The reason for this is that the NAEP exam is given by March of a calendar year, making the prior
calendar year’s value more predictive of the achievement outcome.
12
   We did find that NCLB appeared to have a statistically significant, negative effect on state-year unemployment
rates. However, this result appears to be driven by several small states. In particular, regressions that weight by
student enrollment in the state x year show very small and statistically significant point estimates. Importantly,
similar weighted regressions in our main specifications yield achievement effects comparable to our baseline results
(see Table 5). In addition, our main results are robust to conditioning on state-year unemployment rates.


                                                        29
specific enrollment data from the Common Core and the Private School Universe survey. We

find an extremely small, marginally significant, effect in 4th grade math that suggests that NCLB

may have reduced the fraction of students attending public school by roughly one percent.

Columns 6 and 7 show the fraction of public school students in the state x year who were Black

and Hispanic respectively, as measured by the same NAEP data on which the outcomes are

measured. We see some evidence that NCLB is associated with an increase in the fraction of

students who are Black. However, column 8 indicates that there was no effect on the fraction of

students eligible for free lunch. Moreover, student-reported parental education data from the

NAEP (available only for 8th graders) indicates that NCLB was associated with an increase in

parental education (p-value 0.12) (not reported here; results available upon request). Hence,

there is some evidence of small changes in student composition associated with NCLB, although

the predicted effect is ambiguous. And we will see in Table 5, the inclusion of these variables as

time-varying covariates does not change our results.

         Finally, columns 9 and 10 show that NCLB was not associated with the fraction of

students in a cohort that attended preschool or full-day kindergarten. These results allay

concerns that states that did not adopt school accountability in the mid-1990s were instead

focusing on early childhood policies. If this were the case, one might be concerned that the

impacts we document are really driven by lagged policy changes at the state level – namely,

students who started attending preschool and/or full-day (as opposed to half-day) kindergarten in

the late-1990s were entering elementary school better prepared which is reflected on state NAEP

tests.

         Table 5 presents a series of sensitivity analyses. Perhaps most importantly, column 2

presents results from a model that includes as time-varying covariates all of the variables that




                                                30
appear in Table 4 as well as measures of the pupil-teacher ratio and log per-pupil expenditures in

2007 dollars (see the table notes for the full list of variables included in this specification). The

estimates are virtually identical to our baseline results shown in column 1. We find comparable

results with weighted least squares (WLS) based on public-school enrollments (column 3).

          Columns 4 and 5 present specifications that utilize alternative coding for consequential

accountability. In column 4, we code four states that may be viewed as marginal cases of

consequential accountability (VA, WI, IN and KS; see appendix for a more detailed discussion

of these states) as not having consequential accountability. In column 5, we report results from

the specification described above that uses the difference between state proficiency rates on state

vs. NAEP exams as a measure of treatment intensity. In both cases, we find that our baseline

results are robust.

          The remainder of the table reports the estimated NCLB effect for the following

specifications: the inclusion of a full set of year fixed effects (column 6), the inclusion of state-

specific time trends (column 7), the omission of state fixed effects (column 8), using a sample

that includes all states with at least one year (instead of at least two years) of pre-NCLB data

(column 9), using a sample that includes only states with at least three years of pre-NCLB data

(column 10), using data from the administration that did not permit accommodations in 2000 for

math and 1998 for reading (column 11), alternative years for the first impact of NCLB (columns

12 and 13), and including the recently released math data from the 2009 NAEP.13 The results of

these various sensitivity analyses suggest that the baseline results presented in Table 3 are quite

robust.




13
  In results not reported here but available upon request, we also find comparable results from weighted least
squares using as weights the inverse of the variance of the state-year average.


                                                         31
       Table 6 shows the effect of NCLB on the achievement distribution by grade and subject.

As many have noted, the design of NCLB necessarily focused the attention of schools on helping

students attain proficiency. Hence, one would expect NCLB to disproportionately influence

achievement in the left tail of the NAEP distribution. We find results roughly consistent with

this. However, in contrast with some prior work and many prior concerns, we do not find that

the introduction of NCLB harmed students at higher points on the achievement distribution.

Indeed, NCLB seemed to increase achievement at higher points on the achievement distribution

more than one might have expected. For example, in 4th grade math, the impacts at the 75th

percentile were only 3 scale points lower than at the 10th percentile.



5.3 Heterogeneity by Student Subgroup, Subject and Subscale

       One of the primary objectives of NCLB was to reduce inequities in student performance

by race and socioeconomic status. Indeed, this concern drove the requirement that accountability

under the statute be determined by subgroup performance in addition to aggregate school

performance. Hence, it is of particular interest to understand the effect of NCLB on specific

student subgroups, which is what we do in Tables 7-10. In each table, we present results

separately by race, gender and poverty subgroups. Several interesting findings emerge.

       In the 4th grade math sample (Table 7), effects are somewhat larger for Black and

Hispanic students relative to white students. Interestingly, in the case of Black students,

weighting by student enrollment substantially increases the magnitude of the effects. This

suggests that NCLB had more positive effects on Black students in states with larger Black

populations. Similarly, the effects were substantially larger among students who were eligible




                                                 32
for subsidized lunch (regardless of race) relative to students who were not eligible. The effects

were roughly comparable for boys and girls.

        In 8th grade math (Table 8), we find extremely large positive effects for Hispanic students

and small, only marginally significant for white students. The point estimates for Black students

are large but imprecisely estimated, and generally not statistically distinguishable from zero at

conventional levels. The effects for free-lunch eligible students are large and statistically

significant. Interestingly, the effects are substantially larger for girls, with boys experiencing

little if any benefit of the accountability.

        The results for the 4th grade reading shown in Table 9 suggest some moderate positive

effects for white students and for male students. However, as noted earlier, the trends prior to

NCLB were distinctly non-linear and it thus the estimates shown here are likely invalid. We

choose to present them primarily for the sake of transparency. In results not shown here, but

available upon request, we re-estimated the specifications in this table limiting the sample to the

years 1998 through 2007. In these models, the NCLB impact is identified off of deviations from

the 1998 to 2002 trend in states with and without prior accountability policies. The results for

white students are roughly half as large as those shown in Table 9 and not statistically different

than zero. Similarly, the large point estimates for Hispanic students are reduced to close to zero.

Indeed, none of the impact estimates in any of the specifications in Table 9 are statistically

distinguishable from zero when using the restricted sample. Looking at the 8th grade reading

results in Table 10, we see no positive effects. The most surprising finding is that NCLB

appeared to have a statistically reduced the performance of Black students and students who

were eligible for subsidized lunch. We have no good explanation for this finding, and hesitate to

over-interpret what might be due to sampling variability.




                                                 33
       One concern about NCLB and most other test-based school accountability policies is that

because they focus almost exclusively on math and reading performance they will cause schools

to neglect other important subjects to the detriment of student learning. To date, the evidence for

such resource shifting is mixed. There is some evidence that schools have shifted resources

away from subjects other than reading or math. For example, a recent study by the Center on

Education Policy (2006) reported that 71 percent of school districts had reduced the elementary-

school instructional time in at least one subject so that more instructional time could be spent on

reading and mathematics. From a theoretical perspective, however, it is not clear how such

shifting will influence student performance in these other areas given that math and reading skills

are complementary to student learning in subjects such as science and social studies. The few

studies that have examined this issue have not found that school accountability policies

substantially reduce student performance in other subjects (Jacob 2005, Winters et al.

Forthcoming).

       The NAEP data offers some opportunity to test this hypothesis in the context of NCLB.

A sizeable number of states administered state-representative NAEP science tests to 8th graders

in 1996, 2000 and 2005 (n = 31) and to 4th graders in 2000 and 2005 (n = 36). Using this data,

we estimate models similar to equation (1), comparing deviations from predicted achievement in

2005 in states with and without prior school accountability. For the 8th grade sample, we use the

1996 and 2000 data to estimate a prior intercept and trend. In the 4th grade sample where there is

only one pre-NCLB observation, we estimate a simple difference-in-difference model. We find

no statistically significant effects at either grade level at any point on the achievement

distribution (see appendix Table B2). Our standard errors are relatively precise, allowing us to

rule out effects larger than roughly 3-4 scale points (about .1 standard deviations). Similarly, we




                                                 34
find no significant effects when looking separately by subgroup (see appendix Tables B3 and

B4). Together, these results suggest that NCLB did not have an adverse impact on student

performance in science as measured by the NAEP.14

         Another major concern with test-based accountability, including NCLB, is that it

provides teachers an incentive to divert energy towards the types of questions that appear most

commonly on the high-stakes test and away from other topics within the tested domain. This

resource reallocation within subjects could reduce the validity of inferences based on

performance on the high-stakes test. One of the benefits of the analysis presented here is that it

relies on student performance on the NAEP, which should be relatively immune from such test

score “inflation” since it is not used as a high-stakes test under NCLB (or any other

accountability system of which we are aware).

         It is still interesting to examine whether NCLB has improved student achievement in any

particular topic within math or reading. To explore this, we re-estimate equation (1) using

NAEP subscale scores as the dependent variable. The NAEP math exam measures student

performance in five specific topic areas: Algebra, Geometry, Measurement, Number Properties

and Operations, and Data Analysis, Statistics and Probability. The results shown in Table 11

suggest that NCLB had a positive impact in all math topic areas for the 4th grade sample. The

point estimates are somewhat larger in Algebra (0.26 standard deviations), Number Properties

(0.26 standard deviations) and Data Analysis (0.22 standard deviations) than in Geometry (0.17

standard deviations) and Measurement (0.16 standard deviations). In the 8th grade sample,

NCLB had a moderately large and statistically significant impact within Data Analysis (6.7 scale

14
  The NAEP science exam measures not only factual and conceptual understanding of science topics, but also the
ability to integrate science knowledge into a larger context and to use tools, procedures, and reasoning processes in
scientific investigation. For example, the science exam includes a hands-on task that requires students to conduct
actual experiments using materials provided to them.



                                                         35
points, or 0.16 standard deviations) and marginally significant effects for Number Properties and

Geometry (roughly 0.11 standard deviation in both topics). These results are consistent with

some earlier work indicating large impacts of accountability in similar areas (Jacob 2005),

suggesting that some topics may be more amenable to instruction than others.

       The NAEP reading exam measures student competency in several skills related to

comprehension: reading for information (i.e., primarily non-fiction reading), reading for literary

experience (i.e., primarily fiction reading), and (for 8th grade only) the ability to perform a task

(e.g., students apply knowledge from reading bus schedules or directions for repairing

something). In results not shown here but available upon request, we find no significant

differences in student achievement effects by topic area in reading – that is, NCLB did not

appear to have significant effects on student achievement in any of the three reading

competencies.



6. Conclusions

       NCLB is an extraordinarily influential and controversial policy that, over the last seven

years, has brought test-based school accountability to scale at public schools across the United

States. The impact of this Federally mandated reform on student achievement is an empirical

question of central importance. This study presents evidence on this broad question using state-

year panel data on multiple student-outcome measures from the NAEP. We utilize a

comparative interrupted time series research design that relies on the changes over time in states

that had no prior school-accountability system like those required by NCLB and those that did.

Our results suggest that the achievement consequences of NCLB are decidedly mixed.

Specifically, we find that NCLB generated large and broad gains in the math achievement of 4th




                                                  36
and (to a somewhat lesser extent) 8th graders. However, our results suggest that NCLB had no

impact on reading achievement for 4th or 8th graders.

       The mixed results presented here pose difficult but important questions for policymakers

questioning whether to “end” or “mend” NCLB. The evidence of substantial and almost

universal gains in math is undoubtedly good news for advocates of NCLB. On the other hand,

the lack of any effect in reading, and the fact that the policy appears to have generated only

modestly larger impacts among disadvantaged subgroups in math (and thus only made minimal

headway in closing achievement gaps), suggests that, to date, the impact of NCLB has fallen

short of its extraordinarily ambitious, eponymous goals. Some commentators have argued that

the failure of NCLB and earlier accountability reforms to close achievement gaps reflects a

flawed, implicit assumption that schools alone can overcome the achievement consequences of

dramatic socioeconomic disparities. For example, Ladd (2007) argues that school-accountability

policies should be complemented by research-informed programs situated outside of schools

(e.g., early childhood and health interventions). Ladd (2007) also emphasizes that schools are

embedded within systems with district and state-level actors for whom some form of

accountability may also be appropriate.

       However, an effective redesign of accountability policies like NCLB may also need to

pay more specific attention to the processes and practices within schools (Ladd 2007). Along

those lines, it is interesting to note that our evidence of treatment heterogeneity by race,

ethnicity, grade and subject is broadly similar to the results from evaluations of earlier state-level

school-accountability polices (e.g., Hanushek and Raymond 2005). Understanding the sources

of this treatment heterogeneity (i.e., the mediating mechanisms by which accountability can be

effective) is likely to be a particularly useful policy datum as the proper design and




                                                 37
implementation of school-accountability are evaluated and discussed. For example, the unique

effectiveness of NCLB in improving the math skills of younger students could be related to the

biological evidence on the age-dependent malleability of specific cognitive and non-cognitive

skills (Heckman 2007). On the other hand, it may be due to the specific ways in which schools

and teachers have adjusted their instructional practices, perhaps differently for mathematics and

reading. For example, recent studies (Whitehurst 2009) suggest that school decisions about

curricula (e.g., textbooks, instructional software, and the corresponding pedagogy) can have

comparatively large effects on student achievement. Further research that can credibly and

specifically explicate how school and teacher responses have contributed to the achievement

effects documented here would be a useful next step in identifying effective policies and

practices that can reliably improve student outcomes in chronically low-performing schools at

scale.




                                                38
REFERENCES

Angrist, Joshua D. and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s
Companion. Princeton University Press, 2009.

Associated Press. “Diocese of Tucson Becomes 2nd to File for Bankruptcy,” September 21,
2004.

Ballou, Dale and Matthew G. Springer. “Achievement Trade-offs and No Child Left Behind,”
working paper, October 2008.

Bandeira de Mello, V., Blankenship, C., and McLaughlin, D.H. (2009). Mapping State
Proficiency Standards Onto NAEP Scales: 2005-2007 (NCES 2010-456). National Center for
Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.
Washington, DC.

Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., Mullainathan, S. How Much Should We Trust Differences-in-
Differences Estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics 2004; 119(1), 249-75.

Bloom, Howard S. (1999). “Estimating Program Impacts on Student Achievement Using Short
Interrupted Time Series” Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation, Working Paper.

Bloom, Howard S., Sandra Ham, Laura Melton, Julieanne O'Brien (2001). “Evaluating the
Accelerated Schools Approach A Look at Early Implementation and Impacts on Student
Achievement in Eight Elementary Schools.” Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation.

Braun, Henry, & Qian, Jiahe. (2008). Mapping state standards to the NAEP scale. Report No:
ETS RR-08-57. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service.

Bryk, Anthony, Valerie E. Lee and Peter B. Holland. Catholic Schools and the Common Good.
Harvard University Press, 1993.

Carnoy, Martin and Susanna Loeb. “Does External Accountability Affect Student Outcomes? A
Cross-State Analysis,” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 24(4), Winter 2002, pages
305-331.

Carroll, Matt, Sacha Pfeiffer, Michael Rezendes and Walter V. Robinson. “Church Allowed
Abuse by Priest for Years, Aware of Geoghan Record, Archdiocese Still Shuttled Him from
Parish to Parish,” The Boston Globe, January 6, 2002, A1.

Center on Education Policy. From the Capital to the Classroom: Year 4 of the No Child Left
Behind Act. Washington, DC, March 2006.

Center on Education Policy. Has Student Achievement Increased Since 2002: State Test Score
Trends Through 2006-07. Washington, DC, June 2008.




                                              39
Dobbs, Michael. “Conn. Stands in Defiance on Enforcing 'No Child'”, Washington Post, Sunday,
May 8, 2005

Figlio, D. N., & Ladd, H. (2008). School accountability and student achievement. In H.
Ladd & E. Fiske (Eds.), Handbook of research in education finance and policy (pp. 166-182).
New York and London: Routledge.

Fuller, Bruce, Joseph Wright, Kathryn Gesicki, and Erin Kang. “Gauging Growth: How to Judge
No Child Left Behind?” Educational Researcher 36(5), 2007, pages 268-278.

Goertz, M.E., and M.E. Duffy. Assessment and Accountability Systems in the 50 States: 1999-
2000. CPRE Research Report RR-046. Consortium for Policy Research in Education,
Philadelphia PA, 2001.

Hanushek, Eric A. and Margaret E. Raymond. “The Confusing World of Educational
Accountability,” National Tax Journal 54(2), June 2001, pp. 365-384.

Hanushek, Eric A. and Margaret E. Raymond. “Does School Accountability Lead to Improved
Student Performance?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 24(2), 2005, pages 297-327.

Heckman, James J. “The Economics, Technology and Neuroscience of Human Capability
Formation,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(33): 13250-13255, (2007).

Hess, Frederick M. and Michael J. Petrilli. No Child Left Behind Primer. New York: Peter Lang
Publishing, 2006.

Hess, Frederick M. and Michael J. Petrilli. “Wrong Turn on School Reform,” Policy Review,
February/March 2009.

Jacob, Brian A. (2008). Lecture for the David N. Kershaw Award, Annual Fall Meeting of the
Association of Public Policy Analysis, November 2008, Los Angeles, CA.

Jacob, B. (2005). “Accountability, Incentives and Behavior: Evidence from School Reform in
Chicago.” Journal of Public Economics. 89(5-6): 761-796.

Jacob, B. and Levitt, S. (2003). “Rotten Apples: An Investigation of the Prevalence and
Predictors of Teacher Cheating.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 118(3): 843-877.

Koretz, Daniel (2008). Measuring Up: What Educational Testing Really Tells Us. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Krieg, John M. “Are Students Left Behind? The Distributional Effects of the No Child Left
Behind Act,” Education Finance and Policy 3(2), Spring 2008, pages 250–281.




                                              40
Ladd, Helen F. “Holding Schools Accountable Revisited,” 2007 Spencer Foundation Lecture in
Education Policy and Management, Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management,
https://www.appam.org/awards/pdf/2007Spencer-Ladd.pdf, Accessed November 8, 2009.

Lee, Jaekyung. “Tracking Achievement Gaps and Assessing the Impact of NCLB on the Gaps:
An In-depth Look into National and State Reading and Math Outcome Trends,” The Civil Rights
Project, Harvard University, June 2006.

National Center for Education Statistics. Mapping 2005 State Proficiency Standards Onto the
NAEP Scales (NCES 2007–482). U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education
Statistics, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Neal, Derek and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach “Left Behind by Design: Proficiency Counts
and Test-Based Accountability” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.

Nichols, Sharon L. and David C. Berliner. Collateral Damage: How High-Stakes Testing
Corrupts America's Schools. Harvard Education Press, 2007.

Olson, Lynn. “States Strive Toward ESEA Compliance,” Education Week, December 1, 2002.

Olson, Lynn. “In ESEA Wake, School Data Flowing Forth,” Education Week, December 10,
2003.

Olson, Lynn. “Taking Root,” Education Week, December 8, 2004.

Palmer, Scott R. and Arthur L. Coleman. “The No Child Left Behind Act: Summary of NCLB
Rrequirements and Deadlines for State Action,” Council of Chief State School Officers,
November 2003 (http://www.ccsso.org/content/pdfs/Deadlines.pdf, Accessed November 13,
2009).

Rothstein, Richard, Rebecca Jacobsen and Tamara Wilder (2008). “Grading Education: Getting
Accountability Right.” Teachers College Press, New York City.

Ravitch, Diane “Time to Kill ‘No Child Left Behind’” Education Week, June 10, 2009.

Shadish, W.R., Cook, T.D., & Campbell, D.T. (2002). Experimental and Quasi-Experimental
Designs for Generalized Causal Inference. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.

Springer, Matthew G. “The Influence of an NCLB Accountability Plan on the Distribution of
Student Test Score Gains,” Economics of Education Review 27, 2008, pages 556-563.

Stullich, Stephanie, Elizabeth Eisner, Joseph McCrary, and Collette Roney. National Assessment
of Title I Interim Report to Congress: Volume I: Implementation of Title I, Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, 2006.




                                              41
U.S. Department of Education. “No Child Left Behind is Working,” December, 2006,
http://www.ed.gov/nclb/overview/importance/nclbworking.html, Accessed July 29, 2009.

U.S. Department of Education, Office of Planning, Evaluation and Policy Development, Policy
and Program Studies Service, Private School Participants in Federal Programs Under the No
Child Left Behind Act and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, Washington, D.C.,
2007.

Whitehurst, Grover. “Don’t Forget Curriculum,” Brown Center Letters on Education #3, October
2009.

Winters, Marcus A., Julie R. Trivitt, and Jay P. Greene (Forthcoming). “The Impact of High-
Stakes Testing on Student Proficiency in Low-Stakes Subjects: Evidence from Florida’s
Elementary Science Exam.” Economics of Education Review.




                                              42
                    Appendix A - Catholic Schools as an NCLB Comparison Group

       In earlier versions of this research (e.g., Jacob 2008), we also presented results based on using

Catholic schools as a comparison group for evaluating NCLB. The basic logic of this complementary

research design was that, though private-school students are eligible to participate in a number of major

programs under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), the NCLB reauthorization of

ESEA left these prior provisions “largely intact” (U.S. Department of Education 2007). This implies

that the NCLB reforms were largely, though not completely, irrelevant for Catholic schools.

       Figures A1 and A2 show the comparative achievement trends for public and Catholic-school

students from the national NAEP. In Figures A1 we see that students in Catholic schools outperformed

their counterparts in public schools over the entire period 1990-2007. While both groups showed

increasing achievement during the pre-NCLB period, public school students (particularly in 4th grade)

experienced a shift in achievement in 2003 and continued at roughly the same slope afterwards.

Students in Catholic schools, by contrast, experienced no such shift and achievement trends appeared to

flatten for this group after 2003. These comparisons appear to be broadly consistent with the results

based on comparing the achievement changes across states with and without school accountability prior

to NCLB. That is, they suggest a modest positive impact for 4th grade math and a potential (and

smaller) effect for 8th grade math. Figure A2 suggests a similar pattern for reading – potentially

positive impacts in 4th grade, but no evidence of impacts at 8th grade.

       However, upon further examination, we view public-Catholic comparisons as a deeply suspect

approach to evaluating the effects of NCLB. The key issue is that the implementation of NCLB during

the 2002-03 school corresponded closely with widespread, nationwide attention to the sex abuse

scandal in Catholic schools. Beginning in January of 2002, the Boston Globe published investigative

reporting based on access to previously sealed court documents and Church documents related to the

prosecution of abusive Catholic priests in the Boston Archdiocese (Carroll et al. 2002). These

documents revealed that church officials had frequently reassigned priests known to have been abusive
to different parishes where they were allowed to continue working with children. The high-profile

nationwide coverage of this evidence in the spring of 2002 led to similarly incriminating investigations

in Catholic dioceses across the United States. Over the subsequent years, these inquiries resulted in

high-profile resignations as well as civil lawsuits and large cash settlements. Several Catholic dioceses

have also declared bankruptcy since 2002 to protect themselves from the financial repercussions of

these lawsuits (e.g., Associated Press 2004).

       Figure A3 , which shows the comparative elementary-school enrollment trends in Catholic and

public schools, strongly suggests that this wide-ranging sex-abuse scandal had a substantial effect on

Catholic schools. To facilitate interpretation of the trends, the y-axis in this figure measures the natural

logarithm of enrollment, demeaned by the initial year (1992) value so that both trends are zero in 1992

by construction. The trends thus reflect percent changes relative to 1992 in each sector. Catholic

enrollment declined slightly prior to NCLB, but then dropped by nearly 10 percent between 2002 and

2004, and fell an additional 7 percent between 2004 and 2006. In contrast, public school enrollment

increased steadily prior to NCLB, and leveled off following 2002. Figure A4 suggests that the dramatic

enrollment decline in Catholic schools led to a noticeable decline in pupil-teacher ratios in Catholic

schools relative to public schools. Pupil-teacher ratios in public schools appeared to increase modestly

in absolute terms (relative to steady decline in prior years) after the implementation of NCLB while

ratios in Catholic schools dropped relative to prior trends.

       The enrollment-driven change in pupil-teacher ratios within Catholic schools that occurred

simultaneously with the implementation of NCLB is one factor that complicates using Catholic schools

as an NCLB control group. However, a more direct concern is the possibility of confounding bias due

to the non-random attrition of students from Catholic schools because of the abuse scandal (and,

possibly, as a response to the ongoing recession). To examine the empirical relevance of such non-

random attrition, we collected data on the comparative trends in student and parent observables across

public and Catholic schools. Figure A5 shows the comparative trends in the percent of public and
Catholic-school students that are black and Hispanic. Using data available from NAEP surveys, Figure

A6 shows the comparative trends in the educational attainment of parents whose children attend

Catholic and public schools. The data on the racial and ethnic composition of Catholic and public

schools do not suggest that the sharp enrollment drop had noticeable consequences. In contrast, the data

on parental education suggests that, after 2002, there was a noticeable comparative increase in the

educational attainment of parents whose kids attended Catholic schools. One possible explanation for

this pattern is that financial pressure on dioceses which were compelled to respond to civil litigation

may have led to tuition increases that led more poorly educated parents to withdraw their children from

Catholic schools. Overall, these data provide at best suggestive evidence for non-random attrition from

Catholic schools.

       Nonetheless, the dramatic enrollment decline that coincided with the abuse scandal and the

implementation of NCLB suggests to us that Catholic schools are problematic as a convincing control

group. For example, even in the absence of non-random attrition, the scandal may have improved

Catholic school quality by lowering class sizes or, alternatively, lowered it by degrading the social trust

and sense of community that is often characterized as a key dimension of Catholic school quality

(Bryk, Lee, and Holland 1993). In contrast, the Catholic abuse scandal should not confound the

identifications strategy based on comparing the achievement trends across states that did and did not

have school accountability prior to NCLB. The influx of Catholic school students into public schools

would, in all likelihood, have empirically negligible effects on the measured achievement of public

school students. Furthermore, the cross-sectional variation in this student sorting should be unrelated to

the identifying variation based on a state’s pre-NCLB accountability policies.
             Figure A1: Main NAEP Mathematics Achievement Trends in Public versus Catholic Schools




                                                                                     .9




250
                                                                                     .8




240
                                                                                     .7




230
                                                                                     .6




220
                                                                                     .5




210
      1990     1992    1994   1996     1998   2000   2002       2004   2006   2008        1990   1992   1994   1996     1998   2000   2002       2004   2006   2008
                                           Year                                                                             Year

                                     Public          Catholic                                                         Public          Catholic



                      (a) 4th grade average scale score                                      (b) 4th grade percent meeting “basic” standard




                                                                                     .9




290
                                                                                     .8




280
                                                                                     .7




270
                                                                                     .6
                                                                                     .5




260
      1990    1992     1994   1996     1998   2000   2002       2004   2006   2008        1990   1992   1994   1996     1998   2000   2002       2004   2006   2008
                                           Year                                                                             Year

                                     Public          Catholic                                                         Public          Catholic



                      (c) 8th grade average scale score                                      (d) 8th grade percent meeting “basic” standard
             Figure A2: Main NAEP Reading Achievement Trends in Public versus Catholic Schools




235
                                                                                   80




230
                                                                                   75




225
                                                                                   70
                                                                                   65




220
                                                                                   60




215
                                                                                   55




210
      1990   1992    1994   1996     1998   2000   2002       2004   2006   2008         1990   1992   1994   1996     1998   2000   2002       2004   2006   2008
                                         Year                                                                              Year

                                   Public          Catholic                                                          Public          Catholic



                    (a) 4th grade average scale score                                       (b) 4th grade percent meeting “basic” standard




                                                                                   .9




280
                                                                                   .85




275
                                                                                   .8




270
                                                                                   .75




265
                                                                                   .7




260
                                                                                   .65




255
      1990   1992    1994   1996     1998   2000   2002       2004   2006   2008         1990   1992   1994   1996     1998   2000   2002       2004   2006   2008
                                         Year                                                                              Year

                                   Public          Catholic                                                          Public          Catholic



                    (c) 8th grade average scale score                                       (d) 8th grade percent meeting “basic” standard
Figure A3: Student Enrollment Trends in Public versus Catholic Schools
        .1     0
Ln(Enrollment)
−.1     −.2




                   1994     1996      1998       2000           2002      2004    2006   2008
                                                         Year

                                                Public                 Catholic


                      (a) Log elementary school enrollment, no pre-K, relative to 1994
Figure A4: Pupil-Teacher Ratio Trends in Public versus Catholic Schools
            19       18
  Pupil−Teacher Ratio
16        1715




                          1994   1996   1998     2000           2002      2004    2006   2008
                                                         Year

                                                Public                 Catholic


                                           (a) Pupil-teacher ratio
Figure A5: Student Composition Trends in Public versus Catholic Schools



       18
       16
        14
  Percent
 12    10
       8




              1994   1996   1998        2000           2002      2004    2006   2008
                                                Year

                                       Public                 Catholic


                                    (a) Percent black
      20
      18 16
   Percent
 14   12
      10




              1994   1996   1998        2000           2002      2004    2006   2008
                                                Year

                                       Public                 Catholic


                                   (b) Percent hispanic
                             Figure A6: Parental Education Trends in Public versus Catholic Schools




                                                                                         80




      80
                                                                                         70




         70
                                                                                      60




 Percent
                                                                                      Percent




 60
                                                                                         50




      50
                                                                                         40




      40
              1994   1996     1998    2000           2002      2004    2006   2008              1994   1996   1998    2000           2002      2004    2006   2008
                                              Year                                                                            Year

                                     Public                 Catholic                                                 Public                 Catholic



                            (a) At least some college                                                           (b) College degree




     12
                                                                                        12




     10
                                                                                        10




     8
                                                                                        8




   6
                                                                                        6




Percent
                                                                                     Percent




     4
                                                                                        4




     2
                                                                                        2




     0
                                                                                        0




          1994       1996     1998    2000           2002      2004    2006   2008             1994    1996   1998    2000           2002      2004    2006   2008
                                              Year                                                                            Year

                                     Public                 Catholic                                                 Public                 Catholic



                            (c) Less than high school                                                            (d) Don’t know
                   Table B1 - States included in NAEP analysis samples
                                                     Subject-Grade
                          Grade 4      Grade 8      Grade 4    Grade 8 Grade 4 Grade 8
State                      Math         Math         Read       Read       Science Science
Alabama                       1           1            1          1           1          1
Alaska                        0           0            0          0           0          0
Arizona                       1           1            1          1           1          1
Arkansas                      1           1            1          1           1          1
California                    1           1            1          1           1          1
Colorado                      0           0            0          0           0          0
Connecticut                   1           1            1          1           1          1
Delaware                      0           0            1          1           0          0
District of Columbia          1           1            1          1           0          0
Florida                       0           0            1          1           0          0
Georgia                       1           1            1          1           1          1
Hawaii                        1           1            1          1           1          1
Idaho                         1           1            0          0           1          0
Illinois                      0           1            0          0           1          0
Indiana                       1           1            0          0           1          1
Iowa                          1           0            1          0           0          0
Kansas                        0           0            1          1           0          0
Kentucky                      1           1            1          1           1          1
Louisiana                     1           1            1          1           1          1
Maine                         1           1            1          1           1          1
Maryland                      1           1            1          1           1          1
Massachusetts                 1           1            1          1           1          1
Michigan                      1           1            1          0           1          1
Minnesota                     1           1            1          0           1          1
Mississippi                   1           1            1          1           1          1
Missouri                      1           1            1          1           1          1
Montana                       1           1            1          1           1          1
Nebraska                      1           1            0          0           0          0
Nevada                        1           0            1          1           1          0
New Hampshire                 0           0            0          0           0          0
New Jersey                    0           0            0          0           0          0
New Mexico                    1           1            1          1           1          1
New York                      1           1            1          1           0          0
North Carolina                1           1            1          1           1          1
North Dakota                  1           1            0          0           1          1
Ohio                          1           1            0          0           1          0
Oklahoma                      1           1            1          1           1          0
Oregon                        1           1            1          1           1          1
Pennsylvania                  0           0            0          0           0          0
Rhode Island                  1           1            1          1           1          1
South Carolina                1           1            1          1           1          1
South Dakota                  0           0            0          0           0          0
Tennessee                     1           1            1          1           1          1
Texas                         1           1            1          1           1          1
Utah                          1           1            1          1           1          1
Vermont                       1           1            0          0           1          1
Virginia                      1           1            1          1           1          1
Washington                    0           0            1          1           0          0
West Virginia                 1           1            1          1           1          1
Wisconsin                     0           0            0          0           0          0
Wyoming                       1           1            1          1           1          1
Total                        39           38          37         34          36         31
Notes: Our analysis samples consist of states that have 1996 and 2000 NAEP scores in
mathematics, 1998 and 2002 scores in reading, and 2000 and 2005 scores in science. NAEP
achievement data are not available for racial-ethnic subgroups within all participating state-
year observations.
                                     Table B2 - The Estimated Effects of NCLB on NAEP Science Scores
                                                                  Grade 4 Science                              Grade 8 Science
                                                                             10th       90th                              10th      90th
                                                        Mean     % Basic                         Mean         % Basic
                                                                           percentile percentile                       percentile percentile
Independent variables                                    (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)      (5)            (6)       (7)       (8)
Panel A: Ts = no prior accountability, no sample exclusions
NCLBt × Ts                                            -0.968       -1.257     -1.778     -0.912     -2.017     -2.489      -2.603    -1.709
                                                      (1.314)     (1.472)    (2.303)    (1.020)    (1.602)     (1.717)    (2.787)    (1.051)
Number of states                                        36           36         36         36         31         31          31        31
Sample size                                             72           72         72         72         93         93          93        93
Panel B: Ts = no prior accountability, excludes 1998-2001 adopters
NCLBt × Ts                                             0.883       0.805      1.188      0.261      1.752       1.226      2.934      1.235
                                                      (1.714)     (1.961)    (2.853)    (1.442)    (1.384)     (1.477)    (2.356)    (1.124)
Number of states                                         22          22         22         22        31           31        31          31
Sample size                                              44          44         44         44        93           93        93          93
Panel C: Ts = Years without prior school accountability, no sample exclusions
NCLB × T
      t    s                                           0.168       0.184      0.216      0.055      -0.105     -0.192     -0.086      -0.113
                                                      (0.291)     (0.337)    (0.431)    (0.248)    (0.302)     (0.319)    (0.511)    (0.218)
Total effect relative to state with school
                                                       1.008      1.107       1.297      0.332      -0.628     -1.152     -0.514      -0.678
accountability starting in 1997
                                                      (1.746)     (2.020)    (2.585)    (1.489)    (1.810)     (1.912)    (3.066)    (1.311)
Number of states                                        36           36        36          36        31          31         31         31
Sample size                                             72           72        72          72        93          93         93         93
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                           152        71        113       188         151         63        109         190
accountability
Student-level standard deviation prior to NCLB              35                                         36
Notes: Each column within a panel is a separate regression. All specifications include state fixed effects and linear and quadratic exclusion
rates. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. ***p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                          Table B3 - The Estimated Effects of NCLB on NAEP 4th Grade Science Scores, by Subgroup
                                                                    OLS                                        WLS
                                                                        10th       90th                            10th       90th
                                                   Mean       % Basic                          Mean      % Basic
                                                                      percentile percentile                      percentile percentile
Subgroup                                            (1)         (2)      (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)      (7)        (8)
White (36 states, n=72)
Total effect                                        1.095        1.141       1.666      -0.056          1.976       2.262       2.418       1.015
                                                   (1.613)      (1.757)     (2.330)     (1.437)        (2.181)     (2.279)     (3.026)     (1.869)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     158          79         124          191           160          80          126         192
accountability

Black (28 states, n=56)
Total effect                                        3.372        2.606      5.261*       2.368        4.557**     5.656**       5.575     5.296**
                                                   (2.360)      (3.668)     (2.957)     (2.618)       (2.197)     (2.776)      (3.472)    (1.433)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     126          38          85          163           124          33          87          160
accountability

Hispanic (19 states, n=38)
Total effect                                        -0.433      -0.612      -1.756      -0.887          2.183       1.273       1.639       1.040
                                                   (3.274)      (4.059)     (5.448)     (2.238)        (4.743)     (5.440)     (5.436)     (4.653)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     126          39          82          166           119          31          72          163
accountability

Male (36 states, n=72)
Total effect                                        0.876        0.594       1.518       0.439          2.436       1.781       3.217       2.382
                                                   (1.565)      (1.791)     (2.708)     (1.321)        (2.408)     (2.336)     (4.115)     (1.850)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     154          73          114         191           153          72          112         190
accountability

Female (36 states, n=72)
Total effect                                        1.112        1.627       0.969       0.413          1.299       2.081       0.631       0.946
                                                   (1.989)      (2.299)     (2.972)     (1.913)        (2.609)     (2.727)     (3.641)     (2.755)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     149          68          112         185           149          67          111         186
accountability

Free Lunch Eligible (36 states, n=72)
Total effect                                        0.487        0.397       1.932      -0.022          1.256       0.807       2.317       1.042
                                                   (2.764)      (3.512)     (4.038)     (2.230)        (3.831)     (4.376)     (5.734)     (2.861)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     139          55          99          176           137          52          96          174
accountability

Not Free Lunch Eligible (36 states, n=72)
Total effect                                        1.065        1.305       2.072       0.313          1.884       2.185       2.750       1.580
                                                   (1.591)      (1.673)     (2.196)     (1.629)        (1.962)     (2.017)     (2.754)     (2.147)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                      160          81          127        193             161         82         127         194
accountability
Notes: Each cell is a separate regression as in Panel C of Table 3. The total NCLB effect by 2007 is relative to a state with school
accountability starting in 1997. All specifications include state fixed effects and a quadratic in the exclusion rate. Standard errors are clustered
at the state level. ***p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                          Table B4 - The Estimated Effects of NCLB on NAEP 8th Grade Science Scores, by Subgroup
                                                                    OLS                                        WLS
                                                                        10th       90th                            10th       90th
                                                   Mean       % Basic                          Mean      % Basic
                                                                      percentile percentile                      percentile percentile
Subgroup                                            (1)         (2)      (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)      (7)        (8)
White (31 states, n=93)
Total effect                                        0.098        0.050       0.612      -0.419          0.911       1.074       1.713       0.177
                                                   (1.561)      (1.869)     (2.543)     (1.415)        (1.232)     (1.451)     (2.116)     (1.407)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     158          71          119         194           159          72          120         195
accountability

Black (21 states, n=63)
Total effect                                        1.383        1.139       1.007       0.560          0.527       -1.077      2.474      -1.140
                                                   (3.189)      (2.885)     (5.671)     (3.177)        (2.745)     (3.276)     (3.806)     (3.022)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     120          23          82          160           117          20          79          156
accountability

Hispanic (10 states, n=30)
Total effect                                        -2.081      -2.175      -2.512      -1.602          2.068       0.564       2.116       1.617
                                                   (3.557)      (3.074)     (6.520)     (2.185)        (7.019)     (6.216)     (7.985)     (6.256)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     133          40          90          172           126          32          84          164
accountability

Male (31 states, n=93)
Total effect                                        -0.615      -0.994      -0.913      -0.749          0.005       -0.662      0.854      -0.970
                                                   (1.910)      (2.079)     (3.130)     (1.264)        (1.715)     (1.725)     (2.877)     (1.429)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     153          65         109          193           153          64          108         193
accountability

Female (31 states, n=93)
Total effect                                        -0.716      -1.402      -0.231      -0.336          0.059       -0.507      0.613       0.460
                                                   (2.044)      (2.192)     (3.291)     (1.685)        (1.873)     (1.978)     (3.128)     (1.250)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     149          61         109          186           148          60          107         186
accountability

Free Lunch Eligible (31 states, n=93)
Total effect                                        -2.570      -4.574      -0.412     -3.717**         -0.428      -2.791      2.384      -1.368
                                                   (2.582)      (2.653)     (4.161)     (1.848)        (2.620)     (2.421)     (3.587)     (2.286)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     138          46          94          179           135          43          91          177
accountability

Not Free Lunch Eligible (31 states, n=93)
Total effect                                        0.635        0.896       2.076      -0.444          0.586       0.990       2.097      -0.684
                                                   (1.590)      (1.767)     (2.457)     (1.473)        (1.607)     (1.695)     (2.473)     (1.635)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                      158          71          119        194             158         71         119         194
accountability
Notes: Each cell is a separate regression as in Panel C of Table 3. The total NCLB effect by 2007 is relative to a state with school
accountability starting in 1997. All specifications include state fixed effects and a quadratic in the exclusion rate. Standard errors are clustered
at the state level. ***p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Figure B1: Trends in Grade 4 Science Achievement in the Main NAEP by Timing of Accountability Policy




                             153
                             152
            NAEP scale score
               150    151    149
                             148




                                            1992   1994    1996     1998       2000          2002   2004   2006   2008
                                                                               Year

                                                          State adopted school acct. policy by 1998
                                                          State never adopted school acct. policy before NCLB


                                                                   (a) Average scale score
                          72
          Percent meeting basic standards
              66        6864       70




                                            1992   1994   1996      1998      2000       2002       2004   2006   2008
                                                                              Year

                                                          State adopted school acct. policy by 1998
                                                          State never adopted school acct. policy before NCLB


                                                            (b) Percent meeting “basic” standard
Figure B2: Trends in Grade 8 Science Achievement in the Main NAEP by Timing of Accountability Policy




                               152
            NAEP scale score
            148        150     146




                                               1992   1994    1996     1998       2000          2002   2004   2006   2008
                                                                                  Year

                                                             State adopted school acct. policy by 1998
                                                             State never adopted school acct. policy before NCLB


                                                                      (a) Average scale score
                                          64
          Percent meeting basic standards
             58       60    56  62




                                               1992   1994   1996      1998      2000       2002       2004   2006   2008
                                                                                 Year

                                                             State adopted school acct. policy by 1998
                                                             State never adopted school acct. policy before NCLB


                                                               (b) Percent meeting “basic” standard
                      Appendix C - Discrepancies in Accountability Coding

       To begin, we reviewed a small number of states that were not included in the study by

Hanushek and Raymond (2005) and identified two (i.e., Illinois and Alaska) that implemented

consequential accountability in advance of NCLB (i.e., in 1992 and 2001, respectively). Our

review also suggested that the timing of consequential-accountability policies differed from that

reported by Hanushek and Raymond (2005) in four states: Connecticut, New Mexico, North

Carolina and Tennessee. We identified Connecticut as implementing consequential

accountability in 1999 (i.e., with the adoption of Public Act 99-288) rather than in the early

1990s. While Connecticut reported on school performance in the early 1990s, it only rated

schools that were receiving Title I schools and schools for which a district made a request during

this period. We also identified New Mexico as implementing school accountability (i.e., rating

school performance and providing financial rewards as well as the threat of possible sanctions)

with the 1998 implementation of the Incentives for School Improvement Act rather than in 2003.

We identified North Carolina as implementing school accountability in 1996 under the “ABCs of

Public Education” rather than in 1993. We identified Tennessee as implementing consequential

school accountability in the fall of 2000 rather than in 1996. While Tennessee did begin

reporting school performance in 1996, it did not rate schools, identify low performers or attach

other school-level consequences until the State Board of Education approved a new

accountability system in 2000.

       Finally, there are four additional states (Indiana, Kansas, Wisconsin and Virginia), which

are identified as having consequential accountability in our baseline coding but could be viewed

as marginal cases. Hanushek and Raymond (2005) identified both Wisconsin and Virginia as

having consequential accountability prior to NCLB. However, in both Wisconsin and Virginia,
the available state sanctions appear to have been clearly limited to school ratings. For example,

Education Week (1999) notes, “Wisconsin law strictly limits the state's authority to intervene in

or penalize failing schools.” Similarly, Virginia began identifying low-performance schools

through an accreditation system that became effective during the 1998-99 school year. However,

because of limited state authority, the loss of accreditation was not clearly tied to the possibility

of other explicit school sanctions (e.g., school closure). Hanushek and Raymond (2005) also

identify Indiana and Kansas as introducing report-card, rather than consequential, accountability

prior to NCLB (i.e. in 1995). However, in addition to school-level performance reporting,

Kansas had an accreditation process that rated schools and could culminate in several possible

sanctions for low-performing schools (e.g., closure). Furthermore, Education Week (1999)

indicated that, in addition to rating schools, Indiana rewarded high performing schools and state

officials viewed vague state statutes as suggesting they could also close low-performing schools.

In our baseline coding, we identify all four of these states as having consequential accountability

prior to NCLB. However, we also report the results of a robustness check in which these

designations are switched.
       Table 1 - Descriptive Statistics, National Data and State-Based Analysis Samples (1992-2007)
                                                                        State-based Analysis Samples
                                                               4th Grade 8th grade 4th grade 8th grade
Variable                                              Nation
                                                                 Math      Math    Reading Reading

Pre-NCLB NAEP Performance
4th grade math - 2000 average                          224        224
4th grade math -Percent change, 1992 to 2000          2.28%      3.53%
8th grade math - 2000 average                          272                   271
8th grade math - Percent change, 1992 to 2000         1.87%                 2.35%
4th grade reading - 2002 average                       217                              216
4th grade reading -Percent change, 1994 to 2002       2.36%                            3.41%
8th grade reading - 2002 average                       263                                         260
8th grade reading -Percent change, 1998 to 2002       0.77%                                       0.32%

Observed traits in 2000
NAEP Exclusion rate, 4th Grade                          4%       4.47%
NAEP Exclusion rate, 8th Grade                          4%                  4.40%
Poverty rate                                          11.30%     12.54%     12.47%
Pupil teacher ratio                                    16.40      16.43      16.42
Current per pupil expenditures                        $7,394     $8,773     $8,844
Percent free lunch                                    26.92%     31.88%     31.86%
Percent of students white                             62.10%     59.82%     62.08%
Percent of students black                             17.20%     17.78%     16.66%
Percent of students Hispanic                          15.60%     16.39%     15.41%
Percent of students asian                             5.20%      4.06%      4.44%

Observed traits in 2002
NAEP Exclusion rate, 4th Grade                          6%                             7.06%
NAEP Exclusion rate, 8th Grade                          5%                                        5.91%
Poverty rate                                          12.10%                          12.43%     12.79%
Pupil teacher ratio                                    16.20                           16.57      16.58
Current per pupil expenditures                        $8,259                          $9,252     $9,174
Percent free lunch                                    28.81%                          33.41%     34.39%
Percent of students white                             60.30%                          55.60%     56.84%
Percent of students black                             17.20%                          18.13%     16.75%
Percent of students Hispanic                          17.10%                          19.85%     19.56%
Percent of students asian                             5.60%                            4.16%      5.18%

Number of states                                                    39       38          37         34
Sample size                                                        227       220        249        170
Notes: State data are weighted by state-year public-school enrollment.
                                     Table 2 - States with Consequential Accountability prior to NCLB
                                Hanushek and Raymond (2005)              Carnoy and Loeb (2002)            Lee and Wong (2004)
State      Implementation Year     Accountability Type (Year)       School Repercussions (1999-2000) Accountability Type (1995-2000)
IL                 1992                         n/a                              Moderate                           Strong
WI                 1993               Consequential (1993)                  Weak to Moderate                      Moderate
TX                 1994               Consequential (1994)                         Strong                           Strong
IN                 1995                Report Card (1993)                        Moderate                           Strong
KS                 1995                Report Card (1993)                          Weak                           Moderate
KY                 1995               Consequential (1995)                         Strong                           Strong
NC                 1996               Consequential (1993)                         Strong                           Strong
NV                 1996               Consequential (1996)                         Weak                           Moderate
OK                 1996               Consequential (1996)                         Weak                           Moderate
AL                 1997               Consequential (1997)                         Strong                           Strong
RI                 1997               Consequential (1997)                 Weak implementation                    Moderate
WV                 1997               Consequential (1997)                         Strong                         Moderate
DE                 1998               Consequential (1998)                         None                             Weak
MA                 1998               Consequential (1998)                     Implicit only                        Weak
MI                 1998               Consequential (1998)                         Weak                           Moderate
NM                 1998               Consequential (2003)                  Moderate to strong                      Strong
NY                 1998               Consequential (1998)                         Strong                           Strong
VA                 1998               Consequential (1998)                  Weak to Moderate                      Moderate
AR                 1999               Consequential (1999)                         None                             Weak
CA                 1999               Consequential (1999)                         Strong                         Moderate
CT                 1999               Consequential (1993)                         Weak                           Moderate
FL                 1999               Consequential (1999)                         Strong                           Strong
LA                 1999               Consequential (1999)                       Moderate                           Strong
MD                 1999               Consequential (1999)                         Strong                           Strong
SC                 1999               Consequential (1999)                       Moderate                         Moderate
VT                 1999               Consequential (1999)                         Weak                           Moderate
GA                 2000               Consequential (2000)                         None                           Moderate
OR                 2000               Consequential (2000)                  Weak to Moderate                      Moderate
TN                 2000               Consequential (1996)                         Weak                           Moderate
AK                 2001                         n/a                                None                             Weak
Additional sources: CPRE Assessment and Accountability Profiles, Education Week (1999), CCSSO annual surveys, state Department of
Education websites and Lexis-Nexis searches of state and local newspaper archives.
             Table 3 - The Estimated Effects of NCLB on Mean NAEP Scores
                                                   Grade 4 Grade 8 Grade 4              Grade 8
                                                    Math    Math     Read                Read
Independent variables                                (1)     (2)      (3)                 (4)

Panel A: Ts = no prior accountability, no sample exclusions

NCLBt × Ts                                              1.538       0.177     1.053       0.104
                                                       (1.209)     (1.350)   (0.869)     (1.035)
NCLBt × Ts × (Years since NCLB)t                       0.649**      0.100     0.354      -0.217
                                                       (0.266)     (0.268)   (0.222)     (0.394)
Total effect by 2007                                   4.782**      0.677    2.824**     -0.982
                                                       (1.952)     (2.304)   (1.242)     (1.931)

Number of states                                          39        38           37        34
Sample size                                              227        220         249        170

Panel B: Ts = no prior accountability, excludes 1998-2001 adopters

NCLBt × Ts                                             4.438**     2.602*      1.851     -0.287
                                                       (1.261)    (1.346)     (1.205)    (1.260)
NCLBt × Ts × (Years since NCLB)t                        0.755*     0.530       -0.086    -0.386
                                                       (0.405)    (0.359)     (0.330)    (0.487)
Total effect by 2007                                   8.212**    5.253**      1.420     -2.219
                                                       (2.318)    (2.457)     (1.531)    (2.404)

Number of states                                          24        23           21        19
Sample size                                              139        132         140        95

Panel C: Ts = Years without prior school accountability, no sample exclusions

NCLBt × Ts                                             0.647**      0.273    0.307**     -0.074
                                                       (0.212)     (0.194)   (0.148)     (0.215)
NCLBt × Ts × (Years since NCLB)t                        0.112*      0.069     0.015      -0.055
                                                       (0.058)     (0.060)   (0.046)     (0.074)
Total effect by 2007 relative to state with school
                                                       7.244**     3.704       2.297     -2.101
accountability starting in 1997
                                                       (2.240)     (2.464)    (1.441)    (2.070)
Number of states                                          39         38          37        34
Sample size                                              227         220        249        170

Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                         224        272        216         261
accountability
Student-level standard deviation prior to NCLB            31        38          36         34
Notes: Each column within a panel is a separate regression. All specifications include state
fixed effects and linear and quadratic exclusion rates. Standard errors are clustered at the state
level. ***p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                         Table 4 - The Estimated Effects of NCLB on Other Outcomes
                                                                                                                                                                Fraction of
                                                                          Median Employment- Fraction in                                            Fraction of
                                               Exclusion      Poverty                                                           %         % Free                  Cohort
                                                                         household population  public    % Black                                     Cohort in
                                                 Rate          Rate                                                          Hispanic     Lunch                 Attending
                                                                          income   ratio*100  schools                                               Full-Day K
                                                                                                                                                                Any Pre-K
Grade-Subject Sample                               (1)           (2)        (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)          (9)       (10)
4th Grade Math (39 states, n=227)
Total effect by 2007                             0.766          -2.016      992         0.262        -1.221*      2.151        -2.786      1.868       0.842        3.166
                                                (1.156)        (2.204)    (2,158)      (0.922)       (0.664)     (1.503)      (2.137)     (1.781)     (6.221)      (4.314)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without
                                                [3.400]       [11.613]   [38,796]     [51.402]      [91.397]     [13.133]     [6.133]    [26.597]     [45.012]    [42.339]
prior accountability
8th Grade Math (38 states, n=220)
Total effect by 2007                             0.912          -2.364     2,535        -0.097        -2.707     2.765**       -0.596      1.535       3.735        -1.366
                                                (1.298)        (1.990)    (1,995)      (0.723)       (1.985)     (1.380)      (0.907)     (1.669)     (5.506)      (6.899)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without
                                                [3.214]       [11.914]   [38,631]     [51.189]      [91.907]     [12.643]     [5.429]    [27.119]     [33.208]    [34.398]
prior accountability
4th Grade Reading (37 states, n=249)
Total effect by 2007                             1.868          -1.665    3,187*        -0.225        -0.093     2.387**       -0.121      -0.075      -2.585       3.962
                                                (1.751)        (1.407)    (1,909)      (0.731)       (1.007)     (0.888)      (1.493)     (1.914)     (6.078)      (4.714)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without
                                                [6.167]       [11.792]   [41,229]     [49.667]      [90.612]     [15.667]     [6.917]    [29.450]     [48.913]    [45.504]
prior accountability
8th Grade Reading (34, states, n=170)
Total effect by 2007                              2.072       -1.979     4,331*          -0.762        1.716      1.057       1.693         -1.437       -2.547      1.739
                                                 (2.158)     (1.802)     (2,248)        (0.875)       (4.238)    (1.498)     (1.823)       (2.946)      (7.810)     (8.092)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without
                                                 [4.900]    [12.670] [40,110]          [48.715]      [89.852] [16.200]       [6.600]      [31.526] [46.036] [35.813]
prior accountability
Notes: Each cell is a separate regression as in Panel C of Table 3. The total NCLB effect by 2007 is relative to a state with school accountability starting in 1997. All
specifications include state fixed effects. Parental education not available for 4th grade students. Standard errors are robust to clustering at the state level. ***p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                     Table 5 -The Estimated Effects of NCLB on Mean NAEP Scores, Sensitivity Analyses
                                                                                  Treatment
                                                                    Alternative
                                                       Enrollment                  intensity   Full set of
                                        State-year                   coding for                                        State-specific
                           Baseline                  weighted least                measure     year fixed
                                        covariates                  VA, WI, IN,                                            trends
                                                        squares                    (Panel B      effects
                                                                        KS
                                                                                specification)
Grade-Subject Sample          (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)                       (7)
4th Grade Math
Total effect by 2007       7.244**       6.651**        7.162**       5.423**     10.953**      7.254**                   7.242**
                           (2.240)        (2.266)       (2.818)       (2.532)       (5.010)      (2.251)                  (2.529)

8th Grade Math
Total effect by 2007          3.704          3.893*          1.729           2.363          5.516           3.785          3.255
                             (2.464)         (2.162)        (4.408)         (2.554)        (3.734)         (2.476)        (2.996)

4th Grade Reading
Total effect by 2007          2.297           1.881          1.462           1.807          3.321          2.343*          1.688
                             (1.441)         (1.580)        (1.478)         (1.401)        (2.477)         (1.371)        (1.623)

8th Grade Reading
Total effect by 2007         -2.101          -1.848          -2.112         -1.986         -1.969          -2.076         -1.880
                             (2.070)         (1.715)        (1.841)         (2.197)        (2.600)         (2.069)        (2.645)


                                          States with 1+ States with 3+                     NCLB           NCLB          Including
                         No state fixed                                   Alternate
                                            Pre-NCLB       Pre-NCLB                       starting in    starting in     2009 math
                            effects                                     accom. coding
                                            Test Score    Test Scores                        2002           2004           scores
                               (8)             (9)           (10)            (11)            (12)           (13)            (14)
4th Grade Math
Total effect by 2007        7.533**         5.862**        8.093**         8.571**         7.244**        2.867**         7.227**
                            (2.720)         (2.061)        (2.445)         (2.598)         (2.240)        (1.440)         (2.353)

8th Grade Math
Total effect by 2007          4.930          3.741*          2.714         5.334**          3.704           1.710         4.206*
                             (3.351)         (2.093)        (2.765)        (2.621)         (2.464)         (1.459)        (2.285)

4th Grade Reading
Total effect by 2007          3.657          2.006*          2.158          2.490*         5.942*           0.802            n/a
                             (2.337)         (1.139)        (1.439)         (1.467)        (3.307)         (1.160)

8th Grade Reading
Total effect by 2007            0.734        -1.104            n/a           -1.430           n/a            -1.189           n/a
                               (3.356)       (1.816)                        (2.078)                          (1.806)
Notes: Each cell is a separate regression as in Panel C of Table 3. The total NCLB effect by 2007 is relative to a state with
school accountability starting in 1997. Specifications include state fixed effects and a quadratic in the exclusion rate, except
where indicated otherwise. In addition to the exclusion rate, column 6 includes the fraction of students receiving free lunch,
fraction black, fraction hispanic, fraction white, parental education level for 8th grade specifications, the poverty rate and poverty
rate squared, the unemployment rate and unemployment rate squared, pupil-teacher ratio, and log per-pupil expenditures in 2007
dollars, all at the state-year level. Column 10 uses the assessment administration that began allowing accommodations in 2000
for math and 1998 for reading rather than using the administration allowing no accommodations in all years. Standard errors are
clustered at the state level. ***p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                    Table 6 - The Estimated Effects of NCLB on Achievement Distributions by Grade and Subject
                                                                 Percent    Percent    Percent        10th        25th        50th                75th         90th
                                                     Mean
                                                                  Basic    Proficient Advanced percentile percentile percentile                 percentile   percentile
Grade-Subject Sample                                   (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)          (9)
4th Grade Math (39 states, n=227)
Total effect by 2007                                7.244**      10.090**      5.590**       0.599       9.046**      8.393**       8.004**      6.634**      5.205**
                                                    (2.240)       (3.145)      (1.891)      (0.458)      (3.767)      (2.728)       (2.282)      (1.902)      (1.916)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                      224           64            21           2           186           205          225          244          259
accountability
8th Grade Math (38 states, n=220)
Total effect by 2007                                  3.704      5.888**        1.286        -0.397       5.598*       5.065*       3.890*       4.340**       2.537
                                                     (2.464)     (2.680)       (2.055)      (0.914)       (3.236)      (2.745)      (2.216)      (2.189)      (2.404)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                      272           64            24           4           228           251          275          296          314
accountability
4th Grade Reading (37 states, n=249)
Total effect by 2007                                  2.297        2.359       2.542**      1.102**        3.611        2.244       2.251*       2.258**      2.097**
                                                     (1.441)      (1.592)      (1.035)      (0.396)       (2.804)      (1.969)      (1.366)      (0.938)      (0.805)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                      216           61            29           6           171           194          218          240          258
accountability
8th Grade Reading (34, states, n=170)                -2.101       -3.763        1.977        0.057       -5.341*        -3.462       -1.022       1.289        1.172
Total effect by 2007                                 (2.070)      (2.561)      (2.273)      (0.686)      (3.199)       (2.703)      (2.135)      (2.249)      (2.897)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                      261           73            28           2           219           241          263          282          299
accountability
Notes: Each cell is a separate regression as in Panel C of Table 3. The total NCLB effect by 2007 is relative to a state with school accountability starting in 1997.
All specifications include state fixed effects and a quadratic in the exclusion rate. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. ***p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                            Table 7 - The Estimated Effects of NCLB on 4th Grade NAEP Math Scores by Subgroup
                                                                    OLS                                       WLS
                                                                         10th      90th                           10th       90th
                                                   Mean       % Basic                         Mean      % Basic
                                                                      percentile percentile                     percentile percentile
Subgroup                                            (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)      (7)        (8)
White (39 states, n=227)
Total effect by 2007                               5.817**     8.802**     6.503**     4.126**        4.855**     8.203**      6.371*     3.743**
                                                   (1.679)     (2.722)     (3.268)     (1.580)        (2.047)     (3.478)      (3.769)    (1.769)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     232          76         197          265           233          77          198         265
accountability

Black (30 states, n=176)
Total effect by 2007                                4.931        8.061       3.648       4.288       14.573** 22.221** 16.043** 11.631**
                                                   (5.342)      (6.548)     (7.870)     (6.089)       (3.731)  (6.316)  (5.752)  (3.362)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     203          35         168          238           202          33          169         235
accountability

Hispanic (19 states, n=108)
Total effect by 2007                              11.429**     10.800*     21.159**      3.895        9.793**    24.896**      5.633*     10.115**
                                                   (4.242)     (6.373)      (8.772)     (3.440)       (1.411)     (3.634)      (3.283)     (2.401)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     204          40         164          242           204          36          168         240
accountability

Male (39 states, n=227)
Total effect by 2007                               7.408**     9.182**      8.314*     4.667**        7.612**    10.835**      7.665*     4.945**
                                                   (2.368)     (3.244)      (4.417)    (2.047)        (3.545)     (5.217)      (4.664)    (2.978)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     224          65         186          261           227          68          189         264
accountability

Female (39 states, n=227)
Total effect by 2007                               7.365**    10.466**     9.205**     5.245**        7.426**     11.216**    8.503**     6.328**
                                                   (2.258)     (3.244)     (3.345)     (1.927)        (2.480)      (4.622)    (3.350)     (1.734)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                              222.757           64.032     186.234     257.659          225          67          189         259
accountability

Free Lunch Eligible (36 states, n=180)
Total effect by 2007                               5.487*       9.196*       7.080       2.103        8.011**    15.053** 10.528**          2.761
                                                   (3.294)      (5.463)     (4.618)     (2.962)       (2.631)     (5.347)  (3.384)         (2.162)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     212          49         175          248           212          49          176         248
accountability

Not Free Lunch Eligible (36 states, n=180)
Total effect by 2007                                3.027        5.418       5.011       0.359          1.385     5.508**      3.792*      -1.741
                                                   (2.568)      (3.863)     (3.229)     (2.631)        (2.508)    (2.758)      (1.964)     (3.915)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                      232          76          197        266             234         78         199         266
accountability
Notes: Each cell is a separate regression as in Panel C of Table 3. The total NCLB effect by 2007 is relative to a state with school
accountability starting in 1997. All specifications include state fixed effects and a quadratic in the exclusion rate. Standard errors are clustered
at the state level. ***p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                            Table 8 - The Estimated Effects of NCLB on 8th Grade NAEP Math Scores by Subgroup
                                                                    OLS                                       WLS
                                                                         10th      90th                           10th       90th
                                                   Mean       % Basic                         Mean      % Basic
                                                                      percentile percentile                     percentile percentile
Subgroup                                            (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)      (7)        (8)
White (37 states, n=214)
Total effect by 2007                                2.863       4.740*       4.045       1.803          1.828       4.253       3.859      -0.943
                                                   (2.561)      (2.639)     (2.792)     (3.040)        (3.680)     (3.134)     (3.466)     (4.402)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     281          74         240          320           282          76          242         321
accountability

Black (27 states, n=158)
Total effect by 2007                                9.261        9.977      10.644       5.424          8.826      10.004      12.414       7.306
                                                   (6.774)      (7.886)     (7.481)     (7.219)        (8.999)    (11.955)     (8.929)     (8.829)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     241          28         198          284           242          28          200         283
accountability

Hispanic (16 states, n=90)
Total effect by 2007                              20.031** 22.006** 17.773** 20.754**                 8.219**    18.692**       2.464     9.230**
                                                   (5.766)  (4.618)  (8.349)  (6.084)                 (4.135)     (4.666)      (5.996)    (3.236)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     246          36         200          291           247          36          204         292
accountability

Male (38 states, n=220)
Total effect by 2007                                1.678        3.721       2.565       0.050          -1.702      1.943       1.239      -4.986
                                                   (2.488)      (2.369)     (2.944)     (2.847)        (4.024)     (3.387)     (3.953)     (4.857)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     273          64         226          316           276          67          229         319
accountability

Female (38 states, n=220)
Total effect by 2007                               6.300**     7.690**     8.340**      5.052*          6.436      8.442*       9.272       2.541
                                                   (2.664)     (3.191)     (4.058)      (2.592)        (4.459)     (5.072)     (6.548)     (3.422)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                              271.977           64.108     228.979     312.511          274          67          231         315
accountability

Free Lunch Eligible (34 states, n=170)
Total effect by 2007                               10.702*     12.773*      16.808     8.116**       15.761** 23.432**        20.328*     12.690**
                                                   (6.155)     (7.328)     (10.388)    (4.027)        (5.631)  (6.398)        (11.063)     (3.899)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     257          47          211         300           256          46          210         300
accountability

Not Free Lunch Eligible (34 states, n=170)
Total effect by 2007                                2.199        3.152       1.318       3.158          0.992       2.392       2.063      -1.393
                                                   (3.924)      (4.045)     (4.015)     (4.791)        (4.171)     (3.478)     (3.882)     (6.157)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                      279          72          238        320             281         74         240         320
accountability
Notes: Each cell is a separate regression as in Panel C of Table 3. The total NCLB effect by 2007 is relative to a state with school
accountability starting in 1997. All specifications include state fixed effects and a quadratic in the exclusion rate. Standard errors are clustered
at the state level. ***p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                        Table 9 - The Estimated Effects of NCLB on 4th Grade NAEP Reading Scores by Subgroup
                                                                   OLS                                      WLS
                                                                       10th       90th                          10th       90th
                                                 Mean      % Basic                          Mean      % Basic
                                                                     percentile percentile                    percentile percentile
Subgroup                                          (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)      (7)        (8)
White (37 states, n=249)
Total effect by 2007                           4.854** 4.509** 6.626** 3.472**             5.362** 5.679** 8.252** 3.513**
                                                (1.231)     (1.379)   (1.938)    (1.132)   (1.201)    (1.393)  (2.249)    (0.888)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                  226         73        184        265       225        72       183        264
accountability

Black (32 states, n=214)
Total effect by 2007                                -1.873      -2.294      -2.090      -0.608          -0.871    -4.266*       0.794       0.866
                                                   (3.698)      (3.689)     (6.895)     (2.439)        (2.569)    (2.484)      (4.248)     (1.558)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     200          43         154          244           195          36          151         238
accountability

Hispanic (22 states, n=140)
Total effect by 2007                                6.094        5.597       6.464       5.177          0.242       -0.095      5.488       1.421
                                                   (4.835)      (4.948)     (6.902)     (3.754)        (4.805)     (5.079)     (4.887)     (3.769)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     199          43         154          244           193          37          144         241
accountability

Male (37 states, n=249)
Total effect by 2007                               3.399**     3.510**       4.601     2.953**         2.241*       0.894       3.079     3.490**
                                                   (1.578)     (1.756)      (3.352)    (1.073)         (1.287)     (1.668)     (2.906)    (1.054)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     212          58         166          254           214          60          167         256
accountability

Female (37 states, n=249)
Total effect by 2007                                1.395        1.280       1.762       1.325          0.741       0.607       2.404      -0.057
                                                   (1.535)      (1.811)     (2.605)     (1.249)        (1.697)     (1.827)     (2.761)     (1.472)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     220          65         176          561           222          68          177         263
accountability

Free Lunch Eligible (37 states, n=185)
Total effect by 2007                                0.567        1.278      -0.287       1.895          2.482       2.993      -0.256       5.942
                                                   (4.235)      (4.050)     (6.859)     (3.313)        (4.296)     (4.475)     (5.382)     (5.078)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     205          49         160          248           206          50          161         249
accountability

Not Free Lunch Eligible (37 states, n=185)
Total effect by 2007                                1.355        1.248      -1.851       1.674          -4.790      -4.892     -7.998      -4.390
                                                   (3.042)      (3.328)     (4.201)     (3.299)        (5.073)     (4.761)     (5.818)     (4.771)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                      225          72          184        264             227         74         186         265
accountability
Notes: Each cell is a separate regression as in Panel C of Table 3. The total NCLB effect by 2007 is relative to a state with school
accountability starting in 1997. All specifications include state fixed effects and a quadratic in the exclusion rate. Standard errors are clustered
at the state level. ***p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                      Table 10 - The Estimated Effects of NCLB on 8th Grade NAEP Reading Scores by Subgroup
                                                                   OLS                                     WLS
                                                                        10th      90th                         10th       90th
                                                 Mean      % Basic                          Mean    % Basic
                                                                     percentile percentile                   percentile percentile
Subgroup                                          (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)      (7)        (8)
White (33 states, n=165)
Total effect by 2007                             0.890      -2.111     -1.699     1.523     2.126    -0.287    0.925      2.178
                                                (2.220)    (2.303)    (3.678)    (3.127)   (2.142)  (2.068)   (3.324)    (4.004)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                  226         73        184        265     225.116  72.202    183.453 263.904
accountability

Black (27 states, n=135)
Total effect by 2007                              -14.513** -16.658** -20.449**         -8.678       -11.261** -16.002** -15.195**          -4.811
                                                    (4.061)   (5.156)   (4.424)         (6.357)       (2.714)    (3.493)   (5.422)         (5.269)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     245          54         205          282           244          53          205         280
accountability

Hispanic (20 states, n=100)
Total effect by 2007                                6.463        8.349       3.476      15.614          -1.831      -2.856     -9.639     7.476**
                                                   (6.609)      (6.645)     (9.900)    (11.650)        (2.262)     (3.246)     (6.246)    (3.793)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     243          53         196          285           243          51          196         285
accountability

Male (34 states, n=170)
Total effect by 2007                                -2.104      -4.375      -5.908       3.362        -3.745*     -7.095** -11.065**       6.001*
                                                   (2.305)      (3.209)     (4.092)     (2.320)       (2.138)      (2.876)   (4.731)       (3.120)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     256          67         213          294           258          70          215         296
accountability

Female (34 states, n=170)
Total effect by 2007                                -1.753      -3.314     -5.333*      -0.956          -0.427      -1.472    -4.697**     -0.359
                                                   (2.372)      (2.191)    (3.118)      (3.111)        (2.582)     (1.992)     (2.228)     (3.817)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     266          78         226          304           268          79          227         306
accountability

Free Lunch Eligible (34 states, n=170)
Total effect by 2007                               -4.770*     -6.330*      -7.339      -4.105        -6.447**    -8.050** -11.568**       -4.551
                                                   (2.856)     (3.719)      (4.737)     (3.470)        (2.375)     (2.927)   (5.009)       (3.906)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                     250          61         207          291           250          61          207         291
accountability

Not Free Lunch Eligible (34 states, n=170)
Total effect by 2007                                0.899       -1.538      -4.699       4.247          3.486       0.286      -0.714       4.925
                                                   (2.600)      (2.707)     (3.674)     (4.322)        (3.107)     (2.337)     (3.536)     (4.076)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                      268          80          229        304             270         82         231         306
accountability
Notes: Each cell is a separate regression as in Panel C of Table 3. The total NCLB effect by 2007 is relative to a state with school
accountability starting in 1997. All specifications include state fixed effects and a quadratic in the exclusion rate. Standard errors are clustered
at the state level. ***p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                       Table 11 - The Estimated Effects of NCLB on Math Achievement by Subscale
                                                              4th Grade                       8th Grade
                                                                 10th      90th                  10th      90th
                                                     Mean                            Mean
                                                              percentile percentile           percentile percentile
Subscale Category                                      (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)
Algebra
Total effect by 2007                                 7.725**     13.111**      1.326       3.141       7.202*      -0.730
                                                     (2.213)      (5.069)     (2.540)     (2.798)      (3.979)     (2.660)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                       228          189         264         274         226          319
accountability
Student-level standard deviation prior to NCLB          30                                   36

Geometry
Total effect by 2007                                 5.243**       7.635       2.445      3.943*      8.689**       0.251
                                                     (2.534)      (5.098)     (2.367)     (2.377)     (4.176)      (3.141)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                       225          187         262         270         226          312
accountability
                                                        31                                   34
Measurement
Total effect by 2007                                 5.914**     11.565**      0.751       2.430        9.760      -5.859
                                                     (2.248)      (5.320)     (2.851)     (3.362)      (7.017)     (4.613)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                       224          178         269         272         209          330
accountability
Student-level standard deviation prior to NCLB          36                                   49

Number Properties and Operations
Total effect by 2007                                 8.604**     13.126**     3.619*      4.122*      11.848**     -2.966
                                                     (2.575)      (4.882)     (1.930)     (2.172)      (4.411)     (2.149)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                       220          178         261         273         224          319
accountability
Student-level standard deviation prior to NCLB          33                                   37

Data Analysis, Statistics, and Probability
Total effect by 2007                                 7.306**     16.947**     -1.539      6.767**     16.355**     -2.236
                                                     (2.499)      (5.719)     (3.006)     (2.623)      (6.313)     (4.329)
Mean of Y before NCLB in states without prior
                                                        225          183          266         273           217        326
accountability
Student-level standard deviation prior to NCLB           32                                    42
Notes: Each cell is a separate regression as in Panel C of Table 3. The total NCLB effect by 2007 is relative to a state with
school accountability starting in 1997. All specifications include state fixed effects and a quadratic in the exclusion rate.
Standard errors are clustered at the state level. ***p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                Figure 1: Mean scaled score on the main NAEP for all public schools




              260
                                                                                                         230    220




                   240
                                                                                                        210




         220
                                                                                                 200




    NAEP scale score
                                                                                               NAEP scale score




  200
                                                                                                         190




              180
                                                                                                         180
                         1992   1994   1996   1998    2000     2002     2004   2006   2008                            1992   1994   1996      1998    2000     2002     2004   2006   2008
                                                      Year                                                                                            Year

                                                     African−American                                                                                African−American
                                                     Hispanic                                                                                        Hispanic
                                                     White                                                                                           White


                                         (a) Grade 4 mathematics                                                                           (b) Grade 4 reading




           290
                                                                                                       270




                   280
                                                                                                             260




            270
                                                                                                    250




     260
  NAEP scale score
                                                                                               NAEP scale score




250
                                                                                             240




           240
                                                                                                       230




                         1992   1994   1996   1998    2000    2002      2004   2006   2008                         1992      1994   1996     1998     2000    2002      2004   2006   2008
                                                      Year                                                                                            Year

                                                     African−American                                                                                African−American
                                                     Hispanic                                                                                        Hispanic
                                                     White                                                                                           White


                                        (c) Grade 8 mathematics                                                                            (d) Grade 8 reading
Figure 2: Trends in Grade 4 Mathematics Achievement in the Main NAEP by Timing of Accountability
Policy



                             240
                             235
            NAEP scale score
              225     230    220
                             215




                                            1992   1994   1996    1998      2000   2002            2004     2006     2008
                                                                              Year

                                                          State adopted school acct. policy by 1998
                                                          State never adopted school acct. policy before NCLB


                                                                   (a) Average scale score
                          80
          Percent meeting basic standards
                 60       50  70




                                            1992   1994   1996      1998      2000       2002        2004     2006      2008
                                                                              Year

                                                          State adopted school acct. policy by 1998
                                                          State never adopted school acct. policy before NCLB


                                                            (b) Percent meeting “basic” standard
Figure 3: Trends in Grade 8 Mathematics Achievement in the Main NAEP by Timing of Accountability
Policy



                         275 280
            NAEP scale score
               270           265
                             260




                                            1992   1994   1996    1998      2000   2002            2004     2006     2008
                                                                              Year

                                                          State adopted school acct. policy by 1998
                                                          State never adopted school acct. policy before NCLB


                                                                   (a) Average scale score
                          70
          Percent meeting basic standards
              55        6050      65




                                            1992   1994   1996      1998      2000       2002        2004     2006      2008
                                                                              Year

                                                          State adopted school acct. policy by 1998
                                                          State never adopted school acct. policy before NCLB


                                                            (b) Percent meeting “basic” standard
Figure 4: Trends in Grade 4 Reading Achievement in the Main NAEP by Timing of Accountability Policy




                             218
            NAEP scale score
            214        216   212




                                            1992   1994    1996     1998       2000          2002   2004   2006   2008
                                                                               Year

                                                          State adopted school acct. policy by 1998
                                                          State never adopted school acct. policy before NCLB


                                                                   (a) Average scale score
                          66
          Percent meeting basic standards
              60        6258       64




                                            1992   1994   1996      1998      2000       2002       2004   2006   2008
                                                                              Year

                                                          State adopted school acct. policy by 1998
                                                          State never adopted school acct. policy before NCLB


                                                            (b) Percent meeting “basic” standard
Figure 5: Trends in Grade 8 Reading Achievement in the Main NAEP by Timing of Accountability Policy




                             262
                              261
               NAEP scale score
            259     260      258




                                            1992   1994    1996     1998       2000          2002   2004   2006   2008
                                                                               Year

                                                          State adopted school acct. policy by 1998
                                                          State never adopted school acct. policy before NCLB


                                                                   (a) Average scale score
                          75
          Percent meeting basic standards
              71     72   70 73      74




                                            1992   1994   1996      1998      2000       2002       2004   2006   2008
                                                                              Year

                                                          State adopted school acct. policy by 1998
                                                          State never adopted school acct. policy before NCLB


                                                            (b) Percent meeting “basic” standard
