                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               ACCOUNTABILITY AND FLEXIBILITY IN PUBLIC SCHOOLS:
                 EVIDENCE FROM BOSTON'S CHARTERS AND PILOTS

                                        Atila Abdulkadiroglu
                                           Joshua Angrist
                                           Susan Dynarski
                                          Thomas J. Kane
                                            Parag Pathak

                                        Working Paper 15549
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15549


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2009




The authors are grateful to the Boston Foundation for financial support and to Boston's charter schools,
the Boston Public Schools, and Carrie Conaway, Mary Street, and the staff of the Massachusetts Department
of Elementary and Secondary Education for data and assistance. Sarah Cohodes, Jon Fullerton and
the staff of the Center for Education Policy Research at Harvard University played a critical role in
this project. We also thank Bruno Ferman, Yuqiao Huang, Simone Schaner, Chris Walters, and Victor
Vazquez for expert research assistance. We benefited from comments by Derek Neal and seminar
participants at the Bank of Italy, the LSE, McGill, the New York Fed, UBC, UC Dublin, UCLA, UC
Riverside, UIUC, ZEW, and the November 2009 New Directions in the Economic Analysis of Education
Conference at the University of Chicago. Abdulkadiroglu acknowledges an NSF-CAREER award.
Pathak thanks the Rappaport Institute for Greater Boston for research support. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Atila Abdulkadiroglu, Joshua Angrist, Susan Dynarski, Thomas J. Kane, and Parag Pathak.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Accountability and Flexibility in Public Schools: Evidence from Boston's Charters and Pilots
Atila Abdulkadiroglu, Joshua Angrist, Susan Dynarski, Thomas J. Kane, and Parag Pathak
NBER Working Paper No. 15549
November 2009, Revised December 2009
JEL No. H52,I21,I28,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

Charter schools are publicly funded but operate outside the regulatory framework and collective bargaining
agreements characteristic of traditional public schools. In return for this freedom, charter schools are
subject to heightened accountability. This paper estimates the impact of charter school attendance
on student achievement using data from Boston, where charter schools enroll a growing share of students.
We also evaluate an alternative to the charter model, Boston's pilot schools. These schools have some
of the independence of charter schools, but operate within the school district, face little risk of closure,
and are covered by many of same collective bargaining provisions as traditional public schools. Estimates
using student assignment lotteries show large and significant test score gains for charter lottery winners
in middle and high school. In contrast, lottery-based estimates for pilot schools are small and mostly
insignificant. The large positive lottery-based estimates for charter schools are similar to estimates
constructed using statistical controls in the same sample, but larger than those using statistical controls
in a wider sample of schools. The latter are still substantial, however. The estimates for pilot schools
are smaller and more variable than those for charters, with some significant negative effects.


Atila Abdulkadiroglu                                 Thomas J. Kane
Duke University                                      Harvard Graduate School of Education
Department of Economics                              Gutman Library, Room 455
Durham, NC 27708                                     Appian Way
atila.abdulkadiroglu@duke.edu                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                     and NBER
Joshua Angrist                                       kaneto@gse.harvard.edu
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-353                                         Parag Pathak
50 Memorial Drive                                    Assistant Professor of Economics
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                             E52-391C
and NBER                                             MIT Department of Economics
angrist@mit.edu                                      Cambridge, MA 02142
                                                     and NBER
Susan Dynarski                                       ppathak@mit.edu
University of Michigan
Weill Hall
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091
and NBER
dynarski@umich.edu
I        Introduction
Charter schools operate with considerably more independence than traditional public schools. They
are free to structure their curriculum and school environment; for instance, many charter schools
fit more instructional hours into a year by running longer school days and providing instruction on
weekends and during the summer (Matthews 2009, Wilson 2008, Hoxby et al, 2009). Because few
charter schools are unionized, they can hire and fire teachers and administrative staff without regard
to the collectively bargained seniority and tenure provisions that constrain such decisions in most
public schools. Although charter students made up only 2.9 percent of U.S. public school enrollment
in 2008-2009, charter enrollment has grown rapidly and seems likely to accelerate in the near future
(NAPCS 2009). The growth of charter schools is an important component of the contemporary
education reform movement’s pursuit of accountability and flexibility in public education.
        Proponents see charter schools’ freedom from regulation as a source of educational innovation, with
the added benefit of providing a source of competition that may prompt innovation and improvement
in the rest of the public system. At the same time, charter schools are controversial because, after a
transition period in which the state provides subsidies, they receive a tuition payment for each enrolled
student paid by students’ home (or “sending”) districts. In Massachusetts, the site of our study,
tuition payments are determined largely by the average per-pupil expenditure in sending districts.
Not surprisingly, therefore, public school districts are concerned about the revenue lost when their
students enroll in charter schools.
        The purpose of this paper is to assess the causal effects of charter school attendance and a closely
related alternative, called pilot schools, on student achievement. Pilot schools arose in Boston as a
union-supported alternative to charter schools.1 Boston’s charter schools are legally constituted by the
state as individual school districts and therefore operate independently of the Boston Public Schools
(BPS). In contrast, Boston’s pilot schools are legally part of the BPS district, and the extent to which
they operate outside collective bargaining provisions is spelled out in school-specific election-to-work
agreements signed by pilot faculty. In addition to these negotiated exemptions, pilot schools have
generally greater flexibility and decision-making powers over school budgets, academic programs, and
educational policies than do traditional BPS schools. This includes freedom with regard to policies
related to student promotion, graduation, discipline, and attendance.2
    1
     See Center for Collaborative Education (2006).
    2
     See the Boston Teachers Union website (http://www.btu.org/leftnavbar/HP PilotSchools.htm), which also notes:
“Pilot schools do not have to purchase a variety of services provided by the central office, such as substitute teachers,
textbook, SPED contracted services, and academic coaches. By not purchasing these services pilot schools ‘save’ ,
typically, $300 to $400 per year per student. They are allowed to retain these funds and purchase these services privately
if they wish.”
    In practice, pilot schools occupy a middle ground between charter schools and traditional public
schools. Their teachers are part of the Boston Teachers Union (BTU), with their pay, benefits and
working hours determined by the district-wide BTU contract. On the other hand, pilot schools can set
their own policies with regard to curriculum, student promotion, and graduation. They also fit more
instructional hours into a school year than traditional schools, but not as many as the charter schools.
Accountability standards appear to bind less strictly for pilot schools than for charter schools: while
nine Massachusetts charters have been lost, no pilot school has been closed.
    The charter and pilot school models fit into a broader movement towards choice and decentral-
ization in public education. Related policy experiments that have also been the subject of impact
evaluations include vouchers (Rouse 1998; Angrist, Bettinger, Bloom, King and Kremer 2002), mag-
net schools (Cullen, Jacob, and Levitt 2006), and intra-district choice plans (Abdulkadiroğlu and
Sönmez 2003; Hastings, Kane and Staiger 2008; Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak and Roth 2009). Charter
schools appear to be one of the most widely replicated members of this reform family.
    The schools in our study are attended by students who would otherwise attend traditional Boston
public schools. The Boston Public Schools (BPS) system serves a disproportionately Black and His-
panic student population. Like students in many urban schools, BPS students have lower test scores
and lower rates of high school graduation and college attendance than students from nearby suburban
districts. Boston’s charter schools also serve a high proportion of Black students, even relative to the
majority non-white BPS district. The effects of charter schools in urban populations are of special
interest since any gains in this context might help reduce the black-white achievement gap.
    The major empirical challenge in any study of alternative school models is selection bias. Students
who attend charter and pilot schools differ in a number of ways from the general pool of public
school students, a fact that biases naive comparisons. We can hope to eliminate some of this bias
by controlling for student characteristics such as free lunch status, but the possibility of bias from
unobserved variables such as motivation or family background remains. An important aspect of
our study, therefore, is the use of student admissions lotteries to estimate causal effects. These
lotteries, which admit applicants randomly at over-subscribed schools, are used to construct a quasi-
experimental research design that should generate unbiased estimates of the causal effects of charter
and pilot attendance.
    A charter or pilot school contributes application cohorts to our lottery estimates when the school
is over-subscribed and therefore runs a lottery, has complete lottery records, and, in the case of pilots,
uses a lottery to select students.3 In addition, the charter schools in our lottery sample were all
operating at the time we were collecting lottery data (closed charter schools have often been under-
   3
     More precisely, a given school-year-grade cell contributes to the lottery analysis if entry at that point is over-
subscribed and the resultant lottery records are available.


                                                          2
subscribed). These selection criteria may have consequences for the external validity of our results.
The over-subscription condition tilts our sample towards charter and pilot schools that parents find
appealing, as does the requirement that schools still be open. From a policy perspective, however,
this is an interesting set of schools. As it stands, Massachusetts currently limits both the number of
charter schools and the proportion of a district’s budget that can be lost due to charter enrollment.
Were the supply of alternative school models allowed to freely vary, it seems reasonable to expect
currently operating over-subscribed schools to expand and imitators to open similar schools.
   The requirement that participating schools have complete lottery records also affects our selection
of charter schools for the lottery sample. Specifically, the records requirement tilts the charter lottery
sample towards schools that have archived lottery records. Massachusetts law does not require charter
schools to retain their lottery data. The net impact of the record-keeping constraint is unclear. On
one hand, poor record-keeping may be a sign of disorganization that spills over into teaching. On
the other hand, lottery record-keeping may be a distraction that takes time and energy away from
instructional activity. In some cases, lost records are also a result of bad luck and the fact that the
preservation of lottery data is not a priority once the school admissions process is complete.
   Finally, on the pilot side, not all schools use the centralized lottery system that is embedded in
the BPS school assignment mechanism. Some pilot schools opt out of the BPS assignment mechanism
and chose students by a combination of admissions testing or audition. Non-lottery pilots share this
feature with Boston’s elite exam schools (the most famous of which is the Boston Latin School). In
contrast, over-subscribed charters must use lotteries to select students.
   In an effort to gauge the generality of our lottery-based findings, we complement the quasi-
experimental lottery analysis with an observational analysis of the full set of charter and pilot schools.
The observational analysis controls for demographic and background characteristics as well as stu-
dents’ lagged test scores (for example, the elementary school scores of middle school students). This
investigation produces estimates remarkably similar to the lottery-based estimates when carried out in
the sample of charter schools that have lotteries, lending some credence to the observational analysis.
At the same time, the observational analysis suggests that the charter schools in our sample are better
than others in the sense of generating larger treatment effects. We therefore think of our (mostly
positive) charter estimates as indicative of what a certain charter model can accomplish, rather than
an overall charter-school treatment effect.
   For pilot middle schools, the observational analysis also generates results that are broadly consistent
with the lottery-based analysis, but the observational results for pilot high schools are more positive
than the corresponding lottery-based estimates. This leaves a somewhat muddled picture. Across all
designs and samples, however, the estimate effects of attending a pilot school are smaller than the


                                                    3
corresponding charter estimates. In the subsample of pilot middle schools that serve only grades 6-8,
lottery-based estimates of effects on middle school math scores are negative and significantly different
from zero.
     The next section describes Boston’s charter and pilot schools in more detail and briefly discusses
a few related studies and questions. Following that, Section III lays out our lottery-based estimation
framework while Section IV discusses data and descriptive statistics. Section V presents the main
lottery analysis. Section VI discusses the characteristics of the charter and pilot lottery compliers and
reports results from models with ability interactions and possible peer effects. Section VII reports
observational results from a broader sample, and compares these to the lottery estimates. The paper
concludes in Section VIII.


II     Background
The 1993 Massachusetts Education Reform Act opened the door to charter schools in Massachusetts.
Non-profit organizations, universities, teachers and parents can apply to the state’s Board of Elemen-
tary and Secondary Education for a charter (there are no for-profit charter schools in Massachusetts).
Massachusetts charter schools are generally managed by a board of trustees and are independent of
local school committees. Like other public schools, charter schools charge no tuition and are funded
mostly by sending districts according to formulas set by the state.
     Massachusetts charter schools have a number of organizational features in common with charter
schools in other states. First, they are typically outside local collective bargaining agreements. As
a result, they have greater flexibility than traditional public schools when it comes to staffing, com-
pensation, and scheduling. For example, the five Massachusetts charter schools studied by Merseth
(2009), four of which appear in our lottery sample, have a longer school day and year than public
schools. Many charter schools offer extensive tutoring during and after school. Moreover, teachers
in charter schools need not hold an active state license to begin teaching, though they must pass the
Massachusetts Test for Educator Licensure within the first year of employment.
     Wilson (2008) describes seven Boston charters, six of which are in our lottery sample, as well as a
charter school in Lynn, near Boston. Wilson identifies school practices prevalent at the schools in his
sample. This collection of practices is sometimes said to characterize the “No Excuses” model, a term
that probably originates with Thernstrom and Thernstom (2003). No Excuses schools are character-
ized by small size, frequent testing, a long school day and year, selective teacher hiring, and a strong
student work ethic. Other features include an emphasis on discipline and comportment, teacher-led
whole-class instruction, and the absence of computer-aided instruction. Merseth’s (2009) detailed ac-



                                                    4
count of the workings of five Boston-area charters, which she calls “high-performing schools,” suggests
they share these features.
    The first two columns of Table 1 compare some of the statistically measurable differences between
Boston charter schools and traditional (BPS) public schools. This table shows student-weighted
averages of teacher characteristics and student-teacher ratios by school type. The student-teacher
ratio is substantially lower in charter schools, and charter teachers are less likely to be licensed or to
be “highly qualified” as defined by NCLB. The latter is likely a consequence of the relative inexperience
of many charter school teachers, a fact documented in the age distribution data show in the table.4
As shown in column 7 of Table 1, the features that distinguish the full roster of Boston charter schools
are shared by the schools in our lottery sample.
    Massachusetts charter schools appear to face more stringent accountability requirements than
non-charter public schools. The state Charter School Office reviews and makes recommendations on
charter applications, reviews the performance of existing charter schools, and decides whether charters
should be renewed. Charter schools are held accountable via annual reports, financial audits, and site
visits, and are required to file for renewal every five years. Renewal applications must show that a
school’s academic program is successful, that the school is a viable organization, and that it has been
faithful to its charter. Since 1994, the state has received a total of 350 charter applications and has
granted 76. Eight of the 76 Massachusetts charters ever granted were surrendered or revoked as of Fall
2009 (Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education, 2009b). A ninth (Uphams
Corner Charter School) was revoked later in 2009.5
    In the 2009-2010 school year, 26,384 Massachusetts students attended 62 operating charter schools,
including 16 in Boston (Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education 2009a).
State law caps the number of charter schools at 72, and total enrollment at 30,034, so the statewide
charter cap is not a constraint. However, a provision limiting local charter spending to nine percent of
the district total generates binding or near-binding caps in specific districts, including Boston, where
charter enrollment is already relatively high. The question of whether this local cap should be lifted
is currently the subject of intense debate, fueled in part by the availability of federal stimulus money
for states that facilitate new charters (Vaznis 2009).
    Pilot schools were developed jointly by BPS and the Boston Teachers Union (BTU) as an alter-
native to both charter schools and traditional public schools. Pilot schools are created as the result
   4
     The definition of highly qualified has varied over time, but typically this designation is awarded to teachers who have
a bachelor’s degree, full state certification or licensure, and have shown that they know the subject they teach (usually
this requires some additional certification). Note that in Table 1, the denominators for the proportion licensed and the
proportion highly qualified differ.
   5
     Four of the eight charter losses through Fall 2009 occurred before school operations began. Two of the remaining
four were revocations and two were non-renewals.


                                                             5
of a planning process currently funded by the Boston Foundation, a private charity, with technical
assistance from the Center for Collaborative Education, a local nonprofit organization that runs the
Boston Pilot Schools Network. New schools may be granted pilot status but most are conversions from
traditional BPS schools. Pilot school conversions must be authorized by a two-thirds vote of the BTU
membership employed at the school and authorized by the BTU Pilot School Steering Committee.6
    Like charter schools, pilot schools are answerable to independent governing boards. Also like
charters, pilot schools determine their own budgets, staffing, curricula, and scheduling. Unlike charter
schools, however, they remain part of the Boston school district and their teachers are BTU members
covered by most contract provisions related to pay and seniority. Pilot school teachers have no job
protection within schools but remain in the BPS system if they choose to move or are removed by the
pilot school principal.
    Pilot teachers sign an election-to-work agreement which spells out the extent to which union
contract provisions apply. These agreements vary by school.7 Pilot schools are subject to external
review, but the review process to date appears to be less extensive and structured than the external
state charter reviews. No pilot school has been closed or converted back to a traditional public school.8
Pilot schools are open to all students in the BPS district and operate as part of the district. In the
2007-8 school year, 6,337 BPS students were enrolled in 20 pilot schools. Assignment to all elementary
and middle pilot schools, and to two of the seven regular pilot high schools, is through the centralized
BPS choice plan, which includes a lottery when schools are over-subscribed.
    Pilot teachers have characteristics between those of traditional BPS schools and charter schools,
as can be seen in columns 3 and 8 of Table 1. For example, pilot teachers are younger than traditional
BPS teachers but not as young as charter teachers. Many pilot schools share with charter schools
longer school days and years. But the BTU agreement covering pilot schools limits uncompensated
overtime, as do school-specific election-to-work agreements. This is reflected in statistics on hours of
instruction that we collected from the schools in our lottery sample. The official BPS school year is
180 days, with a little over six hours of instruction per day, for a total of 1,110 annual school hours.
Annual school hours at pilot middle and high school hours run a little longer, but still under 1,200
hours/year. In contrast, the average charter middle school in our sample provides 1,500 hours of
   6
     The pilot school model originated in Boston but other Massachusetts districts have begun to experiment with it. The
Massachusetts Board of Elementary and Secondary Education recently adopted a Commonwealth Pilot School option for
schools that otherwise would have been designated as underperforming under NCLB. Five Commonwealth Pilot Schools
are now operating in Boston, Fitchburg, and Springfield. Versions of the pilot school model are also being tried in Los
Angeles (Manzo, 2007).
   7
     See http://www.ccebos.org/pilotschools/resources/index.html for sample agreements.
   8
     For     more      on      pilot    structure,     see     http://www.ccebos.org/pilotschools/pilot qa.doc       and
http://www.ccebos.org/pilotguides/. The current BTU contract allows for the creation of up to seven additional
pilot schools. In 2007, two pilot conversions were voted down.


                                                           6
instruction, while charter high schools provide about 1,400 hours.9

Related Studies and Questions
A few recent studies use admissions lotteries to measure charter school achievement effects. These
include Hoxby and Murarka (2009), which estimates charter effects in New York City (grades 3-8),
Hoxby and Rockoff (2005), which estimates the effects of three Chicago charter schools, and Dobbie
and Fryer (2009), which evaluates the effects of a charter middle and a charter elementary school
located in the Harlem Children’s Zone. All three studies report positive effects, though they vary by
grade and subject. The achievement gains reported in Hoxby and Murarka (2009) and Hoxby and
Rockoff (2005) are fairly modest, though Hoxby and Rockoff note problems with the Chicago charter
lotteries that may invalidate some of their findings. The Dobbie and Fryer (2009) estimates for middle
school math scores are the largest of the three, with impacts reaching almost half of a standard
deviation per year in charter. Dobbie and Fryer also report IV estimates for an elementary school
in the Harlem Children’s Zone based on proximity to the Zone; these are imprecise. Farther afield,
Clark (2009) uses a regression-discontinuity design to study the impact of attendance at Britain’s
grant-maintained schools, a charter-like model. Grant-maintained schools appear to have produced
large achievement gains.10
       A related study by Cullen, Jacob, and Levitt (2006) uses admissions lotteries to estimate the effect
of attending Chicago magnet schools. Like Boston pilot schools, Chicago magnet schools are part
of the local (Chicago Public Schools) district. Chicago magnet schools are also like pilot schools in
that they offer special programs and enjoy a degree of autonomy while operating within the Chicago
Public School district. Cullen, Jacob and Levitt find no evidence that winning a magnet lottery
raises test scores or any other measure of academic performance, though magnet students are less
likely to self-report being arrested or involved in disciplinary actions. Using administrative crime
records, Deming (2009) similarly finds that adolescents lotteried into their first-choice public school
in Charlotte-Mecklenburg are arrested less frequently and spend fewer days incarcerated, though they
score no higher on standardized tests.
       The question of whether innovations in school organization generate achievement gains is also part
of a debate over whether schools alone can address large racial achievement gaps. Positions on this
point sometimes translate into views about the social significance of charter schools in the Knowledge
   9
    Data on hours of instruction at charter and pilot schools come from the individual schools’ web sites.
  10
    Charter evaluations that don’t use lotteries have generally produced more mixed results. See, for example, Booker,
Sass, Gill, and Zimmer (2008) for Chicago and Florida; Eberts and Hollenbeck (2002) for Michigan; Bifulco and Ladd
(2006) for North Carolina; Booker, Gilpatric, Gronberg, and Jansen (2007) for Texas; Berends, Mendiburo, Nicotera
(2008) for a Northwest Urban District; and CREDO (2009).



                                                          7
is Power Program (KIPP). The students at KIPP schools are mostly from poor families and 95 percent
are Black and Hispanic. Although there are no KIPP schools in our sample, most of the schools for
which we have lottery data embrace the No Excuses model and serve a similar low-income, minority
population.
       The sense in which KIPP constitutes a marker for the role schools can play is clear from influential
accounts on either side. In a study of the racial achievement gap, titled No Excuses, (Thernstrom and
Thernstrom (2003, p. 43)) credit KIPP and similar No Excuses programs with impressive gains for
low-income students:

         Scattered across the American landscape are what some call “break-the-mold” schools
         high-poverty public schools with students who score well on statewide tests. There aren’t
         many of them, and all are atypical within their own districts. Nevertheless, their record of
         success suggests that truly radical education innovation can change the lives of inner-city
         students, whatever their race or ethnicity.

       An alternative view sees schools as only one part–arguably not the most important–in a broad
struggle that requires social reform at many levels. Here is Rothstein (2004, p. 83), former New York
Times education correspondent and an articulate spokesman for the systemic view:

         . . . there is nothing illogical about a belief that schools, if well-operated, can raise
         lower-class achievement without investing in health, social, early childhood, after-school,
         and summer programs. But while the belief is not illogical, it is implausible, and the
         many claims made about instructional heroes or methods that close that gap are, upon
         examination, unfounded.

       Although our limited study cannot be definitive, we see the results as relevant for the evaluation
of these opposing points of view.11


III       Empirical Framework
We’re interested in the effects of charter or pilot school attendance on student achievement. Because
the effects of attendance at different types of school seem likely to be an increasing function of the
  11
    Researchers have also studied the effects of charter schools on traditional public schools. Examples include Bettinger
(2005) and Booker, Gilpatric, Gronberg, and Jansen (2007). A related literature looks at the way parents make schooling
choices (see, e.g., Hastings, Kane, and Staiger 2008; Hanushek, Kain, Rivkin, and Branch 2007; Jacob and Lefgren 2007).
A few studies investigate general equilibrium effects of school choice on achievement (Hoxby 2000, 2007; Rothstein 2006,
2007).


                                                            8
time spent in school, we model score effects as a function of years in pilot or years in charter. The
causal relation of interest is captured using equations like this one for the scores, yigt , of student i
testing in year t in grade g:

                                                   X
                             yigt = αt + βg +          δj dij + γ 0 Xi + ρSigt + igt .                 (1)
                                                   j

The variable Sigt is the years spent in a charter or pilot school as of the test date, counting any repeated
grades, and counting time in all charter and pilot schools, not just the ones in our lottery samples.
We also define a year to be a charter or pilot year if any portion of that year is spent in a charter
or pilot school. The causal effect of Sigt is ρ. The terms αt and βg are year-of-test and grade-of-test
effects, while Xi is a vector of demographic controls with coefficient γ, and igt is an error term that
reflects random fluctuation in test scores. The dummies dij are indicators for lottery-specific risk sets
(indexed by j), described below.
   If Sigt were randomly assigned, ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates of (1) would capture an
average causal effect of years spent at a charter or pilot school. Because students and parents selec-
tively chose schools, however, OLS estimates may be biased by correlation between school choice and
unobserved variables related to ability, motivation, or family background. We therefore use an instru-
mental variables (IV) strategy that exploits the partial random assignment of Sigt in school-specific
lotteries. Assuming the applicant lotteries are fair, students who win and lose a given lottery should
have similar characteristics.
   The first stage equations for IV estimation take the form:
                                                   X
                                Sigt = λt + κg +       µj dij + Γ0 Xi + πZi + ηigt ,                    (2)
                                                   j


where λt and κg are year-of-test and grade effects in the first stage. The first-stage effect is the
coefficient, π, on the instrumental variable, Zi . The charter instrument is a dummy for having been
offered a seat at one of the schools in the applicants’ charter risk set. The pilot instrument is a dummy
for having a BPS lottery number below the highest number offered a spot in the pilot risk set.
   For a given charter applicant, the charter risk set is the list of all lotteries to which the student
applied in a given year and entry grade, among the lotteries included in our charter lottery sample.
Students who did not apply to any of the charter schools in the lottery sample are not in any charter
risk set and are therefore omitted from the IV analysis. The relevant sample of pilot applicants includes
only those students who listed a pilot school first on their BPS assignment form (few students who
did not do so end up in a pilot school). The pilot risk set is defined by the identity of this first-choice


                                                         9
school and the applicant’s walk-zone status. Charter and pilot risk sets also vary by grade of entry
and year of application (the entry cohort).12


IV      Data and Descriptive Statistics
The Massachusetts Students Information Management System (SIMS) contains information on all
Massachusetts public school students’ race, ethnicity, sex, reduced-price lunch status, special education
status, English-language learner status, town of residence and current school. These data are collected
in October and again at the end of the school year. We worked with SIMS files for the 2001-2002
through 2006-2007 school years. The SIMS data were used to determine how many years students
spent in a charter, pilot or traditional BPS school. A student observed at any time during a school
year in a charter or pilot school was classified as a charter or pilot student for that year. To construct
an analysis file, we used student identifiers to merge SIMS demographic and school history data with
test scores from the Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System (MCAS) database, again for
the 2001-2002 through 2007-2008 school years. The MCAS database contains raw scores for math,
English language arts (ELA), and writing. MCAS is administered each spring, typically in grades 3-8
and 10. For the purposes of our analysis, scores were standardized by subject, grade, and year to have
mean zero and unit variance in the population of students attending Boston schools.

Lottery Procedures and Sample Coverage
Each charter school collects applications and holds its own lottery in years the school is over-subscribed.
Siblings of students already attending the school are guaranteed a seat, as are students continuing
on from earlier grades. Students can apply to as many charter schools as they like; the lotteries are
statistically and administratively independent. Students may therefore be accepted or wait-listed at
more than one school. When admitted students decline, slots open up for additional offers farther
down the lottery list. Thus, some students may be offered spots immediately, while others may be
offered seats closer to the beginning of the school year. Charter school lottery records were matched
to MCAS and SIMS data using applicants’ names and year and grade of application.13
  12
      The relevant risk set for students in the pilot lottery is based on the BPS assignment mechanism. Among first-choice
applicants to a given pilot school, admission priority is randomly assigned, with lotteries run separately for students who
live inside and outside the school’s walk-zone. In the pilot analysis, the risk set is therefore specified as the interaction
of the four variables indicating the student’s first-choice pilot school, walk-zone status for that school, and the year and
grade of application.
   13
      Gender, race, town of residence, and date of birth were used to resolve ambiguities. We matched 96.5 percent of
charter applicants at the middle school level (97.3 percent of those admitted and 94.8 percent of those not admitted) and
92.2 percent of applicants at the high school level (92 percent of those admitted and 92.9 percent of those not admitted).



                                                             10
    We asked all operating charter schools in Boston for current and past lottery records. The set
of charter schools and applicant years included in the lottery sample is detailed in Table A1. Of the
four charter schools with elementary grades, one had lottery records for a period that we could use,
but these are for 6th grade entrants and hence contribute to the middle school sample (this school
added elementary grades only in 2006). Of the 11 charter schools that enroll middle school students,
five contribute to the lottery analysis. Two of the omitted middle schools closed before or while our
study was under way (one was under-subscribed), so that charter middle school coverage consists of
5 out of 9 currently operating schools. Two omitted middle schools admit primarily from their own
elementary grades. In such cases, we were unable to recover lottery records because the entry date
precedes the outcome dates by at least seven years.
    Of the eight charter schools that enroll regular (non-alternative) high school students, four con-
tribute to the lottery analysis. Two of the omitted high schools closed before or during our study
(one was under-subscribed) and two admit students at younger grades and are included in the mid-
dle school sample. Our charter high school sample therefore includes all four of Boston’s currently
operating regular 9-12 charter high schools.
    Students apply to pilot schools as part of the regular BPS assignment mechanism. BPS parents
submit a rank order list of at least three schools in January to obtain a seat at a new school in
September. At each school, admission priority is determined in part by whether the applicant is a
continuing student who is guaranteed admission, currently has a sibling at the school, or lives in the
school’s walk zone. Within these priority groups, students are selected using an ordering determined
by the BPS lottery number. The choice mechanism tries to assign as many students as possible to their
top choice, using coarse priority rankings and lottery numbers when there are more applicants than
capacity.14 This produces a system that induces random assignment (albeit with varying probabilities),
conditional on priority groups such as sibling and walk-zone status.
    Students were classified as pilot applicants if they listed a pilot school as their first choice. Because
most pilot schools are oversubscribed, students who rank a pilot school as a second or lower choice are
unlikely to be assigned to a pilot. The BPS assignment mechanism runs in multiple rounds but we
use information only from the first round. Data on parents’ choices and BPS lottery numbers came
from the BPS applications data base. These data were matched to our merged MCAS-SIMS analysis
file using state identifiers.
    All elementary and middle school pilots use the BPS assignment mechanism and lottery, but only
two pilot high schools do. Four others use school-specific admissions criteria, such as musical auditions,
to select their students. One is a 6-12 school that was not over-subscribed. Of the seven pilot schools
Additional information related to the construction of analysis files appears in the data appendix.
 14
    For details, see Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez (2003) and Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak, Roth and Sönmez (2006).


                                                         11
that enroll elementary school students, five were over-subscribed and contribute to the lottery sample.
Of seven pilot middle schools admitting 6th graders, six were over-subscribed and contribute to the
lottery sample. Of the four K-8 pilot schools, our lottery middle school sample includes kindergarten
applicants from three (the kindergarten entry grade is known as K2, the year after preschool, K1).
One K-8 pilot school opened too late to contribute middle school test scores by K2 applicants.
       One of the high schools in our charter lottery sample (Health Careers Academy or HCA) is what
is known as a Horace Mann charter school. HCA is the only Horace Mann charter that serves the
regular 9-12 population in Boston.15 HCA is unusual in that it began as a pilot school in 1995, but
converted to a Horace Mann charter school in 1997.
       Like pilot schools, a Horace Mann charter school’s employees are members of the BTU bargaining
unit and Horace Mann charters are established with the approval of BPS and the BTU. Otherwise,
however, they operate like other charter schools (called Commonwealth charters). In particular, HCA
is subject to state (as opposed to district) supervision, and must submit to the same type of five-year
review for charter renewal. HCA operates in rented space on the Northeastern University campus,
does not use BPS facilities, and is funded like other charter schools.16 The elect-to-work agreements
at HCA also appear to allow for more unpaid overtime than those at pilot schools. Because HCA has
features in common with pilot schools, however, we look briefly at the implications of a reclassification
of HCA as a pilot school in our sensitivity analysis.

Student Characteristics and Covariate Balance
Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for students at Boston’s traditional schools, charter schools, and
pilot schools, as well as a separate breakout for those included in the charter and pilot lottery samples.
The racial and ethnic composition of the student bodies attending pilot elementary and middle schools
is similar to that at traditional BPS schools: around 45 percent Black and 30 percent Hispanic. In
  15
     The other Boston-area Horace Mann charter school, called Boston Day and Evening Academy, is an alternative
school; it serves students aged 16-22 who are overage for grade level or have dropped out.
  16
     The Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education describes the two charter models as follows:
A charter school is a public school that is governed by a board of trustees and operates independently of any school
committee under a five year charter granted by the Board of Elementary and Secondary Education (Board). It has
the freedom to organize around a core mission, curriculum, theme, and/or teaching method and to control its own
budget and hire (and fire) teachers and staff. In return for this freedom, a charter school must attract students and
produce positive results within five years or its charter will not be renewed. There are two types of charter schools,
Commonwealth charter schools and Horace Mann charter schools. They operate under the same set of rules as described
above, with the following exceptions. First, a Horace Mann charter school must have its charter approved by the local
school committee and the local teacher’s union in addition to the Board. Second, to the extent provided by their charters,
Horace Mann charter schools may be exempt from certain provisions in local collective bargaining agreements. Third,
employees of a Horace Mann charter school remain members of the local collective bargaining unit; continue to accrue
seniority; and receive, at a minimum, the salary and benefits established by the local collective bargaining agreement.
See also http://www.doemass.org/charter/qanda.doc.


                                                           12
contrast, charter schools have a higher proportion of Black students (about 70 percent) and a lower
proportion of Hispanic students (about 20 percent). Differences in racial make-up across school types
are similar at the high school level.
   Roughly 85 percent of students at traditional Boston schools are eligible for free or reduced-price
lunch, a measure of poverty status. Charter students are not as poor; about 70 percent fall into this
category. The pilot school student body occupies a middle ground, with more poor students than the
charter schools but fewer than the traditional schools. Relatively few English learners (also known as
limited English proficiency or LEP students) attend charter schools. For example, only seven percent
of charter middle schools students are LEP, while the traditional Boston population is 22 percent LEP
(pilot schools are close at 21 percent). Charter schools also enroll fewer special education students
than traditional schools and pilot schools. Girls are over-represented at charter schools and, to a lesser
extent, at pilot schools; this is particularly striking at the high school level, where nearly 60 percent
of charter school students are female, compared to 52 percent at the pilot schools and 50 percent at
traditional schools. Importantly, however, the demographic make-up of the charter and pilot lottery
samples, described in columns 6 and 7 of Table 2, is similar to that of the total charter and pilot
samples.
   Table 2 also reports pre-treatment test scores - measured in elementary school for the middle school
sample and in middle school for the high school sample. We think of these lagged score variables as
baseline ability measures. For middle school students, baseline scores come from tests taken in fourth
grade while for high school students baseline scores come from tests taken in eighth grade. There
are no baseline scores for elementary school students, since MCAS testing starts in third grade. At
the middle school level, pilot school students have somewhat lower baseline scores than students at
traditional schools, while baseline scores of the charter students are closer to those for students in
traditional BPS schools. At the high school level, charter school students have higher baseline scores,
averaging about 0.4 standard deviations above those of students in traditional schools and a tenth of
a standard deviation above those of students attending pilot schools. Among charter school students
applying to lotteried middle schools, there is a baseline advantage of about 0.2 standard deviations.
   As a measure of lottery quality, Table 3 reports covariate differences between winners and losers.
The numbers reported in the table are regression-adjusted differences by win/loss status, where a
win means students were offered a spot in a charter or pilot school in the relevant risk set. The only
covariates in the regression are dummies for risk sets (year of application and the set of schools applied
to for charters; first-choice school, year of application, and walk zone status for pilots). Conditional
on these covariates, lottery wins should be randomly assigned.
   With a few exceptions, the differences in Table 3 are small and statistically insignificant. Among


                                                   13
middle school applicants, charter lottery winners have baseline math scores a tenth of a standard
deviation above losers’ scores; at the high school level, winners are two percentage points more likely
to be Asian and two percentage points more likely to be English learners. These differences are
only marginally significant and could be due to chance. Among elementary pilot schools applicants,
lottery winners are eight percentage points less likely to be eligible for a subsidized lunch, while at
the high school level, they are six percentage points more likely to be eligible. Again, these and
the other scattered marginally significant contrasts in the table seem likely to be chance findings.
This conclusion is reinforced by the F statistics at the bottom of each column, which test the joint
hypothesis that all differences in baseline test scores and background characteristics in the column are
zero. Only two of these are close to a 0.05 p-value.


V     Lottery-Based Estimates
Charter School Effects
Charter middle school applicants who were offered a spot at one of the schools to which they applied
spent about a year longer attending a charter school than applicants who were not offered a spot.
This difference, which is shown in column 1 of Table 4 (labeled “first stage”), is measured as of the
MCAS test date. The first stage is smaller than the three-year span of middle school because about
a fifth of lottery winners never attend a charter school, while some lottery losers end up in charter
school later, either because they enter the admissions lottery in a future year, gain sibling preference
when a sibling wins the lottery, or move off a wait list after the offers coded by our instrument. In
addition, some tests were taken as earlier as one year into middle school (the MCAS tests math and
ELA proficiency in every middle school grade).
    Middle-school students who win the charter lottery score almost 0.2σ higher on ELA and 0.4σ
higher in math, as shown in column 2 of Table 4 (labeled “reduced form”). The 2SLS estimate of
the effect of an additional year in a charter school is the ratio of the reduced-form estimates to the
first-stage coefficients. Since the first stage coefficients are close to one, the 2SLS estimates (reported
in column 3) are similar to the reduced form estimates, though their interpretation differs. When
estimated without demographic controls, the 2SLS estimates imply that ELA scores increase by about
0.2σ for each year in a charter, while the per-year math effect is 0.4σ. These estimates are reasonably
precise, with standard errors around 0.06 − 0.08, showing that our research design has the power to
detect more modest effects as well. The addition of demographic controls changes this result little, as
can be seen in column 4.
    Although the reduced form effects on high school ELA and math scores are smaller than the


                                                    14
corresponding reduced form effects in middle school, the high school first stage is also smaller. As
a consequence, the ELA and math score gains generated by time spent in charter high schools are
estimated to be similar to the corresponding 2SLS estimates for middle school. High school students
also take a writing test; here the 2SLS estimates show gains of 0.17σ − 0.28σ. As with the results for
middle school, the addition of demographic controls leaves the estimates largely unchanged.

Pilot School Effects
Our lottery-based analysis of pilot effects looks at elementary-grade outcomes as well as test scores from
middle and high school. The impact of a pilot school offer on time spent in elementary school is almost
three years, as can be seen at the top of column 5 in Table 4. The relatively large elementary-level
pilot first stage is driven by the fact that elementary school applicants apply to enter in kindergarten,
while they are not tested until third or fourth grade. The reduced form effect of a pilot school offer
on elementary school applicants is a little under 0.2σ, but this translates into a much smaller per-year
effect of 0.06σ − 0.07σ, reported in column 7 for models without demographic controls.
   The estimated effect of a pilot offer on time spent in high school is similar to the corresponding
first stage for charter applicants, while the pilot middle school first stage is somewhat larger. On the
other hand, the estimated effects on ELA and math scores–both reduced form and 2SLS–are much
smaller (one is negative) and not significantly different from zero. Here too, it’s worth pointing out
that the standard errors are of a size that modest effects, say on the order of 0.1σ, would be detectable
in middle school, though the high school design has less power. The only significant post-elementary
pilot school estimate is for one of the writing scores (This is 0.18σ, a marginally significant result).
Finally, as with the charter lottery results, the estimates using pilot school lotteries are similar with
and without demographic controls. The pilot school estimates with demographic controls appear in
column 8.

Robustness and Magnitudes
The strong charter school effects on middle school scores reported in Table 4 are readily apparent in a
visual representation of IV estimates based on a version of equations (1) and (2). Averaging equation
(1) conditional on treatment status and risk set (and dropping covariates), we have

                          E[yigt |dij = 1, Zi ] = αt + βg + δj + ρE[Sigt |dij , Zi ]                  (3)




                                                     15
Differencing (3) by offer status within risk sets, this becomes

           E[yigt |dij = 1, Zi = 1] − E[yigt |dij , Zi = 0] = ρ(E[Sigt |dij , Zi = 1] − E[Sigt |dij , Zi = 0]).     (4)

In other words, the slope of the line linking offer-status differences in test scores within risk sets to
the corresponding offer-status differences in average years at a charter or pilot school should be the
causal effect of interest, ρ.
       The empirical counterpart of equation (4) for charter applicants’ middle school math scores appears
in Panel A of Figure 1. The unit of observation here is a charter risk set. The regression line fits the
scatterplot well, with no highly influential or outlying risk sets. The slope of the line in the figure is
0.44 when weighted by the size of risk sets. The corresponding 2SLS estimate of ρ using a full set of
offer × risk set dummies as instruments in a model without out covariates is identical.17 In contrast,
the analogous plot for pilot schools, plotted in Panel B, shows a flatter line, with a slope of −0.045.
The pilot x-axis has a wider range than that for charters because some of the pilot risk sets are small,
and because applicants to pilot K-8 schools may spend a longer time in a pilot school than applicants
to grade 6-8 schools. But omitting the small risk sets and outlying first stage values leaves the weak
negative relation captured in the figure essentially unchanged.
       Most of the lottery results shown in Table 4 are insensitive to the inclusion of controls for applicants’
baseline test scores. This is documented in Table 5, which reports results with additional controls
and alternative samples. For reference, Table 5 also repeats the 2SLS estimates with demographic
controls from Table 4 (these regressions also include dummies for year of test, year of birth, and risk
sets). Baseline test scores are available for students who have taken the MCAS before applying to
the lottery; the sample used to construct pilot lottery estimates with baseline score controls therefore
omits elementary school students and K2 applicants to pilot K-8 middle schools.
       The addition of baseline score controls has almost no effect on the charter lottery estimates, a
result documented in column 2 of Table 5. On the other hand, the pilot lottery estimates for middle
school math scores turn negative and at least marginally significant with baseline score controls, as
can be seen in column 6. There is little relation between the pilot lottery instruments and baseline
scores, so this change in middle school math estimates cannot be attributed to omitted variables bias.
Rather, it stems from the loss of K-8 pilot schools in the lagged-score sample. We confirmed this
by estimating middle school pilot effects with demographic controls in a sample that includes grade
  17
     The sample analog of equation (4) can be thought of as a strategy that combines Wald estimates based on Zi across
risk sets. Generalized Least Squares (GLS) estimation of the sample analog of equation (3) can be show to be the same as
2SLS using a full set of offer × risk set dummies as instruments (Angrist, 1991). Size-weighted least squares estimation
of (4) is not algebraically the same as this 2SLS estimator, but should be close (and is indistinguishable from 2SLS in
Panel A of the figure).


                                                           16
6-to-8 middle schools only. These results, reported in column 7 of Table 5, show estimates similar to
those with lagged score controls. The complementary sample that includes only K-8 schools generates
small positive effects (not reported in the table. Thus, there is considerable heterogeneity in the pilot
middle school math effects: grade 6-to-8 schools appear to be weaker than K-8 schools, at least as
measured by their impact on MCAS math scores. It should also be noted, however, that the omission
of K2 applicants to K-8 schools leads to a large drop in precision.
       The results of adding an additional instrument to the charter lottery analysis are reported in column
3. The maintained instrument is a dummy for having been offered a charter seat any time after the
relevant lottery, including off the waiting list (“eventual offer”), while the additional instrument is
a dummy for having received an “initial offer” – that is, an offer of a seat in a charter school made
immediately after the lottery was held.18 The multi-instrument models are over-identified so we can
expect the resulting IV estimates to be more precise. In addition, the comparison of one- and two-
instrument estimates provides an over-identification test for the underlying exclusion restrictions. In
practice, the two-instrument results are close to those using a single instrument, while precision gains
are modest at best.
       The final alternative specification reported in Table 5 is motivated by the unusual history of Health
Careers Academy (HCA), a Horace Mann charter high school. As noted in the background section,
HCA was born as a pilot school in 1995 but converted to a Horace Mann charter school in 1997. Horace
Mann charter schools are like other charter schools in most respects, but their employees remain part
of the BTU bargaining unit. For the reasons detailed in our earlier discussion, we believe HCA should
be a seen as a charter school, albeit with union staff. Nevertheless, as a robustness check, we explored
the implications of moving HCA from the charter to the pilot ledger.19
       Reclassification of HCA as a pilot school has a modest effect on the charter lottery estimates: The
estimated impact on high school math increases from 0.23σ to 0.3σ while the ELA effect falls from
0.19σ to 0.11σ, as shown in column 4 of Table 5. The latter estimate is no longer significantly different
from zero, but this is due more to a drop in precision than to the changed estimate (reclassification
of HCA shifts 300 observations). The charter writing impacts also change little. Addition of HCA
to the sample of pilot high schools produces a marginally significant ELA effect of about 0.11σ and
an insignificant math effect of 0.09σ (HCA becomes the third pilot high school in this case). The
effects of pilot high school attendance on writing increase and are more precisely estimated with HCA
included. The increase in ELA and math estimates when HCA is treated as a pilot school suggests
  18
    The initial offer instrument can be constructed only for some schools; see appendix Table A1 for details.
  19
    Like other charter schools, HCA uses a stand-alone lottery while pilot schools are part of the Boston assignment
mechanism. When HCA is introduced into the sample of pilot high schools, we define risk sets according to whether
applicants picked one of the other two pilot high schools as a first choice, picked HCA as a first choice, or applied to
HCA with one or the other of the other two schools as a first choice in the BPS mechanism.


                                                          17
that HCA may be stronger than the two pilot high schools that are otherwise in our lottery sample.
On the other hand, the changes observed in this context are modest enough to be chance fluctuations.
       A natural benchmark for the size of estimates reported here is the black-white test score gap.
Among students attending regular BPS middle schools, blacks score about 0.7σ below whites on ELA
and 0.8σ below whites in math. The charter middle school effects of 0.15σ on middle school ELA
scores is therefore enough to essentially close two-thirds of the black-white reading gap for students
who remain enrolled in a charter middle school in grades 6-8. The even larger math gains of about
0.4σ are more than enough to eliminate the racial gap in mathematics achievement while students
are in middle school. The effects of roughly 0.2σ estimated for high school ELA and math are also
large enough to close the black-white high school gap of about 0.8σ in both subjects (assuming four
years of charter high school enrollment). Of course, these are extrapolations based on our per-year
average effects and not direct estimates. In practice, we should expect some reduction in the returns
to charter attendance over a long enough period. Moreover, these calculations assume that the effects
reported in Table 4 apply equally to blacks and whites. On the other hand, separate estimation by
race (not reported here in detail) suggests that this is indeed the case.

Selective Attrition
Tables 4 and 5 were constructed from samples of students who participate in charter school and pilot
school lotteries and for whom we have post-lottery test scores. Lottery winners and losers should be
similar at the time the lotteries are held, since a coin flip is all that distinguishes them. Subsequent
attrition may lead to differences in the follow-up sample, however, unless the attrition process itself is
also random. In other words, we worry about differential and selective attrition by win/loss status. For
example, losers may be less likely to be found than winners, since students who lose the opportunity to
attend a charter or pilot school may be more likely to leave the public schools altogether. Differential
attrition generates selection bias (although those who leave Boston for another Massachusetts public
school district should turn up in our sample). A simple test for selection bias looks at the impact of
lottery offers on the probability lottery participants contribute MCAS scores to our analysis sample.
If differences in follow-up rates are small, selection bias from differential attrition is also likely to be
modest.20
       Table 6 reports the mean follow-up rate for lottery participants in columns 1 and 4, and win-loss
differentials in columns 2-3 and 5-6. Roughly 80 percent of charter lottery losers and about 70 percent
of pilot lottery losers contribute a post-randomization test score. These high follow-up rates are due to
  20
    More formally, if attrition can be described by a latent-index model of the sort commonly used to model discrete
choice in econometrics, then selection bias in lottery comparisons arises only if winning the lottery affects the probability
of MCAS participation. See, e.g., Angrist (1997).


                                                             18
the fact that our extract is limited to those enrolled in BPS at baseline and to our use of a statewide
MCAS data set. Follow-up differentials by win/loss status were estimated using regression models
that parallel the reduced forms reported in Table 4. Positive coefficients indicate that lottery winners
are more likely to contribute an MCAS score.
   The estimated follow-up differentials for charter high school applicants are small and not signifi-
cantly different from zero. For example, high school charter lottery winners are about 3 percentage
points more likely to contribute an ELA score than losers (when the differential is estimated with de-
mographic controls; see column 2). The follow-up differentials for charter middle school outcomes are
a little larger, on the order of 4-5 percentage points. Although these small differences are marginally
significant, they seem unlikely to impart substantial selection bias.
   There are virtually no attrition differentials for pilot middle schools. The largest differentials turn
up for participants in pilot high school lotteries, as can be seen in columns 5 and 6 of Table 6. For
example, controlling for demographic characteristics, high school winners are roughly 5 percentage
points more likely to have taken the ELA test than losers, a significant effect with an estimated
standard error of 2.6. But this too seems unlikely to explain our results, which show no effect on
pilot lottery winners in high school. First, the most likely scenario for selective attrition has relatively
high achieving losers dropping out. Second, the attrition differentials in this case are still fairly small.
Nevertheless, as a check on the main findings, we discarded a few of the most imbalanced cohorts to
construct a sample of charter middle school and pilot high school applicants with close-to-balanced
attrition. We then re-estimated treatment effects using this balanced sample. Attrition differentials for
balanced cohorts are reported in Appendix Table A3, while the corresponding lottery-based estimates
of treatment effects are reported in A4. These results are similar to those reported in Table 4.


VI     The Anatomy of Charter and Pilot Treatment Effects
Charter and Pilot Compliers
Our lottery-based research design uses random assignment to construct causal effects for the subpop-
ulation that spends time in a charter or pilot school as a consequence of winning a lottery. What
sort of schools do these students go to? Do the losers in this group remain in schools that look like
the BPS average? Or, are the schools they come from unusual in some way? We’re also interested in
whether winning lottery participants end up in schools with a different socioeconomic and ability mix
or go to schools with smaller classes. We address this set of questions using a causal IV framework to
describe the school characteristics experienced by lottery applicants in alternative states of the world.
   We begin by defining the causal relationship of interest to be the link between characteristics of


                                                    19
schools and classmates and charter or pilot attendance. Let the attendance variable be Di for applicant
i, where this is recorded in the year immediately after application to schools in the relevant risk set.
Let Xi be a characteristic of these schools, such as the fraction nonwhite or class size. To capture the
fact that Di affects school choice and therefore changes the characteristics of the school that applicant
i attends, we write
                                      Xi = X0i (1 − Di ) + X1i Di ,

where X0i and X1i are the potential school characteristics that applicant i would be exposed to if
he or she attends a regular school or a charter or pilot school. The causal effect of charter or pilot
attendance on i is the difference in potential characteristics by school type, X1i − X0i .
   Charter and pilot lottery compliers are applicants who would attend a charter or pilot school in
the year after application if they win the lottery, but not otherwise. To describe this group formally,
we write
                                       Di = D0i (1 − Zi ) + D1i Zi ,

where D0i and D1i are potential assignments that tell us the type of school applicant i would attend if
he or she wins or loses (as before, the instrument is Zi , a dummy indicating lottery winners). Following
Imbens and Angrist (1994), we impose monotonicity:

                                                  D1i ≥ D0i .

In other words, winning the lottery can only make charter or pilot attendance more likely. Given this
restriction, D1i − D0i is equal to zero or one.
   In the causal IV framework developed by Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin (1996), the set of charter
or lottery compliers consists of applicants with D1i − D0i = 1. This happens when D0i = 0 and
D1i = 1. Compliers are those who do not attend a charter or pilot school if they lose the lottery but
do attend if they win. The rest of the population has D1i − D0i = 0, because either D1i = D0i = 1
(indicating applicants who attend whether they win or not, the always-takers) or D1i = D0i = 0
(indicating applicants who do not attend whether they win or not, the never-takers). Always-takers’
and never-takers’ are unaffected by the lottery, so IV estimates using lottery instruments do not reflect
the impact of charter or pilot attendance on these two groups. Replacing years-in-charter or pilot with
a dummy for charter or pilot attendance, and using Y1i and Y0i to denote potential test score outcomes,
IV identifies the average causal effect on compliers,

                                        E[Y1i − Y0i |D1i ≥ D0i ].



                                                      20
This is the local average treatment effect (LATE) captured by lottery instruments.21
       Here we are interested in the school environment or school characteristics rather than test scores.
Moreover, we focus on the average type of schools attended by compliers in alternative states if the
world rather than the treatment effect on school type. In other words, the parameters of interest are

                                              α1c ≡ E[X1i |D1i ≥ D0i ]
                                              α0c ≡ E[X0i |D1i ≥ D0i ].

We think of α0c as the fallback position for compliers unable to attend the type of school to which
they applied (because they lost the lottery); α1c describes the schools attended by compliers whose
lottery applications were successful. Abadie (2002) shows that these marginal means can be estimated
by using Zi as instrument for the following second-stage equations (ignoring covariates):

                                             Di Xi = λ1c + α1c Di + ξ1i                                                (5)
                                      (1 − Di )Xi = λ0c + α0c (1 − Di ) + ξ0i ,                                        (6)

where λ1c and λ0c are terms that incorporate controls – in this case dummies for risk sets.22
       Compliers who lose the lottery end up in schools with a demographic mix similar to the system-
wide BPS average. This can be seen in columns 1 and 5 of Table 7 for charter applicants and columns
3 and 7 for pilot applicants. For example, the average proportion black in BPS middle schools is 47
percent (a statistic from Table 2). Non-treated charter compliers attend middle schools that are also
47 percent Black while non-treated pilot compliers attend middle schools that are 46 percent Black.
Likewise, the average proportion Black in BPS high schools is 0.51, while non-treated compliers attend
high schools that are 55 percent Black.
       In some respects, the complier fallback position is somewhat better than the BPS average. This
suggests that charter treatment effects cannot be explained by arguing that the regular BPS schools
they would otherwise attend have unusually low-achieving peers. At losers’ middle schools, for ex-
ample, the mean baseline scores of peers are positive while the overall BPS average is negative. In
high school, peer means for losers are higher than the BPS average for math though about the same
for ELA scores. Socioeconomic status as measured by the proportion getting a free or reduced price
  21
     LATE can be generalized to covered ordered treatments such as years in charter or pilot, and models with covariates;
see Angrist and Pischke (2009) for details.
  22
     Abadie (2002) uses equations like (5) and (6) to estimate the marginal distribution of potential outcomes for com-
pliers, but his approach works for characteristics as well. Because we use a saturated model for controls (risk sets), 2SLS
estimates of α1c and α0c are the same as those that would be generated using Abadie’s (2003) kappa-weighting scheme
to estimate compliers’ marginal means.



                                                            21
lunch is also higher at the fallback schools than in traditional BPS schools (e.g., compare 0.77 and
0.67 in columns 1 and 5 of Table 7 with BPS means of 0.89 and 0.85). Class sizes at these schools
are smaller than the traditional BPS average. Also noteworthy is the fact that the characteristics of
fallback schools are similar for pilot and charter lottery applicants.
    Successful charter and pilot compliers attend middle schools that have fewer minorities than the
schools attended by losers. In high school, however, wining compliers have more Black and female
classmates (though fewer Hispanic classmates) than losers. Other differences in school environment in-
clude fewer SPED and LEP students and higher baseline scores at the charter middle schools attended
by winners. For example, the peer mean middle school ELA score for winners is 0.35 versus 0.11 for
losers. For high school compliers, the peer mean math score is 0.05 versus −0.385 for losers. On the
other hand, pilot compliers experience similar differentials: among both middle and high school com-
pliers, peer mean baseline scores are higher, there are fewer LEP and SPED students, and the average
proportion receiving a free or reduced price lunch is lower for winners than for losers. This weighs
against a pure peer effect interpretation of charter students gains, since a similar peer differential does
not produce gains for pilot compliers. Its worth noting, however, that charter middle school compliers
end up in smaller classes if they win the lottery. Pilot compliers, by contrast, attend schools with
larger classes.

Ability Interactions and Peer Effects
The distribution of school characteristics described in Table 7, as well as the fact that charter applicants
are positively selected, motivates our analysis of treatment effect heterogeneity. Specifically, we explore
treatment effect interactions with an applicants’ own ability and interactions with the ability of peers.
The interaction with own ability addresses the question of whether charter and pilot schools cater to
a relatively high-ability group since charter applicants (and pilot high school applicants) have higher
baseline scores. The interaction with peer ability provides some evidence on the extent to which peer
effects might explain our findings.
    The equation used to estimate models with interaction terms looks like this:
                                          X
                      yigt = αt + βg +          δj dij + γ 0 Xi + ρ0 Sigt + ρ1 Ai (Sigt − sg ) + igt ,                  (7)
                                            j


where Ai is student i’s baseline score and sg is the average score in the sample, so that the main effect,
ρ0 , is evaluated at the mean.23 The set of covariates, Xi , includes baseline scores. The interaction
   23
      The variables Ai and sg are fixed in any given sample, including those that pool grades, but vary for a given applicant
from middle to high school.



                                                             22
term of interest is ρ1 . The corresponding first stage equations are
                                               X
                         Sigt = λ1t + κ1g +        µ1j dij + Γ01 Xi + π10 Zi + π11 Ai Zi + η1igt       (8)
                                               j
                                               X
               Ai (Sigt − sg ) = λ2t + κ2g +       µ2j dij + Γ02 Xi + π20 Zi + π21 Ai Zi + η2igt ,     (9)
                                               j


so that equation (7) is identified by adding an interaction between Ai and Zi to the instrument list.
   The effects of charter middle school attendance are larger for students with lower baseline scores,
though the estimated interaction terms are small. This can be seen in the second column of Table 8,
which reports 2SLS estimate of ρ1 in equation (7). For example, a lottery applicant with a baseline
score 0.2σ below the mean is estimated to have an ELA score gain that is 0.02σ higher (0.094 ∗ 0.2 =
0.019) and a math score gain that is 0.027σ higher (0.137 ∗ 0.2) than an applicant with a baseline
score at the mean. None of the estimated own-ability interaction terms for applicants to charter high
school are significantly different from zero. These results weigh against the view that charter schools
focus on high achieving applicants.
   The one (marginally) significant own-ability interaction for pilot schools is that for high school
math scores. This interaction term is of the same order of magnitude as the charter interaction terms
for middle school. On the other hand, no significant own-ability interactions emerge from the analysis
of treatment effects in pilot middle schools. Thus, the evidence in column 4 suggests that to the
extent that effects in either charter or pilot schools vary with students’ baseline scores, those with
lower scores benefit more, especially in the charter case. Overall, however, the variation in treatment
effects with pre-treatment scores is modest.
   Table 8 also shows little evidence of peer effects of the usual sort. In particular, columns (6) and
(8) report 2SLS estimates of ρ1 in equation (7) when Ai is mean baseline score in the risk set. We
might think, for example, that one of the benefits of charter attendance is the opportunity to attend
schools with higher-achieving peers. In practice, however, the score gain from charter middle school
attendance varies inversely with peer achievement. For example students, who apply to schools in
a risk set with peer means 0.1σ above the sample mean are estimated to have an ELA gain that is
reduced by 0.07σ and a math gain that is reduced by 0.1σ for each year in charter. These negative
interactions are noteworthy since the charter effect on middle school math scores is the most dramatic
result reported here. A marginally significant positive peer interaction appears for charter effects on
high school math scores, but this is the only evidence we have for interactions with peer means in
charter high schools. The corresponding interaction term for ELA, for example, is only 0.05σ with a
much larger standard error. There is one significant peer interaction for pilot applicants in the effect of


                                                      23
middle school on math scores. It should be noted, however, that many of the peer-mean interactions
are imprecisely estimated, especially for pilot high schools.


VII      Observational Estimates
Our lottery analysis use a sample of applicants and schools for which lotteries are both relevant and
documented. To gauge the generality of the lottery findings, we also estimated the effects of charter and
pilot school attendance in a larger sample that includes all Boston schools. In this case, identification
of causal effects is based on statistical controls for family background and earlier achievement. We
refer to this analysis as an “observational study”, to distinguish it from the quasi-experimental lottery-
based identification strategy. The observational results consist of OLS estimates of equations like (1),
controlling for student demographics and baseline scores.
   The data structure for the observational analysis is similar to that used for the quasi-experimental
study. Baseline scores and demographics for middle school come from 4th grade data, while base-
line scores and demographics for high school come from 8th grade data. The regressors of interest
count years spent attending a charter or pilot school at the relevant level (e.g., years in a charter
middle school, in grades 6-8), as well as time spent in an exam or alternative school. Specifically, the
observational estimates were constructed by fitting

                  yigt = αt + βg + γ 0 Xi + ρc Cigt + ρp Pigt + ρe Eigt + ρalt ALTigt + igt ,         (10)

where Cigt , Pigt , Eigt , and ALTigt denote years in a charter, pilot, exam, or alternative school, with
corresponding effects, ρc , ρp , ρe , and ρalt . To parallel the exclusion of K-8 pilot school applicants in
the lottery analysis with baseline scores, the observational analysis that controls for baseline scores is
estimated on samples that omit students who attended elementary grades in a K-8 pilot.
   The observational charter results, reported in Table 9, are positive and significantly different from
zero for every score outcome except elementary school math. Moreover, at every grade level and
for every test, the charter estimates are more positive than the pilot estimates. Control for baseline
scores has surprisingly little effect on the charter estimates. In models with baseline score controls,
each year spent at a charter middle school is estimated to increase ELA scores by about 0.1σ and to
increase math scores by about 0.18σ. In contrast, the corresponding estimates for pilot middle schools
are significant and negative, on the order of −0.08σ for ELA and −0.1σ for math. For both pilot
schools and charter schools, the high school effects in Table 9 are positive and significant for all score
outcomes, though the estimated charter effects are consistently larger than the parallel estimates for
pilots. The charter effects in elementary school are also larger than those for elementary school pilots;


                                                      24
neither of the pilot estimates in this case is significant.
   The observational results in Table 9 are broadly consistent with the lottery results, but the mag-
nitudes differ. For example, the charter middle school effects in Table 9, while still positive and
economically and statistically significant, are smaller than those reported in Table 4. Is this difference
due to selection bias or to the broader coverage of the observational sample? Table 10 addresses this
question by showing observational results in and out of the lottery sample, alongside the correspond-
ing lottery estimates. These estimates were constructed by replacing the terms ρc Cigt and ρp Pigt in
equation (10) with terms that allow for separate effects for time spent in schools in and out of the
set of schools in the lottery sample. For example, we replace ρc Cigt with ρlc Cligt + ρnc Cnigt where
Cligt counts years spent in a charter school that is included in the lottery sample and Cnigt counts
non-lottery charter years (note that Cigt = Cligt + Cnigt ). The observational estimates reported in
Table 10 control for baseline scores.
   Allowing the effects of time spent in schools in an out of the lottery sample to differ goes a long
way towards reconciling the observational and lottery estimates, especially for charter schools. For
example, the observational estimates of the effects of time attending a charter middle school in the
lottery sample are 0.16σ for ELA and 0.31σ for math. These estimates are not too far from the
corresponding lottery estimates with baseline scores (0.14σ for ELA and 0.39σ for math). The high
school estimates are also a good match: compare, for example, observational estimates of ELA effects
of about 0.19σ using both designs.
   Because the lottery and observational estimates of charter effects line up reasonably well when
estimated for schools in the same sample, the results in Table 10 support the notion that the observa-
tional study design does a good job of controlling for selection bias in this case. On the other hand,
the table also suggests that the charter schools in our lottery sample are among the best in the city.
Observational estimates of the effects of time spent in the charter schools not included in our lottery
sample, while still economically and statistically significant for every outcome, are uniformly smaller
than the corresponding estimates for the effects of time spent in lottery-sample schools.
   The observational and lottery-based analyses of pilot middle schools are also broadly consistent
in that both produce negative effects in the sample that includes lagged scores. The observational
results for ELA are more negative than the corresponding lottery estimates, while the opposite is true
for math. The match across designs is not as good for the high school results, where the observational
analysis using the lottery sample produces substantial and significant positive effects for all outcomes.
In contrast, the lottery results for high school ELA and math are small and not significantly different
from zero (though the match for writing is good). The variance across designs may be due to the fact
that the lottery estimates for pilot high schools are not very precise. Also noteworthy is the fact that


                                                     25
small positive effects of pilot attendance on elementary school achievement turn up using both the
observational and lottery designs.
   On balance, as with the charter results, Table 10 mostly reinforces the lottery findings for pilots.
Moreover, with the exception of middle schools, the observational estimates of pilot-school treatment
effects are also larger for schools used in the lottery sample than for other pilot schools. Like the
middle school effects, the estimated impacts of time spent at a non-lottery elementary school pilot are
negative.


VIII        Summary and Conclusions
Lottery-based estimates of the impact of charter attendance on student achievement in Boston show
impressive score gains in middle and high school. We also evaluate an alternative to the charter model,
Boston’s pilot schools. Lottery-based estimates for pilot schools are small and mostly insignificant. In
an effort to gauge the generality of our lottery-based findings, we complement the quasi-experimental
lottery analysis with an observational study of the full set of charter and pilot schools. This approach
produces estimates similar to the lottery-based estimates for the sample of charter schools that have
lotteries, lending credence to the observational analysis.
   Across study designs and samples, the estimate effects of attending a pilot school are smaller
than the corresponding charter estimates. Although we cannot say pinpoint the source of differential
impacts, a number of factors seem likely to be important. The student-teacher ratio is much smaller
in the charter schools, and the school day and school year are considerably longer. On both of these
dimensions, pilot schools are closer to traditional Boston public schools than they are to charter schools.
These differences may originate in collective bargaining constraints that make it more expensive for
pilot schools to expand instructional hours and staff their schools with more teachers per student.
In addition, many of the charter schools in our sample use elements of the No Excuses model, an
instructional paradigm that is not common in public schools, pilot or otherwise.
   A natural benchmark for our estimates is the black-white test score gap. Among students attending
regular BPS middle schools, blacks score about 0.7 standard deviations below whites in language arts
and 0.8 standard deviations below whites in math. Our estimated charter school effects are large
enough to reduce the black-white reading gap in middle school by two-thirds. The even larger math
gains (about 0.4 standard deviations) are more than enough to eliminate the racial gap in math while
students are in middle school. The effects of roughly 0.2 standard deviations estimated for high school
ELA and math are also large enough to close the black-white high school gap of about 0.8 standard
deviations in both subjects (assuming four years of charter high school enrollment).



                                                    26
   It bears repeating that the lottery results reported here do not estimate overall charter and pilot
school effects, even for Boston. Rather, the lottery results are generated by schools that parents find
most appealing and, in the case of charter schools, those that have well-documented lotteries and that
continue to operate. Perhaps not surprisingly, our observational analysis suggests that the schools in
our charter lottery sample are among the most effective charter schools. On the other hand, results for
this relatively effective set of schools seem likely to be of considerable policy interest. Massachusetts,
along with a number of other states, caps the number of charter schools, while the U.S. Department
of Education is pressing states to lift these caps. It seems likely that over-subscribed and well-run
schools will be the first to expand if caps are lifted. State regulators might also reasonably choose to
encourage replication of schools that have documented effectiveness and high demand.




                                                   27
                                                                     Table 1: Teacher Characteristics by School Type
                                                                           Traditional          Pilot, Charter, Exam or Alternative School                               Lottery Sample
                                                                          BPS Schools      Charter          Pilot         Exam       Alternative                      Charter       Pilot
                                                                               (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)                            (7)          (8)
                                                                       I. Elementary School (3rd and 4th grades)
Teachers licensed to teach assignment                                        86.0%          60.0%          73.2%            ‐           70.6%                              ‐            71.9%
Core classes taught by highly qualified teachers                             90.6%          61.3%          78.2%            ‐           56.6%                              ‐            77.8%
Student/Teacher ratio                                                         15.7           11.4           15.9            ‐            6.9                               ‐             15.8
Proportion of teachers 32 and younger                                        26.6%          64.5%          51.8%            ‐           27.3%                              ‐            50.4%
Proportion of teachers 49 and older                                          39.9%           8.0%          11.9%            ‐           31.6%                              ‐            11.1%

Number of schools                                                                72                 3                 7                ‐                2                  ‐               5

                                                                        II. Middle School (6th, 7th, and 8th grades)
Teachers licensed to teach assignment                                          77.8%          53.9%          65.8%                  90.8%            48.6%             54.4%            65.5%
Core classes taught by highly qualified teachers                               84.8%          70.4%          70.2%                  94.5%            45.4%             73.1%            69.8%
Student/Teacher ratio                                                           16.1           11.9           19.5                   21.1             5.2               11.9             19.6
Proportion of teachers 32 and younger                                          27.1%          74.5%          55.0%                  30.0%            28.6%             81.1%            54.4%
Proportion of teachers 49 and older                                            36.0%           4.8%          13.6%                  43.3%            27.8%              1.3%            13.9%

Number of schools                                                                28                 11                7                3                4                 5                6

                                                                                III. High School (10th grade)
Teachers licensed to teach assignment                                          80.9%           57.6%         64.1%                  90.7%            75.8%             57.7%            73.5%
Core academic teachers identified as highly qualified                          85.7%           78.6%         72.7%                  94.3%            80.6%             82.1%            83.6%
Student/Teacher ratio                                                           17.6            10.9          16.0                   21.1             8.9               10.6             17.5
Proportion of teachers 32 and younger                                          31.9%           66.9%         44.7%                  30.0%            29.7%             64.3%            41.3%
Proportion of teachers 49 and older                                            40.3%            6.9%         15.0%                  43.9%            25.3%              8.2%             7.7%

Number of schools                                                                22                 8                 7                3                4                 4                2
Notes: This table reports student‐weighted average characteristics of teachers and schools using data for 2004‐2007 posted on the Mass DOE website at
http://profiles.doe.mass.edu/state_report/teacherdata.aspx. The variable teachers licensed to teach assignment is the fraction of teachers who are licensed with provisional, Initial, or
professional licensure to teach in the area(s) in which they are teaching. The variable core classes taught by highly qualified teachers is the percent of core academic classes (defined as English,
reading or language arts, mathematics, science, foreign languages, civics and government, economics, arts, history, and geography) taught by highly qualified teachers (defined as teachers not
only holding a Massachusetts teaching license, but also demonstrating subject matter competency in the areas they teach). For more information on the definition and requirements of highly
qualified teachers, see http://www.doe.mass.edu/nclb/hq/hq_memo.html.
                                                                         U#L)&".T"V&>;$(?%(R&"B%#%(>%(;>
                                                                                                                                                  P??)(;#@%>"(@"E*%%&$I"B#5?)&"
                                                               F@$*))&C"(@"'()*%"*$"!"#$%&$            P??)(;#@%>"(@"E*%%&$I"B#5?)&
                                      U$#C(%(*@#)":'B"                                                                                               W(%"":#>&)(@&"B;*$&>
                                         B;"**)>                !"#$%&$           '()*%           !"#$%&$                       '()*%               !"#$%&$                '()*%
                                             +,-                   +.-             +/-              +0-                          +1-                  +2-                   +3-
                                                                 !"!#$%&%'()*+!,-.//$!01*2!)'2!3(.!4*)2%56
4&5#)&                                     067/8                 1.708           06708               !                         19728                     !                   !
:)#;<                                      0/708                 3.798           0/7/8               !                         107/8                     !                   !
=(>?#@(;                                   /0718                 ,17A8           /.798               !                         ..798                     !                   !
B?&;(#)"&CD;#%(*@                          ,9708                 27/8            ,9738               !                         A7A8                      !                   !
4$&&"*$"$&CD;&C"?$(;&")D@;"                6/7.8                 23768           2A7,8               !                         22718                     !                   !
E(5(%&C"F@G)(>""?$*H(;(&@;I                .6768                 /768            ,A7/8               !                         3798                      !                   !
J&#$>"(@";"#$%&$                           979,2                 07116           9799A               !                         97...                     !                   !
J&#$>"(@"?()*%                             979/,                 979./           /769,               !                         ,769/                     !                   !

KD5L&$"*H">%DC&@%>                         ,9M00/                  212                 6./                    !                  13/                     !                   !
KD5L&$"*H">;"**)>                            31                     /                   3                     !                   1                      !                   !

                                                                 !!"!7822$%!,-.//$!09(.:!;(.:!)'2!<(.!4*)2%56
4&5#)&                                     03798                 067A8            0A7A8              067/8                     1.728                 067.8               107A8
:)#;<                                      027A8                 2A708            19718              1A7.8                     0A768                 1A7,8               19728
=(>?#@(;                                   /37/8                 ,A798            .67/8              ,A708                     /,7.8                 ,A728               /1798
B?&;(#)"&CD;#%(*@                          .0718                 ,6718            .,708              ,A7/8                     ,3718                 ,A7,8               ,67.8
4$&&"*$"$&CD;&C"?$(;&")D@;"                6A7/8                 3/7,8            61728              2A7,8                     3A7/8                 2A7,8               63768
E(5(%&C"F@G)(>""?$*H(;(&@;I                .,768                  37,8            .,798              3738                      ,1798                 3768                ,6798
0%""N$#C&"O#%""B;*$&                       !97,,A                !9792A           !97,A2             97,23                     !97933                97,23               !97933
0%""N$#C&"FEP"B;*$&                        !97,,/                97969            !97,.3             97./1                     !979,6                97./1               !979,6
J&#$>"(@";"#$%&$                           979,6                 .7016             979,.             ,7069                      97..9                ,702A                97..,
J&#$>"(@"?()*%                             979./                 979//             .7,0A             97,.9                     97A10                 97,,A               ,7910

KD5L&$"*H">%DC&@%>                         ,.M.13                .M/6.                .M2A2                ,M/11               ,MA,3                  ,M//,               ,M.A6
KD5L&$"*H">;"**)>                            //                    ,,                   3                    1                   3                      1                   2

                                                                          !!!"!=84.!,-.//$!0>?(.!4*)2%6
4&5#)&                                     197,8                 1A7A8               1.7.8            1A7,8                    00738                 1A798                00768
:)#;<                                      197A8                 21768               1/768            23728                    167,8                 23728                137A8
=(>?#@(;                                   /27,8                 ,1728               .2738            ./798                    .07A8                 ..7A8                .1798
B?&;(#)"&CD;#%(*@                          ..768                 ,0768               ,3718            ,1718                    ,.738                 ,17/8                ,.728
4$&&"*$"$&CD;&C"?$(;&")D@;"                60738                 22738               337,8            31738                    36718                 327,8                3A798
E(5(%&C"F@G)(>""?$*H(;(&@;I                ,67A8                 /7A8                37.8             07.8                     1718                  07,8                 1728
6%""N$#C&"O#%""B;*$&                       !97.66                97,/,               9791A            979A.                    97,2/                 979A.                97,2/
6%""N$#C&"FEP"B;*$&                        !97,63                97./,               97,06            97,A/                    97.9A                 97,A/                97.9A
J&#$>"(@";"#$%&$                           979,/                 .79,.               979./            9706/                    97A3,                 97060                97A39
J&#$>"(@"?()*%                             97992                 9799A               ,7A1,            973,A                    97.2A                 973,6                97.3,

KD5L&$"*H">%DC&@%>                          AM,/1                ,M,0A                ,MA0A                ,MA13               ,M9,9                  ,MA/0               ,M99/
KD5L&$"*H">;"**)>                             ./                   6                    3                    0                   .                      0                   .
K*%&>T"U"&"%#L)&"$&?*$%>">#5?)&"5&#@>"(@"L#>&)(@&"I&#$>"LI">;"**)"%I?&7"U"&"@D5L&$&C"@*%&>"L&)*W"C&>;$(L&"&#;"">#5?)&7""V&5*G$#?"(;";"#$#;%&$(>%(;>"#$&"%#<&@"H$*5"G$#C&"X."H*$"
&)&5&@%#$I">;"**)">%DC&@%>M"G$#C&"0"H*$"5(CC)&">;"**)">%DC&@%>M"#@C"G$#C&"6"H*$""(G"">;"**)">%DC&@%>7""P))">%DC&@%>"(@"%"&">#5?)&"$&>(C&"(@":*>%*@"#@C"W&$&"&@$*))&C"(@":'B"*$"#";"#$%&$"
>;"**)"(@"%"&"L#>&)(@&"I&#$7"""U*"L&"(@;)DC&CM">%DC&@%>"5D>%""#R&"#%")&#>%"*@&"O!PB">;*$&"#5*@G"%"&"H*))*W(@GT"FEP"#@C"O#%""H*$"&)&5&@%#$I"#@C"5(CC)&">;"**)">%DC&@%>Y"FEPM"O#%"M"
Z$(%(@G"U*?(;M"#@C"Z$(%(@G"!*5?*>(%(*@"H*$""(G"">;"**)">%DC&@%>7
,7":'B">%DC&@%>"&Q;)DC(@G"&Q#5M"#)%&$@#%(R&M";"#$%&$"#@C"?()*%">%DC&@%>"H$*5".990!.9967
.7"B%DC&@%>"&@$*))&C"(@";"#$%&$">;"**)>"H$*5".990!.9967
/7"B%DC&@%>"&@$*))&C"(@"?()*%">;"**)>"H$*5".990!.9967
07"!"#$%&$"#??)(;#@%";*"*$%>"(@"$#@C*5(S&C")*%%&$(&>T"5(CC)&">;"**)">%DC&@%>"(@".99.!.993M"#@C""(G"">;"**)">%DC&@%>"(@".99.!.9927
17"'()*%"#??)(;#@%";*"*$%>T"&)&5&@%#$I">;"**)">%DC&@%>"(@".99.!.990M"5(CC)&">;"**)">%DC&@%>"(@".99.!.993M"#@C""(G"">;"**)">%DC&@%>"(@".99/!.9927
                                                  P-S"&!5R!V$@-'(-%&!,-"-.0&!*(%+!#$%%&'U!N(..&')!D(.A)!#$%%&'U!#$)&')!-%!V+-'%&'!-.J!K("$%!/0+$$")
                                                        V+-'%&'!/0+$$")                                                                 K("$%!/0+$$")
                                        Y(JJ"&!/0+$$"                      L(F+!/0+$$"                 O"&D&.%-'U!/0+$$"                Y(JJ"&!/0+$$"                                                    L(F+!/0+$$"
                                               #$%%&'(&)!*(%+!                    #$%%&'(&)!*(%+!               #$%%&'(&)!*(%+!                 #$%%&'(&)!*(%+!                                                 #$%%&'(&)!*(%+!
                                !""!#$%%&'(&)     ,-)&"(.&!       !""!#$%%&'(&)     ,-)&"(.&!     !""!#$%%&'(&)    ,-)&"(.&!    !""!#$%%&'(&)     ,-)&"(.&!                                     !""!#$%%&'(&)     ,-)&"(.&!
                                                   /0$'&)                            /0$'&)                         /0$'&)                          /0$'&)                                                          /0$'&)
                                     123             143               153              163            173            183            193              1:3                                            1;3              12<3
L()?-.(0                           "<=<<6          "<=<<7            "<=<4;           "<=<4:         "<=<54            "           "<=<28           "<=<56                                          <=<42            <=<28
                                   1<=<463        1<=<463            1<=<453         1<=<453         1<=<5:3                       1<=<473         1<=<5:3                                         1<=<4:3         1<=<4:3
,"-0M                              "<=<26          "<=<25             <=<48            <=<49          <=<28            "            <=<<9            <=<<:                                         "<=<<4            <=<<8
                                   1<=<4;3        1<=<5<3            1<=<483         1<=<483         1<=<643                       1<=<493         1<=<6<3                                         1<=<523         1<=<523
N+(%&                               <=<2:           <=<2:            "<=<2<           "<=<22          <=<4:            "            <=<<2            <=<48                                         "<=<29           "<=<4<
                                   1<=<453        1<=<463            1<=<243         1<=<243         1<=<583                       1<=<2;3         1<=<443                                         1<=<293         1<=<293
!)(-.                               <=<<5           <=<<5           <=<42>>          <=<2;>         "<=<52>            "            <=<<2           "<=<<2                                          <=<<<            <=<<2
                                   1<=<<:3        1<=<<:3            1<=<223         1<=<223         1<=<2:3                       1<=<263         1<=<423                                         1<=<273         1<=<283
E&D-"&                              <=<47           <=<5<            "<=<<6           "<=<<6          <=<25            "            <=<29            <=<5<                                          <=<27            <=<<;
                                   1<=<523        1<=<543            1<=<483         1<=<483         1<=<6;3                       1<=<5<3         1<=<653                                         1<=<523         1<=<523
E'&&!$'!I&JA0&J!K'(0&!             "<=<2<          "<=<<:             <=<<9            <=<<:        "<=<:<>            "           "<=<25           "<=<2;                                        <=<7;>>          <=<87>>
#A.0+                              1<=<4;3        1<=<4;3            1<=<453         1<=<453         1<=<653                       1<=<453         1<=<4;3                                         1<=<483         1<=<483
/?&0(-"!OJA0-%($.                  "<=<29          "<=<29            "<=<22           "<=<25         "<=<48            "            <=<<<            <=<44                                         "<=<47           "<=<42
                                   1<=<473        1<=<473            1<=<4<3         1<=<4<3         1<=<483                       1<=<4<3         1<=<563                                         1<=<453         1<=<453
#(D(%&J!O.F"()+!                    <=<42           <=<2;            <=<42>          <=<44>          "<=<2:            "          "<=<55>>         "<=<72>                                          <=<27            <=<<9
K'$C(0(&.0U                        1<=<273        1<=<273            1<=<223         1<=<223         1<=<483                       1<=<283         1<=<5<3                                         1<=<273         1<=<273
,-)&"(.&!O#!!P&)%!/0$'&               "             <=<4;               "              <=<44            "              "              "              <=<52                                            "              <=<25
                                                  1<=<753                            1<=<653                                                       1<=<993                                                         1<=<763
,-)&"(.&!Y-%+!P&)%!                   "            <=<;7>               "              <=<98            "              "              "              <=<98                                            "             "<=<;4
/0$'&                                             1<=<773                            1<=<6:3                                                       1<=<9:3                                                         1<=<793
,-)&"(.&!N'(%(.F!                     "               "                 "              <=<<8            "              "              "                "                                              "              <=<68
V$D?$)(%($.!P&)%!/0$'&                                                               1<=<663                                                                                                                       1<=<753
,-)&"(.&!N'(%(.F!P$?(0!               "               "                 "             "<=<9;            "              "              "                "                                              "              <=<4:
P&)%!/0$'&                                                                           1<=<6:3                                                                                                                       1<=<773

?"@-"A&B!C'$D!E"%&)%                <=:4;              <=925                <=225             <=<82>              <=<68>>                 "                 <=926              <=997                <=69<              <=822
Q$%&)R P+() %-S"& '&?$'%) 0$&CC(0(&.%) C'$D '&F'&))($.) $C %+& J&?&.J&.% @-'(-S"&) "()%&J $. -. (.J(0-%$' @-'(-S"& &TA-" %$ $.& (C %+& )%AJ&.% *$. %+& "$%%&'U= V+-'%&' '&F'&))($.) (.0"AJ& JADD(&) C$' 10$DS(.-%($. $C )0+$$")
-??"(&J %$3>1U&-' $C -??"(0-%($.3 -.J &W0"AJ& )%AJ&.%) *(%+ )(S"(.F ?'($'(%U= K("$% '&F'&))($.) (.0"AJ& JADD&() C$' 1C(')% 0+$(0& )0+$$"3>1U&-' $C -??"(0-%($.3>1*-"M X$.&3 -.J &W0"AJ& )%AJ&.%) *(%+ )(S"(.F ?'($'(%U $'
FA-'-.%&&J -JD())($.= /-D?"&) (. 0$"AD.) 123B 153B 173B 193B -.J 1;3 -'& '&)%'(0%&J %$ )%AJ&.%) C'$D 0$+$'%) *+&'& *& )+$A"J $S)&'@& -% "&-)% $.& %&)% )0$'&= /-D?"&) (. 0$"AD.) 143B 163B 183B 1:3B -.J 12<3 -'& '&)%'(0%&J %$
)%AJ&.%) *+$ -")$ +-@& S-)&"(.& %&)% )0$'&)= E %&)%) -'& C$' %+& .A"" +U?$%+&)() %+-% %+& 0$&CC(0(&.%) $. *(..(.F %+& "$%%&'U (. -"" '&F'&))($.) -'& -"" &TA-" %$ X&'$= P+&)& %&)%) )%-%()%(0) -'& 0-"0A"-%&J C$' %+& )AS)-D?"& %+-%
+-)!.$."D())(.F!@-"A&)!C$'!-""!@-'(-S"&)!%&)%&J=!!!/%-.J-'J!&''$')B!(.!?-'&.%+&)&)B!-'&!0"A)%&'&J!-)!J&)0'(S&J!(.!%+&!P-S"&!6!.$%&)
>!)(F.(C(0-.%!-%!2<GH!>>!)(F.(C(0-.%!-%!7GH!>>>!)(F.(C(0-.%!-%!2G
                                                                                          O'65)!<T!!1.%%)#C!*)$,5%$
                                                                           UD'#%)#                                                                                  W"5.%$
                                          !"#$%!&%'()        *)+,-)+!!.#/               0&1&           0&1&!23+)/.$              !"#$%!&%'()        *)+,-)+!!.#/               0&1&            0&1&!23+)/.$
1)4)5     &,67)-%                             89:                 80:                    8;:                8<:                      8=:                 8>:                    8?:                 8@:
A5)/)B%'#C!&-D..5
          A1E                                  "                      "                   "                    "                 0F@=0GGG              HF9I>GG               HFH>IGG              HFH><GGG
                                                                                                                                  8HF9I;:              8HFH?@:               8HFH0?:               8HFH0<:
                                 J                                                                                                                       @?>                                         @?>

              K'%D                             "                      "                   "                    "                 0F@=@GGG              HF9??GG               HFH>0GG               HFH>HGG
                                                                                                                                  8HF9I<:              8HFH?@:               8HFH0?:               8HFH0>:
                                 J                                                                                                                       @?<                                         @?<

K"++5)!&-D..5
          A1E                             HFI>=GGG              HF9@9GGG             HF9@?GGG             HF9<IGGG               9F;?@GGG                HFH09                HFH9>                 HFHH>
                                           8HF99<:               8HFH>9:              8HFH>0:              8HFH=0:                8HF9@I:               8HFH>=:              8HFH<?:               8HFH<;:
                                  J                             0L<9>                                       0L<9>                                        ;L;IH                                      ;L;IH

              K'%D                        HFI9@GGG              HF;I?GGG             HF<;0GGG             HF<H=GGG               9F0I9GGG                "HFH?@               "HFH>H                "HFH=I
                                           8HF9H@:               8HFH>?:              8HFH?=:              8HFH>>:                8HF9@9:               8HFH>I:              8HFH=;:               8HFH<@:
                                  J                             0L=@0                                       0L=@0                                        ;L@=9                                      ;L@=9

M"(D!&-D..5
           A1E                            HF?<0GGG              HF9<?GGG             HF9IIGGG             HF9@?GGG               HF><<GGG                HFH9;                HFH0H                 HFHH?
                                           8HF9;I:               8HFH=;:              8HFH>0:              8HFH==:                8HF9H@:               8HFH<I:              8HFH?=:               8HFH?;:
                                  J                             9LI<?                                       9LI<?                                        9LHH?                                      9LHH?

              K'%D                        HF?;@GGG              HF0;=GGG             HF;9@GGG             HF0?<GGG               HF>;0GGG                HFH9;                HFH09                 "HFH99
                                           8HF9;?:               8HFH=I:              8HFH??:              8HFH?9:                8HF9H@:               8HFH>=:              8HF9HH:               8HF9H9:
                                  J                             9LI0I                                       9LI0I                                         II>                                        II>

              N#"%"B(!O.P"-               HF?<9GGG              HF0H>GGG             HF0?@GGG             HF0>?GGG               HF>;>GGG              HF99IGG               HF9@?GG               HF9?;G
                                           8HF9;@:               8HFH>I:              8HFH@;:              8HFH?@:                8HF9HI:              8HFH=I:               8HFHI;:               8HFHI;:
                                  J                             9LI;9                                       9LI;9                                        II?                                         II?


              N#"%"B(!                    HF?<9GGG               HF90?GG             HF9?9GGG             HF9>@GGG               HF>;>GGG                HFH??                HF90H                 HF999
              U./P.$"%".B                  8HF9;@:               8HFH=0:              8HFH><:              8HFH>0:                8HF9HI:               8HFH=<:              8HFH@<:               8HFH@>:
                                  J                              9LI;9                                      9LI;9                                         II?                                        II?
J.%)$T!OD"$!%'65)!#)P.#%$!Q"#$%!$%'()L!#)+,-)+"Q.#/L!'B+!0&1&!)$%"/'#)$!,$"B(!5.%%)#C".QQ)#!"B$%#,/)B%$F!OD)!$'/P5)!"$!#)$%#"-%)+!%.!$%,+)B%$!2"%D!6'$)5"B)!+)/.(#'PD"-!-D'#'-%)#"$%"-$F!*)(#)$$".B$!"B-5,+)!
C)'#!.Q!%)$%!'B+!C)'#!.Q!6"#%D!+,//")$F!K"++5)!$-D..5!'B+!)5)/)B%'#C!$-D..5!#)(#)$$".B$!P..5!(#'+)!.,%-./)$!'B+!"B-5,+)!+,//")$!Q.#!(#'+)!5)4)5F!UD'#%)#!#)(#)$$".B$!"B-5,+)!+,//")$!Q.#!8-./6"B'%".B!.Q!
$-D..5$!'PP5")+!%.:G8C)'#!.Q!'PP5"-'%".B:!'B+!)V-5,+)!$%,+)B%$!2"%D!$"65"B(!P#".#"%CF!!W"5.%!#)(#)$$".B$!"B-5,+)!+,//")$!Q.#!8Q"#$%!-D."-):G8C)'#!.Q!'PP5"-'%".B:G82'5X!Y.B)!$%'%,$:!'B+!)V-5,+)!$%,+)B%$!2"%D!
$"65"B(!P#".#"%C!.#!(,'#'B%))+!'+/"$$".BF!!U.5,/B$!8<:!'B+!8@:!#)P.#%!0&1&!-.)QQ"-")B%$!Q#./!$P)-"Q"-'%".B$!%D'%!'++!+)/.(#'PD"-!-.B%#.5$L!2D"-D!"B-5,+)!+,//")$!Q.#!Q)/'5)L!65'-XL!D"$P'B"-L!'$"'BL!.%D)#!
#'-)L!$P)-"'5!)+,-'%".BL!5"/"%)+!)B(5"$D!P#.Q"-")B-CL!Q#))3#)+,-)+!P#"-)!5,B-DL!'B+!'!Q)/'5)G/"B.#"%C!"B%)#'-%".BF!!A5)/)B%'#C!$-D..5!%)$%$!'#)!("4)B!"B!;#+!'B+!<%D!(#'+)S!/"++5)!$-D..5!%)$%$!'#)!("4)B!"B!>%DL!
D"(D!$-D..5!%)$%$!'#)!("4)B!"B!9H%D!(#'+)F!!OD)!%'65)!#)P.#%$!#.6,$%!$%'B+'#+!)##.#$L!-5,$%)#)+!.B!C)'#!6C!9H%D!(#'+)!$-D..5!Q.#!D"(D!$-D..5F!&"B-)!%D)!/"++5)!'B+!)5)/)B%'#C!$-D..5!#)(#)$$".B$!P..5!$%,+)B%$!
'-#.$$!(#'+)$L!%D)!'$$.-"'%)+!$%'B+'#+!)##.#$!'55.2!Q.#!%2."2'C!-5,$%)#"B(!.B!$-D..5"6C"C)'#!'B+!$%,+)B%!"+)B%"Q")#F!!!&%'B+'#+!)##.#$!'#)!#)P.#%)+!"B!P'#)B%D)$)$F
G!$"(B"Q"-'B%!'%!9HRS!GG!$"(B"Q"-'B%!'%!=RS!GGG!$"(B"Q"-'B%!'%!9R
                                                                                      S-,)"!IV!!?$''"(W!X"*A)'*3!X$,A*'&"**!96"%Y*
                                                                          96-('"(!?$''"(."*                                                                                    Z.)$'!?$''"(."*
                                                                                        /0"(.1"&'.2."1!       4.56!*%6$$)!7849:!                                                    <$!=">!;.)$'!   4.56!*%6$$)!7849:!
                                                              !"#$!+!,-*").&"!          #$1")3!1"#$!            -*!;.)$'3!1"#$!                                  !"#$!+!,-*").&"! -;;).%-&'*3!1"#$!   -*!;.)$'3!1"#$!
                                       !"#$!%$&'($)*           *%$("!%$&'($)*             %$&'($)*                 %$&'($)*               !"#$!%$&'($)*           *%$("!%$&'($)*      %$&'($)*           %$&'($)*
?"0")     @A,B"%'                          CDE                       CFE                     CGE                      CHE                     CIE                       CJE              CKE                C>E
L.11)"!@%6$$)
          M?:                             NODHPQQQ                 NODHHQQQ                NODGHQQQ                      "                      NONNJ                   "NONGI                   "NONKP                     "
                                           CNONIFE                  CNONHHE                 CNONIDE                                            CNONHGE                 CNODDFE                  CNODDNE
                                  <         F3HDJ                    F3GJI                   F3HDJ                                              G3GPN                    F3HDH                    F3JHI

              L-'6                        NOHNIQQQ                 NOG>JQQQ                NOGKNQQQ                      "                      "NONIP                "NOFIDQQ                 "NOFGGQQ                     "
                                           CNONJJE                  CNONIHE                 CNONJDE                                            CNONH>E                 CNODNJE                  CNODDPE
                                  <         F3I>F                    F3IF>                   F3I>F                                               G3>ID                  F3KGG                    G3NKI

4.56!@%6$$)
           M?:                            NOD>KQQQ                 NOD>JQQQ                NODJFQQQ                   NODDF                     NONNK                   "NONIG                      "                   NODDDQ
                                           CNONIIE                  CNONHPE                 CNONIGE                  CNONKJE                   CNONKGE                 CNONIPE                                          CNONJIE
                                  <         D3PHK                    D3JFP                   D3PHK                    D3J>G                     D3NNK                    PHP                                             D3GJK

              L-'6                        NOFKHQQQ                  NOFFJQQ                NOFIDQQQ                 NOGNGQQ                     "NONDD                  NONNK                       "                    NON>J
                                           CNONKDE                  CNONJNE                 CNONJIE                 CNON>HE                    CNODNDE                 CNONKNE                                          CNONKKE
                                  <         D3PFP                    D3>PF                   D3PFP                   D3JJH                       PPJ                     P>G                                             D3GII

              R(.'.&5!S$;.%               NOFJKQQQ                  NOF>DQQ                NOFH>QQQ                 NOFFIQQ                    NODKGQ                  NODIDQ                       "                  NOFDHQQ
                                           CNONK>E                  CNON>GE                 CNONKNE                 CNODDFE                    CNONPGE                 CNON>PE                                         CNONKIE
                                  <         D3PGD                    D3JDJ                   D3PGD                   D3JKN                       PPK                     PGH                                            D3GIH

              R(.'.&5!                    NODJ>QQQ                  NODGFQQ                NODHJQQQ                  NODIJQ                     NODDD                   NONPK                       "                  NODGDQQ
              9$#;$*.'.$&                  CNONJFE                  CNONIPE                 CNONIIE                  CNON>PE                   CNON>JE                 CNON>NE                                         CNONJIE
                                  <         D3PGD                    D3JDJ                   D3PGD                    D3JKN                      PPK                     PGH                                            D3GIH
<$'"*V!S6.*!'-,)"!(";$('*!#$1.2.%-'.$&*!$&!'6"!*;"%.2.%-'.$&*!(";$('"1!.&!S-,)"!HO!9$)A#&*!D!-&1!I!-("!(";"-'"1!2($#!S-,)"!H!#$1")*!C7.'6!1"#$5(-;6.%!%$&'($)*EO!!9$)A#&*!F!-&1!J!*6$7!'6"!("*A)'*!$2!-11.&5!,-*").&"!*%$("*O!!
9$)A#&!G!;("*"&'*!("*A)'*!A*.&5!,$'6!.&.'.-)!$22"(!-&1!"0"&'A-)!$22"(!1A##."*!-*!.&*'(A#"&'*!2$(!%6-('"(!*%6$$)!-''"&1"&%"3!*$!'6"!#$1")!.*!$0"(.1"&'.2."1O!!9$)A#&*!H!-&1!>!*6$7!'6"!("*A)'*!$2!%)-*.2.W.&5!49:!-*!-!;.)$'!6.56!
*%6$$)O!!9$)A#&!K!*6$7*!;.)$'!("*A)'*!2$(!5(-1"!J">!!#.11)"!*%6$$)*!$&)WO!!:))!("5("**.$&*!-)*$!.&%)A1"!W"-(!$2!'"*'!-&1!W"-(!$2!,.('6!1A##."*!-&1!A*"!'6"!*-#"!%)A*'"(.&5!*%6"#"!-*!A*"1!2$(!S-,)"!HO!!!!@'-&1-(1!"(($(*!-("!(";$('"1!
.&!;-("&'6"*"*O
Q!*.5&.2.%-&'!-'!DNTU!QQ!*.5&.2.%-&'!-'!ITU!QQQ!*.5&.2.%-&'!-'!DT
                                                                     S'7/"!@R!C..&*.*$-
                                                                 ,)'&."&                                                          V*/$.
                                                                       !*OO"&"-.*'/                                                       !*OO"&"-.*'/
                                          V&$(!$O!-$-"                                                   V&$(!$O!-$-"
                                          $OO"&"L!T*.)!      !"#$%&'()*+! !"#$%&'()*+0!1!                $OO"&"L!T*.)!      !"#$%&'()*+! !"#$%&'()*+0!1!
                                             K,C3              ,$-.&$/0   2'0"/*-"!3+$&"0                   K,C3              ,$-.&$/0   2'0"/*-"!3+$&"0
4"5"/ 3678"+.                                   9:;                 9<;                 9=;                   9>;                  9?;                   9@;
A/"#"-.'&B!3+)$$/
       A4C                                       "                   "                    "                  DEFG@               DED==                    "
                                                                                                                                9DED=F;
                                     H                                                                        @I@                :JDI?                    "

          K'.)                                   "                   "                    "                  DEFG@               DED=<                    "
                                                                                                                                9DED=F;
                                     H                                                                        @I@                :JDI?

K*LL/"!3+)$$/
        A4C                                   DEID?              DED><M               DED>DM                 DE@GG               DED<G               DEDDI
                                                                 9DED<:;              9DED<<;                                   9DED<>;             9DED<@;
                                     H         G<=                <JI@G                <JID:                 <J@<?               >J?G@               <JFFI

          K'.)                                DEI::              DED>@MM             DED>@MM                 DEFD<               DED=D               DEDDG
                                                                 9DED<:;             9DED<:;                                    9DED<=;             9DED<@;
                                     H         G@I                =JD=>               <JG?I                  <JIF>               ?J:=D               =J:<>

N*%)!3+)$$/
        A4C                                   DEFF@               DED<F                DED<D                 DEF>G             DED?=MM             DEDF>MMM
                                                                 9DED<<;              9DED<>;                                  9DED<@;              9DED<@;
                                     H         I<?                <J>==                <JD<@                  FI@               :J=DD                :J<:D

          K'.)                                DEF@F               DED<G                DED<I                 DEF>D              DED>IM              DED@>MM
                                                                 9DED<=;              9DED<=;                                   9DED<@;             9DED<@;
                                     H         I<?                <J>==                <J=F?                  FI@                :J=DD               :J<F:

          U&*.*-%!S$(*+!'-L!                  DEF@I               DED<I                DED<@                 DEF>=              DED>IM             DEDF=MMM
          U&*.*-%!,$#($0*.*$-                                    9DED<=;              9DED<>;                                   9DED<@;             9DED<@;
                                     H         I<?                <J>==                <JD:G                  FI@                :J=DD               :J<DD
H$."0R!S)*0!.'7/"!&"($&.0!"OO"+.0!$O!/$.."&B!$OO"&0!$-!'!L6##B!5'&*'7/"!.)'.!*-L*+'."0!T)"-!.)"!$6.+$#"!."0.!0+$&"!*0!-$-"#*00*-%E!S)"!0("+*O*+'.*$-!*0!!.)"!0'#"!'0!
.)'.!60"L!.$!+$-0.&6+.!.)"!"0.*#'."0!*-!S'7/"!>E!!S)"!0'#(/"!*-!.)*0!+'0"!*-+/6L"0!'//!0.6L"-.0!*-!.)"!7'0"/*-""L"#$%&'()*+0!6-*5"&0"!'-L!-$.!860.!.)$0"!T*.)!."0.!
0+$&"0E!!3.'-L'&L!"&&$&0J!*-!('&"-.)"0"0J!'&"!+/60."&"L!'0!L"0+&*7"L!*-!.)"!S'7/"!>!-$."0E
M!0*%-*O*+'-.!'.!:DPQ!MM!0*%-*O*+'-.!'.!?PQ!MMM!0*%-*O*+'-.!'.!:P
                                                 $'A-&"9M"".,'%'+(&%/0(/+0""<"$%&'(&)"'#)"!"#!(%&'(&)"*+,""-0"<"%"."=C-/&%0
                                                                    I/))-&"*+,""-0                                                    V/F,"*+,""-0
                                                      .,'%(&%                             W/-"(                         .,'%(&%                         W/-"(
                                             !"#!$%&'(&)      $%&'(&)          !"#!$%&'(&)      $%&'(&)       !"#!$%&'(&)       $%&'(&)       !"#!$%&'(&)     $%&'(&)
*+,""-".,'%'+(&%/0(/+                            123            143                153            163              173            183              193          1:3
;%'+(/"#"<&='-&                                  >?686           >?767             >?687           >?699             >?6@6            >?874             >?695           >?6>8


;%'+(/"#"A-'+B                                   >?68@           >?582             >?677           >?582             >?769            >?874             >?766           >?7>9


;%'+(/"#",/0C'#/+                                >?495           >?2@4             >?592           >?44>             >?544            >?464             >?478           >?476


;%'+(/"#"D/(,"-/=/(&)"E#F-/0,"C%"</+/&#+G        >?245          !>?>>4             >?2>@           >?2>5             >?269            >?>>2             >?22>           >?>42


;%'+(/"#"0C&+/'-"&)                              >?449           >?2>5             >?489           >?2:8             >?2::            >?>:@             >?2@6           >?265


;%'+(/"#"<%&&""%"%&)H+&)"C%/+&"-H#+,             >?989           >?7>2             >?9:8           >?984             >?88:            >?8:5             >?852           >?7>4


;%'+(/"#"D/(,"</%0("-'#FH'F&"#"("E#F-/0,         >?52>           >?265             >?5@>           >?5:4             >?58:            >?44@             >?568           >?527


I&'#"A'0&-/#&"EJK"I.K*"0+"%&                     >?22>           >?575             !>?>65          >?484             !>?422           >?4>4            !>?28:           >?>5@

I&'#"A'0&-/#&"I'(,"I.K*"0+"%&                    >?>@:           >?5:>             !>?>2@          >?4@5             !>?5:7           >?>7>            !>?498           !>?>9:


;%'+(/"#""<"(&'+,&%0"-/+&#0&)"(""(&'+,"
                                                 >?@>6           >?6@8             >?::@           >?:79             >?:64            >?998             >?:86           >?:@:
'00/F#=&#(


*(H)&#(L(&'+,&%"%'(/"                           24?8:>          2>?8>7            24?85@           25?>:6            26?866          25?594            26?442           26?9:8

!"(&0M""$,/0"('A-&"%&C"%(0"=&'#"(%&'(&)"'#)"#"#!(%&'(&)"+,'%'+(&%/0(/+0"<"%"+"=C-/&%0"/#"(,&"+,'%(&%"'#)"C/-"("-"((&%/&0?""$,&"#"#!(%&'(&)"=&'#0"'%&"C%")H+&)"AG"
&0(/='(/#F"=")&-0""<"(,&"<"%=M""N /12!O/3P#>+"Q"$ >+12!O/3"Q%>/R"D,&%&"N/"/0"(,&"0+,""-"+,'%'+(&%/0(/+""<"/#(&%&0(""A0&%S&)"'("(,&"0+,""-"'+(H'--G"'((&#)&)"AG"&'+,"0(H)&#("/#"(,&"
G&'%"/==&)/'(&-G"'<(&%"(,&"-"((&%GR"O /"/0"'")H==G"<"%"D,&(,&%"(,&"0(H)&#("'((&#)&)"+,'%(&%LC/-"("/#"(,/0"G&'%R"# >+"%&C%&0&#(0"+"#(%"-0"1%/0B"0&(")H==/&03R"'#)"12!O /3"/0"
/#0(%H=&#(&)"H0/#F"(,&"-"((&%G"D/#L-"00")H==G?""$,&"TU"&0(/='(&""<"$ >+"F/S&0"'#"&0(/='(&""<"(,&"=&'#""<"N"<"%"(,&"+"=C-/&%0"/#"(,&"#"#!(%&'(&)"0('(&?""$,&"(%&'(&)"=&'#0"
'%&"C%")H+&)"AG"&0(/='(/#F"=")&-0""<"(,&"<"%="N /O/P#2+"Q"$ 2+O/"Q%2/R"D,&%&"O"/0"/#0(%H=&#(&)"AG"(,&"-"((&%G"D/#L-"00")H==G?""$,&"TU"&0(/='(&""<"$ 2+"F/S&0"'#"&0(/='(&""<"
(,&"=&'#""<"N"<"%"(,&"+"=C-/&%0"/#"(,&"(%&'(&)"0('(&?"
                                                                     I"0-%!;O!X$(%)"'(#*$!<*=%-L
                                                        YP$!0"L%-#$%!L'*)%                                                  <%"$!0"L%-#$%!L'*)%!#$!)#LW!L%(
                                             K>")(%)L                           V#-*(L                                 K>")(%)L                           V#-*(L
                                    !"#$!%&&%'(!   #$(%)"'(#*$     !"#$!%&&%'(!       #$(%)"'(#*$             !"#$!%&&%'(!   #$(%)"'(#*$     !"#$!%&&%'(!       #$(%)"'(#*$
+%,%- ./01%'(                           234            254              264               274                     284            294              2:4               2;4
<#==-%!.'>**-
       ?+@                            AB378CCC           "ABAD7C            "ABA6A            "ABA77            AB3;8CCC           "AB:39CC           "ABAAD            "AB59D
                                       2ABA774           2ABA834            2AB3374           2ABA864            2ABA8A4            2AB6794           2AB36;4           2AB7864
                                E                5R698                                5R737                                5R698                                5R737
        <"(>                          AB6;9CCC           "AB36:CC          "AB58ACC           "ABAA5            AB773CCC           "3BA38CCC        "AB673CCC           AB868C
                                       2ABA854            2ABA9A4           2AB3A:4           2ABA734            2ABA8D4             2AB5:D4          2AB36A4           2AB5D34
                                E                5R85;                                5R:66                                5R85;                                5R:66
F#G>!.'>**-
        ?+@                           AB3;DCCC            ABAD5             "ABA86            "ABA59            AB3;8CCC             ABA85            "ABA7A             AB:D5
                                       2ABA8A4           2ABA;64            2ABA8;4           2ABA;:4            2ABA8A4            2AB73D4           2ABA8D4           2AB9:54
                                E                3R95D                                 D7D                                 3R95D                                 D7D
        <"(>                          AB569CCC            ABA;9              ABA3A            "AB3A5C           AB53;CCC           AB9ADCC             ABA56             AB9A9
                                       2ABA934           2ABA994            2ABA984           2ABA854            2ABA884           2AB5D:4            2ABA:A4           2AB8984
                                E                3R;D5                                 D;6                                 3R;D5                                 D;6
        H)#(#$G!I*J#'                 AB5;5CCC            ABA6:             AB386C            "ABA;3            AB5:5CCC             AB6;8            AB397C             AB376
                                       2ABA;74           2ABA;54            2ABADA4           2ABA;:4            2ABA;94            2ABD754           2ABADA4           2AB95D4
                                E                3R939                                 D67                                 3R939                                 D67
        H)#(#$G!K*!J*L#(#*$           AB36:CC             ABA:;              AB33:            "ABA:D             AB37ACC            "AB56;             AB35D             AB75;
                                      2ABA8D4            2ABA:64            2ABA;54           2ABAD34            2ABA9;4            2AB9374           2ABA;:4           2AB88:4
                                E                3R939                                 D67                                 3R939                                 D67
E*(%LO!!I>#L!("0-%!L>*PL!)%L/-(L!)%L/-(L!"$"-*G*/L!(*!(>*L%!)%J*)(%=!#$!(>%!5.+.!-*((%)Q!)%L/-(L!#$!I"0-%!7R!0/(!(>%!LJ%'#&#'"(#*$L!#$'-/=%!#$(%)"'(#*$!(%)!LB!!I>%!!*=%-L!
%L(#!"(%=!")%!*&!(>%!&*)!O!Q#G(S#(T$GT%&1=#1T'U#T(A.#G(T(3@#2.#G("LG4T)#G(R!P>%)%!Q#G(!#L!(>%!*/('*!%!*&!#$(%)%L(!&*)!L(/=%$(!#!#$!G)"=%!G!#$!Q%")!(R!.#G( #L!Q%")L!LJ%$(!#$!'>")(%)!
2*)!V#-*(4R!@#!#L!*P$!0"L%-#$%!(%L(!L'*)%!*)!!%"$!0"L%-#$%!L'*)%!#$!(>%!)#LW!L%(R!(>%!=#1!")%!)#LW!L%(!=/!!#%LR!U#!#L!"!,%'(*)!*&!'*$()*-LR!"$=!LG!#L!(>%!",%)"G%!L'*)%!#$!(>%!
L"!J-%!L*!(>"(!(>%!!"#$!%&&%'(L!(A!")%!"(!(>%!!%"$B!!!U#!#$'-/=%L!Q%")!*&!0#)(>!=/!!#%LR!Q%")!*&!(%L(!=/!!#%LR!=%!*G)"J>#'!'*$()*-LR!"$=!"$!*P$!0"L%-#$%!L'*)%!!"#$!
%&&%'(B!!.("$=")=!%))*)LR!#$!J")%$(>%L%LR!")%!'-/L(%)%=!"L!=%L')#0%=!#$!(>%!I"0-%!7!$*(%LB
C!L#G$#&#'"$(!"(!3AMN!CC!L#G$#&#'"$(!"(!8MN!CCC!L#G$#&#'"$(!"(!3M
                                       L#/)&!HT!U/N&$,#%(*:#)!<:#);N(N!!O*$!!"#$%&$!#:F!'()*%!
                                                         Y&9*J$#M"(1N!                    Y&9*J$#M"(1N!\!W#N&)(:&!-1*$&N
                                                   !"#$%&$               '()*%!            !"#$%&$             '()*%
+&,&)        -./0&1%                                 234                  254                  264              274
8)&9&:%#$;!-1"**)
             8+<3                                   =>=??@@@                 =>=3?                     "                        "
                                                     2=>=3A4                2=>=5=4
                B                                                5=S=?E
                C5                                               =>367

                D#%"5                                  =>=6E                 =>=57                     "                        "
                                                      2=>=564               2=>=564
                B                                                3AS6?G
                C5                                               =>363

D(FF)&!-1"**)
             8+<6                                   =>33G@@@              "=>=A5@@@               =>3=7@@@                "=>=AE@@@
                                                     2=>=374                2=>=374                2=>=354                  2=>=334
                B                                                67S6=3                                          63SG5=
                C5                                               =>66H                                           =>?6E

                D#%"7                               =>3AG@@@              "=>=HG@@@               =>3E=@@@                "=>3==@@@
                                                     2=>=5=4                2=>=3A4                2=>=3E4                  2=>=364
                B                                                6ES?E6                                          6?SAG7
                C5                                               =>6?=                                           =>?AG

I(J"!-1"**)
                8+<?                                =>55E@@@               =>3??@@@               =>3GG@@@                =>=H7@@@
                                                     2=>=5=4                2=>=3E4                2=>=3E4                 2=>=3G4
                B                                                3GSG=H                                          35S67A
                C5                                               =>7EA                                           =>G56

                D#%"G                               =>57A@@@               =>35G@@@               =>3?3@@@                 =>=?5@@
                                                     2=>=7=4                2=>=5G4                2=>=634                 2=>=564
                B                                                3GS6?=                                          3?SEGE
                C5                                               =>?=H                                           =>A==

                K$(%(:J!L*M(1A                      =>55E@@@               =>3?7@@@               =>5=G@@@                =>373@@@
                                                     2=>=5E4                2=>=564                2=>=634                 2=>=574
                B                                                3GS5EH                                          35S3E3
                C5                                               =>6=E                                           =>6?7

                K$(%(:J!!*9M*N(%(*:E                =>5=7@@@               =>37E@@@               =>3AE@@@                =>35H@@@
                                                     2=>=534                2=>=3H4                2=>=554                 2=>=3E4
                B                                                3GS5EH                                          35S3E3
                C5                                               =>67E                                           =>6H7
B*%&NT!L"(N!%#/)&!$&M*$%N!U+-!&N%(9#%&N!*O!%"&!&OO&1%N!*O!%(9&!NM&:%!(:!N1"**)N!*O!,#$(*.N!%;M&N>!!L"&!&V1).F&F!1#%&J*$;!(N!%$#F(%(*:#)!W'-!
N1"**)N>!!L"&!N#9M)&!$&N%$(1%&F!%*!N%.F&:%N!X(%"!/#N&)(:&!F&9*J$#M"(1!1"#$#1%&$(N%(1N>!!Y&9*J$#M"(1N!(:1).F&!O&9#)&S!/)#1ZS!"(NM#:(1S!#N(#:S!
*%"&$!$#1&S!NM&1(#)!&F.1#%(*:S!)(9(%&F!&:J)(N"!M$*O(1(&:1;S!O$&&[$&F.1&F!M$(1&!).:1"S!#:F!#!O&9#)&@9(:*$(%;!F.99;>!!C&J$&NN(*:N!#)N*!(:1).F&!
;&#$!*O!%&N%!#:F!;&#$!*O!/($%"!F.99(&N>!D(FF)&!N1"**)!#:F!&)&9&:%#$;!N1"**)!$&J$&NN(*:N!M**)!J$#F&!*.%1*9&N!#:F!(:1).F&!F.99(&N!O*$!J$#F&!
)&,&)>!!C&J$&NN(*:N!.N&!$*/.N%!N%#:F#$F!&$$*$N!#:F!#$&!1).N%&$&F!#N!(:!L#/)&!7>!!-%#:F#$F!&$$*$N!#$&!$&M*$%&F!(:!M#$&:%"&N&N>
@!N(J:(O(1#:%!#%!3=PQ!@@!N(J:(O(1#:%!#%!?PQ!@@@!N(J:(O(1#:%!#%!3P
3>!8)&9&:%#$;!N1"**)!8+<!(N!O*$!R$#F&!6!25==?"=E4!#:F!R$#F&!7!25==?"=E4>
5>!8)&9&:%#$;!N1"**)!D#%"!(N!O*$!R$#F&!6!25==?"=E4!#:F!R$#F&!7!25==?"=E4>
6>!D(FF)&!N1"**)!8+<!(N!O*$!R$#F&!G!25==?"=E4S!R$#F&!A!25==?"=E4S!#:F!R$#F&!E!25==?"=E4
7>!D(FF)&!N1"**)!D#%"!(N!O*$!R$#F&!G!25==7"=E4S!R$#F&!A!25==?"=E4S!#:F!R$#F&!E!25==G"=E4
?>!I(J"!N1"**)!8+<!(N!O*$!R$#F&!3=!25==7"=E4>
G>!I(J"!N1"**)!D#%"!(N!O*$!R$#F&!3=!25==7"=E4>
A>!I(J"!N1"**)!K$(%(:J!L*M(1!(N!O*$!R$#F&!3=!25==7"=E4>
E>!I(J"!N1"**)!K$(%(:J!!*9M*N(%(*:!(N!O*$!R$#F&!3=!25==7"=E4>
                                                                     O+90&!<GS!E.#"'+#&.!"1!+1M!T8#!(P!#$&!4(##&*5!2+',0&
                                                                     U$+*#&*.!                                                                                  V"0(#.
                                                 4(##&*5                            T9.&*7+#"(1+0                         4(##&*5                                               T9.&*7+#"(1+0

                                     !"#$!             !"#$!/+.&0"1&!            31!4(##&*5!       6(#!"1!4(##&*5!           !"#$!             !"#$!/+.&0"1&!            31!4(##&*5!       6(#!"1!4(##&*5!
                                  %&'()*+,$"-.            2-(*&.                  2+',0&             2+',0&               %&'()*+,$"-.            2-(*&.                  2+',0&             2+',0&
4&7&0     289:&-#                     ;<=                   ;>=                      ;?=                 ;@=                  ;A=                   ;B=                      ;C=                 ;D=
E0&'&1#+*5!2-$((0
          E4F                             "                    "                      "               GHGAAIII               GHGB@III                  "                  GHGA<I                "GHG??
                                                                                                       ;GHG<D=                ;GHG>@=                                     ;GHG>B=              ;GHG>A=
                              6                                                                        >GJGAD                   DCB                                                  >GJGAD

             K+#$                         "                    "                      "                 GHG?C                 GHGBGII                  "                 GHGCLIII              "GHGALI
                                                                                                       ;GHG>?=                ;GHG>B=                                     ;GHG>D=              ;GHG?>=
                              6                                                                        <CJ?AB                   DC@                                                  <CJ?AB

K"MM0&!2-$((0
          E4F                        GH<@LIII              GH<@@III              GH<ADIII             GHGD>III                 GHGGB                "GHG?A               "GHGCBIII       "GHGCLIII
                                      ;GHGA>=               ;GHG@@=               ;GHG<C=              ;GHG<@=                ;GHG@?=              ;GH<<>=                 ;GHG<A=         ;GHG<B=
                              6        >J@<B                 >J?BA                           ?<JB>G                            ?J?LG                 >J@<@                         ?<JB>G

             K+#$                    GH@GAIII              GH?DBIII              GH?<>III             GH<>LIII                 "GHGAL             "GH>A<II               "GH<<BIII       "GHGCDIII
                                      ;GHGBB=               ;GHGA@=               ;GHG>D=              ;GHG>G=                ;GHG@D=              ;GH<GB=                 ;GHG<A=         ;GHG<L=
                              6        >JAD>                 >JA>D                           ?AJCB@                             ?JDA<               >JC??                          ?AJCB@

N")$!2-$((0
          E4F                        GH<DCIII              GH<DBIII              GH<DDIII             GH<?@III                 GHGGC                "GHGA?               GH<@<III             GHGCCIII
                                      ;GHGAA=               ;GHG@L=               ;GHG>?=              ;GHG>>=                ;GHGC?=              ;GHGAL=                ;GHG<D=              ;GHG<C=
                              6        <JL@C                 <JB>L                           <>J?@C                            <JGGC                 L@L                             <>J?@C

             K+#$                    GH>C@III              GH>>BII               GH<ADIII             GH<@GIII                 "GHG<<               GHGGC                GH<?LIII               GHG>@
                                      ;GHGC<=              ;GHGBG=                ;GHG@A=              ;GHG?>=                ;GH<G<=              ;GHGCG=                ;GHG?B=              ;GHG>?=
                              6        <JL>L                <JDL>                            <AJDBD                             LLB                  LD?                             <AJDBD

             !*"#"1)!O(,"-           GH>BCIII              GH>D<II               GH>A?III             GH<?BIII                GH<C?I               GH<A<I                GH>@>III             GH<G?III
                                      ;GHGCD=              ;GHGD?=                ;GHG@<=              ;GHG?>=                ;GHGL?=              ;GHGDL=                ;GHG<L=              ;GHG>A=
                              6        <JL?<                <JB<B                            <>J<D<                             LLC                  L?@                             <>J<D<

             !*"#"1)!                GH<BDIII              GH<?>II               GH>GCIII             GH<?@III                 GH<<<                GHGLC                GH<LAIII             GH<G@III
             U(',(."#"(1              ;GHGB>=              ;GHGAL=                ;GHG>L=              ;GHG>@=                ;GHGDB=              ;GHGDG=                ;GHG><=              ;GHG<D=
                              6        <JL?<                <JB<B                            <>J<D<                             LLC                  L?@                             <>J<D<
6(#&.S!U(08'1.!;<=!+1M!;A=!(P!#$".!#+90&!*&,(*#!>242!-(&PP"-"&1#.!P*('!O+90&!@H!!U(08'1.!;>=!+1M!;B=!*&,(*#!>242!-(&PP"-"&1#.!P*('!O+90&!AH!!O$&.&!'(M&0.!"1-08M&!M&'()*+,$"-!+1M!9+.&0"1&!#&.#!.-(*&!
-(1#*(0.H!!T9.&*7+#"(1+0!'(M&0.!"1-08M&!.&,+*+#&!7+*"+90&.!P(*!5&+*.!"1!0(##&*5!.+',0&!,"0(#!.-$((0.J!0(##&*5!.+',0&!-$+*#&*!.-$((0.J!1(1"0(##&*5!.+',0&!,"0(#!.-$((0.J!+1M!1(1"0(##&*5!.+',0&!-$+*#&*!
.-$((0.H!!O$&.&!'(M&0.!+0.(!"1-08M&!#$&!.+'&!-(7+*"+#&.!+.!8.&M!#(!-(1.#*8-#!#$&!&.#"'+*&.!"1!O+90&!LH!!W(*!+!)"7&1!.-$((0!0&7&0!+1M!#&.#J!-(08'1.!;?=J!;@=J!;C=J!+1M!;D=!*&,(*#!-(&PP"-"&1#!&.#"'+#&.!P*('!
#$&!.+'&!*&)*&.."(1H!!F.!"1!O+90&!LJ!(9.&*7+#"(1+0!'(M&0.!*&.#*"-#!#$&!.+',0&!#(!.#8M&1#.!X$(!X&*&!"1!+!/V2!(*!/(.#(1!-$+*#&*!.-$((0!"1!#$&!5&+*!(P!#$&!*&0&7+1#!#&.#H!!2#+1M+*M!&**(*.J!"1!,+*&1#$&.&.J!
+*&!-08.#&*&M!+.!M&.-*"9&M!"1!#$&!O+90&!@!1(#&.H
I!.")1"P"-+1#!+#!<GQR!II!.")1"P"-+1#!+#!AQR!III!.")1"P"-+1#!+#!<Q
                                                              VIV!Estimates!of!the!Middle!School!Math!Effect
                                              2.5

                                               2

                                              1.5
              Score!Difference




                                               1

                                              0.5

                                               0

                                       !0.5

                                               !1

                                       !1.5
                                                !0.75         !0.25            0.25               0.75                1.25       1.75       2.25

                                                                       Difference!in!average!years!in!charter



                                                                             A. Charter Schools



                                                              VIV!Estimates!of!the!Middle!School!Math!Effect
                                                2.5

                                                    2

                                                1.5
                           Score!Difference




                                                    1

                                                0.5

                                                    0

                                               !0.5

                                                    !1

                                               !1.5
                                                         !1   0        1              2            3              4          5          6   7
                                                                           Difference!in!average!years!in!pilot



                                                                               B. Pilot Schools
Figure 1. This figure plots treatment-control differences in test score means against treatment-control differences in years in charter
(Panel A) or pilot (Panel B). The unit of observation is a charter or pilot application risk set (N=34 for charters and N=51 for pilots). The
charter slope (unweighted) is .66, and the corresponding 2SLS estimate is .44. The pilot slope (unweighted) is -.006, while the
corresponding 2SLS estimate is -.007. The pilot graph is produced after dropping one small imbalanced risk set.
Data Appendix
Data Sources
The data for this study come from four sources: the BPS assignment system, lottery records from
individual charter schools, and two state-wide datasets, the SIMS and MCAS files. The BPS assign-
ment data are documented in Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak, Roth and Sönmez (2006). Lottery coverage is
documented below and in Table A1. Following the discussion of lottery data, we describe the state
data sets and our matching process in detail.

Lottery Sample Coverage
Charter School Lotteries

   • Of the four charters that enroll elementary school students, three had no usable lottery data.
     One K-8 school contributes to the middle school sample but is not used in the elementary school
     analysis because it added elementary grades only in 2006.

   • Of the 11 charters that enroll middle school students, five contribute to the lottery analysis:
     Academy of the Pacific Rim, Boston Collegiate, Boston Preparatory, Edward Brooke and Rox-
     bury Preparatory. Two non-included schools closed before or while the study was under way.
     Lottery data from four other schools were unavailable, either because they were not archived or
     lost.

   • Of the eight (non-alternative) charter schools that enroll high school students, four contribute to
     the lottery analysis: City on a Hill, Codman Academy, MATCH, and Health Careers Academy
     (a Horace Mann Charter). Two non-included schools closed before or while the study was under
     way. Two schools do not admit via lottery in grade nine but rather admit students in grade five;
     they contribute to the middle school analysis.

Pilot School Lotteries

   • Of the seven pilot schools that enroll elementary school students, five were over-subscribed in
     our sample window and contribute to the lottery sample: Lyndon, Mason Elementary, Mission
     Hill, Orchard Gardens, and Young Achievers.

   • Of seven pilot middle schools admitting 6th graders, six were over-subscribed and contribute
     to our lottery sample: Harbor School, Josiah Quincy, Lilla G. Frederick, Lyndon, Mission Hill,
     Orchard Gardens. We also have middle school scores from three K-8 pilot schools: Lyndon,

                                                  39
     Mission Hill, and Young Achievers. A fourth K-8 pilot began enrolling kindergartners too late
     to contribute middle school outcomes.

   • Of the six (non-alternative) 9-12 pilot high schools, two use lotteries and contribute to the lottery
     sample: Another Course to College, and TechBoston Academy. One 6-12 pilot was not over-
     subscribed. A single alternative high school that serves an older population was omitted from
     the study.

   The applicant cohorts contributed by each school are detailed in Appendix Table A1.

State Data
The first state dataset is the Massachusetts Students Information Management System (SIMS). This
contains snapshots of all students in public school in Massachusetts in October and at the end of
the school year. The SIMS file includes demographic information on students, their current school,
residence, and days of attendance. We work with the SIMS files for the 2001-2002 through the 2007-
2008 school years. Schools are classified as pilot schools, charter schools, public schools, exam schools,
and alternative/special education schools using a grade-specific algorithm described below. The second
state-wide dataset is the Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System (MCAS) database. The
MCAS files have raw test scores for Math, English Language Arts (ELA), and Writing for grades 3-8
and grade 10 from spring 2002-2007. We standardized MCAS scores by subject, grade, and year to
a combined BPS and Boston charter schools reference population. MCAS scores were merged to the
SIMS file using unique student identifiers (the SASID). Students in the MCAS file but not in the SIMS
file are excluded because they cannot be assigned to schools.

Cohorts and Test Years Analyzed
The cohorts and test years analyzed in this study are summarized in the table below. Baseline years
are defined as the year a student attended 8th grade for the high school sample, the year a student
attended 4th grade for the middle school sample, and the year a student attended kindergarten for the
elementary school and K2-applicants-to-K-8-middle-school samples. There are no baseline test score
for this last group of students, but we pulled demographics from the baseline years listed in the table.




                                                   40
                                     Elementary          Middle (non-K2          Middle (K2            High
                                        school             applicants)       lottery applicants)      school
         Outcome                      2005-2008            2003-2008              2004-2008         2004-2008
         years                   Lottery application       2002-2004              2002-2007         1997-2001

         Lottery application          2002-2004               2002-2007           1997-2001         2002-2006
         years                         Baseline               2002-2005           2001-2006         1998-2002

         Baseline                     2002-2005               2001-2006           1998-2002         2002-2006
         years


Notes: All years refer to Spring. Baseline grades are kindergarten for elementary school and K2 middle school applicants,
4th grade for all other middle school students and 8th grade for high school students. The 2003 middle school outcome
year is used only for 2002 pilot middle school 6th grade applicants, as we use BPS demographics for these students from
2001 and we do not have state demographics for 2001.


Analysis Samples
Three matched files constitute the extracts used for statistical analysis. The first (the charter lottery
extract) was constructed by linking charter applicants to SIMS and MCAS data; the second (the pilot
lottery extract) was constructed by linking students with a first-choice pilot in the BPS assignment
mechanism to SIMS and MCAS records; and the third and largest (the observational extract) uses
the SIMS and MCAS matched file without regard to charter and pilot application. Table A2 shows
how these three extracts were constructed. All three extracts are limited to students enrolled in BPS
or a Boston charter school as of the relevant baseline date.

Classification of Schools
We    define     pilot   schools     as   those     listed    on    the   pilot    school     network     website     at
http://www.ccebos.org/pilotschools/schools.html.                  We define charter schools as those schools
identified as such by the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Second Education website
(http://www.profiles.doe.mass.edu). As discussed in the text, Health Careers Academy is a Horace
Mann charter high school. Boston Day and Evening Charter, also a Horace Mann charter, serves
over-age students. This school, along with Greater Egleston Community High School, a pilot school
that also serves older students, was designated as an alternative/special education school rather than
a charter or pilot and therefore omitted from our lottery analysis.



                                                             41
Placing Students at Schools
In the Massachusetts State SIMS file, school designation is grade-specific. When a student repeats
grades, we kept the first school in grade. Students attending multiple schools in a given school year
were assigned as follows:

   • A student was assigned to a Boston charter or pilot school if any record for the grade shows
     attendance at a Boston charter or pilot.

   • If a student attends multiple Boston charters or pilots, or both a Boston charter and pilot, the
     student was assigned to school for which the attendance duration is longest. Ties are broken
     randomly.

   • Students attending multiple traditional BPS schools were assigned to the school of the longest
     attendance duration. Ties were broken randomly.




                                                 42
                                                                                               Table A.1: Charter and Pilot School Study Participation
                                                                                                        Years with Initial
                                                                           Years in Lottery Study          Offer Data           Grade Range                                                                     Notes
                                                                                     (1)                       (2)                    (3)                                                                        (4)
                                                                                                     I. Elementary School (3rd and 4th grades)
Charter Schools
      Boston Renaissance Charter Public School                                          x                             x                         K‐6              School lottery data are unavailable for elementary school.
      Conservatory Lab Charter School                                                   x                             x                         K‐5              School lottery data are unavailable for elementary school.
      Edward Brooke Charter School                                                      x                             x                         K‐8              Became K‐8 in 2006, so test scores are not used in elementary analyses.
      Neighborhood House Charter School                                                 x                             x                         K‐8              School lottery data are unavailable for elementary school.
Pilot Schools
      Gardner Elementary School                                                       x                               x                         K‐5              All applicants in 2002‐2004 are accepted.
      Lee Academy                                                                     x                               x                         K‐5              New school in 2004, all applicants in 2004 are accepted.
      Lyndon K‐8 School                                                           2002‐2004                           x                         K‐8
      Mason Elementary School                                                     2003‐2004                           x                         K‐5              All applicants in 2002 are accepted.
      Mission Hill School                                                         2002‐2004                           x                         K‐8
      Orchard Gardens K‐8 School                                                  2003‐2004                           x                         K‐8              No Kindergarten class in 2002 (new school).
      Young Achievers K‐8 School                                                  2002‐2004                           x                         K‐8

                                                                                                          II. Middle School (6th, 7th, and 8th grades)
Charter Schools
      Academy of the Pacific Rim Charter Public School                            2005‐2007                     2005‐2007                      5‐12              Insufficient lottery records from 2002‐2004.
      Boston Collegiate Charter School                                            2002‐2006                     2002‐2006                      5‐12
      Boston Preparatory Charter Public School                                    2005‐2007                     2005, 2007                     6‐10              All applicants in 2004 accepted. Initial offer only 2005, ever offer only 2006.
      Boston Renaissance Charter Public School                                        x                             x                          K‐6               School lottery data are unavailable.
      Edward Brooke Charter School                                                  2006                            x                          K‐8               Became K‐8 in 2006.
      Excel Academy Charter School                                                    x                             x                          5‐8               Insufficient lottery records.
      Frederick Douglass Charter School                                               x                             x                          5‐12              Closed.
      Neighborhood House Charter School                                               x                             x                          K‐8               School lottery data are unavailable for elementary school.
      Roxbury Preparatory Charter School                                          2002‐2007                         x                          6‐8               Ever offer only 2002‐2007.
      Smith Leadership Academy Charter Public School                                  x                             x                          6‐8               Insufficient admissions lottery records.
      Uphams Corner Charter School                                                    x                             x                          5‐8               Insufficient admissions lottery records. Closed.
Pilot Schools ‐ 6th Grade Applicants
      Harbor School                                                            2002, 2006‐2007                        x                        6‐8               All applicants in 2003‐2005 are accepted.
      Josiah Quincy Upper School                                                 2004‐2007                            x                        6‐12              No Grade 6 class in 2002 and 2003 (new school).
      Lilla G. Frederick Pilot Middle School                                     2004‐2007                            x                        6‐8               No Grade 6 class in 2002 and all Grade 6 applicants in 2003 are accepted.
      Lyndon K‐8 School                                                          2004‐2007                            x                        K‐8               All Grade 6 applicants in 2002 and 2003 guaranteed admission.
      Mission Hill School                                                      2002‐2003, 2007                        x                        K‐8               All Grade 6 applicants in 2004‐2006 guaranteed admission.
      Orchard Gardens K‐8 School                                                 2003‐2007                            x                        K‐8               No Grade 6 class in 2002 (new school).
      Young Achievers K‐8 School                                                      x                               x                        K‐8               All Grade 6 applicants in 2002‐2007 guaranteed admission.
Pilot Schools ‐ K2 applicants
      Lyndon K‐8 School                                                    1997‐1998, 2000‐2001                       x                         K‐8              All K2 applicants in 1999 were admitted.
      Mission Hill School                                                       1998‐2001                             x                         K‐8
      Orchard Gardens K‐8 School                                                    x                                 x                         K‐8              No Kindergarten class before 2003.
      Young Achievers K‐8 School                                                1999‐2001                             x                         K‐8              Error in records 1998, all K2 applicants in 1997 guaranteed admission.

                                                                                                                  III. High School (10th grade)
Charter Schools
      Academy of the Pacific Rim Charter Public School                                x                            x                           5‐12              No admissions lottery for students in Grade 9.
      Boston Collegiate Charter School                                                x                            x                           5‐12              No admissions lottery for students in Grade 9.
      City On A Hill Charter Public School                                     2002, 2004‐2006              2002, 2004‐2006                    9‐12              Initial only for 2002 and 2004, records unclear in 2003.
      Codman Academy Charter Public School                                          2004                         2004                          9‐12              Initial offer data only for 2004.
      Frederick Douglass Charter School                                               x                            x                           5‐12              Closed.
      MATCH Charter Public High School                                           2002‐2006                    2002‐2004                        9‐12              Ever offer only 2005‐2006.
      Roxbury Charter High Public School                                              x                            x                           9‐12              Closed.
Horace Mann Charter Schools
      Boston Day and Even Academy Charter School                                      x                                                      9‐12, Alt           Included in observational study as alternative school.
      Health Careers Academy Charter School                                       2003‐2006                     2003‐2006                      9‐12
Pilot Schools
      Greater Egleston Community High                                                 x                               x                      9‐12, Alt           Included in observational study as alternative school.
      Another Course to College                                                   2003‐2006                           x                        9‐12              No Grade 9 class in 2002 (new school).
      Boston Arts Academy                                                             x                               x                        9‐12              Selective admissions.
      Boston Community Leadership Academy                                             x                               x                        9‐12              Selective admissions.
      Fenway High School                                                              x                               x                        9‐12              Selective admissions.
      Josiah Quincy Upper School                                                      x                               x                        6‐12              All students guaranteed admission.
      New Mission High School                                                         x                               x                        9‐12              Selective admissions.
      TechBoston Academy                                                          2003‐2006                           x                        9‐12              No Grade 9 class in 2002 (new school).
Notes: Schools are excluded from the lottery study (those marked with x in column (1)) if they are undersubscribed,only have seats for students with guaranteed admissions, did not keep sufficient records, or if they do not have an entry lottery at the school level
start grade as indicated in the notes. Fredrick Douglass Charter School and Roxbury Charter High Public School were closed by the State Board of Education in the 2004‐2005 school year. A school that spans K‐8 is listed as both elementary and middle. K‐8 pilot
schools contribute to both the elementary and middle school samples.
                                                            K'G"#!5L8M!.'$6"#!.#"#/&+0%
                                                                            !"#$#%&'()         J+AA"#!./-00"          *+,-!./-00"
                                                                                123                 183                   143
                                                            12!3#&%"(%!45""(%6!7&8)*(
566"+/'&+0%!/0-0(&7                                                              "              8998"899=             8998"899:

566"+/'&+0%7!&0!/-'(&#(                                                           "                  4<?;9              ;<=8:

                                                                                  "                  4<@2:              ;<;8>
!D/"EA+%,!'66"+/'&+0%7!%0&!$'&/-#A!&0!7&'&#!A'&'7#&
                                                                                  "                  4<>?4              ;<49?
!D/"EA+%,!'66"+/'&+0%7!F+&-!7+G"+%,!6(+0(+&)
!D/"EA+%,!'66"+/'&+0%7!&-'&!'66"+#A!&0!'!/-'(&#(!%0&!7EGN#/&!&0                   "                  8<=:@              ;<9:=
('%A0$+O'&+0%
                                                                                  "                  8<8=>              4<98@
K('%7B0($+%,!'66"+/'&+0%7!+%&0!0%#!0G7#(P'&+0%!6#(!7&EA#%&
                                                                                  "                  8<989              8<;2@
!D/"EA+%,!7&EA#%&7!F+&-!%0!B0""0F"E6!&#7&!7/0(#
!D/"EA+%,!7&EA#%&7!%0&!+%!CH.!0(!+%!'!/-'(&#(!7/-00"!+%!C07&0%!'&!                "                  2<4>>              2<?>=
G'7#"+%#!1&-+7!'"70!A(067!&-07#!F+&-0E&!G'7#"+%#!A#$0,('6-+/73
                                                                                  "                  2<442              2<?4;
!D/"EA+%,!7&EA#%&7!F+&-!%0!G'7#"+%#!&#7&!7/0(#7
IE$G#(!0B!B0""0F"E6!Q!5!7/0(#7!B0(!7&EA#%&7!+%!CH.!0(!'!C07&0%!                   "                  8<;2:              2<?;=
/-'(&#(!'&!G'7#"+%#
IE$G#(!0B!B0""0F"E6!J'&-!7/0(#7!B0(!7&EA#%&7!+%!CH.!0(!'!C07&0%                   "                  8<>@8              2<?8?
/-'(&#(!'&!G'7#"+%#

                                                               92!:+*5"!45""(%6!7&8)*(
                                                                                           !"#!$%&'(!    /0!
                                                                                           &))*+,&-". &))*+,&-".
566"+/'&+0%!/0-0(&7                                                           8998"899;    8998"899= 2??="8992        8994"899:

566"+#A!&0!6+"0&!7/-00"!'7!B+(7&!/-0+/#                                         2<8>?        ;<@:>            2<8=4     2<;88

                                                                                2<9>2        4<>;>            2<99=     2<4?2
!D/"EA+%,!,E'('%&##7!'%A!7&EA#%&7!F+&-!7+G"+%,!6(+0(+&)
                                                                                 ?4;         2<=88            =>8       2<4?2
!D/"EA+%,!7&EA#%&7!&-'&!'66"+#A!&0!'!6+"0&!%0&!7EGN#/&!&0!('%A0$+O'&+0%
                                                                                 =99         2<>@@            ;;;       2<9:=
!D/"EA+%,!7&EA#%&7!F+&-!%0!B0""0F"E6!&#7&!7/0(#
!D/"EA+%,!7&EA#%&7!%0&!+%!CH.!0(!+%!'!/-'(&#(!7/-00"!+%!C07&0%!'&                >=4         2<;=;            ;;4       2<929
G'7#"+%#!1&-+7!'"70!A(067!&-07#!F+&-0E&!G'7#"+%#!A#$0,('6-+/7
                                                                                  "          2<8?@              "       2<994
!D/"EA+%,!7&EA#%&7!F+&-!%0!G'7#"+%#!&#7&!7/0(#7
IE$G#(!0B!B0""0F"E6!!Q5!7/0(#7!B0(!7&EA#%&7!+%!CH.!0(!'!C07&0%                   @=:         8<:;>            =;>       2<99=
/-'(&#(!'&!G'7#"+%#
IE$G#(!0B!B0""0F"E6!J'&-!7/0(#7!B0(!7&EA#%&7!+%!CH.!0(!'!C07&0%                  @=;         4<9=>            ==:        ??:
/-'(&#(!'&!G'7#"+%#

                                                                  32!;($%(..+5-!7&8)*(
C'7#"+%#!)#'(7                                                                 8998"899>        8998"899:             8998"899:

.&EA#%&7!!+%!CH.!0(!+%!'!/-'(&#(!7/-00"!+%!C07&0%!'%A!A#$0,('6-+/7!'&           2=<8?4               84<?=:             8><>@@
G'7#"+%#
.&EA#%&7!!+%!CH.!0(!+%!'!/-'(&#(!7/-00"!+%!C07&0%!'%A!A#$0,('6-+/7!'&           28<>>8               89<29>             2@<?8>
0E&/0$#
                                                                                28<9?4               2?<2@=             2:<=94
!D/"EA+%,!7&EA#%&7!F+&-!%0!B0""0F"E6!&#7&!7/0(#
                                                                                  "                  2@<>@;             2:<899
!D/"EA+%,!7&EA#%&7!F+&-!%0!G'7#"+%#!&#7&!7/0(#7
IE$G#(!0B!B0""0F"E6!&#7&!7/0(#7!B0(!7&EA#%&7!+%!CH.!0(!'!C07&0%                 89<9>@               4;<492             2:<:9?
/-'(&#(!'&!G'7#"+%#!'%A!0E&/0$#
IE$G#(!0B!B0""0F"E6!&#7&!7/0(#7!B0(!7&EA#%&7!+%!CH.!0(!'!C07&0%                 2=<4>:               4@<>@4             2:<4>9
/-'(&#(!'&!G'7#"+%#!'%A!0E&/0$#
                                            O'7/"!CE=P!!*RR"&"-.*'/!C..&*.*$-!U#*..*-%!V-7'/'-+"L!,$)$&.0
                                                              ,)'&."&                                                               T*/$.

                                          T&$(!$R!-$-"                     !*RR"&"-.*'/                   T&$(!$R!-$-"                      !*RR"&"-.*'/
                                          $RR"&"L!S*.)!                                                   $RR"&"L!S*.)!
                                                              !"#$%&'()*+! !"#$%&'()*+0!1!                                    !"#$%&'()*+! !"#$%&'()*+0!1!
                                             K,C3                                                            K,C3
                                                                ,$-.&$/0   2'0"/*-"!3+$&"0                                      ,$-.&$/0   2'0"/*-"!3+$&"0
4"5"/ 3678"+.                                   9:;                  9<;                  9=;                   9>;                  9?;                   9@;
A/"#"-.'&B!3+)$$/
      A4C                                        "                    "                    "                  DEFG@                DED==                    "
                                                                                                                                  9DED=F;
                                    H                                                                          @I@                 :JDI?                    "

         K'.)                                    "                    "                    "                  DEFG@                DED=<                    "
                                                                                                                                  9DED=F;
                                    H                                                                          @I@                 :JDI?

K*LL/"!3+)$$/
      A4C                                     DEIDF                DED=<                DED=D                 DE@GG                DED<G                DEDDI
                                                                  9DED<<;              9DED<<;                                    9DED<>;              9DED<@;
                                    H          I:G                 <J@@=                <J@DD                 <J@<?                >J?G@                <JFFI

         K'.)                                 DEI:F                DED==                DED=<                 DEFD<                DED=D                DEDDG
                                                                  9DED<<;              9DED<<;                                    9DED<=;              9DED<@;
                                    H          I>?                 <JF?:                <J@IF                 <JIF>                ?J:=D                =J:<>

M*%)!3+)$$/
       A4C                                    DEFF@                DED<F                DED<D                 DEF?>                DED<G                DED>I
                                                                  9DED<<;              9DED<>;                                    9DED=<;              9DED=<;
                                    H          I<?                 <J>==                <JD<@                  ?D>                  IIF                  I<D

         K'.)                                 DEF@F                DED<G                DED<I                 DEF?D                DED<D                DED>:
                                                                  9DED<=;              9DED<=;                                    9DED==;              9DED=<;
                                    H          I<?                 <J>==                <J=F?                  ?D>                  IIF                  I@>

         N&*.*-%!O$(*+!'-L!                   DEF@I                DED<I                DED<@                 DEF>@                DED<>                DED>?
         N&*.*-%!,$#($0*.*$-                                      9DED<=;              9DED<>;                                    9DED==;              9DED==;
                                    H          I<?                 <J>==                <JD:G                  ?D>                  IIF                  I:>
H$."0P!O)*0!.'7/"!)'0!.)"!0'#"!-$."0!'0!O'7/"!@J!76.!60"0!0'#(/"0!.)'.!"Q+/6L"0!.)"!R$//$S*-%!+$)$&.0P!!,)'&."&!@.)!%&'L"!A4C!9<DD?!?.)!%&'L"!'((/*+'-.0;J!,)'&."&!
F.)!%&'L"!A4C!9<DD>!@.)!%&'L"!'((/*+'-.0;J!,)'&."&!@.)!%&'L"!K'.)!9<DD?!?.)!%&'L"!'((/*+'-.0!'-L!<DD<!?.)!%&'L"!'((/*+'-.0;J!,)'&."&!F.)!%&'L"!K'.)!9<DD>!@.)!
%&'L"!'((/*+'-.0;J!T*/$.!:D.)!%&'L"!A4C!9<DD@!)*%)!0+)$$/!'((/*+'-.0;J!T*/$.!:D.)!%&'L"!K'.)!9<DD@!)*%)!0+)$$/!'((/*+'-.0;J!T*/$.!:D.)!%&'L"!S&*.*-%!9<DD@!)*%)!0+)$$/!
'((/*+'-.0;E!!3.'-L'&L!"&&$&0J!*-!('&"-.)"0"0J!'&"!+/60."&"L!'0!L"0+&*7"L!*-!.)"!O'7/"!>!-$."0E
                                                          O'65)!EF<T!UD'#%)#!'B+!V"5.%!1.%%)#C!*)$,5%$!W/"%%"B(!XB6'5'B-)+!U.D.#%$
                                                                      UD'#%)#                                                              V"5.%$
                                        !"#$%!&%'()       *)+,-)+!!.#/          0&1&          0&1&!23+)/.$        !"#$%!&%'()   *)+,-)+!!.#/                              0&1&           0&1&!23+)/.$
1)4)5      &,67)-%                          89:                 80:              8;:                8<:               8=:            8>:                                   8?:                8@:
A5)/)B%'#C!&-D..5
           A1E                                "                    "                   "                    "                 0F@=0GGG             HF9I>GG              HFH>IGG             HFH><GGG
                                                                                                                               8HF9I;:             8HFH?@:              8HFH0?:              8HFH0<:
                                 J                                                                                                                   @?>                                       @?>

              K'%D                            "                    "                   "                    "                 0F@=@GGG             HF9??GG              HFH>0GG              HFH>HGG
                                                                                                                               8HF9I<:             8HFH?@:              8HFH0?:              8HFH0>:
                                 J                                                                                                                   @?<                                       @?<

K"++5)!&-D..5
           A1E                           HFI=HGGG            HF9?9GGG             HF9?IGGG             HF9<?GGG               9F;@=GGG               HFH0;                HFH9?                HFHH?
                                          8HF900:             8HFH><:              8HFH>>:              8HFH=>:                8HF9IH:              8HFH>=:              8HFH<?:              8HFH<;:
                                 J                             0L0;@                                     0L0;@                                       ;L;><                                     ;L;><

              K'%D                       HFIH>GGG            HF;@IGGG             HF<0IGGG             HF<H@GGG               9F0I9GGG               "HFH?@               "HFH>9               "HFH=?
                                          8HF99=:             8HFH?9:              8HFH@H:              8HFH?H:                8HF9@0:              8HFH>I:              8HFH=;:              8HFH<@:
                                 J                             0L;<H                                     0L;<H                                        ;L@0=                                     ;L@0=

M"(D!&-D..5
              A1E                        HF?0<GGG            HF9<@GGG             HF0H<GGG             HF9I?GGG               HF=I9GGG               HFH0H                HFH;<                HFH0;
                                          8HF9;9:             8HFH=;:              8HFH>>:              8HFH=@:                8HF9H9:              8HFH=;:              8HFH@?:              8HFHI9:
                                 J                             9L@;I                                     9L@;I                                        >@>                                       >@>

              K'%D                       HF?9@GGG            HF0;;GGG             HF;0<GGG             HF0@0GGG               HF=??GGG               "HFH>0               "HF9H?               "HF9<I
                                          8HF90I:             8HFH>9:              8HFH@H:              8HFH?=:                8HF9H9:              8HFH?=:              8HF90?:              8HF90?:
                                 J                             9L@0;                                     9L@0;                                        >@9                                       >@9

              N#"%"B(!O.P"-              HF?00GGG            HF9@=GGG             HF0=>GGG             HF0<@GGG               HF=@0GGG               HFHI9                HF9=>                HF9<>
                                          8HF9;H:             8HFH>>:              8HFH@>:              8HFH@9:                8HF9H0:              8HFH?;:              8HF909:              8HF9;H:
                                 J                             9L@0;                                     9L@0;                                        >?@                                       >?@

              N#"%"B(!                   HF?00GGG             HF909GG              HF9>?GG              HF9>?GG               HF=@0GGG               HFH=@                HFHII                HFHI0
              U./P.$"%".B                 8HF9;H:             8HFH=;:              8HFH>I:              8HFH>>:                8HF9H0:              8HFH>=:              8HF9H?:              8HF99@:
                                 J                             9L@0;                                     9L@0;                                        >?@                                       >?@
J.%)$T!OD"$!%'65)!#)P)'%$!%D)!'B'5C$"$!.Q!O'65)!<L!,$"B(!%D)!6'5'B-)+"-.D.#%$!$'/P5)!$%,+")+!"B!O'65)!E;F!!OD)!$'/P5)!"$!#)$%#"-%)+!%.!$%,+)B%$!2"%D!6'$)5"B)!+)/.(#'PD"-!-D'#'-%)#"$%"-$!'B+!)Y-5,+)$!%D)!
Q.55.2"B(!-.D.#%$T!UD'#%)#!>%D!(#'+)!A1E!80HH=!=%D!(#'+)!'PP5"-'B%$:L!UD'#%)#!?%D!(#'+)!A1E!80HH<!>%D!(#'+)!'PP5"-'B%$:L!UD'#%)#!>%D!(#'+)!K'%D!80HH=!=%D!(#'+)!'PP5"-'B%$!'B+!0HH0!=%D!(#'+)!'PP5"-'B%$:L!
UD'#%)#!?%D!(#'+)!K'%D!80HH<!>%D!(#'+)!'PP5"-'B%$:L!V"5.%!9H%D!(#'+)!A1E!80HH>!D"(D!$-D..5!'PP5"-'B%$:L!V"5.%!9H%D!(#'+)!K'%D!80HH>!D"(D!$-D..5!'PP5"-'B%$:L!V"5.%!9H%D!(#'+)!2#"%"B(!80HH>!D"(D!$-D..5!
'PP5"-'B%$:F!!!&%'B+'#+!)##.#$L!"B!P'#)B%D)$)$L!'#)!-5,$%)#)+!'$!+)$-#"6)+!"B!%D)!O'65)!<!B.%)$F
G!$"(B"Q"-'B%!'%!9HRS!GG!$"(B"Q"-'B%!'%!=RS!GGG!$"(B"Q"-'B%!'%!9R
References
 [1] Abadie, A. (2002). “Bootstrap Tests for Distributional Treatment Effects in Instrumental Variable
    Models.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 97(457): 284-292.

 [2] Abadie, A. (2003). “Semiparametric Instrumental Variable Estimation of Treatment Response
    Models.” Journal of Econometrics, 113(2): 231-263.

 [3] Abdulkadiroğlu, A. and Sönmez, T. (2003). “School Choice: A Mechanism Design Approach.”
    American Economic Review, 93(3): 729-747.

 [4] Abdulkadiroğlu, A. Pathak, P. A., Roth A. E. and Sönmez, T. (2006). “Changing the Boston
    School Choice Mechanism.” NBER Working Paper 11965.

 [5] Abdulkadiroğlu, A, Pathak, P. A., and Roth, A. E. (2009). “Strategyproofness versus Efficiency
    in Matching with Indifferences: Redesigning the NYC High School Match.” American Economic
    Review, 99(5), forthcoming.

 [6] Angrist, J. (1991). “Group-data Estimation and Testing in Simple Labor Supply Models.” Journal
    of Econometrics, 47(2-3): 243-266.

 [7] Angrist, J. (1997). “Conditional Independence in Sample Selection Models.” Economics Letters,
    54(2): 103-112.

 [8] Angrist, J., Bettinger, E., Bloom, E., King, E. and Kremer, M. (2002). “Vouchers for Private
    Schooling in Columbia: Evidence from a Randomized Natural Experiment.” American Economic
    Review, 92(5): 1535-1558.

 [9] Angrist, J., Imbens, G., and Rubin, D. (1996). “Identification of Causal Effects Using Instrumental
    Variables.” JASA Applications invited paper, with comments and authors’ rejoinder, Journal of
    the American Statistical Association, 91 (434): 444-472.

[10] Angrist, J. and Pischke, J.S. (2009). Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s Companion,
    Princeton University Press.

[11] Berends, M., Mendiburo, M. and Nicotera, A. (2008). “Charter Schools Effects in an Urban School
    District: An Analysis of Student Achievement Growth,” Working Paper, Vanderbilt University

[12] Bettinger, E. (2005). “The Effect of Charter Schools on Charter Students and Public Schools.”
    Economics of Education Review, 24(2): 133-147.

                                                  47
[13] Bifulco, R. and Ladd, H. (2006). “The Impact of Charter Schools on Student Achievement:
    Evidence from North Carolina.” American Education Finance Association, 1(1): 50-90.

[14] Booker, K., Gilpatric, S. M., Gronberg, T., and Jansen, D. (2007). “The Effect of Charter Schools
    on Traditional Public School Students in Texas: Are Children Who Stay Behind Left Behind?”
    Journal of Urban Economics, 64(1): 123-145.

[15] Booker, K.,T.R. Sass, B. Gill, and R. Zimmer (2008). “Going Beyond Test Scores: Evaluating
    Charter School Impact on Educational Attainment in Chicago and Florida,” RAND Working
    Paper WR-610-BMG, August.

[16] Center for Collaborative Education (2006). “Description of the Boston Pilot Schools Network.”
    Accessed November 25, 2009 at http://www.ccebos.org/pilotschools/pilot qa.doc.

[17] Clark, D. (2009). “The Performance and Competitive Effect of School Autonomy.” Journal of
    Political Economy, 117(4): 745-783.

[18] CREDO. (2009). Multiple Choice: Charter Performance in 16 states. Stanford University: Center
    for Research on Education Outcomes.

[19] Cullen, J. B., Jacob, B. A. and Levitt, S. (2006). “The Effect of School Choice on Participants:
    Evidence from Randomized Lotteries.” Econometrica, 74(5): 1191-1230.

[20] Deming, D. (2009). “Better Schools, Less Crime?” Unpublished working paper, Harvard Univer-
    sity.

[21] Dobbie, W. and Fryer, R. (2009). “Are High Quality Schools Enough to Close the Achievement
    Gap? Evidence from a Social Experiment in Harlem.” NBER Working Paper 15473.

[22] Eberts, R. W. and Hollenbeck, K. (2002). Impact of Charter School Attendance on Student
    Achievement in Michigan. Upjohn Institute Staff Working Paper No. 02-080

[23] Hanushek E. A., Kain, J. F., Rivkin, S. G., and Branch, G. F. (2007). “Charter School Quality and
    Parental Decision Making with School Choice.” Journal of Public Economics, 91(5-6): 823-48.

[24] Hastings, J., Kane, T., and Staiger, D. (2008). “Heterogeneous Preferences and the Efficacy of
    Public School Choice.” NBER Working Paper 2145 and Working Paper 11805 combined.

[25] Hoxby, C. M. (2000). “Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers?”
    American Economic Review, 90(5): 1209-1238.


                                                 48
[26] Hoxby, C. M. (2007). “Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers?
    Reply.” American Economic Review, 97(5): 2038-2055.

[27] Hoxby, C. M. and Murarka, S. (2009). “Charter Schools in New York City: Who Enrolls and
    How They Affect Student Achievement.” NBER Working Paper 14852.

[28] Hoxby, C. M., Murarka, S., and Kang, J. (2009). How New York City’s Charter Schools Af-
    fect Achievement, August 2009 report. Second report in series. Cambridge, MA: New York City
    Charter Schools Evaluation Project.

[29] Hoxby, C. M. and Rockoff, J. (2005). “The Impact of Charter Schools on Student Achievement.”
    Harvard Institute of Economic Research Working Paper Series.

[30] Imbens, G. and Angrist, J. (1994). “Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment
    Effects.” Econometrica, 62(2): 467-475.

[31] Jacob, B. and Lefgren, L. (2007). “What Do Parents Value in Education? An Empirical Investi-
    gation of Parents’ Revealed Preferences for Teachers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4):
    1603-1637.

[32] Manzo, K. K. (2007). “Arts Education Building Steam in L.A. Area Schools.” Education Week,
    02774232, 26(41), 6/13.

[33] Massachusetts    Department     of     Elementary   and    Secondary     Education.    (2009a).    Mas-
    sachusetts Charter Schools Fact Sheet. Retrieved online on September 30, 2009 from:
    http://www.doe.mass.edu/charter/factsheet.pdf.

[34] Massachusetts    Department    of    Elementary     and    Secondary     Education.   (2009b).    2008-
    2009 Enrollment by Grade Report. Retrieved online on September 30,                         2009 from:
    http://profiles.doe.mass.edu/state report/enrollmentbygrade.aspx?mode=school&orderBy=.

[35] Matthews, J. (2009). Work Hard. Be Nice. How Two Inspired Teachers Created the Most Promis-
    ing Schools in America. Chapel Hill: Alongquin Press.

[36] Merseth, K., Robert, J., Cooper, K., Casey, M. C., and Valant, J. (2009). Inside Urban Charter
    Schools: Promising Practices and Strategies in Five High-performing Charter Schools. Cambridge:
    Harvard Education Publishing.

[37] National    Alliance   for    Public     Charter    Schools.   (2009).     Public     Charter     School
    Dashboard.       Washington      D.C.      Retrieved       on   September       21,      2009      from:
    http://www.publiccharters.org/files/publications/DataDashboard.pdf.

                                                    49
[38] Rothstein, J. (2006). “Good Principals or Good Peers? Parental Valuations of School Charac-
    teristics, Tiebout Equilibrium, and the Incentive Effects of Competition among Jurisdictions.”
    American Economic Review, 96(4): 1333-1350.

[39] Rothstein, Jesse. (2007). “Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students and Tax-
    payers? Comment on Hoxby (2000).”American Economic Review, 97(5): 2026-2037.

[40] Rothstein, R. (2004). Class and Schools: Using Social, Economic, and Educational Reform to
    Close the Black-White Achievement Gap. Columbia: Teachers College Press.

[41] Rouse, C. (1998). “Private School Vouchers and Student Achievement: An Evaluation of the
    Milwaukee Parental Choice Program.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2): 553-602.

[42] Thernstrom, A. and Thernstrom, S. (2003). No Excuses: Closing the Racial Gap in Learning.
    New York: Simon & Schuster.

[43] Vaznis, J. (2009). “Backers Seek End to Charter Cap.” The Boston Globe, August 5.

[44] Wilson, S. F. (2008). “Success at Scale in Charter Schooling.” Working Paper 2008-02 from the
    American Enterprise Institute Future of American Education Project.




                                               50
