NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CLIMATE VARIABILITY AND WATER INFRASTRUCTURE:
HISTORICAL EXPERIENCE IN THE WESTERN UNITED STATES
Zeynep K. Hansen
Gary D. Libecap
Scott E. Lowe
Working Paper 15558
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15558

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2009

The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Zeynep K. Hansen, Gary D. Libecap, and Scott E. Lowe. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Climate Variability and Water Infrastructure: Historical Experience in the Western United
States
Zeynep K. Hansen, Gary D. Libecap, and Scott E. Lowe
NBER Working Paper No. 15558
December 2009
JEL No. N5,N51,N52,Q25,Q54
ABSTRACT
Greater historical perspective is needed to enlighten current debate about future human responses to
higher temperatures and increased precipitation variation. We analyze the impact of climatic conditions
and variability on agricultural production in five semi-arid western states. We assemble county-level
data on dams and other major water infrastructure; agricultural crop mixes and yields; precipitation
and temperature; soil quality, and topography. Using this extensive data set, we analyze the impact
of water infrastructure investments on crop mix and yields in affected counties relative to similarly-endowed
counties that lack such infrastructure. We find that water infrastructure smoothes agricultural crop
production and increases the likelihood of a successful harvest, especially during times of severe drought
or excessive precipitation.

Zeynep K. Hansen
College of Business and Economics
Department of Economics
Boise State University
1910 University Drive
Boise, ID 83725-1620
and NBER
zeynephansen@boisestate.edu
Gary D. Libecap
Bren School of Environmental Science
and Management and Economics Department
University of California, Santa Barbara
Bren Hall 4412
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-5131
and NBER
glibecap@bren.ucsb.edu

Scott E. Lowe
Department of Economics
College of Business and economics
Boise State University
1910 University Drive
Boise, Idaho 83725-1620
Scottlowe@boisestate.edu

I. Introduction
There is a large and rapidly growing literature on climate change (Stern, 2007; Nordhaus,
2007; Weitzman, 2007 and references therein). Agriculture is particularly vulnerable to the
impacts of climate change. For the U.S., the estimated impacts are often mixed, with findings of
nonlinearities in key commodity yields beyond threshold temperatures; predictions of higher
profitability for US agriculture; and reports of high adjustment costs (Mendelsohn, Nordhaus,
and Shaw, 1994; Cline, 1996; Kelly, Kolstad, and Mitchell, 2005; Schlenker, Hanemann, and
Fisher, 2006; Deschenes and Greenstone, 2007; Schlenker and Roberts, 2008). These climate
change studies generally rely upon contemporary data or simulations. Greater historical
perspective, however, would enlighten current debate about the effects of climate change and
future human responses to it. Indeed, the expansion of agriculture across North America in the
19th and 20th centuries encountered greater climatic variation than is predicted under the current
climate change models (Olmstead and Rhode, 2008). Accordingly, analysis of how those
conditions were addressed historically and their impacts on crop mixes and agricultural
production can provide valuable information for addressing current climate variability. This
study adds to the literature on adaptation to climate fluctuation and change.
Much academic and policy concern has been focused on the mitigation of potential
climate change through international efforts to control greenhouse gas emissions. Examples
include the Kyoto Protocol and other national policies to implement cap and trade programs, as
well as the shifting of energy production toward less-polluting sources, such as wind and solar
power. Adaptation has received somewhat less attention. Yet, it is increasingly evident that
adaptation must be given more consideration because the stock of greenhouse gasses may result
in climate change regardless of mitigation efforts and because of the vulnerabilities of many of

2

the world’s poorest societies. As Nordhaus observed, “mitigate we might; adapt we
must.”(Pielke, 1998).
The IPCC (2001) defines adaptation as the “adjustment in natural or human systems in
response to actual or expected climatic stimuli or their effects, which moderates harm or exploits
beneficial opportunities.” In our study, we examine planned adaptation that involves deliberate
policy decisions. Our specific concerns are water resources and the investment in infrastructure
dedicated to irrigation that could help to mitigate the effects of more variable precipitation levels
and periods of drought on agricultural production.
Agriculture is particularly sensitive to changes in water supplies. Water infrastructure
investments in the United States in the 20th century, designed to address semi-arid conditions and
drought (as well as flooding), provides a natural experiment to assess the impacts of such
policies on agricultural production. The land west of the 100th meridian is North America’s driest
and has its most variable climate (Lettenmaier, et al., 2008). Further, there is an indication of
increases in the duration and severity of drought in western regions (Andreadis and Lettenmaier,
2006). Concerns about the variability of water supplies in the West are not new – much of the
present water supply infrastructure was constructed in the late 19th and early to mid 20th centuries
due to historical demand for agricultural irrigation, flood protection, drinking water, and
hydroelectric power. The extent to which this investment assuaged the impacts of climate
instability is a focus of this study. Using historical county-level data for five western states, we
examine if and how the water supply infrastructure stabilized agricultural production during
droughts (and provided flood protection during periods of increased precipitation).
We construct an integrated dataset on water supply and water infrastructure in the states
of North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, Wyoming and Idaho.

3

This county-level water

infrastructure dataset is spatially linked to topographic characteristics, historical climate data,
and historical agricultural data. We use these data to analyze the impact of the water
infrastructure on agricultural production, especially during times of drought or flood.
We find that counties that had water storage and distribution facilities were generally
better able to deal with climatic variability. Farmers with access to more consistent water
supplies were more likely to smooth their agricultural production (crop mix and yields) and had a
higher likelihood of successful harvest, especially during periods of severe droughts and/or
floods. Counties with water supply control were better able to mitigate losses in agriculture
relative to similar counties without such infrastructure. Thus, our results indicate that the
presence of major water infrastructure has helped to mitigate the damages of periodic droughts
and floods, and will likely continue to do so in the future.
The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows: Section II provides a brief
background on the origins of the water infrastructure in the western U.S., and lays out the
questions examined in the paper. Section III describes data sources and the empirical strategies
that were employed. Section IV summarizes the results of the empirical analysis, and section V
concludes.

II. Origins and Impact of Western Water Infrastructure
During late 19th century, as agricultural settlement of North American moved into the
Great Plains and beyond, irrigation expansion and flood control became crucial issues. The
agricultural techniques and practices settlers brought with them from the humid East were not
applicable in the arid or semi-arid West. Institutions such as the 1862 Homestead Act that
created 160 to 320 acre small farms were not appropriate in the region (Libecap and Hansen,

4

2002). As early as the 1870s John Wesley Powell was promoting the organization of autonomous
irrigation districts to promote cooperation among farmers and to cope with the externalities
associated with each individual farmer’s decision on water storage and distribution.
Interest in federal reclamation programs to construct dams and canals to store and
distribute water developed after individual, corporate and state attempts to deliver such
infrastructure was found to be inadequate. Many state attempts, such as the 1887 Wright Act of
California, faced problems ranging from poor construction to the creation of fraudulent irrigation
districts and the huge debts that ensued (Robinson, 1979). Most private irrigation projects failed,
and those that succeeded were of small size due to problems of free-riding.
After much debate and failed attempts to develop water infrastructure in the West, the
Federal Reclamation Act was passed in June 1902, and a revolving Reclamation Fund was
created to finance water infrastructure projects. The Reclamation Fund was financed through the
sales of public lands and through cost-sharing agreements by recipients (Pisani, 2002). The title
for the water infrastructure remained with the federal government, state and territorial agencies;
local water supply organizations, such as irrigation districts, governed the use and the
distribution of water (Robinson, 1979). This structure mostly remains in place today.
In this chapter, we analyze the impact of this federal and related state and private water
infrastructure on agricultural production and flood control over time using historical agricultural
and climatic data. The specific research questions we seek to answer are:
•

Were counties that had irrigation water supply and distribution infrastructure better able
to cope with the problems of short-term climatic variability (either due to natural
variability in the hydrologic cycle or due to disruptions of the cycle), relative to those
similar counties without such infrastructure?

5

•

Did cropping patterns (measured in area of irrigated and harvested land, relative to total
agricultural land) change after the construction of irrigation water supply and distribution
infrastructure?

•

Did agricultural productivity (measured in crop-specific tons/acre or bushels/acre,)
change after the construction of irrigation water supply and distribution infrastructure?

•

Was the impact of water infrastructure on agricultural productivity and cropping patterns
different (especially important) during periods of climate shocks of severe droughts and
floods?
To address these questions, we examine the variation in agricultural production before

and after dam and canal construction at the county level as well as across counties with and
without such infrastructure. Counties with access to water infrastructure are likely to experience
fewer agricultural production failures after unfavorable climatic conditions, all else equal. We
also examine the variation in agricultural production in periods of normal precipitation and in
times of droughts (and floods), across time.

III. Data and Empirical Model
In order to analyze the impact of dams on agricultural activities, we have compiled the
most detailed data available on major water infrastructure, historical agricultural productivity and
other relevant data, including the climate and geographic characteristics of our study area. Our
empirical strategy focuses on five north-central states: Idaho, Wyoming, Montana, North Dakota
and South Dakota (see: Map 1). Although there is variation within them, these five states are
quite similar in annual temperature trends, precipitation, crops grown and soil types. However,
within these states, the availability of irrigation water varies widely. Our sample includes all

6

counties in these states that are located west of the 100th meridian, generally considered the
boundary between the dryer and wetter Great Plains; these counties, all of which are considered
“arid” or “semi-arid”, require additional irrigation in order to grow crops in a water-intensive
fashion. We have 181 counties and a total of 3,620 observations, measured across 20 years
(1900-2002) from the agricultural census.
The following sections describe our data sources, discuss the mechanisms that were used
to assign non-uniform counts and averages to the counties, and present summary statistics on
trends in major water infrastructure, agriculture, and climate characteristics.

Major Water Infrastructure
Our primary source for the major water infrastructure is U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’
National Inventory of Dams (NID). The data include information on the location, owner, year of
completion, the primary purposes, capacity and height characteristics for major dams in the U.S.1
The primary purposes of construction include flood control, debris control, fish and wildlife
protection, hydroelectric generation, irrigation, navigation, fire protection, recreation, water
supply enhancement, and tailings control. Figure 1 shows the major dams in our five-state
sample, based on the NID.
As shown in Table 1, approximately 22 percent of the water captured by dams in our
five-state sample has irrigation listed as the primary purpose and 83 percent of the water has
irrigation listed as a purpose. Dam construction in the west peaked in the post-WWII period –
with the vast majority of dams constructed during the 1950s, 60s and 70s. Over 55 percent of the

1

“Major dams” refers to any dams that exceed 25 feet in height with more than 15 acre-feet in total storage; any
dams that exceed 6 feet in height with more than 50 acre-feet in storage; or any dams that maintain a “significant”
hazard-mitigation classification.

7

total dam capacity in the Western United States was added during the 1950s and 1960s alone,
and over 73 percent was added over that same time-frame in our five-state sample (see Table 2).
Because we are concerned with the impact that dams had on agricultural productivity,
correctly connecting the available water supply with agricultural demand is essential. In order to
do so, all of the major dams in and around our five-state sample have been spatially merged with
the county-level agricultural census data. Therefore, if a county has a major dam located within
its boundaries or nearby, it has been assigned access to the supply of dam water (measured in
both volume of water and the number of irrigation dams that the county has access) for all
subsequent years after dam completion.
Unfortunately, assigning water allocation based solely on the location of the dam itself
ignores those counties that are connected to the dam via canals, aqueducts or major river
systems. Many major water infrastructure projects are shared by multiple counties and multiple
states. In situations where river systems and aqueducts are many hundreds or thousands of miles
in length and have multiple dams on the same river, the water supply accordingly is assigned to
those counties that are down-stream from the dam, before any subsequent dam. In order to
accomplish this adjustment and to create a robustness check for our empirical models, we have
contacted and surveyed the operators or management agencies for each of the 475 major dams in
our five-state sample. With this survey we are able to determine the actual allocation of water
from each dam to the different counties in our study.2 This survey does not address any temporal

2

A questionnaire was administered via telephone to all major dam operators in Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, North
Dakota and South Dakota. The information collected through these questionnaires includes whether water is
withdrawn onsite, downstream or both, the counties (and the acreages) that dams supply irrigation water, and
primary method of withdrawing water (pump or canals).

8

changes in the supply of water from major dams, but it does provide a more accurate
representation of the spatial distribution of water from major dams.3

Census of Agriculture Data
Historical agriculture data from the U.S. Census of Agriculture have been collected and
inputted manually from hard-copy historical agricultural census records. The data include 20
yearly observations for each county in the sample, assembled between 1900 and 2002. The first
few years of the agricultural census were decennial and aligned with the population census, but
after 1920 the agricultural census was conducted every 5 years, with a reorganization in 1978 so
that the data were collected at two points before the next decennial population census.4
From the agricultural census data several different measures of agricultural composition
and production have been constructed, including: total planted acreage, total failed acreage, total
fallow or idle acreage, and total harvested acreage by crop (measured in tons or bushels per
acre). We have collected major crop variables that are found in all five of our sample states,
including wheat, barley and hay, as well as major crop variables that are more state/region
specific in the west, such as potatoes and corn.
Figures 1 and 2 present the historical trends in agricultural composition and productivity,
respectively, in our five sample states. The average trends in agricultural composition presented
in Figure 1 indicate that large decreases in hay acreage were experienced throughout the first 25
years of the 20th century, followed by a general decline in average acreage after 1925.
3

We were able to collect data on the total number of wells providing water to agriculture in our sample states (see
Table 1), but the data is measured in 2009 and therefore doesn’t reflect the changing availability of well water over
time, nor does it represent the volume of well water available. We acknowledge that the availability of well water
and the electrification of the farm increased the agricultural potential of many western counties.

4

Our yearly observations include 1900, 1910, 1920, 1925, 1930, 1935, 1940, 1945, 1950, 1955, 1960, 1965, 1970,
1975, 1978, 1982, 1987, 1992, 1997, and 2002.

9

Conversations with research hydrologists justify this decline as a function of hay being a prime
input to production for all agriculture prior to the mass availability of internal combustion power,
but just an input to livestock agriculture after the arrival of heavy planting and harvesting
machinery.5 Wheat acreage increased until the 1950s, and then experienced relatively stagnant
growth. What becomes very apparent in Figure 1 is the impact of the mid-1930s dustbowl era
droughts – the spikes in failed and idle acreage, and the associated declines in wheat, barley and
all of the other major crops.
Figure 2 presents the average trends in agricultural productivity, as measured by output
per acre, per crop. All crops experienced increased productivity throughout the 20th century,
with relatively larger gains made by corn, barley and wheat. Hay productivity was relatively
stagnant, however.
Two issues arise when integrating agricultural data into the analysis: the changing shape
of counties over time, and the changing measures or definitions within the agricultural data set.
First, because the agricultural census is provided at the county level, and county boundaries have
changed over time, we have normalized the agricultural census data to current 2000 census
county boundaries. In order to do so, we multiply the historical census count data (measured in
acres or volume of output,) by the fraction of the county that lies in the current 2000 census
county boundary definition (measured as the percentage of the total land area). In almost all
cases the historical county boundaries were subdivided into current boundaries, with very few
modifications.6
5

Personal communication between Scott Lowe and Bryce Contor, research hydrologist with IWRRI -- the
University of Idaho Water Resources Research Institute, November 2009.

6

For example, in Idaho, Alturas County, which existed from 1864 to 1895, was divided over the years into 8
separate counties. The transition to 8 counties was not instantaneous – therefore the number of counties is often
different across different Agricultural Census periods. By limiting our period of analysis to the 1900-2002
Agricultural Censuses, we avoid much of the redistricting of county areas that took place in the western United

10

Second, the crop acreage and harvest data within the census has changed over time. For
example, in the early years of the agricultural census, certain forage crops were listed as a single
entry, but in later years the forage crops were split into multiple categories. We are limited by the
lowest common denominator in these cases. In the models in which we are interested in
individual crops that have been further divided into sub-crops, we aggregate so that the unit of
measure is consistent across all of the years of our sample.

Climate Data
The U.S. Climate Division Dataset (USCDD) provides averaged climate data based on
344 climatic zones, covering 1895 to present.7 The USCDD provides temperature and
precipitation measures, including the monthly maximum, minimum, mean temperatures and total
monthly precipitation levels. In addition, it includes other climate-related variables such as
Palmer drought severity indices and standardized z-scores of temperature and precipitation. The
Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI) is a long-term drought measure that is standardized to the
local climate so that it shows relative drought and rainfall conditions in a region at a specific
time. It uses temperature and rainfall information in a formula to determine relative wetness or
dryness. The Palmer Index is most effective in determining long term drought—a matter of
several months. It uses a 0 as normal, with drought periods shown in terms of negative numbers
and flood periods shown in terms of positive numbers.8

States before the 20th century. Less than 2% of the total observations in our sample were affected by county-level
redistricting.
7

The five-state sample includes 45 distinct climate zones in Idaho (10), Montana (7), North Dakota (9), South
Dakota (9), and Wyoming (10).

8

The Climatic data are from the Area Resource File (ARF). The ARF file is maintained by Quality Resource
Systems (QRS) under contract to the Office of Research and Planning, Bureau of Health Professions, within the
Health Resources and Services Administration.

11

The USCDD is zonal in nature: dividing each state into similar climate zones. Unlike
monitor-level temperature and precipitation data, the zonal climate data utilize all of the monitor
readings within a zone to arrive at zone-averaged temperature and precipitation measures. In
addition, there are no missing observations for the zonal climate data, so from year to year the
same zones’ climate data can be used. Unfortunately, the zones reflect topographic and
meteorological uniformities, and therefore don’t conform to sociopolitical county boundaries.
For this reason, in order to assign zonal climate data to counties that overlap multiple zones, the
zonal climate data must be averaged across the overlapping counties.9

Topography and Soil Quality Data
We utilize a general topography classification from The National Atlas (USGS), which
identifies counties according to their major landform types. The variable we use is the “Land
Surface Form Topography code”, which identifies 21 different classifications, including plains,
tablelands, open hills and mountains. This topography type allows us to group counties
according to similar landforms – and the likelihood that they have land that is suitable for
growing certain crops. Similarly, the topography type reflects the likelihood that a county has the
potential of having a major dam in place: the major western dams are much more likely to occur
in the more mountainous counties, or those with open hills, than they are in tablelands or plains.
In addition to landform type, we have collected county-level soil quality (soil type)
information from the Natural Resources Conservation Service’s (NRCS) Soil Survey Geographic

9

We use an evenly weighted average – so if a county falls in two zones, the temperature and precipitation values
that are assigned that that county would be 50% of the first zone and 50% of the second zone. As an example, of the
44 counties in Idaho, 28 are contained in a single climate zone, 9 overlap with 2 climate zones, 5 overlap with 3
climate zones, 1 overlaps with 4 climate zones, and 1 overlaps with 5 climate zones. As a robustness check, we will
run models with only those counties that are contained in a single climate zone.

12

(SSURGO) database. The SSURGO database provides a national-coverage of soil quality
measures, according to the non-irrigated Land Capability Classification System (LCC). The
LCC includes eight classes of land, derived from a series of soil qualities, including percent
slope, erosion potential, rooting depth, drainage class, composition, salinity, growing season,
average annual precipitation and surface textures. The coverage of each LCC in each county is
weighted by total area to arrive at a county-averaged LCC that is time-invariant.

Econometric Model
In this section we describe the econometric strategy used to estimate the impact of major
water infrastructure on cropping practices and on crop outcomes (harvest per acre, crop failure,
etc.), using the data sources outlined in the previous sections. It is important to note that any
empirical exercise that models the impact of water provided by dams on agricultural composition
or output may suffer from spurious positive correlation: counties that have the natural amenities
present, and thus anticipate a larger productivity gain from an increased volume of irrigation
water, may be more likely to invest in a major water infrastructure project. Thus, traditional OLS
analyses may be biased. In addition, water supply infrastructure could have brought agricultural
production to areas where it was not possible without irrigation, and therefore introduce a
potential endogeneity problem. To overcome these issues, we present two different, but related
identification strategies.
First, we cluster similar counties based on topographic and climatic types. Identification
therefore comes from the within-cluster differences in availability of irrigation water over time.
In this case, counties within clusters are very similar in agricultural potential (soil type, annual
precipitation total, annual temperature average,) as well as the potential for having a major water

13

infrastructure project (topography classification), and we estimate the treatment effect of having
irrigation water. To cluster counties, we use a definition of “arability” based on possible
profitable production of crops without irrigation on land with low, average and highly variable
rainfall, and match counties in our sample accordingly. We then exclude all counties in our
sample where profitable agricultural production without irrigation would not be possible. The
definition of arability used includes a minimum average rainfall of 10 inches per year;
sufficiently deep soil with no clay and sand; and no excessive evaporation due to wind and heat
during critical stages of plant growth. We further differentiate the cluster by the topographic
characteristics of the county, and therefore control for counties that have similar potential for
major water infrastructure.
We let Hi,g,t denote the agricultural outcome in county i, in cluster g, in year t. Di,g,t is an
indicator variable that equals one when county i has access to irrigation water provided via a
major water infrastructure project in year t, and zero otherwise.10 Our basic econometric model is
equation (1) below:

H i , g , t = αDi , g , t + βI i , g , t + X i , g ,tϕ + Z i , g μ + θ g , t + δ g , j + ηi , g ,t

(1)

where α is the parameter of interest, and measures the difference in the dependent variable
between counties with and without major water infrastructure projects.11 Ii,g,t represents the
10

We begin with a 50,000 AF cutoff to construct the indicator variable for irrigation water provided by dams, but
relax this cutoff as a robustness check. As expected, as the cutoff level decreases, so does the magnitude of the
coefficient on the dam indicator variable.
11

We constrain the major water infrastructure binary variable so that it represents only projects with a dedicated
purpose of irrigation. In these cases, dams that were constructed for hydroelectric, recreation or other purposes
without any indication that they will provide irrigation water are not included as dams in our analysis of agricultural
impacts.

14

occurrence of a particularly wet or dry period using the PDSI. Xi,g,t is a vector of controls that
vary over time at the county level, and includes the annual rainfall and temperature measures.12
Zi,g is a vector of controls that are continuous across time, but vary at the county level. This
vector includes the non-irrigated soil capability classification of the county. θg,t is a year fixed
effect, δg,j is a state fixed effect and ηi,g,t is the unobserved error component.
We allow Hi,g,t to represent: 1) percentage measures of agricultural mix (changes in
composition), or 2) the successful harvest per acre before and after a major water infrastructure
project is completed.13 To further test whether major water infrastructure provides security
during times of drought or flood, we utilize a difference-in-difference model, presented in
equation (2) below, where we interact Di,g,t with the indicator variables for those periods in
which agriculture experienced droughts and severe floods ( Ii,g,t)14:

[

]

H i ,t = αDi , g ,t + β I i , g , t + γ Di , g ,t * I i , g ,t + X i , g , tϕ + Z i , g μ + θ g ,t + δ g , j + ηi , g , t

(2)

12

We also include non-linearities in the precipitation and temperature variables in all of our models. As a robustness
check, we alter the months that are used to calculate precipitation and temperature totals, including adding the winter
(wetter) months in the year prior to the agricultural census, or limiting the climate averages to the summer months
during the growing season (to account for dry-cropping or those operations that rely solely on rain and snowfall for
crop irrigation). These modifications do not have noticeable effects on our variables of concern.
13

It is worth noting that in most cases, the dependent variable (be it harvest per acre or the composition (%) of
different crops produced,) is not biased by the size of the county. In models in which the total land area of the
county may affect results the treatment variable will need to be normalized by the total land area or the size of the
county.
14

We use two cutoffs for to construct the drought and flood dummy variables: with a drought condition represented
by PDSI <=-2, and a flood condition represented by PDSI>=2. These cutoffs are considered “moderate to severe
droughts/floods” within the PDSI literature. See Palmer (1965) and discussion in the U.S. Department of Commerce,
National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration (2009) website regarding “moderate drought” versus “moderate
rainfall” and other categorizations. http://www.drought.noaa.gov/palmer.html

15

Our second strategy to account for the spurious positive correlation, follows Duflo and
Pande (QJE 2007), and takes advantage of the topography classifications of each county as
instruments for the likelihood of dam construction. Specifically, we estimate a fixed effects two
stage least squares panel regression of the form:

Di , t = [τTi * θ t ] + β I i , t + X i , tϕ + Z i μ + [θ t * δ i ] + ηi , t

(3)

The notation follows from equation (1), with the following exceptions: the topographic
classification (Ti) has been interacted with the year fixed effects; the panel fixed effect is now
represented by an interaction between the year fixed effect and the state fixed effect to arrive at a
state-year fixed effect. To generate instruments for Di,t, we utilize the parameter estimates from
(3) to predict the likelihood of a dam being constructed ( Dˆ i ,t ) in our first-stage equation. Our
final instrumental variables estimation is therefore equation (4):

[

]

H i ,t = αDi ,t + βI i ,t + X i ,t ϕ + Z i μ + θ t * δ j + η i ,t

(4)

using instruments for Di,t from the parameter estimates from (3).

IV. Results
The objective of this chapter is to examine the impact of major water infrastructure on
agricultural composition and productivity. We hypothesize that counties with access to water
supply infrastructure are better able to deal with the problems of short-term climatic variability
(either due to natural variability in the hydrologic cycle or due to disruptions of the cycle) in

16

terms of smoothing out agricultural production over time relative to those similar counties
without such infrastructure.
It is important to note that the temperature variability and average levels of precipitation
are very similar across the five states in our sample, and unlike more temperate western states,
the year-to-year water availability is not a significant factor in determining annual crop mix
changes. Because of the climate extremes (traditionally represented by very hot summers and
very cold winters,) the presence of irrigation water is less essential in our sample states than in
states that grow crops that are much more dependent on irrigation water. Many of the crops that
we analyze are field crops that can be dry-farmed, unlike row crops that require intensive
irrigation to produce any output. For these reasons, we anticipate that the impacts of damprovided irrigation water are likely to be less significant in states in our sample than in those
states that grow crops that are much more dependent on it for their agricultural practices. Thus,
we expect that our results likely underestimate the true benefit of the major water infrastructure
projects, particularly in those states that have more crop variability, and that are more dependent
on dam-provided irrigation water.
Tables 3 through 9 show results from our clustered sample presented in equations (1) and
(2) from Section III. Our sample counties are clustered based on similarities in topographic and
climatic characteristics; thus, identification in our models comes from the within-cluster
differences in availability of irrigation water over time.
Table 3 presents the impact of dams on agricultural composition, shares of total cropland
dedicated to certain crops as well as fallow and failed crop acres, controlling for precipitation,
temperature, soil quality, and state and year fixed effects, measured within clusters of counties.
In our sample counties, annual water variability, and hence, dam-provided irrigation water

17

availability is not expected to be a significant determinant of crop mix changes. As anticipated,
in these models we see that the indicator variable for dams has only a small, insignificant impact
on agricultural composition. The indicator variable for droughts, however, which is constructed
using PDSI cutoff of “moderate to severe droughts,” shows a shift away from wheat and corn
during drought periods, and an increase in failed acreage.
When we interact the indicator variables for dams and droughts, in Table 4, we see that
the counties that have dams experienced an increase in wheat acreage (+2.46 percent) and a
decrease in failed acreage (-4.41 percent) during drought periods relative to those drought areas
without dams present.15
According to these results, dams had very little impact on the agricultural practices
during normal precipitation years, but had a much more significant impact during drought years.
Relative to similar counties that did not have dam-provided irrigation water available, counties
with the dams were much more successful during difficult growing years—they were able to
plant more of their total acreage and they lost less of the crop that was planted.
The results are economically significant. The average aggregate annual wheat acreage
across the five states in our sample was 10.2M acres, and the average aggregate annual failed
acreage was 1.8M acres. The coefficient on our drought-dam interaction term from Model (2) in
Table 4, a 2.46% increase in wheat acreage, is equivalent to an average increase of over 251,000
acres dedicated towards wheat, in aggregate across all states, averaged across all years.
Similarly, the coefficient on our drought-dam interaction term from Model (6) in Table 4, a

15

We estimated our models using all dams as well as irrigation dams only. Results are qualitatively similar although
more significant when we use irrigation dams. We also estimated models showing the impact of dam not only where
it is located, but from various distances from dam and again find similar results.

18

4.41% decrease in failed acreage, is equivalent to an average decrease of approximately 80,000
failed acres, in aggregate across all states, averaged across all years.
Tables 5 and 6 present similar models to Tables 3 and 4, but measure agricultural
productivity as opposed to agricultural composition. Agricultural productivity is measured in
bushels per acre for wheat, barley and corn; in tonnage per acre for hay and in 100 pounds per
acre for potatoes. In these models we see an across-the-board increase in productivity during
drought periods, even when total cropland harvested may be declining. For example, we observe
a 0.12 ton/acre increase in hay productivity and a 2.96 bushel/acre increase in wheat
productivity. Conversations with water resource managers indicate that these results are not all
that surprising—when farmers are faced with decreased water availability, they are very careful
with their overall water management, thus applying the water that they do have to their most
productive acreage. This application practice results in an increased productivity per acre across
the fewer acres that are planted.16
Similar to Tables 3 and 4, the dam indicator variables have a positive, but insignificant
effect on agricultural productivity. This is again due to fact that the presence of irrigation water
is likely less essential in our sample states that mostly grow field crops that can be dry-farmed,
than in states that grow crops that are much more dependent on irrigation water. When we
interact the indicator variables for dams and droughts, in Table 6, we see that the presence of
dams in areas that are suffering from droughts has a positive, significant impact on wheat
productivity (+3.16 bushels/acre) and barley productivity (+2.61 bushels/acre).
These effects also are economically significant. They are roughly 13 percent and 8
percent, respectively, of the annual mean productivity per acre in our sample. In terms of the

16

Personal communication between Scott Lowe and Hal Anderson , Administrator of Planning and Technical
Services Division, Idaho Department of Water Resources, November 2009.

19

total harvest, an increase of 3.16 bushels/acre of wheat translates into an average output increase
of approximately 182,000 bushels per county, per year.17 At the current commodity price for
wheat, this is equal to almost a $1M increase in annual revenue, per county (National
Agricultural Statistics Service, 2009). To put these results in context, we estimate that the
average acres of wheat harvested per county, per year were 57,500 across our study sample. With
an average of 23.8 bushels/acre, and an average 2009 commodity price of $5/bushel for wheat,
the total revenue per county from wheat is $6.8M per year.
Tables 7 and 8 present similar models to those presented in Tables 5 and 6, but are altered
to account for periods of excessive precipitation, as opposed to periods of drought. We want to
test for the impact of dams on agricultural productivity during periods of potentially damaging
flooding. We use a flood condition represented by PDSI >=2 to create the flood dummy variable
indicating “moderate to severe floods / precipitation levels” within the PDSI literature.
Increased levels of precipitation, of course, may have other effects, such as greater
opportunity to hold more water behind dams and have water available for even more irrigation to
positively impact agricultural productivity of those crops that benefit from extra water
availability. On the other hand, increased water availability may also increase the use of marginal
land for some crops where output per acre is lower. In addition, damaging levels of precipitation
and flooding may decrease overall agricultural productivity levels.
We find that periods of excessive precipitation (shown as the flood indicator variable in
the tables) result in a significant positive effect on agricultural productivity of wheat and hay, the
two dry-farmed crops in our sample. These results are presented in Models 1 and 2 on Table 7.

17

The mean harvest, measured at the county level between 1900 and 2002, was 57,500 acres of wheat, 41,700 acres
of hay, 12,400 acres of barley, 3,300 acres of corn, and 1,370 acres of potatoes. These numbers are larger (with the
exception of hay) for the latter half of the 20th century than the first half, but had more variation across counties in
the latter years.

20

Extra water storage and the availability of more water for irrigation to be applied to lands that are
typically cultivated by using dry-cropping techniques is the likely explanation for the positive
and significant effect on the total productivity of wheat and hay, ceteris paribus.
The general precipitation variable for wheat has a negative effect for wheat productivity.
This result, combined with agricultural composition results presented in Tables 3 and 4 that show
that share of total cropland in wheat declines when there is increased precipitation. This result
indicates that some of the most productive lands are shifted away from wheat production during
wet seasons to alternative crops, especially more water-intensive potatoes.
Although the presence of a dam alone has a limited impact on agricultural productivity in
our sample states, when this effect is interacted with the presence of a period of excessive
precipitation (and increased likelihood of flooding), we find a positive impact for all agricultural
productivities studied. Results, shown in Table 8, indicate that the productivity of wheat (+2.14
bushels/acre) and corn (+4.52 bushels/acre) are statistically significant and positive. These
effects are roughly 9 percent and 13 percent of the annual mean productivity per acre in our
sample. The overall increased productivity impact of dams during periods of excessive
precipitation may be due to the prevention of damaging flooding when a dam is present, plus the
availability of greater irrigation water held behind dams.
Table 9 presents the results of the empirical models outlined in Model (4) of Section III.
In these models, we use a two-staged fixed effects process, following Duflo and Pande (2007), in
which we instrument for the likelihood of a county having a dam, using topographic
characteristics of counties (interacted with year effects) in addition to all of the independent
variables that we use to explain the variation in crop composition and productivity. This is
another econometric strategy we implement to address the likely spurious positive correlation

21

and endogeneity problems we face in our econometric identification: those counties that have the
natural characteristics for dam presence, and thus anticipate a larger productivity gain from
dams, are also more likely to invest in a major water infrastructure project.
The results of instrumental variable approach, presented in Table 9, are in general
consistent with our previous results. However, unlike our findings in Tables 3 through 8, the
fixed effects instrumental variables results suggest that the presence of a dam has a large,
positive impact on all crops, and a significant impact on hay productivity (+0.94 tons/acre),
wheat productivity (+7.1 bushels/acre), and barley productivity (+22.90 bushels/acre). 18 We also
continue to find positive impacts of droughts on productivity, but these effects are only
marginally significant.19
All told, our results from the various estimation strategies indicate that the availability of
water infrastructure increases agricultural productivity and the likelihood of successful harvest as
measured by harvested cropland as a share of total cropland. Although dams, in our sample, may
have had little impact on agricultural composition and agricultural productivity during normal
precipitation years, when we interact the indicator variables for dams and droughts, however, we
find that the counties that have dams experienced an increase in wheat acreage (+2.46 percent)
and a decrease in failed acreage (-4.41 percent). Relative to similar counties that did not have

18

Given our concern with spurious positive correlation, we had expected to find reduced magnitude in the estimated
coefficients and possibly improved standard errors when we use a two-staged fixed effects process. We instead find
increased coefficient estimates. This may be due to the weakness of our main instrument for dams: topography of
counties. For broader work on this topic, we are exploring alternative instruments, such as river gradient, details on
reservoir site (wide or narrow valley), county elevation and length of rivers.
19

As noted earlier, we were able to collect data on the total number of wells providing water to agriculture in our
sample states, but the data is measured in 2009 and therefore doesn’t reflect the changing availability of well water
over time, nor does it represent the volume of well water available. As a robustness check, we introduce the well
availability as both a time invariant indicator variable and as a dummy variable (which is in turn instrumented for
endogeneity) for all years after 1950, when most western farms uniformly had access to electricity. The inclusion of
these well variables slightly reduces the magnitudes of our variables of concern, but doesn’t alter their significance,
signs or their general magnitudes.

22

dam-provided irrigation water, counties with the dams were able to have more of their total
acreage planted and lost less of the crop that was planted. Similarly, the results presented in
Table 6 show that the presence of dams in areas that are suffering from droughts has a positive,
significant impact on wheat productivity (+3.16 bushels/acre) and barley productivity (+2.61
bushels/acre).
In addition, our results also indicate that the presence of major water infrastructure helped
to mitigate the damages of periodic floods. As shown in Tables 7 and 8, periods of excessive
precipitation result in a significant positive effect on agricultural productivity of wheat and hay,
the two dry-farmed crops in our sample. Again, the presence of a dam alone only has a limited
impact on agricultural productivity, but when this effect is interacted with the presence of a
period of excessive precipitation, we find a positive impact for all agricultural productivities
studied. Results presented in Table 8 indicate that the increased productivity of wheat (+2.14
bushels/acre) and corn (+4.52 bushels/acre) are statistically significant and positive.

V. Summary and Conclusions
Climate change is a major issue and much of the scientific focus is on its likely impact
and the costs of various paths of mitigation. Less attention has been directed towards adaption—
of how policies and markets have addressed past climate shocks. This is vital information
because adaptation to climate change can influence both its effects and the costs of addressing it.
The empirical evidence on past adaptation policies is limited. This chapter examines the impact
of one of the most extensive water infrastructure investments ever made—the “reclamation”
systems of the U.S. West— to determine their impact on agricultural production in the face of
severe drought or flooding. Water infrastructure is particularly important as a long-term
adaptation strategy to climate change because dams and associated canals are among the longest-

23

lasting infrastructures in agriculture, and investment in them differs from most other agricultural
adaptation strategies available to farmers (Reilly, 1999).
Analysis of historical data from the western U.S., where temperature and precipitation
differences relative to the eastern part of the country are greater than those predicted from
climate change models, allows for assessment of adaption policies. We present a large-scale time
series analysis of historical data on mitigation of the impact of climate change on agricultural
production. Because there is evidence that mean changes in temperature may have less impact on
agricultural production, our focus is on extremes of precipitation levels that are likely to cause
significant negative agricultural outcomes. This approach follows the recommendation of Reilly
(1999) and others regarding analysis of the impact of climate change on agricultural production.
Our results indicate that historical water supply investments have increased agricultural
productivity and improved the likelihood of successful harvest during times of climatic shocks—
droughts and floods. These are characteristic of the semi-arid west and may become more so if
climate projections of greater swings in drought and flooding come to pass.

24

References
Anderson, H., Administrator of the Planing and Technical Services Division of the Idaho
Department of Water Resources. Personal Communication with Scott E. Lowe,
November 2009.
Andreadis, K.M., and D.P. Lettenmaier, 2006: Trends in 20th century drought over the
continental United States, Geophysical Research Letters, 33, L10403,
doi:10.1029/2006GL025711.
Bates, B.C., Z.W. Kundzewicz, S. Wu and J.P. Palutikof, Eds., 2008: Climate Change and
Water. Technical Paper of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, IPCC
Secretariat, Geneva.
Brekke, L.D., J.E. Kiang, J.R. Olsen, R.S. Pulwarty, D.A. Raff, D.P. Turnipseed, R.S. Webb,
and K.D. White, 2009, “Climate change and water resources management—A federal
perspective” U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1331. (Also available online at
http://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/1331/.)
Clarke, Harry, 2008, “Classical Decicision Rules and Adaptation to Climate Change,” Australian
Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics. December 2008; 52(4): 487-504.
Cline, William R, 1996, “The Impact of Global Warming on Agriculture: Comment,” American
Economic Review, 86 (5): 1309-11.
Collier, Paul; Gordon Conway, and Tony Venebles, 2008, “Climate Change and Africa,” Oxford
Review of Economic Policy. Summer 2008; 24(2): 337-53.
Contor, B., Research Hydrologist, Idaho Water Resources Research Institute. Personal
Communication with Scott E. Lowe, November 2009.
Deschenes, Olivier and Michael Greenstone, 2007, “The Economic Impacts of Climate Change:
Evidence from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather,” American
Economic Review 97(1): 354-385.
Duflo, Esther and Rohini Pande, 2007, “Dams,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (2): 601646.
Easterling, William, Brian Hurd, Joel Smith, 2004, Coping with Global Climate Change: The
Role of Adaptation in the United States. Pew Center on Global Climate Change.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2007, Adaptation to Climate Change
in Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries: Perspective, framework and priorities.
Interdepartmental Working Group on Climate Change, United Nations. Accessed 26
February 2008. ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/009/j9271e/j9271e.pdf
Francisco, Herminia, 2008, “Adaptation to Climate Change: Needs and Opportunities in
Southeastern Asia,” ASEAN Economic Bulletin. April 2008; 25(1): 7-19.
Hansen, Christian B., 2007, “Generalized least squares inference in panel and multilevel models
with serial correlation and fixed effects,” Journal of Econometrics, 140(20): 670-694.
Heyden, Constantin and Guy Pegram, 2007, “Integrating Climate Change Adaptation
intoInternational River Basin Management in Southern Africa.” GWP - Southern Africa,
Regional Technical Committee (RTEC), Pegasys Internatinal. Technical Report.
Hikel, Kenneth, Frederick Nelson, Walter Parker, Vladimir Romanovsky, Orson Smith, Walter
Tucker, Ted Vinson, and Lawson Bingham, 2003, Climate Change, Permafrost, and
Impacts on Civil Infrastructure. U.S. Arctic Research Commission, Permafrost Task
Force. United States Arctic Research Commission: Special Report 01-03.

25

IPCC, 2001, Climate Change 2001. Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of
Working Group II to the Third Assessment Report of the IPCC, Chapters 10, 11, 17, 18.
IPCC, 2007, Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and
Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof,
P.J. van der Linden and C.E. Hanson (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.
IPCC, 2007, Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability Contribution of
Working Group II to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Parry, Martin L., Canziani, Osvaldo F., Palutikof, Jean P., van der
Linden, Paul J., and Hanson, Clair E. (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom.
Kahn, Shahbaz; Rana, Tariq; Abbas, Akhtar; Hafeez, Mohsin; Hanjra, Munir; Asghar, Nadeem;
Pillow, Richard; Narayan, Kumar, 2008, Development of the Technical Manual for
Assessing Hotspots in Channel and Piped Irrigation Systems. Project Report for the
Australian Government Department of the Environement, Water, Heritage and the Arts.
Accessed 26 February 2009.
http://www.environment.gov.au/water/publications/action/pubs/project-report.pdf
Kelly, David L., Charles D. Kolstad, Glenn T. Mitchell, 2005, “Adjustment Costs from
Environmental Change,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 50: 46895.
Kingwell, Ross, 2006, Climate Change in Australia: agricultural impacts and adaptation.
Australasian Agribusiness Review. Vol 14, paper 1, ISSN 1442-6951.
Kurukulassuriya, Pradeep and Robert Mendelsohn, 2008, “How Will Climate Change Shift
Agro-ecological Zones and Impact African Agriculture?,” The World Bank, Policy
Research Working Paper Series: 4717, Washington D.C.
Lettenmaier, D.P., David Major, Leroy Poff, and Steve Running, 2008, “The Effects of Climate
Change on Agriculture, Land Resources, Water Resources, and Biodiversity in the United
States. Chapter 4: Water Resources”, Report by the U.S. Climate Change Sciences
Program and the Subcommittee on Global Change Research, Synthesis and Assessment
Product 4.3, May 2008.
Libecap, Gary D. and Zeynep K. Hansen (2002), “Rain Follows the Plow” and Dryfarming
Doctrine: The Climate Information Problem and Homestead Failure in the Upper Great
Plains, 1890-1925,” Journal of Economic History, 62(1): 86-120.
Lobell, David; Marshall Burke, Claudia Tebaldi, Michael Mastrandrea, Walter Falcon, and
Rosamond Naylor, 2008, “Prioritizing Climate Change Adaptation Needs for Food
Security in 2030” Science; 319(5863): 607-610.
Mendelsohn, Robert, William D. Nordhaus, and Daigee Shaw, 1994, “The Impact of Global
Warming on Agriculture: A Ricardian Analysis,” American Economic Review, 84 (4):
753-71.
Mendelsohn, Robert and Niggol Seo, 2007, “Changing Farm Types and Irrigation as an
Adaptation to Climate Change in Latin American Agriculture,” World Bank Policy
Research Working Paper 4161, March 2007, Washington D.C.

26

MacGill, Iain; Outhred, Hugh; Passey, Rob. 2003. The Australian Electricity Industry and
Climate Change: What role for geosequestration? ERGO Draft Discussion Paper 0503.
The University of New South Wales, School of Electrical Enineering and
Telecommunicatinos: Electricity Restructuring Group.
Nordhaus, William D., 2007, “A Review of the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate
Change,” Journal of Economic Literature, September, 686-702.
Olmstead, Alan L. and Paul W. Rhode, 2008, Abundance: Biological Innovation and American
Agricultural Development, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Palmer, W.C., 1965: Meteorological drought. Research Paper No. 45. U.S. Weather Bureau.
[NOAA Library and Information Services Division, Washington, D.C. 20852]
Pielke, Roger A. Jr, 1998, “Rethinking the Role of Adaptation in Climate Policy,” Global
Climate Change 8(2): 159-70.
Pisani, Donald J., 2002, Water and American Government: The Reclamation Bureau, National
Water Policy, and the West, 1902-1935, Berkeley: University of California Press.
Quiggin, John; Horowicz, John. 2003, “Costs of Adjustment to Climate Change”. The
Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics. Volume 47, Number 4:
429-446.
Quiroga, Sonia and Ana Iglesias, 2007, “Projections of Economic Impacts of Climate Change in
Agriculture in Europe,” Economia Agraria Recursos Naturales. 7(14); 65-82.
Reilly, John, 1999, “What Does Climate Change Mean for Agriculture in Developing Countries?
A Comment on Mandelsohn and Dinar,”The World Bank Research Observer. 14 (2): 295-305.
Schlenker, Wolfram, Michael Hanemann, and Anthony C. Fisher, 2006, “The Impact of Global
Warming on U.S. Agriculture: An Econometric Analysis of Optimal Growing
Conditions,” Review of Economics and Statistics 88(1): 113-25.
Schlenker, Wolfram and Michael Roberts, 2008, “Estimating the Impact of Climate Change on
Crop Yields: The Importance of Nonlinear Temperature Effects,” NBER Working Paper
13799.
Stern, Nicholas, 2007, The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review, Cambridge and
New York: Cambridge University Press.
U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration. 2009. Palmer
Drought Severity Index: http://www.drought.noaa.gov/palmer.html
United States Environmental Protection Agency. 2008, Notes on the Climate Change and Water
Infrastructure Forum. Accessed: 26 February 2009.
http://yosemite.epa.gov/R10/ECOCOMM.NSF/95534441d036059c882574740052e10f/4
7f3373c82647b3a8825746b00600267/$FILE/CCWI%20Forum%20Notes%20092508.pd
f
United States Agency for International Development. 2007 Adapting to Climate Variability and
Change: a guidance manual for development planning. Accessed 26 February 2009.
http://www.usaid.gov/our_work/environment/climate/docs/reports/cc_vamanual.pdf
Weitzman, Martin L., 2007, “A Review of the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate
Change,” Journal of Economic Literature, September, 703-724.
Zhan, Lijuah; Rozell, Scott; Huang, Jikun; Dinar, Ariel; Mendelsohn, Robert; Wang, Jinxia,
2008, Can China Continue Feeding Itself? The Impact of Climate Change on Agriculture.
The World Bank, Policy Research Working Paper Series: 4470.

27

Map 1: Sample Location with State, Counties, and Major Dams West of the 100th Meridian

28

Table 1: Primary Purpose of Water Provided by Dams (total maximum-storage measured in Acre-feet)
State:
ID
MT
ND
SD
WY
Flood Control
3,947,643 19,130,823 25,208,840 23,618,835 4,589,966
HydroElectric
5,870,818 10,913,527
758,390
Irrigation
7,146,890 10,569,892
500,860
1,692,602
7,486,167
Recreation
5,500
15,430
51,762
31,443
Water Supply
235,583
107,467
439,758
433,015
Other
384,290
97,176
21,256
100,970
361,721
Total:
17,590,724 40,834,315 25,782,719 25,883,608 13,629,259
# Wells in 2009
"Irrigation" listed as a purpose

31,400
8,483,473

4,220
31,186,090

860
25,000,860

2,680
25,736,800

1,740
12,691,233

Note: "Other" includes Debris Control, Fish and Wildlife, Fire Protection, Tailings and Other
"Total" is different from Table 2 due to ommitted primary purpose for dam

Table 2: Storage and Count of Dams
ID
MT
ND
State:
Year Completed
Storage #
Storage #
Storage #
<1910
1,604,365 13
324,453 7
0
0
1910-1919
2,173,450 14
1,523,704 24
2,068
1
1920-1929
131,573 6
691,403 17
0
0
1930-1939
303,378 6
2,953,150 36
529,358 11
1940-1949
1,169,090 10
415,850 15
500,860 3
1950-1959
5,874,917 10
26,625,161 28
24,505,318 2
1960-1969
64,459
8
2,133,834 15
53,163
6
1970-1979
5,500,870 15
6,129,722 14
189,464 8
1980-1989
134,287 11
8,929
3
2,206
2
1990-2000
255,707 8
24,450
1
0
0
Unknown
378,628 10
3,659
2
282
1
Total:
17,590,724 111
40,834,315 162
25,782,719 34
Note: Storeage reflects the maximum storage, in AF, behind the dams in the given state

29

SD
Storage
0
186,837
0
25,353
116,794
1,835,649
23,617,135
5,690
5,250
20,900
70,000
25,883,608

#
0
2
0
3
4
7
4
10
2
1
1
34

WY
Storage
2,895,107
2,760,933
257,250
1,290,735
94,494
4,742,634
749,376
387,056
336,585
115,089
0
13,629,259

#
12
5
11
12
3
21
20
19
20
11
0
134

60%

50%
Barley

40%

Wheat
Hay

30%

Potatoes
Corn

20%

Failed
Idle & Fallow

10%

0%

Figure 1: Historical Agricultural Composition, % of total acreage

100
90
80
70

Barley (bushels)

60

Wheat (bushels)

50

Hay (1/10th ton)

40

Potatoes (1,000 lbs)

30

Corn (bushels)

20
10
0

Figure 2: Historical Agricultural Productivity, average per acre

30

Table 3: Fixed Effects Models of Agricultural Composition With Geograhic-Climate Clusters
Model:
Dep Var:

(1)
% Hay
0.0038
(0.0305)

(2)
% Wheat
-0.0018
(0.0197)

(3)
% Barley
0.0047
(0.0066)

(4)
% Corn
-0.0113
(0.0055)*

(5)
% Potatoes
0.0009
(0.0022)

(6)
% Failed
-0.0035
(0.0050)

(7)
% Fallow
0.0142
(0.0190)

Precipitation

0.1494
(0.1024)

-0.1671
(0.0612)**

0.0345
(0.0226)

-0.0081
(0.0290)

0.0005
(0.0051)

0.1673
(0.0705)**

0.0676
(0.0722)

Precipitation Squared

-0.0406
(0.0291)

0.0316
(0.0220)

-0.0159
(0.0064)**

0.0004
(0.0090)

-0.0031
(0.0010)***

-0.0394
(0.0217)*

-0.0150
(0.0201)

Temperature

-0.0417
(0.0503)

0.0258
(0.0299)

-0.0045
(0.0201)

-0.0055
(0.0095)

0.0161
(0.0066)**

0.0064
(0.0189)

0.0351
(0.0233)

Temperature Squared

0.0004
(0.0006)

-0.0003
(0.0003)

0.0000
(0.0002)

0.0001
(0.0001)

-0.0002
(0.0001)**

-0.0000
(0.0002)

-0.0004
(0.0003)

Soil type

0.0412
(0.0221)*

-0.0317
(0.0067)***

-0.0014
(0.0031)

-0.0029
(0.0042)

-0.0023
(0.0020)

-0.0010
(0.0022)

-0.0194
(0.0145)

Drought Dummy

0.0281
(0.0199)

-0.0500
(0.0085)***

0.0032
(0.0054)

-0.0070
(0.0036)*

0.0025
(0.0012)*

0.0215
(0.0066)***

-0.0368
(0.0120)***

3471
16
0.27
YES
YES

3372
16
0.16
YES
YES

3359
16
0.25
YES
YES

2415
16
0.52
YES
YES

2407
16
0.29
YES
YES

Dam Dummy

Observations
3498
3482
Geographic-Climate Clusters
16
16
R-squared
0.18
0.20
Year FEs
YES
YES
State FEs
YES
YES
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Table 4: Difference-in-Difference Fixed Effects Models of Agricultural Composition With Geograhic-Climate Clusters
Model:
Dep Var:

(1)
% Hay
0.0004
(0.0325)

(2)
% Wheat
-0.0071
(0.0208)

(3)
% Barley
0.0059
(0.0055)

(4)
% Corn
-0.0136
(0.0062)**

(5)
% Potatoes
0.0006
(0.0018)

(6)
% Failed
0.0055
(0.0044)

(7)
% Fallow
0.0157
(0.0191)

Precipitation

0.1523
(0.1028)

-0.1627
(0.0621)**

0.0335
(0.0235)

-0.0060
(0.0290)

0.0007
(0.0049)

0.1584
(0.0724)**

0.0663
(0.0735)

Precipitation Squared

-0.0416
(0.0293)

0.0300
(0.0223)

-0.0156
(0.0067)**

-0.0003
(0.0091)

-0.0032
(0.0010)***

-0.0361
(0.0221)

-0.0145
(0.0204)

Temperature

-0.0421
(0.0500)

0.0252
(0.0300)

-0.0043
(0.0199)

-0.0057
(0.0094)

0.0160
(0.0066)**

0.0076
(0.0180)

0.0354
(0.0237)

Temperature Squared

0.0004
(0.0006)

-0.0003
(0.0003)

0.0000
(0.0002)

0.0001
(0.0001)

-0.0002
(0.0001)**

-0.0000
(0.0002)

-0.0005
(0.0003)

Soil type

0.0412
(0.0220)*

-0.0318
(0.0068)***

-0.0014
(0.0031)

-0.0029
(0.0042)

-0.0023
(0.0020)

-0.0010
(0.0023)

-0.0194
(0.0145)

Drought Dummy

0.0247
(0.0209)

-0.0553
(0.0102)***

0.0044
(0.0048)

-0.0093
(0.0050)*

0.0022
(0.0016)

0.0310
(0.0057)***

-0.0352
(0.0112)***

Drought-Dam Interaction

0.0159
(0.0248)

0.0246
(0.0120)*

-0.0056
(0.0111)

0.0110
(0.0064)

0.0015
(0.0022)

-0.0441
(0.0079)***

-0.0074
(0.0174)

3471
16
0.27
YES
YES

3372
16
0.16
YES
YES

3359
16
0.25
YES
YES

2415
16
0.53
YES
YES

2407
16
0.29
YES
YES

Dam Dummy

Observations
3498
3482
Geographic-Climate Clusters
16
16
R-squared
0.18
0.20
Year FEs
YES
YES
State FEs
YES
YES
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

31

Table 5: Fixed Effects Models of Agricultural Productivity With Geograhic-Climate Clusters

Dam Dummy

(1)
Prod Hay
0.0123
(0.0480)

(2)
Prod Wheat
0.3328
(0.8814)

(3)
Prod Barley
0.5809
(0.8567)

(4)
Prod Corn
2.9639
(1.9674)

(5)
Prod Potatoes
7.2172
(6.1585)

Precipitation

0.3182
(0.2458)

-6.1633
(4.2880)

4.4790
(3.9326)

15.0053
(11.0013)

93.7036
(32.5217)**

Precipitation Squared

-0.1098
(0.0732)

0.9087
(1.0289)

-2.1465
(0.9230)**

-8.0377
(3.2000)**

-29.3468
(7.5700)***

Temperature

0.0603
(0.2465)

-2.3920
(3.1610)

-0.4798
(3.8940)

0.5813
(5.6545)

-4.0923
(21.9671)

Temperature Squared

-0.0004
(0.0029)

0.0299
(0.0374)

0.0059
(0.0439)

0.0018
(0.0634)

0.0632
(0.2528)

Soil type

0.0338
(0.0480)

1.0415
(0.6582)

1.3763
(0.7562)*

0.5997
(0.8414)

2.7186
(3.4159)

0.1209
(0.0505)**

2.9577
(0.8035)***

2.8479
(0.6823)***

7.6389
(1.1996)***

27.5879
(11.3440)**

3413
16
0.66
YES
YES

2328
16
0.71
YES
YES

2634
16
0.20
YES
YES

Dep. Var: (Output / acre)

Drought Dummy

Observations
3506
3420
Geographic-Climate Clusters
16
16
R-squared
0.53
0.60
Year FEs
YES
YES
State FEs
YES
YES
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Table 6: Difference-in-Difference Fixed Effects Models of Agricultural Productivity With Geograhic-Climate Clusters

Dam Dummy

(1)
Prod Hay
-0.0067
(0.0415)

(2)
Prod Wheat
-0.4286
(0.9418)

(3)
Prod Barley
0.0188
(0.7529)

(4)
Prod Corn
2.8026
(1.9337)

(5)
Prod Potatoes
3.0916
(7.8396)

Precipitation

0.3350
(0.2388)

-5.7519
(4.2002)

4.8524
(3.9769)

15.1235
(10.8108)

96.1183
(32.4707)***

Precipitation Squared

-0.1158
(0.0711)

0.7523
(1.0107)

-2.2842
(0.9418)**

-8.0737
(3.1360)**

-30.1155
(7.7400)***

Temperature

0.0583
(0.2467)

-2.5230
(3.1334)

-0.5571
(3.9098)

0.5670
(5.6679)

-5.0299
(22.2777)

Temperature Squared

-0.0004
(0.0029)

0.0314
(0.0370)

0.0068
(0.0440)

0.0019
(0.0635)

0.0737
(0.2555)

Soil type

0.0338
(0.0481)

1.0307
(0.6582)

1.3675
(0.7552)*

0.5965
(0.8421)

2.6699
(3.4237)

Drought Dummy

0.1013
(0.0533)*

2.1855
(0.7126)***

2.2760
(0.7209)***

7.4923
(1.3703)***

24.1668
(12.1120)*

Drought-Dam Interaction

0.0903
(0.0528)

3.6065
(1.1923)***

2.6113
(1.2537)*

0.7814
(2.3636)

17.8331
(17.7115)

3413
16
0.66
YES
YES

2328
16
0.71
YES
YES

2634
16
0.21
YES
YES

Dep. Var: (Output / acre)

Observations
3506
3420
Geographic-Climate Clusters
16
16
R-squared
0.53
0.60
Year FEs
YES
YES
State FEs
YES
YES
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

32

Table 7: Fixed Effects Models of Agricultural Productivity With Geograhic-Climate Clusters
Dep. Var: (Output / acre)
Dam Dummy
Precipitation
Precipitation Squared
Temperature
Temperature Squared
Soil type
Flood Dummy

(1)
Prod Hay
0.0126
(0.0506)
0.0268
(0.2082)
-0.0580
(0.0660)
0.0617
(0.2533)
-0.0004
(0.0030)
0.0389
(0.0484)
0.1398
(0.0347)***
3506
16
0.54
YES
YES

(2)
Prod Wheat
0.3072
(0.8782)
-13.0083
(4.6598)**
2.1824
(1.1178)*
-2.3434
(3.2984)
0.0298
(0.0390)
1.1521
(0.6787)
2.9364
(0.7315)***
3420
16
0.60
YES
YES

(3)
Prod Barley
0.5481
(0.8637)
-0.3792
(4.1653)
-1.1781
(0.9004)
-0.6577
(3.9774)
0.0081
(0.0449)
1.4650
(0.7816)*
0.8852
(0.8744)
3413
16
0.66
YES
YES

Observations
Geographic-Climate Clusters
R-squared
Year FEs
State FEs
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

(4)
Prod Corn
3.2722
(2.1265)
0.7309
(10.7330)
-4.8988
(3.0446)
0.2194
(5.5347)
0.0075
(0.0620)
0.7392
(0.8652)
1.9395
(1.5675)
2328
16
0.70
YES
YES

(5)
Prod Potatoes
7.0380
(6.5410)
57.3807
(26.8012)**
-21.8682
(6.3280)***
-5.5828
(21.9204)
0.0816
(0.2531)
3.4508
(3.4181)
-1.1331
(8.0507)
2634
16
0.20
YES
YES

Table 8: Difference-in-Difference Fixed Effects Models of Agricultural Productivity With Geograhic-Climate Clusters
(1)
Prod Hay
-0.0021
(0.0493)

(2)
Prod Wheat
-0.2770
(0.8708)

(3)
Prod Barley
0.1311
(1.0194)

(4)
Prod Corn
2.2655
(2.0239)

(5)
Prod Potatoes
4.1813
(6.5446)

Precipitation

0.0182
(0.2100)

-13.2862
(4.7839)**

-0.6033
(4.3083)

0.4775
(10.9863)

56.1630
(26.8280)*

Precipitation Squared

-0.0550
(0.0667)

2.2842
(1.1547)*

-1.0985
(0.9332)

-4.7831
(3.1454)

-21.4047
(6.3653)***

Temperature

0.0639
(0.2528)

-2.2708
(3.3171)

-0.5916
(3.9742)

0.2069
(5.5170)

-5.2821
(22.0397)

Temperature Squared

-0.0004
(0.0030)

0.0290
(0.0392)

0.0073
(0.0448)

0.0075
(0.0618)

0.0778
(0.2547)

Soil type

0.0387
(0.0485)

1.1438
(0.6806)

1.4576
(0.7816)*

0.7302
(0.8739)

3.3650
(3.4402)

0.1267
(0.0361)***

2.4195
(0.6928)***

0.5073
(0.7736)

1.1066
(1.4970)

-4.0288
(8.7669)

0.0535
(0.0316)

2.1364
(0.9720)**

1.5742
(1.3151)

4.5210
(2.1746)*

12.1472
(8.5258)

3413
16
0.66
YES
YES

2328
16
0.70
YES
YES

2634
16
0.20
YES
YES

Dep. Var: (Output / acre)
Dam Dummy

Flood Dummy
Flood-Dam Interaction

Observations
3506
3420
Geographic-Climate Clusters
16
16
R-squared
0.54
0.60
Year FEs
YES
YES
State FEs
YES
YES
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

33

Table 9: Fixed Effects Two Stage Least Squares Models of Agricultural Productivity

Dam Dummy

(1)
Prod Hay
0.9449
(0.2260)***

(2)
Prod Wheat
7.0894
(3.1919)**

(3)
Prod Barley
22.9035
(4.8980)***

(4)
Prod Corn
7.5803
(8.6688)

(5)
Prod Potatoes
16.8781
(50.1415)

Precipitation

-0.6948
(0.1792)***

-16.2502
(2.7630)***

-11.3826
(3.9622)***

-2.5440
(6.7786)

88.4890
(38.4334)**

Precipitation Squared

0.0553
(0.0594)

4.8924
(0.9126)***

3.2137
(1.3135)**

0.0489
(2.2179)

-37.1447
(12.9879)***

Temperature

-0.0478
(0.1217)

-8.8767
(1.6791)***

0.4770
(2.7007)

-4.8688
(3.1910)

-34.8418
(21.6511)

Temperature Squared

0.0012
(0.0014)

0.1092
(0.0187)***

0.0020
(0.0300)

0.0617
(0.0351)*

0.4318
(0.2429)*

Drought Dummy

0.0684
(0.0388)*

0.6081
(0.5750)

0.7513
(0.8448)

0.0979
(1.2899)

25.9228
(7.6828)***

3413
YES

2328
YES

2634
YES

Dep. Var: (Output / acre)

Observations
3506
3420
State-Year FEs
YES
YES
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Instrument: Topography-Year Interaction Variable

34

