                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           A REFERENCE POINT THEORY OF MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

                                          Malcolm Baker
                                              Xin Pan
                                          Jeffrey Wurgler

                                       Working Paper 15551
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15551


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2009




For helpful comments we thank the Honorable William Allen, Yakov Amihud, Nick Barberis, Lauren
Cohen, Ravi Dhar, Robin Greenwood, Steven Huddart, Ulrike Malmendier, Florencia Marotta-Wurgler,
Steven Mintz, Daniel Paravisini, Gordon Phillips, Gerald Rosenfeld of Rothschild North America,
Rick Ruback, Joshua White, Russ Winer, and seminar participants at Columbia University, Harvard
Business School, Michigan State, the NBER Corporate Finance Summer Institute, NYU Stern, and
the Securities and Exchange Commission. Baker gratefully acknowledges financial support from the
Division of Research of Harvard Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Malcolm Baker, Xin Pan, and Jeffrey Wurgler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Reference Point Theory of Mergers and Acquisitions
Malcolm Baker, Xin Pan, and Jeffrey Wurgler
NBER Working Paper No. 15551
December 2009
JEL No. G34

                                            ABSTRACT

The use of judgmental anchors or reference points in valuing corporations affects several basic aspects
of merger and acquisition activity including offer prices, deal success, market reaction, and merger
waves. Offer prices are biased towards the 52-week high, a highly salient but largely irrelevant past
price, and the modal offer price is exactly that reference price. An offer's probability of acceptance
discontinuously increases when the offer exceeds the 52-week high; conversely, bidder shareholders
react increasingly negatively as the offer price is pulled upward toward that price. Merger waves occur
when high recent returns on the stock market and on likely targets make it easier for bidders to offer
the 52-week high.


Malcolm Baker                                      Jeffrey Wurgler
Baker Library 261                                  Stern School of Business, Suite 9-190
Harvard Business School                            New York University
Soldiers Field                                     44 West 4th Street
Boston, MA 02163                                   New York, NY 10012
and NBER                                           and NBER
mbaker@hbs.edu                                     jwurgler@stern.nyu.edu

Xin Pan
Harvard University
xinpan@fas.harvard.edu
I.      Introduction

        The price that a bidding firm offers for a target is generally the outcome of a negotiation

with the target’s board. The standard textbook story emphasizes synergies. The offer price starts

with an estimate of the increased value of the combined entity under the new corporate structure,

deriving from cost reductions in labor or capital equipment, supply chain reliability, debt tax

shields, market power, market access and expertise, improved management, internal finance, and

other economic factors (e.g., Lang, Stulz, and Walkling 1989 or Jovanovic and Rousseau

(2002)). This value gain is then divided between the two entities’ shareholders according to their

relative bargaining power. In theory, the textbooks suggest, all of this leads to an objective and

specific price for the target’s shares.

        In practice, valuing a company is subjective. A large number of assumptions are needed

to justify any particular valuation of the combination. In addition, relative bargaining power may

not be fully established. Boards can bluff in the negotiation. Other bidders may emerge. These

real-life considerations mean the appropriate target price cannot be set with precision, but

established only to be within a broad range. We hypothesize that this indeterminacy, in turn,

creates space for the price offered and its reception to reflect other influences, in particular the

psychological influences on the board of the target and the bidder and target shareholders, who

ultimately must approve the price.

        In particular, we propose a “reference point” view of mergers which holds that salient but

largely irrelevant reference point stock prices of the target help to explain several aspects of

mergers and acquisitions, involving both the pricing and the types and quantities of firms traded.

This psychological motivation has well-established roots in the anchoring-and-conservative-

adjustment estimation method (Tversky and Kahneman (1974)), the salience of initial anchor




                                                 2
positions in negotiations, and the prospect theory tenet that the utility of an outcome is evaluated

relative to a reference point.

        The reference point stock price that we focus on is the target’s recent high. The 52-week

high price is widely reported in the financial press and is salient to executives, boards, and

investors.1 Importantly, and in contrast to target shareholders’ individual cost bases, another

natural reference point, this is a reference price that is common across stakeholders. We start

with some anecdotes regarding how the 52-week high indeed plays a special role: Target firm

boards that are discouraging the deal may point out that the bid is below the recent high, while

those that are encouraging the deal note when the bid compares favorably with that price.

        The most obvious dimension of mergers that may be affected by reference prices is the

offer price. Our results show a visually and statistically obvious effect of the 52-week high.

Even controlling for the target’s stock return over various fixed intervals, the 52-week high price

exerts a strong positive effect on the bid price. A simple histogram of offer prices shows a spike

at the 52-week high. For the modal bidder, the 52-week high serves not merely as a subtle

psychological anchor but as one sufficiently heavy that there is no “adjustment” from it at all.

More generally, a 10% increase in the 52-week high is associated with as much as a 3% increase

in the offer premium. Overall, we estimate that anchoring on the 52-week high leads to an

arbitrary value transfer of $179 billion in the 5,135 completed mergers and acquisitions in our

sample, or 18% of the total offer premium paid.2

        We examine the 52-week high’s effect on offer prices in various subsamples and consider

non-psychological alternative explanations. For example, this reference price could simply be

correlated with the objective, but unobserved value gain from combination—e.g. it is the value to

1
  More recent high prices, if they are different from the 52-week high, may be equally salient and important in
practice, but for simplicity we focus on the commonly reported 52-week high.



                                                      3
which the target assets could return if only they were managed as well by the bidder in the future

as they were by the target in the past. However, the 52-week high of the market index also

affects offer prices.    Since the market component of the target’s 52-week high cannot be

recovered merely by changing management, this alternative does not provide a fully convincing

explanation for the 52-week high effect on offer prices. We also check that it is the high price

itself, not other points in the distribution of past stock prices, like the 90th percentile, that is most

important in shaping the offer price.

        The second dimension of merger activity we consider is deal success—what distinguishes

bids that succeed from those that fail. We find that the probability of deal success is significantly

and discontinuously increased by 3% to 4% when the bidder makes an offer price above the

target’s 52-week high.

        The cross-section of market reactions to bid announcements is also not well understood.

One hypothesis is that bidder announcements reflect the market’s estimate of overpayment. The

offer premium itself is not a clean measure of overpayment, as better combinations may attract

higher offer premia. We find that the bidder’s announcement effect becomes more negative with

the target’s distance from its 52-week high. Given the connection between 52-week highs and

offer prices, shareholders of the bidder appear to view the bidder as more likely to be overpaying

when the target has fallen far below this reference price. This pattern is also consistent with the

view that a high 52-week premium per se raises offer prices as opposed to it serving solely as a

proxy for value gains from the combination. The 52-week high is an ideal instrument for the

effects of overpayment in mergers and acquisitions, separate from synergies or misvaluation in

the bidder for example. The bidder announcement effect is 2% to 3% worse for each 10%

increase in the component of offer premium that is explained by the 52-week high.




                                                   4
           Apart from its impact on deal success and the value transfer in successful deals, the 52-

week high may deter bidders from appearing in the first place. The fourth and last aspect of

merger activity that we examine is merger waves. It is well known that merger waves coincide

with higher stock market valuations.                From the reference point perspective, higher market

valuations mean that more targets are trading closer to their 52-week highs, so this reference

point becomes easier to satisfy (from the perspective of targets) and to justify (from the

perspective of bidders) than when valuations have fallen. Here, our tests are less refined. Not

surprisingly, we find that the market’s 52-week high relative to its current value is inversely

related to the level of merger activity. Somewhat more surprising is that the 52-week high

matters controlling for the past twelve individual monthly returns. Furthermore, the effects are

somewhat stronger using the 52-week high premium on firms that ex ante have typical

characteristics of targets.

           The reference point theory complements other theories of mergers. Its unique strength is

its account of offer premia; other theories of merger activity make few testable predictions here.

The deal success and market reaction implications of reference points are also somewhat unique.

There are other explanations for the coincidence of stock market valuations and merger activity,

however, such as the market timing theories of mergers by Shleifer and Vishny (2003) and

Rhodes-Kropf and Viswanathan (2004). Reference points don’t shed light on the nature of deal

synergies, although nor do several other merger theories, and in any case it should be noted that

synergies have long proved difficult to document empirically.3                       Jovanovic and Rousseau’s

(2002) Q-theory considers mergers as vehicles for technology transfer and capital reallocation,

addressing the market valuations-merger waves link and incorporating a synergies story, but is

silent on some other aspects of the evidence. Jensen’s (1986) agency theory has few overlapping

3
    See Rajan, Volpin, and Zingales (2000) and the other chapters in Kaplan (2000) for recent progress.


                                                           5
predictions with reference points, nor do the managerial theories of Amihud and Lev (1981) and

Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1990), nor do the overconfidence views of Roll (1986), Ben-David,

Graham, and Harvey (2007), and Malmendier and Tate (2008).4                     An important difference

between the reference point view and other merger theories is that it embraces considerations of

the target rather than those of the bidder alone or features of the combination. While it is clear

that no single theory will never be able to address the full range of merger phenomena, reference

points fill in some of the blanks.

        Section II proposes some hypotheses based on the anchoring and adjustment

phenomenon and briefly reviews related scientific and anecdotal evidence. Section III reviews

the basic data. Sections IV, V, VI, and VII report how reference points affect offer prices, deal

success, offer announcement effects, and merger waves, respectively. Section VIII concludes.



II.     The Psychology of Reference Points, Loss Aversion, and Anchoring and Adjustment

        The psychology of pricing is a recognized subfield of marketing research. There, the

focus is on identifying prices or “price points” that lead to discontinuous jumps in demand. The

M&A context is has several parallels. The bidder wants to offer the lowest price that the target

will accept: the target is the consumer to whom the bidder markets.

        Unlike in retail pricing, of course, the target shareholders in a merger transaction are

selling not buying. The bidder is therefore looking for announced price points that will lead to

discontinuous jumps in supply. We briefly review some of the psychology and economics

relevant to the use of reference point prices.




4
 Baker, Ruback, and Wurgler (2007) survey behavioral theories of mergers (not including reference points) and
Andrade and Stafford (2004) review non-behavioral theories.


                                                     6
A.     Reference Points, Loss Aversion, and Anchoring and Adjustment

       The empirically-motivated prospect theory of Kahneman and Tversky (1979) identifies a

departure from preference specifications that emphasize levels of goods and wealth as the sole

drivers of value or utility. Their theory holds that changes in status relative to particular

reference points are also a carrier of perceived value. The reference point in their theory is

derived from the context at hand. It may be influenced by normatively-irrelevant frames of

reference, or it may be based on an aspirational level or expectation as opposed to the status quo

(Kahneman (1992)).

       Another component of preferences that Kahneman and Tversky emphasize is loss

aversion. This refers to a kink in prospect theory’s value function at its origin, specifically that

losses are disliked more than equal-size gains are liked. Furthermore, they set the shape of their

theory’s value function to include convexity in the domain of losses and concavity in gains to

help it explain finer features of observed choice. To summarize, their value function is shaped

like a kinked “S” and is defined over changes in value relative to a reference point.

       The related phenomenon of anchoring and adjustment is associated with Tversky and

Kahneman (1974). Anchoring and adjustment refers to a belief formation process (as opposed to

a utility perception) under which one begins at a specific initial value, salient but perhaps entirely

irrelevant, and then adjusts toward a final estimate based on other considerations. The bias

typically observed is that the final estimate is insufficiently adjusted from the initial value, hence

its term “anchor.” The anchoring and adjustment bias can and is used often to advantage in

negotiations. Kahneman (1992) notes that “negotiators commonly have an interest in misleading

their counterpart about their reservation prices.… High claims and low offers are therefore made

in the hope of anchoring the other side’s view of one’s true position…. The moral of studies of




                                                  7
anchoring is that such efforts at deception can succeed … even when these messages are neither

accepted nor even believed” (p. 309-310).

         Economic applications of these ideas are plentiful. Neale and Bazerman (1991) consider

the setting of union negotiations over wages and review strategems that appear to take advantage

of the anchoring phenomenon. Babcock, Wang, and Loewenstein (1996) similarly report on the

self-serving use of comparison groups as reference points in wage bargaining. Camerer and

Malmendier (2007) consider reference point effects in organizational economics generally.

Northcraft and Neale (1987) show that the asking price affects estimates of the value of a house,

even among professional real estate agents who claim to view it as uninformative; but List (2004,

2005) and Plott and Zeiler (2005) qualifies this with evidence that experience attenuates or

eliminates the endowment effect.5 Genesove and Mayer (2001) find that homeowners’ cost

bases significantly affects negotiations and thus outcomes of real estate transactions. The large

literature on money illusion is based centrally on nominal reference point pricing.

         The use of reference points among investors and other financial actors appears, for

example, in Shefrin and Statman (1985), who note that prospect theory and loss aversion imply

that investors have a “disposition effect” and are more reluctant to sell stocks showing paper

losses than they are stocks showing gains, which is empirically confirmed in Odean (1998),

Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001), Grinblatt and Han (2005), Ivkovich, Poterba, and Weisbenner

(2005), and Birru (2009).6 Shefrin and Statman (1984) suggest a view of dividends based on loss

aversion and framing effects.            Barberis, Huang, and Santos (2001) discuss asset pricing

implications of prospect theory, and Barberis and Xiong (2008) emphasize that the 52-week high
5
  In this connection, it is noteworthy that most executives and investors are not involved in merger transactions with
any frequency, although their bankers may be.
6
  In unreported tests we considered the trading volume-weighted average price (e.g. Grinblatt and Han (2005)) as
another reference price that may be relevant to merger activity. However, perhaps because of the inherent noisiness
of our measure, as well as the fact that it pertains exclusively to target shareholders rather than a wider range of
stakeholders, we found weaker results than those for the 52-week high.


                                                          8
is a price where investors are particularly willing to realize gains.      DeGeorge, Patel, and

Zeckhauser (1999) show that executives strain to exceed salient EPS thresholds. Baker and

Xuan (2009) find that the price at which the CEO joined the company is an important reference

point for raising outside equity.    Loughran and Ritter (2002) propose that reference-point

preferences and mental accounting help to explain IPO underpricing, a view tested by Ljungqvist

and Wilhelm (2005). Hart and Moore (2008) develop contracting theory based on parties’ use of

anchoring and psychological reference points.

       Certain of these actions are efforts to cater to investors who notice reference points such

as earnings per share and 52-week highs—for example, Huddart, Lang, and Yetman (2009) find

stock market volume and price effects around this reference stock price, and Heath, Huddart, and

Lang (1999) find that employee exercise of stock options doubles when their company’s stock

price exceeds its 52-week high. Baker, Greenwood and Wurgler (2009) argue that managers

cater to shareholder preference for certain nominal share price ranges.



B.     The Target

       In a sufficiently large merger or acquisition, the transaction must be approved by the

management and shareholders of the target as well as those of the bidder. We start with the

target, for whom there are straightforward applications of the psychology outlined above that

lead to empirical hypotheses.

       The most obvious application involves the disposition effect, or the reluctance to realize

losses relative to a reference point. While for some investors the reference point is likely to be

their purchase price, i.e. the disposition effect documented in papers mentioned above, another

important reference point—and, importantly for our purposes, one that is common across

shareholders—is the firm’s 52-week high price. This price is of course widely reported in the

                                                9
financial media. Furthermore, because it by definition is a fairly recent price, it seems attainable

by target shareholders even in the absence of a merger. This logic predicts that targets are more

likely to approve mergers in which the offer price approaches or exceeds the 52-week high.

More subtly, the S-shaped value function predicts that the further is the current price from the

52-week high, the less influence the marginal dollar away from that reference will have in terms

of the perception of losses.

       Belief formation via anchoring and adjustment may reinforce the utility effects—and at at

least three levels, two psychological and one practical. First, target shareholders must form an

estimate of target value when deciding whether to accept the offer. Lacking time, information,

and ability to accurately compute present values of future cash flows under alternative ownership

and management scenarios, some of them will consult the 52-week high as a reference. Second,

targets seek and attempt to justify the highest possible price. Whether or not the target board

views it as relevant, the 52-week high price can be used as a negotiating anchor. It is the highest

salient and specific price at hand. Third, the target’s management and board faces a risk of

shareholder litigation if they recommend selling at a price that is viewed as too low. That they

did not sell below the 52-week high price provides some reasonably compelling rhetorical cover.



C.     The Bidder

       The bidder’s psychology can also be affected by anchoring and adjustment both directly

and strategically. When pursuing a target, the bidder has to decide how much it is willing to pay,

and that in turn depends on how it values the target. It is not possible to pin this down with

certainty. An input to this estimation must be the target’s recent valuations, and as such its 52-




                                                10
week high may enter as an anchor.7 The bidder may reason, if the target was valued at that level

a few months ago, shouldn’t we, with our ability to realize synergies, value it above or at least

near that same level? Thus the 52-week high can become an anchor, and as mentioned above

insufficient adjustment from that level becomes the norm.

        Reinforcing predictions arise from the fact that bidder management must justify their

offer to shareholders and financiers. The management may reassure such stakeholders with the

simple argument that the target was worth that price in the past and so, of course, it must be

possible to realize that in the future. On the other hand, if the bidder’s investors do not think as

hard as its board about the target’s potential valuation, they may be less biased by the anchoring

phenomenon and so more likely to view 52-week-high-driven bids as overpaying.

        And there is the bidder’s perception of the target’s psychology. Once a target valuation is

established by any means, the bidder must consider the minimum price that the target will

accept. Boards, at least those advised by experienced investment bankers, are likely to predict

that the target’s 52-week high will both be used as a strategic anchor against them in negotiations

as well as a reference point that their own investors truly care about.

        In summary, it is not difficult to imagine how that the reference price supplied by a

specific price, in our setting the 52-week high, could enter the consideration of virtually every

stakeholder in a merger transaction—advisors, boards, and investors and financiers of both the

bidder and the target. Our empirical work therefore looks for reference price effects on a range

of merger phenomena including offer prices, deal success, market reaction, and merger waves in

the below. While the empirical search benefits from the numerous overlapping and reinforcing

predictions noted above, at the same time it will not in every case be able to identify the

7
 In an interview with one of the authors, Gerald Rosenfeld, currently CEO of the investment bank Rothschild North
America, stated that the target’s current price is generally the most important reference for valuation while the 52-
week high as the second-most critical reference.


                                                        11
stakeholders behind the effects that we shall see. Moreover, we are not wedded to the 52-week

high per se. Realistically, the bidder and target management and boards will be cognizant of the

full past price histories, making any price peak a potentially salient reference point. For

simplicity, we focus on the commonly reported 52-week high. We expect that shorter or longer

date ranges would produce similar results, with recent peaks having somewhat stronger effects

than more distant ones.



D.     Anecdotes from Shareholder Communications

       The 52-week high price is often cited in communications between managements and

shareholders about pending mergers or acquisitions. It is also cited by the media as a simple

yardstick with which to put the bid price in context. Here are three of many examples.

       The management of Taro Pharmaceutical Industries, in a July 28, 2008, amendment to its

SEC SC 14D-9 filing recommending against the tender offer from Sun Pharmaceutical

Industries, made the following statement: “Beyond what was written in the 14D-9, I would add

only the obvious: that Sun’s offer of $7.75 per share is significantly below the price at which our

shares are trading today, which is at a 52-week high, and even further below the price that Sun

paid to get blocks of Taro shares in recent private transactions with investors. Given our

performance year to date and our outlook, I believe the Sun offer significantly undervalues our

Company and deprives you of what we believe your shares are worth.” Left unmentioned is the

fact that Sun’s bid itself obviously contributed to Toro’s high price today.

       The media often reinforce these claims. For example, on February 1, 2008, the Wall

Street Journal reported, “Microsoft’s $31-per-share offer – $44.6 billion – represented a 62

percent premium to Yahoo’s closing price late Thursday, although it’s below Yahoo’s 52-week




                                                12
high of $34.08 reached less than four months ago.” The article failed to explain why an

historical price more than 78% higher than the current price should be relevant, however.

       The 52-week high can of course also be cited as reason to embrace, not reject, an offer.

Figure 1 shows an example slide from a shareholder presentation by Cablevision to its

shareholders on October 24, 2007. In arguing for acceptance of the offer from the family which

already controlled the company, Cablevision management highlights the fact that the bid price is

at a premium to the 52-week high price, an appeal both to anchoring as an estimate of value and

reference point utility. Cablevision management also highlights the bid against other reference

prices. These anecdotes give some background and suggestive color to the salience of reference

points to target agents and the media. The evidence below documents more precisely their

significance to both bidders and targets.



III.   Data

A.     Merger and Acquisition Sample

       The sample of deals is described in Table 1. Our source for mergers and acquisitions is

Thomson Financial. We start with 23,350 unique deals where the announcement date is between

January 1, 1984, and December 31, 2007, where the target is a public company, where the offer

price is not missing, and where the bidder purchased at least 85% of the target firm shares

outstanding or else the percentage of shares acquired is unknown. We exclude deals that are

missing an offer price or have been classified by Thomson as recapitalizations, repurchases,

rumors, and target solicitations.

       Of these deals, we were able to compute the target’s 52-week high price from CRSP for a

final sample of 7,498. We define the offer premium as the total consideration offered scaled by

the target’s price as of 30 days prior to the announcement. Similarly, the 52-week target (market

                                               13
index) high is the 52-week high stock price (market index) over the 365 calendar days ending 30

days prior to the announcement date expressed as a percentage difference from the CRSP stock

price (market index) 30 calendar days prior to the announcement date. The CRSP market index

is formed using total market value-weighted returns.

       The purpose of scaling these prices by a common factor is to eliminate heteroskedasticity

that would otherwise result from comparing these two prices in raw form. The purpose of

choosing a 30-day lagged price as this scaling factor is to attenuate the upward “rumors” effect

on the offer premium.

       For all deals, Thomson gives information on whether the offer is a tender offer and

whether the bidder is a financial buyer (LBO). For a subset of deals, we have information on the

form of payment is cash, stock, or other, whether the deal is completed or withdrawn, and

whether the bidder attitude is hostile, friendly, or neutral. Data on the form of payment and

attitude of the deal are not available before 1990, but we are able to determine the form of

payment for 4,361 deals and attitude for 4,346 deals, 220 of which were hostile. Of our main

sample, 1522 are tender offers and 192 are acquisitions by financial firms. It seems likely that

Thomson is underreporting these deals, particularly the frequency of leveraged buyouts in recent

years. We keep track of the success of specific offers, not whether the target is ultimately

acquired. Of the 6,926 deals that Thomson records as either completed or withdrawn, 26% are

withdrawn. Of course, this includes situations where a competing or revised offer emerged, so

the rate of overall success is much higher than these averages would indicate.



B.     Summary Statistics

       Table 2 reports means, standard deviations, medians, and extreme values for deal pricing,

outcome variables, and control variables. Regarding prices, the median offer premium is 29.4%,

                                               14
the median 52-week high target price is 21.2%, and the median 52-week high market price is

3.2%. These are each expressed in log terms. For the 52-week high prices, which of course are

positive by definition, we Winsorize at the 1% and 99% levels, but wide variation remains.

       In addition to the primary variables of interest, we record secondary deal outcome

variables in Panel B, and deal, target, and bidder characteristics in Panel C. All continuous

variables among these are also Winsorized. We calculate the three-day announcement return of

the bidder by compounding the daily holding period return from CRSP (CRSP: RET) centered

on the announcement date from Thomson. The median is -0.81%. About 74% of the offers are

successfully completed.

       The target and bidder characteristics are from standard sources. Return on equity is

defined as net income (Compustat: NI) divided by shareholders’ equity (Compustat: SEQ). The

return on assets is defined as net income (NI) divided by total assets (Compustat: AT). The

book-to-market ratio is defined as book equity divided by market equity, where book equity is

total shareholders’ equity (Compustat: SEQ) plus deferred taxes and investment tax credit

(Compustat: TXDITC) minus the redemption value of preferred stock (Compustat: PSRKRV)

and market equity is calculated by multiplying shares outstanding (CRSP: SHROUT) and price

(CRSP: PRC) at fiscal year end. The earnings price ratio is defined as earnings before interest

and taxes (Compustat: EBIT) divided by market equity (ME). Because not all target and bidder

companies within the main sample of 7,498 deals were tracked by Compustat in the year before

the announcement of the deal, we have financial ratios of the target for only 5,108 deals and of

the bidder for only 2,048 deals.

       The price volatility, two-month return, and one-year return of the target are from CRSP.

Volatility is defined as the standard deviation of daily returns for the 365 calendar days ending

30 days prior to the announcement date. Returns are calculated by compounding the daily

                                               15
holding period return (CRSP: RET) for the appropriate period ending 30 days prior to the

announcement date.     Market capitalization is price (CRSP: PRC) times shares outstanding

(CRSP: SHROUT) from CRSP at the fiscal year end prior to Thomson’s announcement date.

       Panel C of Table 2 summarizes the distribution of our battery of controls. Over the

period from 1984 to 2007, 43% of the deals are financed with cash, 33% are financed with stock,

20% are tender offers, 5% are hostile, and 3% are acquired by financial firms. As one would

expect, targets are generally financially weaker than bidders, including in valuation ratios with

targets relatively more likely to be value firms. One explanation is, of course, that poorly-

managed firms become targets (e.g., Lang and Stulz (1984) and Mitchell and Lehn (1990)).

       To sum up, our primary sample consists of 7,498 deals with full data on offer premia and

52-week high prices. Control variables include deal characteristics, target financials, and bidder

financials. Regressions including target financial variables have a maximum sample of 5,108

observations; those also including bidder financial variables have a maximum sample of 2,048.



IV.    Bid Prices

A.     Basic Results

       We begin with the effect of the 52-week high on offer prices. Figure 2 simply plots the

density of offer prices relative to the 52-week high. To keep the scale of the x-axis manageable,

we do not plot outcomes that exceed 500% in absolute value. It reveals a remarkable feature: the

modal offer premium is exactly the 52-week high price. To be clear, this cannot be mechanical

because we have defined the 52-week high for the period ending 30 days before the offer’s

announcement. The figure immediately suggests that the 52-week high plays a special role.

       Figure 3 presents a formal discontinuity analysis of the density. Not only is the modal

outcome equal to the 52-week high, but also many other offers tend to collect just above the 52-

                                               16
week high. This is most apparent when we divide offers into 200 bins in Panel B. This jump in

the distribution is statistically significant, with a p-value of 0.01 or less.8 Panel A shows another

subtle but interesting feature. There is a slight decline in the density as we approach the 52-week

high from below, and a surge as we pass it. Perhaps some bidders reason that if they were

already thinking of a bid in this neighborhood, they may as well make a push to just above the

52-week high to increase the likelihood of acceptance.9

         The vast majority of offer prices do not equal the 52-week high, of course. We examine

the overall shape of the relationship between these prices nonparametrically in Figure 4. We

estimate Gaussian kernel regressions of the model

         Offerit
         Pi , t − 30   = a+b   (
                               52WeekHighi , t − 30
                                   Pi , t − 30
                                                      )+ e   it                                                   (1)

with varying bandwidths and estimation points.

         Both panels in the figure suggests that the offer premium rises by approximately 3 to

3.5% with every 10% increase in the 52-week high. Panel A limits the sample to situations

where the 52-week high is less than 50% higher than the pre-offer price. Beyond this level, with

a long right tail and limited data, the estimated incremental effect of the 52-week high is much

noisier and both statistically and economically weaker, as shown in Panel B. This might be

consistent with the shape of the prospect theory value function—as “losses” increase, the


8
  One concern is whether the discontinuity reflects discreteness in prices. Shares are quoted in sixteenths, eighths,
decimals in our sample. The 52-week high is a price that has been observed in the price history of the target, so it
falls on what might naturally be a mass point. A few refined tests provide some comfort that this is not driving our
discontinuity results. A discontinuity is apparent, even when we drop the bin that contains the 52-week high. The p-
value is 0.016 in Panel A and less than 0.000 in Panel B. We have also estimated a bootstrap p-value by computing
z-statistics for discontinuities around randomly chosen past target stock prices. Using this bootstrap distribution for
the z-statistic, we find a p-value of 0.013.
9
  One question is why any bidder would locate just below the 52-week high. This could reflect the bidder’s
anticipation of a difficult negotiation and the preservation of a psychological “option value” of being able to cross a
salient threshold as a “concession” in subsequent rounds. Alternatively, mass here may be the result of stock
deals—cash deals would have a more uneven mass on the left and right side of the distribution; we study cash and
stock deals separately below. In any event, strategic behavior seems likely to make the outcome effects here
weaker.


                                                                  17
marginal pain of additional loss decreases, so target shareholders may acquiesce more easily.

Somewhat more simply, targets which have fallen substantially from their 52-week high may, in

negotiation, fail to persuade the bidder of the great relevance of this past price.

       In Table 3 we report linear regressions along the lines of Eq. (1), adding some control

variables and, with the nonlinearity in Figure 4 in mind, also examining a piecewise linear

specification:

        (Offerit
         Pi , t − 30
                            )
                       − 1 ⋅ 100 = a + b1 min            ((                 )
                                                          52WeekHigh i , t − 30
                                                              Pi , t − 30
                                                                                    )
                                                                                  − 1 ⋅ 100,25 +

                        (       ((                       − 1.25 )⋅ 100 ,50 )) + b max ((                                          )       )
                                                                                                                                                   (2)
                                                                                                                           − 1.75 ⋅ 100 ,0 + eit
                                 52WeekHigh i , t − 30                                             52WeekHigh i , t − 30
        b2 max 0, min                Pi , t − 30                                        3              Pi , t − 30



clustering standard errors by month. This specification allows for a marginal effect of b1 for 52-

week high premia up to 25%, b2 for premia between 25% and 75%, and b3 for premia greater

than 75%. We always scale the dependent variable and the key independent variable by the 30-

day lagged price to attenuate heteroskedasticity, but to the extent that investors and boards don’t

think of these prices in terms of their ratio to the 30-day lagged price, this practice can also lead

to a sort of measurement error that induces a spurious positive correlation. To control for this we

control for the inverse of the 30-day lagged price in all specifications.

       The simplest linear specification shows that offer prices rise 1% for every 10% rise in the

52-week high. This is statistically significant but not economically large. The true size of the

effect is masked by large outliers in the independent variable, which even when Winsorized

includes observations with values exceeding 250%. The piecewise linear specifications address

this. They show a magnitude similar to that suggested in Figure 4, with a 10% higher 52-week

high effecting a roughly 3.3% higher offer price over the typical range of 52-week highs. As the

52-week high reference price exceeds 25%, however, it exerts a smaller influence, rising at 1.1%

for each additional 10% increase in the 52-week high between 25% and 75%. Beyond 75%, the

effect is approximately 0.7%. There are other interpretations of this shape, but one is the S-

                                                                                   18
shaped value function of prospect theory, which implies that the further is the current price from

the reference point, the less the marginal perceived loss.

       The 52-week high effect does not appear to arise simply because it reflects some other

effect associated with target firm returns over a pre-specified period. We control for each of the

twelve months ending at t-30 in the third and fourth columns and find that the key estimates are

little affected. This indicates that it is truly the return since the 52-week high, i.e. the 52-week

high premium, that drives the results, not that past returns were low over some fixed interval.

       The last specification in Table 3 is useful in evaluating an important, non-psychological

alternative explanation. This explanation says that the 52-week high price is particularly relevant

because it represents a clear level of value that the bidder could hope to obtain by returning the

target to “optimal” management, where optimal is defined as the policies prevailing as of the

time the high was reached. The specification here replaces the 52-week high premium for the

target with the overall market-level 52-week high. The fact that this is also a statistically and

similarly economically significant predictor of offer prices is inconsistent with the alternative

explanation, since the bidder cannot hope to recapture the market component of the target’s 52-

week high through returning to a particular management style.

       If we take the sensitivity of the offer premium to the 52-week high as an arbitrary transfer

of value, we can compute the total value transfer for our sample. For each the 5,135 deals in our

sample that are completed, we multiply the 52-week high by the piecewise linear coefficients b

in the second column to estimate the component of the offer premium that is driven by the 52-

week high. To convert this to dollars, we multiply this quantity by the target market

capitalization at t-30 to arrive at the value transfer. The total value transfer is $179 billion, $34.9

million per deal, or 18.0% of the total offer premium. Even under the assumption that the

variation in the 52-week high is entirely arbitrary, we cannot clearly identify whether this is

                                                  19
overpayment or underpayment. It is possible, for example, that on average the bidder gets a good

deal, but overpays when the target 52-week high is especially large relative to its current price.



B.     Robustness and Other Subsamples

       We report robustness tests in Table 4. We first examine the influence of characteristics

of the proposed transaction itself—whether it is for cash, stock, hostile, a tender, or a financial

bidder. Tender offers are associated with large increases in offer prices, while financial buyers

are associated with even larger large decreases. These control variables do not diminish the

effect of the 52-week high, nor do they increase the total regression R2 as much as one might

expect, presumably due to the relative scarcity of tenders and financial buyers in our sample.

       We also ask how the 52-week high effect compares with bidder and target firm

fundamentals as key inputs to offer premia. We control for seven characteristics of the bidder

and the target. A robust pattern is that large bidders bid more, while large targets receive less, as

is intuitive when one considers bids in dollar terms. Another notable control variable is the

target’s return volatility. This is correlated with the 52-week premium and could reflect aspects

of the target’s value to the bidder, although in what direction is unclear. However, the inclusion

of this and the several other controls does not much reduce the effect that we focus on. Even

combined, these characteristics and potential proxies for “synergies” fail even to double the

explanatory power of the regression that focuses only on reference price considerations.

       In the last column we conduct a falsification test. While it is reasonable to imagine that

merger participants rely on a number of recent price reference points and local price maxima—

for example, refer to Figure 1—we look for a quite specific effect of the 52-week high. We ask

whether it, as the 100th percentile price over the past year, represents an effect distinct from the

90th percentile price, with which it is highly correlated. The results in Table 4 indicate that

                                                 20
despite this high correlation, the 52-week high effect comes through. In other words, any old

point in the distribution does not have the same explanatory power. Furthermore, to the extent

that the 90th percentile price also serves as an appropriate proxy for fundamental valuation, this

test, like that involving the market component of the 52-week high, also casts doubt on the view

that the 52-week high price effect reflects only that channel. Results are similar for the 80th, the

95th, and even the 99th percentile of the target past stock price distribution.

       Results for a variety of subsamples are in Table 5. The first column shows that the effect

is stronger in tender offers. Since a tender offer is an appeal directly to target shareholders, this

reflects the perception of the bidder of the relevance of the reference point to target shareholders,

as opposed to the outcome of a negotiation with the target board or its advisors. A related effect,

perhaps, involves the attitude of target management. Hostile offers’ prices are a bit more

influenced by the 52-week high than friendly offers when the 52-week premium is relatively

high. This could also relate to an effort to appeal directly to target shareholders.

       Reference points have similar effects on first offer and subsequent offers. (Most offers in

the sample are first offers, and indeed last offers also because most offers are successful. Be

mindful that what we can observe are public first offers. Boone and Mulherin (2007) show that

on the order of half of targets are sold in a competitive auction process that takes place prior to

the first public offer; in other words, we often observe the outcome of that process.) The success

of the offer itself, while clearly endogenous as we show later (when we study the effect of the

offer price on the probability of success), provides an interesting sample split. Within the sample

of successful offers, bids more strictly adhere to the 52-week high price.

       The form of payment is relevant to the reference point effect, although the results and

their interpretation are also murky in this case. The offer price in stock deals are more prone to

reflect the 52-week high when that price is relatively modest, while cash deals are more

                                                  21
responsive to it when it is higher, i.e. when the target has recently fallen more sharply. One

possibility is that this reflects the communication between bidders and their cash-providing

bankers, with the bidders justifying the offer price in part on the basis of the target’s recent high.

       The effect is strong in both halves of the sample, but somewhat lower in the latter half.

The second half result might reflect somewhat more detailed due diligence or the increasing ease

of sophisticated analysis and valuation modeling. On the other hand, the effect has actually

increased for medium-size 52-week high premia. Last, in unreported results, we consider large

(above the median cap of $100 million) and small targets separately. The effect is particularly

strong for large targets, including the effect of the market’s 52-week high. In light of the strong

results both for recent years and within large firms, the effects would appear to be of ongoing

economic importance.



C.     The Persistent Relevance of Reference Points

       In Table 6 we ask whether the time between the 52-week high and the bid affects the

relevance of the 52-week high. We include in our piecewise linear specifications an interaction

with the log number of days elapsed between these two events. It turns out that the 52-week

high, even if it was achieved many months ago, still affects the offer premium. There is some

deterioration in the effect, as might be expected.         Using the results from column 3, the

coefficients indicate that the offer premium effect of a 10% increase in the 52-week high falls

from 4.27%, when the price peak was reached quite recently, down to 2.79% (= 4.27 -

0.576*ln(365)), when the 52-week high was reached a full year ago.

       Under a literal interpretation of our story, one could imagine that a bidder would wait for

a target's 52-week high to decline before making an offer. This presumes that investors and

boards are unaware of, say, the 53-week high, and are unable to look beyond the Wall Street

                                                  22
Journal’s summary price quote. Of course, in practice, other local maxima prices may also serve

as reference points, as mentioned in the hypotheses section. We focus on the 52-week high

simply as a salient example.



V.       Deal Success

         The previous tests address the division of value between the bidding and target

shareholders. Another important question is whether 52-week high pricing affects deal success,

leading to “real” economic effects via capital reallocation. While evidence exists that investor

psychology affects numerous financial decisions such as corporate and mutual fund name

changes, dividend policy, nominal share pricing, and financing choices, strong evidence of

behavioral phenomena having real effects is not plentiful.10 A second key feature of this analysis

is that, like the tender offer differential in the subsamples table, it focuses on the reception of the

bid by the target’s management, board, investors, and advisors. It thus may identify another

aspect of merger activity sensitive to anchoring and reference point utility considerations of

those agents as opposed to those of the bidder.

         The precision of our prediction here makes for a straightforward test for such real effects,

and Figure 1 suggests that this is a plausible hypothesis. Suggestive of such an effect, the

probability of success across our sample is 69.9% if the offer price is below the 52-week high

and 76.9% if it is above.11 Table 7 tests for a discontinuity in a probit regression. Where S = 1 if

the deal is successful, we model

          pr (S ) = a + b Offer     it
                          Pi , t − 30
                                       + c (Offerit > 52WeekHigh i ,t −30 ) + eit                                   (3)


10
   An exception is Polk and Sapienza (2009) who propose that catering to investor sentiment directly affects
corporate investment.
11
  Bear in mind that this is the success of a particular offer, not the overall rate of success in selling the target to a
given bidder.


                                                               23
including control variables. This specification allows us to control for the absolute level of the

offer premium, unlike the cross-tab just reported, and thus to test whether offer prices that are

high relative to the 52-week high specifically enjoy an increased probability of success. To

ensure that c identifies a true discontinuity, we control for a quartic polynomial of the offer price.

       The results do indicate a discontinuous increase in the probability of target acceptance as

the offer price passes the 52-week high threshold. The effect remains identifiable upon the

inclusion of additional control variables that contain explanatory power for deal success, such as

hostility (reducing success probability), tender (increasing), and bidder size (increasing). The

magnitude of the effect is a nontrivial 3.0% to 4.3% percentage point discontinuous increase in

success probability. One way to think about the economic significance of this is to consider that

our sample consists of 7,498 deals. An effect of this magnitude implies that, all else equal,

between 224 to 322 bids failed or were accepted simply because they were on one side or the

other of this reference point price.



VI.    Bidders’ Announcement Returns

       We next investigate how the bidder’s shareholders react to the news of bids, particularly

the component that reflects the target’s 52-week high. We compute the 3-day cumulative

market-adjusted return around each bidder’s announcement and assess its sensitivity to the offer

premium

        rt −1→ t +1 = a + b Offer     it
                            Pi , t − 30
                                         + eit .                                                  (4)

We start with OLS but we are more interested in IV slope estimates in which the 52-week high is

used as an instrument for the offer price. In particular, we use Eq. (2) as the first stage.




                                                   24
        Table 8 shows the results of both approaches.12 Not surprisingly, the least-squares

estimates indicate that bidding shareholders react more negatively as the offer premium

increases. The magnitude of this effect does not appear overwhelming, as the third specification

indicates that a 10% increase in the offer premium is associated with a 0.2% (20 basis points)

lower bidder announcement effect. One way to think about this small effect is that particularly

good combinations of bidders and targets may warrant a high offer premium. If so, the market in

general and bidder shareholders in particular recognize that a 10% higher offer price does not

mean 10% overpayment. Rather, the higher offer price reflects the omitted effect of deal quality.

        However, bidders’ shareholders are considerably more disappointed about the component

of the offer price that depends on a historical reference point. The last IV regression implies that

when the component of the offer premium driven by the 52-week high increases by 10%, the

bidder’s shareholders react with a considerable -2.2% announcement effect relative to the

average. This is large relative to the unconditional average announcement effect of -1.5% and it

is almost ten times larger than the comparable OLS estimate.13 The large difference between the

OLS and IV results implies that bidder shareholders consider 52-week-high-driven bids as

overpaying – and that the first stage piecewise linear specification makes an excellent instrument

for pure overpayment, as opposed to simply higher offers. This distinction between the bidder

shareholders and other stakeholders may reflect their greater objectivity, given that they are

likely to suffer less from the anchoring or reference point utility effects of past target prices .



12
   Note that the sample in Table 8 is smaller than in previous analyses because we are limited by the availability of
the bidder’s announcement return (recall that our sample is not limited to publicly-traded bidders, only publicly-
traded targets).
13
   Summarizing several studies of merger announcement effects, Jensen and Ruback conclude that “corporate
takeovers generate positive gains, that target firm shareholders benefit, and that bidding firm shareholders do not
lose” (p.5, 1983). Apparently, the last statement about announcement returns is no longer valid in cases when the
offer premium is high, at least in our more recent data, and is particularly invalid when the high offer premium may
have been driven up by a reference point price.


                                                        25
       If we take the sensitivity of the offer premium to the 52-week high as an arbitrary transfer

of value, we have another opportunity to estimate of the total value transfer for our sample. In

the case of bidder announcement returns, there is also the possibility of an incremental value

loss. That is, the bidder announcement return can reflect the loss to bidder shareholders from

overpayment for the target as well as a revaluation of the bidder, when the market learns of a

broader tendency to overpay that may extend beyond the deal at hand.

       For each the 5,135 deals in our sample that are completed, we multiply the 52-week high

by the piecewise linear coefficients b in the second column of Table 3 to estimate the component

of the offer premium that is driven by the 52-week high as before. We then multiply this effect

on the offer premium by the coefficient b in the third column of Table 8 to determine the bidder

announcement return. To convert this to dollars, we multiply this quantity by the bidder market

capitalization at t-2 to arrive at the value transferred or lost. The total is $757 billion, 147.5

million per deal, or 4.2 times the simple value transfer. This suggests either a market

overreaction or an incremental value loss stemming from a realization that the bidder

management has a tendency to overbid in mergers and acquisitions.



VII.   Merger Waves

       We have documented that a given deal is more likely to go through if the bidder offers at

least the target’s 52-week high. But whether an offer appears in the first place depends on

market valuations. A bidder will all else equal find it easier to pay the 52-week high when it is at

a relatively small premium to current prices. A merger requires both an offer and its acceptance,

so a reference point channel may help to explain the coincidence of aggregate merger waves and

stock market valuations: 52-week high reference prices for targets will generally be more

affordable to bidders, relative to current prices, when the market has recently done well.

                                                26
       To test for an effect of reference point prices on aggregate merger activity, we study

quarterly data on the number of mergers from Mergerstat Review 1973 through 2007. We

normalize the raw number of mergers by the total number of firms on the NYSE and then

detrend by subtracting the average normalized level of quarterly merger activity over the trailing

two and one-half year period starting before the 365 calendar days over which the market’s 52-

week high is calculated. The Mergerstat data include all mergers involving public and private

firms, so the annual total is often more than 100% of the firms on the NYSE. The 52-week

market index high price, now measured at quarterly frequency, is again calculated from CRSP.

       The first regression in Table 9 shows that the market 52-week high is a negative predictor

of quarterly merger activity, consistent with the most basic prediction. Specifically, when

market prices are 10 percentage points below their 52-week high, the merger rate falls by 18%

relative to its trend. This fall represents 70% of the merger rate’s time-series standard deviation.

Panel A of Figure 5 graphs this relationship. The inverse relationship is apparent.

       We test finer predictions. We calculate quarterly 52-week high series for high and low

book-to-market portfolios using monthly returns and value-sorted portfolios constructed by Ken

French.   Shleifer and Vishny (2003) and Rhodes-Kropf and Viswanathan (2004) explain

acquisitions in terms of market timing, with richly-valued bidders pursuing lower-valued targets,

and Rhodes-Kropf et al. (2005) and Baker et al. (2009) confirm that targets do indeed have

higher book-to-market ratios than bidders. Forming these portfolios thus allows us, to some

extent, to separate firms that are relatively more likely to be targets from those more likely to be

bidders, which allows us to add a cross-sectional dimension to the analysis. For simplicity, we

refer below to low book-to-market firms as “bidders” and high book-to-market firms as

“targets,” while recognizing that the classifications are extremely coarse.




                                                27
       The next column shows that the decline in the merger rate associated with reference point

prices is even stronger when one calculates the reference price of targets alone. This is shown in

Panel B of Figure 5. Importantly, this result is unaffected by including the contemporaneous

valuation level of bidders. We feel this is important for identifying an effect of the reference

point theory. It controls for the general relationship between market valuations and merger

volume, which could reflect not just the reference point effect but also the market timing theory

or any other explanation that predicts merger activity is positively correlated with recent returns.

       The remaining columns test further aspects of robustness. We include both the 52-week

high of bidding firms and the valuation level of target firms. Consistent with predictions, these

variables are unimportant in themselves and, more importantly, they do not alter inferences about

the importance of bidders’ reference prices. Finally, we control for lagged monthly returns,

which again have no effect on key inferences. In other words, it is the specific drop from the 52-

week high that matters, not the past return over any fixed past interval. Overall, the results

suggest that the reference point view sheds new insight on merger waves and their coincidence

with stock market valuations and recent returns.



VIII. Conclusions

       Mergers and acquisitions are the largest transactions that take place in a modern capitalist

economy. It is perhaps surprising, then, that several basic features of merger and acquisition

activity seem to be importantly shaped by psychological reference points and anchors. We find

that the target’s 52-week high price exercises a strong effect on the bidder’s offer price and is in

fact the modal offer price. Other aspects of merger activity are also explained from a reference

point price perspective. Bidders’ shareholders appear to view bids driven by the target’s 52-




                                                 28
week high as overpaying, reacting especially negatively to the component of the offer price

driven by the target’s 52-week high.

       Most important, perhaps, is the fact that psychological pricing has clear real effects. Bids

that exceed the 52-week high discontinuously increase the probability of deal success and thus

the distribution of capital across firms’ alternative investment policies. To our knowledge, this

represents some of the clearest evidence of real effects of behavioral corporate finance to date.

Finally, the 52-week high as a reference price adds additional insight into why merger activity is

associated with high market valuations and thus comes in waves.




                                               29
References

Amihud, Yakov, and Baruch Lev, 1981, “Risk reduction as a managerial motive for
     conglomerate mergers,” Bell Journal of Economics 12, 605-617.

Andrade, Gregor, and Erik Stafford, 2001, “New evidence and perspectives on mergers,”
      Journal of Economic Perspectives 15, 103-120.

Babcock, Linda, Xianghong Wang, and George Loewenstein, 1996, “Choosing the wrong pond:
      Social comparisons in negotiations that reflect a self-serving bias,” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics 116, 1-19.

Baker, Malcolm, Robin Greenwood and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2009, “Catering through nominal share
       prices,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Baker, Malcolm, Richard Ruback and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2009, “Multinationals as arbitrageurs:
       The effect of market valuations on foreign direct investment,” Review of Financial
       Studies, forthcoming.

Baker, Malcolm, Richard Ruback and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2007, “Behavioral corporate finance: A
       survey." In The Handbook of Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance, edited
       by Espen Eckbo. New York: Elsevier/North Holland.

Baker, Malcolm, and Yuhai Xuan, 2009, “Under new management: Equity issues and the
       attribution of past returns,” Harvard Business School working paper.

Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang, and Tano Santos, 2001, “Prospect theory and asset prices,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1-53.

Barberis, Nicholas, and Wei Xiong, 2008, “What drives the disposition effect? An analysis of a
       long-standing preference-based explanation,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Ben-David, Zahi, John Graham, and Campbell Harvey, 2007, "Managerial overconfidence and
      corporate policies," Duke University working paper.

Birru, Justin, 2009, “Confusion of confusions: A test of the disposition effect on momentum,”
        New York University working paper.

Boone, Audra L., and J. Harold Mulherin, 2007, “How are firms sold?” Journal of Finance 62,
      847-875.

Camerer, Colin, and Ulrike Malmendier, 2007, “Behavioral economics of organizations” in: P.
      Diamond and H. Vartiainen (eds.), Behavioral Economics and Its Applications, Princeton
      University Press.

DeGeorge, Francois, Jayendu Patel, and Richard Zeckhauser, 1999, “Earnings management to
      exceed thresholds,” Journal of Business 72, 1-33.

                                              30
Genesove, David, and Christopher Mayer, 2001, “Loss aversion and seller behavior: Evidence
      from the housing market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1233-1260.

Grinblatt, Mark, and B. Han, 2005, “Prospect theory, mental accounting, and momentum,”
       Journal of Financial Economics 78 (2), 311-339.

Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2001, “What makes investors trade?” The Journal of
       Finance, 56 (2), 589-616.

Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 2008, “Contracts as reference points,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 123, 1-48.

Heath, Chip, Stephen Huddart, and Mark Lang, 1999, “Psychological factors and stock option
       exercise,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(2), 601-627.

Huddart, Steven, Mark Lang, and Michelle H. Yetman, 2009, “Volume and price patterns around
      a stock’s 52-week highs and lows: Theory and evidence,” Management Science 55, 16-
      31.

Ivkovich, Zoran, James Poterba and Scott Weisbenner. 2005, “Tax-motivated trading by
       individual investors,” American Economic Review 95, 1605-30.

Jensen, Michael C., 1986, “Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance and takeovers,”
       American Economic Review 76, 323-329.

Jensen, Michael C., and Richard S. Ruback, 2003, “The market for corporate control: The
       scientific evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics 11, 5-50.

Jovanovic, Boyan, and Peter Rousseau, 2002, “The Q-theory of mergers,” American Economic
      Review 92, 198-204.

Kahneman, Daniel, 1992, “Reference points, anchors, norms, and mixed feelings,”
      Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 51, 296-312.

Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, 1979, “Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under
      risk,” Econometrica 47, 263-291.

Kaplan, Steven N., ed., 2000, Mergers and Productivity, Cambridge: National Bureau of
      Economic Research.

Lang, Larry H.P., and René M. Stulz, 1994, “Tobin’s q, corporate diversification, and firm
      performance,” Journal of Political Economy 102, 1248–1280.

Lang, Larry H.P., Rene M. Stulz, and Ralph A. Walkling, 1989, “Managerial performance,
      Tobin’s Q, and the gains from successful tender offers,” Journal of Financial Economics
      24, 137-154.

                                             31
List, John A. 2004. “Neoclassical Theory Versus Prospect Theory: Evidence from the
       Marketplace,” Econometrica 72, 615-625.

List, John A., 2005, “Does market experience eliminate market anomalies?” Quarterly Journal
        of Economics 118, 41-71.

Ljungqvist, Alexander, and William Wilhelm, 2005, “Does prospect theory explain IPO market
      behavior?” Journal of Finance 60, 1759-1790.

Loughran, Tim, and Jay Ritter, “Why don’t issuers get upset about leaving money on the table in
      IPOs?” Review of Financial Studies 15, 413-443.

Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate, 2008, “Who makes acquisitions? CEO overconfidence
     and the market’s reaction,” Journal of Financial Economics 89(1), pp. 20-43.

Mitchell, Mark L., and Kenneth Lehn, 1990, “Do Bad Bidders Become Good Targets?” Journal
       of Political Economy 98, 372-398.

Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1990, “Do managerial objectives drive
      bad acquisitions?” Journal of Finance 45, 31-48.

Neale, Margaret Ann, and Max H. Bazerman, 1991, Cognition and rationality in negotiation.
       New York: The Free Press.

Northcraft, Gregory B., and Margaret Ann Neale, 1987, “Experts, amateurs, and real estate: An
       anchoring-and-adjustment perpective on property pricing decisions,” Organizational
       Behavior and Human Decision Processes 39, 228-241.

Odean, Terrance, 1998, “Are investors reluctant to realize their losses?” Journal of Finance
      53(5), 1775-1798.

Plott, Charles R., and Kathryn Zeiler, 2005, “The willingness to pay–willingness to accept gap,
        the ‘endowment effect,’ subject misconceptions, and experimental procedures for
        eliciting valuations,” American Economic Review 95, 530-545.

Polk, Christopher, and Paola Sapienza, 2009, “The stock market and corporate investment: A test
       of catering theory,” Review of Financial Studies 22, 187-217.

Rajan, Raghuram, Paolo Volpin, and Luigi Zingales, 2000, “The eclipse of the U.S. tire
       industry,” in: Mergers and Productivity, Steven N. Kaplan, ed., Cambridge: National
       Bureau of Economic Research.

Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew, and S. Viswanathan, 2004, “Market valuation and merger waves,”
      Journal of Finance 59, 2685-2718.




                                              32
Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew, David T. Robinson, and S. Viswanathan, 2005, “Valuation waves and
      merger activity: The empirical evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics 77, 561-603.

Roll, Richard, 1986, “The hubris hypothesis of corporate takeovers,” Journal of Business 59,
       197-216.

Shefrin, Hersh and Meir Statman, 1984, “Explaining investor preference for cash dividends,”
       Journal of Financial Economics 13, 253-282.

Shefrin, Hersh and Meir Statman, 1985, “The disposition to sell winners too early and ride losers
       too long: Theory and evidence,” Journal of Finance 40(3), 777-90.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, 2003, “Stock market driven acquisitions,” Journal of
        Financial Economics 70, 295-312.

Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman, 1974, “Judgement under uncertainty: Heuristics and
      biases,” Science 185, 1124-1130.




                                               33
Table 1. Sample. The sample consists of merger or acquisition announcements. We start with 23,350 unique deals from
Thomson Financial, where the announcement date is between January 1, 1984, and December 31, 2007, where the target is a
public company, where the offer price is not missing, and where the bidder purchased at least 85% of the target firm shares
outstanding or the percentage of shares acquired is unknown. Of these, we were able to compute 52-week high prices from
CRSP for a final sample of 7,498. We have information on whether the offer is a tender offer and whether the bidder is a
financial buyer from Thomson for all deals. We have information on whether the form of payment is cash, stock, or other,
whether the deal is completed or withdrawn, and whether the bidder attitude is hostile, friendly, or neutral from Thomson for
a subset of deals.

                  Median Pricing                     Form of Payment             Attitude             Completed
                               Log
                                52-
                 Log Offer Week
        Total    Premium     High
Year    Deals           %        %      Tender    Cash    Stock    Other    Friendly   Hostile     Yes     No       ?   LBO
1984     221          29.9    23.8          61                                                     115     97       9      3
1985     241          25.5    10.2          67                                                     121     93      27      2
1986     260          28.2    12.5          98                                                     152     93      14      3
1987     284          27.9    17.3          82                                                     153    112      19      4
1988     450          35.2    29.0         160                                                     219    194      34      8
1989     330          27.0    12.4          94                                                     158    129      41      1
1990     179          35.0    40.5          30                                                      91     63      17      4
1991     135          38.2    31.2          10       1        3        0           4          0     77     44      10      0
1992     149          33.8    19.6           9       6       14        5          23          1     92     33       6      1
1993     201          32.5    16.0          23      18       22       11          51          0    125     52      12      2
1994     285          30.5    22.3          42      32       56       20         106          2    187     77      14      0
1995     357          29.3    16.2          64      81      112       40         224          9    256     86      13      2
1996     375          27.7    14.0          53      77      133       75         277          8    282     72      18      6
1997     473          27.6    15.1          94     103      187       95         376          9    374     81      17     11
1998     520          28.8    26.7          98     131      206      103         430         10    417     90      13     10
1999     612          34.5    32.4         139     200      203      129         503         27    474    106      28     17
2000     516          37.3    36.5         126     202      159      101         430         30    377    101      32     15
2001     334          38.3    39.8          80     126       94       90         294         13    267     44      22      2
2002     229          33.0    37.9          44     110       40       61         188         22    159     47      20      3
2003     237          27.2    19.6          39     122       51       52         204         21    181     40      14      6
2004     221          22.4    11.3          18      94       59       60         199         13    184     26       8      8
2005     256          22.7    17.7          26     150       37       63         226         23    204     33      18     16
2006     313          22.5    16.4          18     202       37       71         291         17    238     34      37     34
2007     320          21.6    14.9          47     203       40       74         300         15    232     44      40     34
Total   7498          29.9    22.2        1522    1858     1453     1050        4126        220   5135   1791     483    192




                                                            34
Table 2. Summary Statistics. Means, standard deviations, medians, and extreme values for the pricing of mergers and
acquisitions and control variables. Panel A shows the offer premium, the 52-week target high, and the 52-week market index
high. The offer premium is the offer price from Thomson expressed as a log percentage difference from the CRSP stock price
30 calendar days prior to the announcement date. The 52-week target (market index) high is the 52-week high stock price
(market index) over the 365 calendar days ending 30 days prior to the announcement date expressed as a log percentage
difference from the CRSP stock price (market index) 30 calendar days prior to the announcement date. The CRSP market
index is formed using total market value-weighted returns. Panel B shows the two other outcome variables: whether the deal
was recorded as completed from Thomson and the log bidder 3-day announcement return from CRSP centered on the
announcement date from Thomson. Panel C shows control variables. The form of payment (cash, stock), the bidder attitude
(hostile), the offer type (tender), and the identity of the bidder (financial buyer) are from Thomson. The target and bidder
return on equity, return on assets, book-to-market equity, and earnings price ratio are from Compustat, expressed in log
terms. The return on equity is defined as net income (Compustat:NI) divided by shareholders’ equity (Compustat:SEQ). The
return on assets is defined as net income (NI) divided by total assets (Compustat:AT). The book-to-market ratio is defined as
book equity divided by market equity, where book equity is total shareholders’ equity (Compustat:SEQ) plus deferred taxes
and investment tax credit (Compustat:TXDITC) minus the redemption value of preferred stock (Compustat:PSRKRV) and
market equity is calculated by multiplying shares outstanding (CRSP:SHROUT) and price (CRSP:PRC) at fiscal year end.
The earnings price ratio is defined as earnings before interest and taxes (Compustat:EBIT) divided by market equity (ME).
The target’s volatility is from CRSP. Target market capitalization is equal to price times shares outstanding from CRSP at t-
30. Bidder market capitalization is equal to price times shares outstanding from CRSP at t-30. Volatility is the standard
deviation of daily returns for the 365 calendar days ending 30 days prior to the announcement date. The past two-month and
one-year target returns are computed ending 30 days prior to the announcement date. Continuous independent variables are
Winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels.

                                                   N     Mean        SD          5%      Median        95%      Winsorized
Panel A: Merger and Acquisition Pricing
Offer Premium %                                 7498     32.54     27.92       -3.28       29.39      78.85        No
52-Week Target High Price %                     7498     36.73     44.26        1.56       21.19     125.39        Yes
52-Week Market Index High Price %               7498      6.72      8.53        0.00        3.19      26.44        Yes
Panel B: Other Outcome Variables
Completed                                       6926       0.74     0.44        0.00        1.00       1.00         No
Bidder 3-day Announcement Return %              3937      -1.46     8.25      -14.43       -0.81       9.76         No
Panel C: Control Variables
Cash                                            4361      0.43      0.49        0.00        0.00       1.00        No
Stock                                           4361      0.33      0.47        0.00        0.00       1.00        No
Hostile                                         4346      0.05      0.22        0.00        0.00       1.00        No
Tender                                          7498      0.20      0.40        0.00        0.00       1.00        No
Financial Buyer                                 7498      0.03      0.16        0.00        0.00       0.00        No
Target ROE %                                    4917     -0.23     40.51      -62.63        7.45      28.58        Yes
Target ROA %                                    5108      0.86     26.42      -35.03        6.41      19.14        Yes
Target B/M %                                    5108     66.11     74.46        1.64       48.84     219.69        Yes
Target E/P %                                    4971      3.33     45.10      -41.67        3.75      47.18        Yes
log(Target Market Capitalization)               5108     11.71      1.84        8.84       11.62      14.84        Yes
Target Volatility %                             5108      3.76      2.08        1.39        3.29       7.86        Yes
Target 2-Month Return %                         7498      0.75     25.00      -43.72        2.25      37.81        Yes
Target 1-Year Return %                          7498     -4.01     55.04     -105.61        3.91      70.09        Yes
Bidder ROE %                                    2001      7.05     32.44      -32.89       10.88      31.61        Yes
Bidder ROA %                                    2048      3.16     15.63      -14.77        3.75      20.24        Yes
Bidder B/M %                                    2048     59.30     81.04        0.60       36.94     228.46        Yes
Bidder E/P %                                    2029     11.60     47.03      -13.61        4.30      74.57        Yes
log(Bidder Market Capitalization)               2048     13.86      2.34       10.04       14.00      17.66        Yes




                                                            35
Table 3. The Pricing of Mergers and Acquisitions. Regressions of the offer premium on the 52-week target high price. We run ordinary least squares and piecewise linear
regressions.
                                                                                                                 = a+b                         + eit
                                                                                                     Offerit             52WeekHighi ,t − 30
                                                                                                     Pi ,t −30               Pi ,t −30

         (   Offerit
             Pi , t − 30
                             )
                           − 1 ⋅ 100 = a + b1 min   ((
                                                     52WeekHigh i , t − 30
                                                         Pi , t − 30
                                                                               )            )
                                                                             − 1 ⋅ 100 ,25 + b2 max 0, min       (       (( 52WeekHigh i , t − 30
                                                                                                                                Pi , t − 30
                                                                                                                                                          )          ))
                                                                                                                                                    − 1.25 ⋅ 100 ,50 + b3 max   ((
                                                                                                                                                                                 52WeekHigh i , t − 30
                                                                                                                                                                                     Pi , t − 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                )       )
                                                                                                                                                                                                         − 1.75 ⋅ 100 ,0 + eit
where Offer is the offer price from Thomson, P is the target stock price from CRSP, and 52WeekHigh is the high stock price over the 365 calendar days ending 30 days prior to the
announcement date. All regressions control for 1/P, and all ratios are expressed in log terms. Column 1 shows basic OLS results. Columns 2, 3, and 4 show piecewise linear
regressions without and with controls for target past returns, measured in logs. Time fixed effects are included in the fourth column. Column 5 repeats Column 1 replacing the high
target stock price with the high market index price. Robust t-statistics with standard errors clustered by month are in parentheses.

                                                                                   OLS                               Piecewise                           Piecewise                   Piecewise                              OLS
                                                                                                1                                          2                              3                                 4                            5
52-Week Target High Price %:
b                                                                                    0.0941***
                                                                                         (5.82)
b1                                                                                                                            0.327***                          0.320***                        0.231***
                                                                                                                                 (7.60)                            (6.75)                          (4.65)
b2                                                                                                                            0.114***                          0.104***                        0.0860**
                                                                                                                                 (3.28)                            (2.84)                          (2.44)
b3                                                                                                                            0.0697**                           0.0547*                        0.0454**
                                                                                                                                 (2.41)                            (1.78)                          (2.31)
52-Week Market Index High Price %:
b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.269***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (4.70)
Inverse Price                                                                            4.615***                             4.251***                          3.675***                        3.721***                          6.561***
                                                                                            (9.71)                               (9.03)                             (7.37)                          (9.74)                          (14.34)
Target Returnt-1 %                                                                                                                                             0.0000398                          -0.0224
Target Returnt-2 %                                                                                                                                                -0.0257                         -0.0321
Target Returnt-3 %                                                                                                                                                -0.0321                       0.000209
Target Returnt-4 %                                                                                                                                                -0.0115                         -0.0148
Target Returnt-5 %                                                                                                                                               -0.0432*                         -0.0163
Target Returnt-6 %                                                                                                                                                -0.0154                         -0.0194
Target Returnt-7 %                                                                                                                                                -0.0323                         -0.0372
Target Returnt-8 %                                                                                                                                                -0.0188                         -0.0182
Target Returnt-9 %                                                                                                                                                 0.0116                       -0.00848
Target Returnt-10 %                                                                                                                                                0.0115                         -0.0122
Target Returnt-11 %                                                                                                                                                0.0124                       -0.00874
Target Returnt-12 %                                                                                                                                                0.0277                        0.00639
Time Effects                                                                                   No                                     No                               No                             Yes                               No
N                                                                                            7498                                   7498                             7172                            7172                             7498
R2                                                                                         0.0867                                 0.0928                           0.0913                           0.152                           0.0790




                                                                                                                         36
Table 4. The Pricing of Mergers and Acquisitions: Robustness. Piecewise linear regressions of the offer premium on the 52-week target high price. We run regressions:
           (   Offerit
               Pi , t − 30
                               )
                             − 1 ⋅ 100 = a + b1 min   ((
                                                       52WeekHigh i , t − 30
                                                           Pi , t − 30
                                                                                 )         )            (
                                                                               − 1 ⋅ 100 ,25 + b2 max 0, min        ((  52WeekHigh i , t − 30
                                                                                                                            Pi , t − 30
                                                                                                                                                      )               ))
                                                                                                                                                − 1.25 ⋅ 100 ,50 + b3 max          ((   52WeekHigh i , t − 30
                                                                                                                                                                                            Pi , t − 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      )             )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                − 1.75 ⋅ 100 ,0 + eit
where Offer is the offer price from Thomson, P is the target stock price from CRSP, and 52WeekHigh is the high stock price over the 365 calendar days ending 30 days prior to the
announcement date. Column 1 is the baseline (Column 3) from Table 3. Column 2 adds deal characteristics (tender, attitude, form of payment, bidder identity) as controls to the
baseline. Column 3 adds target specific controls to the baseline. Column 4 adds bidder specific financial controls to the baseline. Column 5 includes all controls. Columns 6-9 add the
x percentile versions of 52WeekHigh, in the same piecewise linear specification as 52WeekHigh, to Column 2. All columns control for target past returns and 1/P, and all ratios are
expressed in log terms. Robust t-statistics with standard errors clustered by month are in parentheses.

                                                                 Piecewise            Piecewise       Piecewise              Piecewise              Piecewise              80%                     90%                    95%           99%
                                                                                 1                2                3                            4                5                 6                            7                  8             9
52-Week Target High Price %:
b1                                                                     0.320***          0.328***           0.377***               0.399***               0.320***         0.366***                 0.372***              0.482***       0.470**
                                                                          (6.75)            (5.80)             (7.77)                 (5.24)                 (3.63)            (4.85)                  (4.31)                (4.02)        (2.15)
b2                                                                     0.104***          0.0995**           0.109***                 0.0781                0.136**          0.00779                   0.0213                  0.101       0.0545
                                                                          (2.84)            (2.36)             (2.69)                 (1.38)                 (2.01)            (0.15)                  (0.34)                (1.03)        (0.37)
b3                                                                      0.0547*          0.0751**           0.0783**                 0.0316                 0.0127           -0.0489                  0.0492                  0.168         0.162
                                                                          (1.78)            (2.12)             (2.32)                 (0.83)                 (0.23)           (-0.64)                  (0.53)                (0.86)        (0.60)
x-% Target Price %:
c1                                                                                                                                                                           -0.0120                 -0.0285                  -0.154        -0.140
                                                                                                                                                                              (-0.22)                 (-0.42)                (-1.45)       (-0.67)
c2                                                                                                                                                                         0.194***                     0.118                0.0212        0.0577
                                                                                                                                                                               (2.75)                  (1.64)                  (0.20)        (0.38)
c3                                                                                                                                                                              0.193                 0.0297                  -0.122        -0.101
                                                                                                                                                                               (1.45)                  (0.20)                (-0.48)       (-0.32)
Cash                                                                                       -0.0893                                                         1.922              0.0724             -0.0000470                 -0.0276       -0.0902
                                                                                            (-0.09)                                                       (1.12)               (0.07)                 (-0.00)                (-0.03)       (-0.09)
Stock                                                                                         1.498                                                        2.565                1.567                   1.494                   1.414         1.449
                                                                                             (1.27)                                                       (1.35)               (1.36)                  (1.30)                  (1.22)        (1.24)
Hostile                                                                                  -3.572**                                                      9.298***            -3.602**                 -3.697**              -3.560**      -3.529**
                                                                                            (-2.05)                                                       (3.27)              (-2.08)                 (-2.12)                (-2.04)       (-2.02)
Tender                                                                                   8.021***                                                      4.922***            8.026***                8.011***               7.911***      7.991***
                                                                                             (7.32)                                                       (2.96)               (7.26)                  (7.24)                  (7.13)        (7.22)
Financial Buyer                                                                         -10.53***                                                         -6.253              0.0724             -0.0000470                 -0.0276       -0.0902
                                                                                            (-6.89)                                                      (-0.66)               (0.07)                 (-0.00)                (-0.03)       (-0.09)
Target ROA %                                                                                               0.0352                                      -0.00522
                                                                                                            (1.32)                                       (-0.10)
Target B/M %                                                                                              0.00525                                        0.0144
                                                                                                            (0.93)                                        (1.36)
log(Target Market Capitalization)                                                                       -1.626***                                     -3.661***
                                                                                                           (-5.39)                                       (-5.13)
Target Volatility %                                                                                       0.947**                                          1.170
                                                                                                            (2.37)                                        (1.60)
Bidder ROA %                                                                                                                         0.0734              0.0314
                                                                                                                                      (1.39)              (0.34)
Bidder B/M %                                                                                                                       -0.00219            -0.00267
                                                                                                                                     (-0.29)             (-0.58)
log(Bidder Market Capitalization)                                                                                                  1.618***            1.775***
                                                                                                                                      (6.26)              (4.68)
Time Effects                                                                  No               No                 No                      No                  No                 No                         No                   No            No
N                                                                           7172            4152               5108                    2048                1246               4152                       4152                 4152          4152
R2                                                                        0.0913            0.143              0.117                   0.101               0.179              0.146                      0.144                0.144         0.143




                                                                                                                   37
Table 5. The Pricing of Mergers and Acquisitions: Subsamples. Piecewise linear regressions of the offer premium on the
52-week target high price, for subsamples. We divide the sample from Table 3 according to tender and non-tender offers,
bidder attitude, and first and subsequent offers, successful and unsuccessful offers, form of payment, and first and second half
of the sample period. All regressions control for 1/P, and all ratios are expressed in log terms. Robust t-statistics clustered by
month are in parentheses.

                             Tender                                   Attitude                               First Offer
                           No       Yes – No               Hostile          Friendly – Hostile               No          Yes – No
52-Week Target High Price %:
b1                      0.246***         0.329***        0.462***                         -0.110      0.328***            -0.0650
                            (4.97)           (6.51)          (3.56)                      (-0.94)          (6.88)           (-0.92)
b2                       0.0751*            0.124*           -0.205                     0.340**       0.103***             0.0109
                            (1.83)           (1.77)         (-1.32)                       (2.14)          (2.68)            (0.13)
b3                         0.0597          -0.0201         0.0280                        0.0608          0.0485             0.112
                            (1.59)          (-0.38)          (0.35)                       (0.68)          (1.55)            (1.41)
Inverse Price           3.870***                         4.644***                                     3.667***
                            (8.00)                           (7.67)                                       (7.40)
Time Effects                    No                               No                                          No
N                             7172                            4152                                         7172
R2                           0.105                            0.126                                      0.0919



                           Successful                           Form of Payment                             Second Half
                            No       Yes – No               Stock            Cash – Stock                    No        Yes - No
52-Week Target High Price %:
b1                      0.179***         0.201***        0.450***                     -0.147**        0.405***         -0.150***
                            (2.69)          (3.65)           (6.64)                      (-2.36)          (6.89)           (-2.93)
b2                       0.133**          0.00300          -0.0227                    0.248***          0.0669            0.0759
                            (1.98)          (0.04)          (-0.29)                       (2.75)          (1.16)            (1.11)
b3                         0.0620        -0.00229           0.0478                       0.104*       -0.00572            0.0767
                            (1.31)         (-0.04)           (0.86)                       (1.81)         (-0.08)            (1.04)
Inverse Price           4.021***                         4.307***                                     3.678***
                            (7.51)                           (6.46)                                       (7.34)
Time Effects                    No                               No                                          No
N                             6635                            3143                                         7172
R2                           0.109                            0.139                                      0.0929




                                                               38
Table 6. The Pricing of Mergers and Acquisitions: Time Since 52-Week High. OLS and piecewise linear regressions of
the offer premium on the 52-week target high price interacted with log Time. log Time is the time since the 52-week high was
reached measured in days. All regressions control for 1/P, and all ratios are expressed in log terms. Column 1 shows basic
OLS results of regressing price on the 52-week high. Column 2 shows piecewise linear regressions. Column 3 repeats
Column 1, replacing the high target stock price with the high market index price. Columns 4-6 repeat Columns 1-3 with
controls for target past returns. Robust t-statistics with standard errors clustered by month are in parentheses.

                                                 OLS         Piecewise        OLS         OLS         Piecewise      OLS
                                                        1             2              3           4              5          6
log Time                                        1.524***        0.0345       1.090***      0.493*          -0.226    0.512*
                                                   (5.77)        (0.12)         (4.35)      (1.93)        (-0.84)     (1.80)
52-Week Target High Price %:
b                                               0.427***                                 0.114***
                                                   (3.82)                                   (3.90)
b1                                                            0.444***                                  0.614***
                                                                  (2.68)                                   (6.26)
b2                                                               0.698*                                 0.248***
                                                                  (1.92)                                   (2.66)
b3                                                               -0.567                                 -0.00780
                                                                (-1.06)                                   (-0.09)
52-Week Market Index High Price %:
b                                                                             -0.0120                                0.0860
                                                                               (-0.08)                                (0.59)
52-Week Target High Price % ⋅ log Time:
c                                             -0.0576***                                 -0.00212
                                                   (-2.90)                                 (-1.40)
c1                                                                -0.0229                             -0.0393***
                                                                   (-0.71)                                 (-2.66)
c2                                                                 -0.104                                -0.00230
                                                                   (-1.58)                                 (-0.24)
c3                                                                   0.112                                0.00203
                                                                    (1.20)                                  (0.72)
52-Week Market Index High Price % ⋅ log Time:
c                                                                             0.0523*                                0.0240
                                                                                (1.70)                                (0.75)
Time Effects                                          No              No           No          No             No         No
N                                                   7498            7498         7498        7172           7172       7172
R2                                                0.0823          0.0942       0.0833      0.0862         0.0931     0.0852




                                                             39
Table 7. Predicting Success in Mergers and Acquisitions. Regressions of the offer premium on the 52-week target high
price. We run probit regressions.
                                pr (S ) = a + b Offer     it
                                                Pi , t − 30
                                                             + c (Offerit > 52WeekHigh i ,t −30 ) + eit
where S is equal to 1 if a deal is completed, Offer is the offer price from Thomson, P is the target stock price from CRSP, and
52WeekHigh is the high stock price over the 365 calendar days ending 30 days prior to the announcement date. All
regressions control for 1/P, and all ratios are expressed in log terms. We limit the sample only to those deals that Thomson
identifies as completed or withdrawn. The first two columns estimate a linear relationship between the probability of success
and the offer premium. The second two columns use a flexible polynomial. Robust t-statistics with standard errors clustered
by month are in parentheses.

                                                            Probit                Probit                  Probit           Probit
                                                                       1                     2                       3                4
Offer Premium:
b                                                          0.00109***               0.000103               0.00116            0.000783
                                                                (3.28)                 (0.64)                (1.03)               (1.50)
 Offer Premium2                                                                                        0.00000179         -0.00000760
                                                                                                             (0.08)              (-0.73)
 Offer Premium3                                                                                       0.000000232         0.000000105
                                                                                                             (0.51)              (-0.67)
 Offer Premium4                                                                                          -3.86e-09            9.93e-10
                                                                                                            (-0.78)               (0.48)
Offer Premium>52-Week Target High Price:
c                                                            0.0431***            0.0319***                0.0425***        0.0297***
                                                                 (2.87)                 (3.07)                 (2.75)             (2.86)
Cash                                                                                  -0.0133                                   -0.0141
                                                                                       (-1.18)                                   (-1.24)
Stock                                                                                0.00935                                     0.0101
                                                                                        (1.17)                                    (1.27)
Hostile                                                                            -0.454***                                 -0.453***
                                                                                       (-6.23)                                   (-6.22)
Tender                                                                            0.0251***                                 0.0252***
                                                                                        (3.59)                                    (3.67)
log(Target Market Capitalization)                                                -0.0107***                                -0.0108***
                                                                                       (-3.74)                                   (-3.70)
log(Bidder Market Capitalization)                                                0.00587***                                0.00580***
                                                                                        (3.28)                                    (3.26)
Inverse Price                                                   -0.0110             -0.00978                   -0.0101        -0.00908
                                                                 (-1.48)               (-1.64)                  (-1.34)          (-1.52)
Target Returnt-1 %                                            0.000230             -0.000181                 0.000219        -0.000194
Target Returnt-2 %                                         0.00155***               0.000114              0.00152***        0.0000859
Target Returnt-3 %                                         0.00118***             0.0000122               0.00117***       0.00000775
Target Returnt-4 %                                        0.000870***              -0.000151              0.000842**         -0.000145
Target Returnt-5 %                                           -0.000536           0.000384**                 -0.000560      0.000370**
Target Returnt-6 %                                            0.000620              0.000301                 0.000600         0.000277
Target Returnt-7 %                                            0.000591           -0.0000365                  0.000579      -0.0000409
Target Returnt-8 %                                           -0.000209           -0.0000556                 -0.000214      -0.0000691
Target Returnt-9 %                                           -0.000246            0.0000338                 -0.000267      0.00000176
Target Returnt-10 %                                          -0.000480              0.000137                -0.000500         0.000129
Target Returnt-11 %                                          -0.000567              0.000253                -0.000566         0.000244
Target Returnt-12 %                                         0.0000920               0.000342               0.0000666          0.000336
Time Effects                                                         No                    No                       No               No
N                                                                  6635                  2355                     6635             2355
R2                                                               0.0148                 0.206                   0.0151            0.209




                                                                 40
Table 8. Mergers and Acquisitions: Market Reaction. Ordinary and two-stage least squares regressions of the 3-day CAR of the bidder on the offer premium.
                                                                                                   rt −1→ t +1 = a + b Offer
                                                                                                                       Pi , t − 30 + e it
                                                                                                                                 it




          (   Offerit
              Pi , t − 30
                              )
                            − 1 ⋅ 100 = a + b1 min   ((
                                                      52WeekHigh i , t − 30
                                                          Pi , t − 30
                                                                                )        )               (
                                                                              − 1 ⋅ 100 ,25 + b2 max 0, min         ((52WeekHigh i , t − 30
                                                                                                                          Pi , t − 30
                                                                                                                                                    )       ))
                                                                                                                                              − 1.25 ⋅ 100 ,50 + b3 max       ((
                                                                                                                                                                               52WeekHigh i , t − 30
                                                                                                                                                                                   Pi , t − 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                             )        )
                                                                                                                                                                                                       − 1.75 ⋅ 100 ,0 + eit
where r is the market-adjusted return of the bidder for the three-day period centered on the announcement date, Offer is the offer price from Thomson, P is the target stock price from
CRSP, and 52WeekHigh is the high stock price over the 365 calendar days ending 30 days prior to the announcement date. The first, second, and fourth columns use ordinary least
squares. The third and the fifth columns instrument for the offer premium using 52WeekHigh. Robust t-statistics with standard errors clustered by month are in parentheses.

                                                                                             OLS                               OLS                          IV                               OLS                          IV
                                                                                                             1                                  2                        3                                   4                       5
Offer Premium:
b                                                                                             -0.0186***                         -0.0204***                  -0.215***                         -0.0443***                  -0.253***
                                                                                                   (-2.64)                            (-2.74)                    (-3.48)                            (-4.21)                    (-4.39)
Cash                                                                                                                                                                                             1.421***                   1.749***
                                                                                                                                                                                                     (3.76)                     (3.59)
Stock                                                                                                                                                                                           -1.831***                  -1.380***
                                                                                                                                                                                                    (-5.14)                    (-3.37)
Hostile                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.229                     1.249
                                                                                                                                                                                                    (-0.25)                     (1.07)
Tender                                                                                                                                                                                           1.124***                   2.560***
                                                                                                                                                                                                     (3.10)                     (4.06)
Financial Buyer                                                                                                                                                                                       3.185                      0.704
                                                                                                                                                                                                     (1.56)                     (0.20)
log(Target Market Capitalization)                                                                                                                                                               -1.073***                  -1.532***
                                                                                                                                                                                                    (-7.26)                    (-6.85)
log(Bidder Market Capitalization)                                                                                                                                                                0.386***                   0.729***
                                                                                                                                                                                                     (4.06)                     (4.97)
Inverse Price                                                                                      0.320**                           0.614***                    1.412***                         -0.651**                    -0.0215
                                                                                                     (2.00)                              (3.38)                      (4.19)                         (-2.43)                    (-0.06)
Target Returnt-1 %                                                                                                                   -0.00159                    -0.00970                          0.00413                  -0.00922
Target Returnt-2 %                                                                                                                   -0.00846                      -0.0120                        -0.00641                  -0.00538
Target Returnt-3 %                                                                                                                   -0.00261                    -0.0225*                          0.00799                  -0.00121
Target Returnt-4 %                                                                                                                    0.00875                    -0.00298                         -0.00436                    -0.0161
Target Returnt-5 %                                                                                                                    0.0201*                     0.00549                         -0.00247                    -0.0211
Target Returnt-6 %                                                                                                                      0.0166                      0.0152                          0.0113                     0.0121
Target Returnt-7 %                                                                                                                      0.0128                    0.00454                          0.00307                  -0.00539
Target Returnt-8 %                                                                                                                    0.00737                    -0.00922                          0.00277                    -0.0142
Target Returnt-9 %                                                                                                                    0.0231*                       0.0187                          0.0207                     0.0114
Target Returnt-10 %                                                                                                                  0.0268**                       0.0211                          0.0117                   0.00794
Target Returnt-11 %                                                                                                                     0.0174                      0.0195                         0.00294                   0.00136
Target Returnt-12 %                                                                                                                     0.0139                    0.00686                           0.0222                     0.0133
Time Effects                                                                                          3937                                3750                        3750                            2400                       2400
N                                                                                                       No                                  No                          No                               No                         No
R2                                                                                                 0.00301                              0.0129                            .                         0.0873                            .

                                                                                                                    41
Table 9. Merger Waves. Regressions of the number of mergers on the 52-week high of different indices. We run ordinary least squares regressions.
                                                                           Mergers t = a + b 52WeekHigh
                                                                                                Pt −1   + et
where Mergers is a normalized measure of merger activity, and 52WeekHigh is the high stock price for the market over the 365 calendar days prior to the quarter for which the number
of mergers is reported. Quarterly data on the raw number of mergers are from Mergerstat Review for the period 1973-2007. The quarterly levels of merger activity are calculated by
dividing the raw number of mergers each quarter by the total number of firms on the NYSE, as reported by CRSP. Detrended quarterly levels of merger activity are calculated by
subtracting the average level of quarterly merger activity over the trailing two and one-half year period before the 365 calendar days over which the high stock price is calculated from
the current quarterly level of merger activity. The 52-week market index high price is calculated from CRSP (CRSP: TOTVAL). The 52-week high B/M and low B/M index high
prices are calculated from proxies indices formed from the monthly returns in Ken French’s “Portfolios Formed on Book-to-Market.” High B/M is defined as the top 30% of French’s
B/M-ranked universe; low B/M is defined as the bottom 30%. Robust t-statistics with standard errors that correct for autocorrelation up to five lags are in parentheses.

                                                                    1                  2                   3                  4                 5                   6                  7
52-Week Market Index High Price %:
b                                                        -0.0181***
                                                              (-3.03)
52-Week High B/M Index High Price %:
b                                                                            -0.0229***          -0.0258***         -0.0216***         -0.0351**          -0.0349***          -0.0283**
                                                                                  (-5.09)             (-6.34)            (-4.21)           (-2.19)             (-2.86)            (-2.08)
52-Week Low B/M Index High Price %:
b                                                                                                                      -0.00370                                                -0.00962
                                                                                                                         (-0.57)                                                 (-1.12)
B/M of High B/M Index:
                                                                                                                         -0.189                                                   0.0478
                                                                                                                         (-0.65)                                                   (0.15)
B/M of Low B/M Index:
                                                                                                  -2.101***             -1.670*                            -2.128***           -2.244**
                                                                                                      (-3.80)            (-1.75)                               (-3.76)            (-2.22)
Market Returnt-1 %                                                                                                                        -0.0108           -0.00937             -0.0141
Market Returnt-2 %                                                                                                                      -0.00900           -0.000946           -0.00227
Market Returnt-3 %                                                                                                                        -0.0142             -0.0131            -0.0141
Market Returnt-4 %                                                                                                                       0.00678             0.00897            0.00881
Market Returnt-5 %                                                                                                                       0.00134             0.00863            0.00848
Market Returnt-6 %                                                                                                                        -0.0170             -0.0134            -0.0147
Market Returnt-7 %                                                                                                                       0.00687             0.00743            0.00841
Market Returnt-8 %                                                                                                                       0.00910               0.0151             0.0157
Market Returnt-9 %                                                                                                                        -0.0157           -0.0139*           -0.0156*
Market Returnt-10 %                                                                                                                        0.0147              0.0183             0.0196
Market Returnt-11 %                                                                                                                     -0.00528            -0.00346           -0.00299
Market Returnt-12 %                                                                                                                     0.000162           -0.000119           0.000826
N                                                                126                 126                126                 126               126                 126                126
R2                                                            0.1005              0.0991             0.3239              0.3357            0.1640              0.3886             0.4045




                                                                                            42
Figure 1. Slide from Cablevision Presentation to Shareholders, October 24, 2007. The management of Cablevision
recommended acceptance of a $36.26 per share cash bid from the Dolan family. The slide compares this bid price to various
recent prices including 52-week highs.




                                                           43
Figure 2. Offer Price Density. Histogram of the difference between the offer price and the target’s 52-week high price.
                                                     Offerit − 52WeekHighi ,t −30
                                                                Pi ,t −30
where Offer is the offer price from Thomson, P is the target stock price from CRSP, and 52WeekHigh is the high stock price
over the 365 calendar days ending 30 days prior to the announcement date.




                                                                44
Figure 3. Offer Price Density: Discontinuity at the 52-week high. Histogram of the difference between the offer price and
the target’s 52-week high price.
                                                      Offerit − 52WeekHighi ,t −30
                                                                 Pi ,t −30
where Offer is the offer price from Thomson, P is the target stock price from CRSP, and 52WeekHigh is the high stock price
over the 365 calendar days ending 30 days prior to the announcement date. Panel A uses 500 bins, while Panel B uses 200
bins. The discontinuities are statistically significant with bootstrap p-values of 0.016 and 0.000 respectively, using the
approach described in Nicholas (2007).

Panel A: 500 bins of the offer price, centered at the 52-week high




Panel B: 200 bins of the offer price, centered at the 52-week high




                                                                 45
Figure 4. Non-linear effects. Gaussian kernel regressions of the offer premium on the 52-week target high price.
                                             Offerit
                                             Pi , t − 30   = a+b   (
                                                                   52WeekHighi , t − 30
                                                                       Pi , t − 30
                                                                                          )+ e   it

where Offer is the offer price from Thomson, P is the target stock price from CRSP, and 52WeekHigh is the high stock price
over the 365 calendar days ending 30 days prior to the announcement date. The first kernel regression has a bandwidth of 20
and has 40 estimation points. The second has a bandwidth and 40 estimation points. Panel A limits the sample to situations
where the 52-week high is less than 1.5 times the target price 30-days prior to the announcement date. Panel B limits the
sample to situations where the 52-week high is less than two times the target price 30-days prior to the announcement date.

Panel A. Acquisition premium (y-axis) on the 52-week high premium (x-axis), 0 to 55




Panel B. Acquisition premium (y-axis) on the 52-week high premium (x-axis), 0 to 105




                                                                       46
Figure 5. Merger Waves. Quarterly data on the raw number of mergers are from Mergerstat Review for the period 1973-
2007. The quarterly levels of merger activity are calculated by dividing the raw number of mergers each quarter by the total
number of firms on the NYSE, as reported by CRSP. Detrended quarterly levels of merger activity are calculated by
subtracting the average level of quarterly merger activity over the trailing two and one-half year period before the 365
calendar days over which the high stock price is calculated from the current quarterly level of merger activity. The 52-week
market index high price is calculated from CRSP (CRSP: TOTVAL). The 52-week high B/M and low B/M index high prices
are calculated from proxies indices formed from the monthly returns in Ken French’s “Portfolios Formed on Book-to-
Market.” High B/M is defined as the top 30% of French’s B/M-ranked universe; low B/M is defined as the bottom 30%.

Panel A. Plot of detrended quarterly level of merger activity (solid, left y-axis) and the 52-week high of the market index
(dashed, right y-axis)




Panel B. Plot of detrended quarterly level of merger activity (solid, left y-axis) and the 52-week high of the high B/M index
(dashed, right y-axis)




                                                             47
