NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EMPLOYERS’ PREFERENCES FOR GENDER, AGE, HEIGHT AND BEAUTY:
DIRECT EVIDENCE
Peter Kuhn
Kailing Shen
Working Paper 15564
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15564

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2009

The authors thank UC Santa Barbara’s Institute for Social, Behavioral and Economic Research (ISBER)
for financial support. Kuhn thanks UC Berkeley’s Center for Labor Economics for their generous hospitality
during the research on this project. Catherine Weinberger, and seminar participants at Xiamen University,
Tsinghua University, Renmin University China, ZEW (Centre for European Economic Research),
University of Aarhus, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, the Trans-Pacific Labor Seminar, the
all-UC labor economics conference, UC Denver, and UCSB supplied helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Peter Kuhn and Kailing Shen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Employers’ Preferences for Gender, Age, Height and Beauty: Direct Evidence
Peter Kuhn and Kailing Shen
NBER Working Paper No. 15564
December 2009
JEL No. J6,J7
ABSTRACT
We study firms’ advertised preferences for gender, age, height and beauty in a sample of ads from
a Chinese internet job board, and interpret these patterns using a simple employer search model. We
find that these characteristics are widely and highly valued by Chinese employers, though employers’
valuations are highly specific to detailed jobs and occupations. Consistent with our model, advertised
preferences for gender, age, height and beauty all become less prevalent as job skill requirements rise.
Cross-sectional patterns suggest some role for customer discrimination, product market competition,
and corporate culture. Using the recent collapse of China’s labor market as a natural experiment, we
find that firms’ advertised education and experience requirements respond to changing labor market
conditions in the direction predicted by our model, while firms’ advertised preferences for age, gender,
height and beauty do not.

Peter Kuhn
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara
2127 North Hall
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
pjkuhn@econ.ucsb.edu
Kailing Shen
Wang Yanan Institute for Studies in Economics (WISE)
Xiamen University
China 361005
kailing.shen@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Over the past half century, economists have devoted considerable effort to
measuring the strength and source of employers’ preferences for certain demographic
attributes of their employees, including race, gender, age, and physical attractiveness. A
well known difficulty with measuring these preferences is the fact that it is either illegal,
or highly controversial, for employers to publicly express them in many countries. 1
These data limitations have led researchers to pursue a variety of indirect strategies,
including the study of wage regression residuals (Oaxaca 1973), studies of the evolution
of returns to cognitive ability over workers’ careers (Altonji and Pierret 2001), and
studies that use aggregate data on discriminatory attitudes (Charles and Guryan 2008).
Alternatively, some investigators have turned to resource-intensive audit studies (e.g.
Yinger 1986, Neumark 1996), which typically focus on very specific jobs and industries.
The starting point for this paper is the observation that this fundamental data
problem in the economics of discrimination does not apply to the world’s largest labor
market: China’s. 2 This allows us to measure employers’ preferences more directly, by
studying posted requirements for a worker’s gender, age, height and physical appearance
in a large sample of ads on an internet job board. 3 Interpreting these advertising
decisions in light of a simple employer search model, we draw a number of inferences
about the magnitude, pattern and likely sources of employers’ preferences for these
attributes. We find, first of all, that employer preferences for these attributes are widely
advertised in China: 34 percent of firms that advertised on the board during our fivemonth sample period placed at least one ad stipulating a preferred gender; 47, 29 and 10
percent respectively expressed a preference for age, physical attractiveness, and height
respectively. Ninety percent of firms who placed 50 or more ads expressed a preference
for at least one of these characteristics. We also find a high degree of job-specificity in
firms’ ‘discriminatory’ ads: it is commonplace for firms to require, say, beauty for some
jobs, but not for others, or to solicit men for some jobs and women for others. Since,
even for conservative parameter values, our model suggests that discriminatory ads
should only be used when employers’ group-based preferences are particularly intense,
we conclude that the above characteristics are widely and highly valued by Chinese
employers.

1

While gender discrimination is prohibited in the US, age discrimination is barred by the 1967 Age
Discrimination in Employment Act only for workers over 40 in firms with at least 20 workers. A handful of
U.S. jurisdictions, including Michigan and California, prohibit discrimination on the basis of height, weight
and/or looks (Hamermesh 2010); obesity is partially covered by the Americans with Disabilities Act.
2
The only Chinese anti-discrimination law of which we are aware is contained in the August 2007 Law of
Employment Promotion, which states: “When recruiting, employers, except for jobs or positions claimed to
be unsuitable for females by the country, should not refuse to employ women based on gender or raise the
employment standard for women. When recruiting, the employers should not set rules restricting females’
marriage or fertility.” (chapter 3, Rules 25-28). No sanctions appear to be prescribed for violations.
3
To our knowledge, the only other article to have studied explicit discrimination in job ads is Lawler and
Bae (1998). Their focus is on the impact of a multinational firm’s home country culture on its overt gender
discrimination in a sample of 902 ads placed in an English-language newspaper in Thailand. Darity and
Mason (1998) reproduce examples of discriminatory U.S. job ads from before the Civil Rights era, but do
not conduct a statistical analysis. Banerjee et al. (2009) study caste and other preferences in a small sample
of marriage ads in India.

2
Consistent with our model, we also find that Chinese firms are more likely to
express preferences for each of these “US-prohibited” attributes when education and
experience requirements for the job are low. This finding suggests that our internet-based
sample of ads for highly skilled jobs may understate employers’ preferences for “USprohibited’ characteristics in China as a whole. Cross-sectional patterns in our data also
suggest some role in job ads for customer discrimination (especially for beauty and
height among women); for product market competition (state-owned enterprises
discriminate more); and for corporate culture (foreign-owned firms discriminate much
less). Finally, using the recent collapse of China’s labor market --which occurred at
different rates in different occupations and provinces-- as a natural experiment, we find
that firms’ posted education and experience requirements respond to changing labor
market conditions in the direction predicted by our search model, while firms’ advertised
preferences for age, gender, height and beauty do not.

2. Related Literature
a) Discrimination
As noted, economists have studied gaps in labor market outcomes related to
gender (e.g. Bertrand et al. 2009), age (e.g. Lazear 1979), beauty (e.g. Hamermesh and
Biddle 1994) and height (e.g. Case and Paxson 2008) for some time. Possible
explanations for such gaps include the tastes of employers, co-workers and/or customers
(Becker 1964, Mobius and Rosenblat 2006, Charles and Guryan 2008), and differences in
the amounts and types of skills held by these groups. 4 To the extent that the above
characteristics are used as a signal of employee skills that are not measured at the time of
hire, such employer behavior would constitute what is commonly called statistical
discrimination. 5
As also noted, attempts to measure the amount of taste-based and/or statistical
discrimination face significant obstacles in labor markets where such practices are
frowned upon or illegal. Not only is it difficult to distinguish taste-based from statistical
discrimination; it is also difficult to differentiate both types of discrimination from a
scenario where firms do not use these criteria at all, but some groups outperform others in
a group-blind hiring process. These difficulties have led some investigators to conduct
audit studies, in which matched pairs of interviewees (actors) of different race or gender
respond to ads and attend interviews (see for example Yinger 1986, Neumark 1996).
Well-known concerns with audit studies include imperfect matching (and training) of
actors, the inability to double-blind (auditors may wish to please the researcher, and do
not care about actually landing the job), expense (which limits both sample size and the
4

See for example Niederle and Vesterlund 2007 and Black and Spitz-Oener 2007 regarding gender
differences in skill mix and personality; Cerella 1991, Papalia 2002 and Charness and Villeval 2009 for age
differences; and Case and Paxson 2008 regarding height, health and cognitive ability.
5
Also, we note two additional possible explanations for group-based hiring: (1) monopsonistic wage
discrimination by employers (Oaxaca and Ransom, 2008), and (2) –specifically for the case of age—
deferred-compensation contracts that might make firms unwilling to hire older workers at the same wage
offered to new junior employees in the same position (e.g. Lazear 1979). Whether the latter truly
constitutes ‘discrimination’ is open to debate.

3
scope of studies, which are typically focused on narrowly-defined occupations), and the
need to deceive employers, which raises issues of informed consent.
In the study that is probably most closely related to ours, Bertrand and
Mullainathan (BM) (2004) essentially conduct just the first part of an audit study, which
occurs before the actual interview. BM submit resumes to employers in response to
newspaper job ads, with the respondent’s apparent race randomly assigned via racespecific first names. They then study the callback rates for these resumes. Advantages of
this approach include the fact that resumes can be ‘perfectly’ matched, the absence of
actors and interviews (which greatly limits the scope for experimenter demand effects
and reduces expenses), and less employer deception than audit studies. Remaining
concerns with BM’s methodology include the question of whether these resumes are seen
as realistic by employers (given the level of racial segregation in most U.S. cities, is it
plausible that a black applicant attended the same school as his matched white
applicant?), the fact that race is only inferred (persons with distinctively-black names
may not be representative of all black applicants), the fact that callbacks do not imply a
job offer, and the absence of data on the population of ‘real’ resumes received by the firm
for the position, either from the ad that was responded to or via other recruitment
channels.
A key difference between our study and BM’s is our focus not on employer
responses to identical resumes, but on employer preferences that are advertised before
any applications arrive. One obvious advantage of this approach is that no resumes need
to be constructed or submitted; thus their comparability, realism and representativeness
are not at issue. This also makes our approach much cheaper; our data is collected
automatically by a web crawler, thus our sample consists of over 500,000 observations,
compared to about 5,000 in BM and much smaller numbers in most audit studies. This
sample size, in turn, lets us study not just a few specific occupations but the population of
all jobs on offer on this website. We can thus compare discrimination across
occupations, industries, firm types, time periods, labor market conditions, and worker
characteristics (gender, age, height and beauty), and study some ways in which these
conditions and characteristics interact. 6
This said, it is important to note that our approach measures a different aspect of
employer discrimination than BM’s. One difference is that discrimination in our data is
expressed ex ante, i.e. before the employer learns the contents of any applicant’s resume.
Thus, we measure employer preferences (or estimates/perceptions of expected applicant
quality) that are not conditional on the characteristics observed in a resume. To the
extent that the disfavored group has, on average, lower quality observables, our measure
should therefore generate higher levels of measured discrimination than conditional-onobservables indicators like BM’s. On the other hand, while BM’s measure can, at least in
principle, detect small employer preferences for one group over another, we observe
discrimination only when the employer does not want to see any applications from the
6

Our approach also shares some limitations with BM and with audit studies. For example, like them, we
do not know how many (or what types of) applications these firms received, either in response to the ads
we observe, or through other channels. Thus, for example, it is possible, though we think rather unlikely,
that firms with affirmative-action type motivations request (say) female applicants in Zhaopin ads because
of a shortage of female applications from other recruitment channels for the same job.

4
disfavored group. As our model shows, employers’ preferences might need to exceed
quite a high threshold for this to be optimal; for this reason we should see discrimination
less frequently using our method than using BM- and audit-type measures. Importantly,
our model provides testable predictions about the conditions under which employers will
wish to impose such ‘blanket’ restrictions, which differ from the type of discriminatory
behavior that is typically measured in U.S. studies.
Our study also contributes to a literature on the effects of market competition on
discrimination, which dates back to Becker (1957). Interestingly, both Becker’s original
model, and recent empirical studies (for example Black and Strachan 2001 and Black and
Brainerd 2004) focus on the effects of competition in product and capital markets on the
demand for discrimination. Empirical study of the effects of labor market conditions,
beginning with Freeman’s (1973) classic analysis of black wages and unemployment, to
our knowledge, has been confined to the study of time-series patterns in black versus
white unemployment rates in the U.S. 7 We contribute to this literature, first, by
providing a simple search model within which to interpret the effects of labor market
conditions on firms’ demand for discrimination, and by providing a new empirical
approach, based on job ad content.
b) Employer Search
The main outcome of interest in the current paper is a firm’s decision, when
posting a job advertisement, to specify that the applicant should be of a particular gender,
age, or have some other characteristic. Aside from possible differences in the firm’s
motivation, this is conceptually the same as a practice that is universally accepted in job
advertising: specifying that the applicant should, for example, have a high school degree,
or at least two years of experience. Indeed, our theoretical and empirical analysis treats
all advertised job requirements isomorphically. Since advertised job requirements have
received surprisingly little attention in the literature on optimal employer search and
recruiting, our paper contributes to that literature as well.
Recent treatments of employer search or recruitment take two main approaches.
The first, inspired among others by Mortensen and Pissaridies (1994), models search
equilibria in which both workers and firms optimize. In these models, employers’
strategy space is typically highly restricted; for example in many models the only choices
firms make are whether to enter the market and what wage to post; sometimes firms can
choose to advertise wages or working conditions (e.g. Moen, 1997; Menzio 2007).
Further, in most of these models, workers are identical. 8 Thus, to our knowledge, the
equilibrium search literature has not yet considered the possible optimality of advertised
hiring restrictions of the type documented in this paper, which invite some (but not all)
worker types to apply.

7

For a recent update to Freeman’s analysis, see Couch and Fairlie (2005).
For an excellent recent exception, see Teulings and Gautier (2004). Lang¸ Manove and Dickens (2005)
develop a posted-wage search model with two worker types; they show that small employer preferences for
one group can generate large equilibrium differentials in outcomes. Rosen’s (1997) model has two worker
types and assumes workers are better informed about match quality than firms; discriminatory equilibria
can arise even when firms have no group-based preferences.

8

5
A second branch of the employer search literature looks more closely at the
dynamics of employee recruitment using data on individual vacancies (e.g. Burdett and
Cunningham 1998). A key question here is whether vacancy durations are better
described by a sequential employer search model (where firms set a reservation level of
worker quality, then simply wait until an application exceeding that quality arrives), or a
nonsequential one (where a large batch of applications arrives shortly after a vacancy is
advertised, and vacancy durations largely consist of the time taken by the firm to select
the best candidate from this pool). 9 Van Ours and Ridder’s (1992, 1993) results tend to
favor the nonsequential model. Van Ommeren and Russo (2009) make the subtler point
that a nonsequential model best characterizes the type of employer search (i.e. publicly
advertised vacancies, as opposed to less formal methods) that is studied in this paper. For
this reason, we use a simple nonsequential model here.
In contrast to the general equilibrium literature, two papers in the above ‘micro’
literature --Barron, Bishop and Dunkelberg (1985) and Van Ours and Ridder (1991)—
have studied employers’ advertised job requirements empirically. However, unlike us,
both of these papers treat advertised requirements as exogenous vacancy characteristics
(that might affect vacancy durations), rather than as a choice variable for the employer.
Thus, to our knowledge, ours is the first paper to write down a theoretical model of
employers’ decisions regarding what job requirements to advertise (whether
‘discriminatory’ or not), and the first to study the determinants of this decision
empirically.

3. A Model
Consider a firm inviting applications for a vacant position; applications can come
from two distinct groups labeled A and B, where A and B also represent the number of
applications that would be received from each group. Under what conditions will the
firm prefer to invite only one of these two groups to apply? To address this question, let
the value to the firm of an individual applicant, j, be given by Uj = vA + εj, and Uj = vB +
εj for groups A and B respectively, where the εj represent independent draws from the
same cdf, F(εj). 10 For the job in question, we assume that members of group A are on
average more highly desired, i.e. that vA > vB. The firm is assumed to choose the worker
with the highest total value, Uj, from its pool of applicants. The cost of processing an
application (thus learning its εj) is c per application. 11 All of our analysis assumes what

9

See Morgan (1983) for a model that combines elements of both approaches.
Importantly, in this formulation, the worker’s total value to the firm, Uj, includes both his/her actual
productivity and any discriminatory tastes or inaccurate perceptions the employer might hold. It should
also be interpreted as net of wages paid; thus for example vA will be higher if the As can be paid a lower
wage than the Bs for the job that is advertised. This noted, for brevity we often refer to Uj (and related
parameters such as vA and vB ) simply as workers’ “productivities” in this section.
11
Note that application processing costs (as distinct from the vacancy costs more typically modelled, such
as a fixed cost of opening a vacancy and the opportunity cost of keeping the job vacant) are an essential
component of our model: after all, in the absence of processing costs, firms could costlessly duplicate the
effects of any advertised job requirement by soliciting applications from everyone, then just discarding the
applications from the groups that are not wanted. Note also that application processing costs will, in
general, be affected by different factors (including, for example, the firm’s information-processing
10

6
we call “free random disposal” of applications; this means that a firm can avoid
processing costs on any random sample of applications by discarding them. 12
We begin by denoting the expected maximum value of Uj in a pool of n applicants
with ‘baseline” productivity v  {vA , vB} by H(v, n); under quite general conditions H1
>0, H2 >0, and H22 <0. 13 If the firm chooses a search strategy to maximize expected
profits net of search costs, H(v,n) – cn, then it simply selects the highest level of profits
from the following three cases: 14
A: Invite A’s only:
B: Invite B’s only:
C: Combined search— invite all:

E() = H(vA,A) – cA
E() = H(vB,B) – cB
E() = G[vA,A; vB,B] – c(A+B),

where G[vA,A; vB,B] is the expected value of the best match chosen from a sample
composed of A applications with baseline value vA, and B applications with baseline
value vB.
Because it is difficult to make useful comparisons between the G and H functions
for an arbitrary underlying cdf of match qualities F(εj ), (and because we wish to
parameterize certain features --in particular the variance-- of this distribution and
calibrate the model numerically), we assume that εj follows a Type-1 extreme-value
distribution, which yields a simple closed-form expression for the expected value of the
maximum in any given number of draws. In particular, we assume that F(εj) = exp(-exp(εj/β)); thus Var(εj) = β2π2/6, and E(εj) = βγ, where γ is Euler’s constant (≈.577). Under
these assumptions, Appendix 1 shows that:
H(vJ,A) = vJ + βγ + log(J ) ≡ µ J + βlog(J ), and

(1)

G[vA,A; vB,B] = µ C + βlog(M),

(2)

where µ J ≡ vJ + βγ, J  { A, B} , is the expected productivity of a type-J worker,
M=A+B, and:

 C   log exp A    (1   ) exp B   .

(3)

technology and the complexity of the methods used to evaluate job candidates) than the vacancy costs that
are typically included in search models.
12
More precisely, when the firm disposes of a subset of applications in a mixed pool of As and Bs, we
assume that share of the two groups in the deleted samples equals their share in the population. Thus, while
disposal is random with respect to the εj’s, there is no randomness in the shares of the two types in the
sample of retained applications. In the absence of free random disposal, there are conditions (specifically
when applications are plentiful overall and the less-productive group (B) is smaller in number), where the
firm’s optimal policy is to invite only group B to apply, simply to save on processing costs. We do not
think this is very likely.
13
See for example Stigler (1961), p. 215.
14
Our analysis assumes that applicants comply with firms’ announced preferences by not applying where
they are not ‘wanted’. This is incentive compatible for applicants if there is any cost to submitting an
application.

7
In (3), δ = A/M is the fraction of group A (the more ‘desired’ group) in the combined
pool.
As noted, a comparative static of interest to us is the effect of expanding the
supply of applications on firms’ preferences among strategies A through C. Supply is
parameterized by M, the number of applicants in the combined pool; since we are
considering applications for a single vacancy, M is effectively the unemployment/
vacancy (u/v) ratio facing a single firm. We wish to characterize how the firms’
preferences among strategies change as we expand M starting from its smallest possible
value, keeping the shares of the As and Bs constant, i.e. holding A=δM and B=(1-δ)M.
The predicted effects of M are summarized in: 15
Proposition 1: If µA - μC + βlog(δ ) + c(1- δ )/ δ > 0, firms will invite only the favored
group (A) to apply at all levels of application supply, M. Otherwise, there exists a
~
critical value of M , denoted by M , above which firms invite only the As to apply, and
below which firms invite applications from all.
Proof: In Appendix 1.

~
Proposition 2: M falls (making Strategy A more ‘likely’) when:
-the baseline productivity difference between the groups, vA – vB, rises;
-application processing costs, c, rise;
-the standard deviation of unobserved worker productivities,    / 6 , falls.
Proof: In Appendix 1. 16

Next, we define a neutral increase in a job’s skill level as one that multiplies the
productivity, Uj, of every worker by the same factor, θ>1. Appendix 1 also shows that:

~
Corollary: A neutral increase in a job’s skill level, θ, raises M , making Strategy A less
likely.
The intuition is that, as skill demands rise, workers’ idiosyncratic ability ‘matters
more’ to job performance (see for example Gibbons and Waldman 1999); thus the option
15

To focus on nontrivial cases, all of our theoretical results assume that M*> 1/ δ, where M* is the
(common) number of applications that maximizes the firm’s profits under all three strategies (A, B, and C).
This simply states that applications are scarce at the minimum level of market supply when there is only
one applicant of the “preferred” type available, i.e. when A=1.
16
We have shown that Proposition 1 is robust to various changes in assumptions. For example, it must
hold in the following sense for any processing cost function that satisfies the second order condition for an
optimal number of applications N* holds: If N* exists, then any increase in labor supply (M) beyond N*
increases the likelihood that firms will advertise hiring restrictions. Also, it is reasonable to ask what
happens if we introduce a distinction between two aspects of application processing: (a) simply screening
applications for the presence of the preferred or dispreferred demographic attribute, and (b) determining an
applicant’s match quality, ε. Even if (a) can be done very cheaply, we argue that firms will still choose to
advertise their preferred worker attributes, since advertising the restriction has the same effect as screening
and costs even less (typically nothing for internet job ads).

8
value of searching within the disfavored group rises. In sum, our model predicts that
firms’ decisions to target their job ads to a particular demographic group should become
more frequent (1) the greater the number of applications the firm expects to receive
(higher M); (2) the greater the firm’s preference for one demographic group over another
(vA - vB); (3) the higher are application processing costs (c); (4) the lower is the
dispersion of unobserved worker productivity (β); and (5) the lower is the skill level of
the job (θ).
We conclude our theoretical discussion with an analysis of expected magnitudes.
Essentially, our model says that firms should advertise that they are not interested in
receiving applications for a job from a specific group (say women, or applicants with less
than high school education) when the firm’s ex ante assessment of the chance that the
best overall candidate will come from that group is so low that the expected benefits of
examining that group’s applications are outweighed by the costs of processing them. If
marginal processing costs are low, and if the variance of unobserved productivity is not
too low, we should therefore expect to see advertised hiring restrictions relatively rarely,
even in the presence of strong preferences for the favored group, i.e. high vA – vB.
To illustrate this property of our model more formally, define [μA –μB ]* as the
critical level of μA –μB above which a firm prefers to target its ad at group A only; [μA –
μB]* is implicitly defined by equation (A4). Normalize the expected net productivity
(over his entire tenure with the firm) of a type A worker at μA =1, and let δ =.5. Next,
note that equation (A4) depends not on c and M individually, but only on their product,
cM, i.e. on the total costs of processing all applications that arrive when no restrictions
are imposed. To our knowledge, the only study that quantifies these costs is Barron and
Bishop (1985). Specifically, their Table 1 reports that the total man-hours spent by
company personnel recruiting, screening, and interviewing applicants to hire one
individual was between 10.60 and 16.99 hours for occupations typical of ads on Zhaopin
(professional/technical, managerial, clerical and sales). 17 Assuming that the expected
tenure of a newly hired worker is one year18 and assigning the same value of time to the
hirers and hirees, this implies a ratio of total hiring costs to expected employee value of
[15/(40·4.33·12)] = .0072 for the preferred group. Finally, the remaining parameter we
require is β, or equivalently, σ—the standard deviation of idiosyncratic worker net
productivity. As a starting point, suppose that the 95th percentile of the type-A net
productivity distribution is twice the mean; this implies that σ=.75.
The top left entry of Table 1 indicates that, in the base case scenario described
above, the less favored group (say, women) would need to have an annual expected net
productivity of minus 1.97 (compared to men’s expected net productivity of one), or an
expected productivity disadvantage of at least 297 percent, for it to make sense for firms
17

A handful of other studies provide data on the number of applicants per position, M on its own. For
example, Barron and Bishop 1985, and Barron, Bishop and Dunkelberg 1985 report means of about 6 and 9
respectively for the U.S. in the early 1980s; van Ours and Ridder (1992) report a mean of 11 in the
Netherlands in 1986/7). While it seems likely that the number of applicants to internet job ads might
greatly exceed these values, we also note that the internet also greatly reduces the marginal cost of
processing ads, c. Thus, it is not all clear that our estimate of cM – the total cost of processing all ads that
arrive—is very different for our Chinese internet sample than in these pre-internet studies.
18
This corresponds roughly with the mean duration of all uncensored jobs (13.7 months) in Farber’s (1994)
study of inter-firm worker mobility.

9
to exclude women from the application process.19 Referring back to Proposition 2, this
very high level of [μA –μB ]* would only increase further if total application processing
costs (cM) were lower (or equivalently if a typical worker stayed at the firm for more
than a year), or if σ was higher than these base-case values. Thus, we only explore the
sensitivity of our results to parameter changes in the other direction in Table 1.
Row 1 of Table 1 shows, first, that if instead of taking a total of 15 employee
hours to recruit for a position that will be occupied for one year, it took about a week (.02
≈ 1/52), the massive critical productivity disadvantage falls from 297% to a still-massive
237%. The remaining entries in Row 1 imagine that recruiting costs for a one-year
position amount to one month and two months respectively. Even in the latter case
(column 4), it still makes sense to exclude women from consideration for the job only
when they are 84% less valuable than men on average, or worse. Column 1 examines the
consequences of reducing the idiosyncratic variation in worker net productivity, σ, while
holding application processing costs, cM, at their base-case value. When σ falls to .375,
the 95th percentile male applicant is only 50 percent more valuable to the firm than the
mean male applicant. Here, firms will wish to exclude women if their mean net
productivity is 128 percent below men’s or worse. This number falls to 59% when σ =
.20, which corresponds to a ratio of the 95th percentile to the mean of 1.27.
The remainder of Table 1 shows that hiring restrictions against the less-favored
group can be in the firm’s interest for relatively low (say, under 20%) values of the
expected net productivity differential between the two groups only if (a) it is highly
costly for firms to process applications and (b) employee performance is highly
predictable, with the ‘best’ employees little better than the average.20 Overall, we
conclude from Table 1 that, for what seem to be realistic costs of employee selection and
realistic levels of employee heterogeneity, employers would need to expect very large
productivity differentials between the groups --or to have very strong tastes for one
group over another-- in order for it to make sense to exclude one group from the
application process. On a priori grounds, we thus expect such restrictions to be relatively
rare.
4. Data and Descriptive Analysis

Our data is the universe of unique job advertisements posted between May 16 and
July 29, 2008 and between Dec 17, 2008 and Feb 28, 2009, on Zhaopin.com, the third-

19

At this point, it may be worth recalling that between-group differences in μ in our model include both
employer tastes and employer expectations of actual productivity. Further, they are net of wages paid.
This does not affect the interpretation of our results if firms post wages, i.e. if they pay group-independent
wages within the job that is advertised. If, on the other hand, firms can pay lower wages to the disfavored
(B) group than the A’s within the same job, then 297% actually understates the firm’s tastes for (or
perceived productivity advantage of) the favored group.
20
We also examined the effects of changes in the relative numbers of the two groups, δ, on [μA –μB ]*.
Varying δ from .05 to .95 did not change our baseline results materially. This is because a small expected
number of (say) female applicants, (a) reduces the expected costs of processing women’s applications, but
(b) reduces the likelihood that this (small) additional pool will yield the best candidate. These two
tendencies offset each other.

10
largest online job board in China at the time (now second). 21 Information on the
advertising firm’s characteristics was added to the data via links to the firms’ websites in
the ads. Procedures for downloading the data and defining variables are discussed in
Appendix 2. Clearly, ads on Zhaopin.com will not be representative of all jobs in China;
like all samples of job ads they will overrepresent jobs in expanding and high-turnover
occupations and industries. In addition, the jobs on Zhaopin.com likely require a
significantly higher skill level than the median job in China. Since, according to our own
data, discrimination according to gender, age, height and beauty is more common in lessskilled occupations, our data likely underestimates its extent in China.
Another sampling issue arises from the fact that some of the ads in our data are
for multiple vacancies. 22 While most of our analysis treats the job ad as the unit of
analysis (using the number of vacancies it advertises as a control variable of interest) we
report some specifications which weight the sample by the number of vacancies. A
related issue is that ads for multiple vacancies can specify up to three occupations. Since
the share of vacancies corresponding to the individual occupations is typically unknown
in these cases, we restrict our sample to ads for a single occupation; this reduces our
sample by about 20 percent. 23 Finally, we note that, by construction, our data is a ‘stock’
sample of “ads in progress” rather than a flow sample of newly-posted (or just-filled) ads.
This implies that long vacancy spells are overrepresented in our data, which would affect
our estimates if there is parameter heterogeneity that is correlated with vacancy durations.
To address this concern, we replicated our estimates for a subsample of ads that consists,
almost certainly, of newly posted ads. 24
Descriptive statistics for our data are provided in Table 2. All told, we study a
total of 633,664 job ads; as expected these tend to be for relatively highly-skilled jobs:
about 70 percent of ads require at least some post-secondary education.25 Seventy
percent require some experience, with the modal experience requirement between one
and three years. 26 One in ten ads expressed a gender preference; this was evenly split
21

Note that firms frequently re-post the same ad; as detailed below our sample treats all such renewals as
the same ad. Our choice of Zhaopin is largely for the technical reason that its site structure allowed us to
easily and accurately identify such renewals.
22
The most extreme case was a single ad for 8000 vacancies at a newly-opened chemical plant; our results
are not materially affected by excluding this observation.
23
Our results were very similar when we included all ads and classified them according to the first
occupation listed, or when we allocated ads fractionally, and equally, across all the occupations they listed.
Importantly, we do not exclude ads for multiple occupations when we calculate our indicators of labor
market conditions (for example the number of competing ads in an occupation/region/period cell), which
are the key regressors of interest in Section 5 of the paper.
24
Appendix 2 describes the creation of this “inflow sample”. See Bergeron et al. (2009) for a recent
discussion of the effects of length-biased sampling.
25
By far the most common occupation (of the 38 categories used by Zhaopin on its site) is sales, at about
20 percent of the ads, with computer-related occupations second at about 9 percent. The top five industries
were consulting, IT service, construction, software and internet/e-commerce. 26 and 18 percent of the ads
were for jobs in Beijing and Shanghai respectively, but all Chinese provinces are represented in our data.
26
Additional information about skill requirements, as well as about how firms respond to labor supply
shocks, might of course be gleaned from the wage levels attached to jobs advertised on Zhaopin.
Unfortunately, only about one eighth of the ads in our sample contained any usable information about
wages. Since this small a sample is likely to be highly unrepresentative, we decided not to include wages
in our analysis of ad contents.

11
between men and women. 27 About one in four ads expressed an age preference; perhaps
surprisingly, minimum age requirements were almost as common as maxima. Indeed, 12
percent of ads specified both a minimum and a maximum age, and fewer than one percent
of advertised minima were at age 16—the lowest observed in our data. That said, firms
seem overall to be seeking younger workers: the mean minimum and maximum ages
were about 25 and 35 respectively, and fewer than 5 percent of the maximum ages were
over 45.
Unlike gender and age requirements, which can go in both ‘directions’ (excluding
either men or women, ruling out both the too-old and the too-young), none of the 633,664
ads in our sample requested short or unattractive applicants. All together, 8 percent of
ads requested that the applicant be physically attractive (“xingxiang”). Given the relative
rarity of gender restrictions, a large majority of the requests for beauty in our sample
were in ads that did not express a gender preference. Among ads that did express a
gender preference, however, beauty was much more valued among women than men:
fully one out of every three ads targeted at female applicants required the applicant to be
physically attractive, compared to 6.7 percent for ads targeted at men. This contrasts
starkly with some U.S. studies (e.g. Hamermesh and Biddle 1994), which did not find
that the labor market returns to beauty were highly ‘gendered’.
At two percent of job ads, height requirements are the least common of the ‘USprohibited” job requirements we study here. That noted, a fascinating aspect of these
height restrictions is that, when they exist, they are always gender-specific. In some
sense, this is true by definition in ads that are gender-targeted. More surprising is the fact
that the majority of height requirements --which appear in ads without gender
restrictions-- explicitly list two, gender-specific height requirements, with the female
about 8 cm (3.15 inches) shorter. This suggests that these height requirements are not
associated with specific job tasks (e.g. operating a particular machine), but either used as
signals of health or cognitive ability (as argued by Case and Paxson 2008), or valued in
themselves, perhaps by a firm’s customers. 28
About half of the ads in our sample specified the number of vacancies that were
available. Half of these, in turn, were for a single position. That said, a significant share
of the ads were for large numbers of job openings. More than half of the ads were placed
by privately owned, Chinese firms (this includes privately held companies, publiclytraded companies and former State-Owned Enterprises where a majority of shares are still
owned by the state). Another 35 percent of ads were from employers with some foreign
connection. Most of these were Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and joint ventures,
though a small number of representative offices are also included. A further eight
percent of ads were for jobs in State-Owned Enterprises. We also observed some ads
from non-profit employers (e.g. in education or health care) or (local, provincial or
federal) public service; while these are a very small share of the total, our large sample
size allows us to study them as well.
27

This includes all intensities of preference, though the most typical employer statements were either
“female[male] preferred” and “female[male] only”.
28
We also searched for evidence of ethnic or racial discrimination in our sample of ads. Only 56 ads in
our sample explicitly requested that the applicant be Han (China’s dominant ethnic group). Ads requesting
minority ethnicities were actually more common.

12
One advantage of working with job board data is the fact that our data is a census
of the ads posted there. Thus, to the extent that ads on Zhaopin provide a representative
picture of all vacancies that are relevant to workers who search on line, we can use our
data to characterize the labor market environment each ad inhabits. To that end, the final
panel in Table 2 shows our baseline indicators of the labor market conditions facing each
ad, computed at the level of the occupation/province/period cell.29 Note that all three of
our empirical indicators actually measure excess labor demand, or labor market tightness
(i.e. v/u); thus they are inversely related to M in our theoretical model. The first of these
(MRR, or the mean renewal rate) is the mean number of times an ad in that cell was
renewed. “Renewing” an ad means simply re-posting the same ad on Zhaopin on a day
after it was first posted; in consequence it will be listed as “posted today” on the site.
Since it is essentially free for employers to renew ads, employers do so very frequently
and workers pay little attention to ads posted more than a few days ago. Thus, the
number of renewals is probably the best available indicator of a vacancy’s duration in our
data. 30 On average, an ad in our data was renewed about 13 times; this declined by 27
percent (from about 15 to 11) between our two observation windows, suggesting a
considerable decline in excess demand for labor. This is supported by our two other
indicators of labor market tightness, namely the total number of competing ads (NCA) in
an occupation*province cell, or the total number of competing vacancies (NCV = NCA
times the mean number of positions per ad in the cell), which declined between our two
periods from 4499 to 2867 and from 19185 to 12275 respectively, which is 36 % by
either measure.
Interestingly, means of the US-prohibited job requirements in the first part of
Table 2 change very little between periods despite this large decline in competition for
workers. Advertised education requirements fell, but both of these trends were almost
certainly affected by the nature of the demand shock that hit Chinese labor markets in this
period, which disproportionately affected highly-skilled occupations and the prosperous
eastern provinces. 31 A complete analysis of the effects of labor demand shocks would
net out such economy-wide factors, as we do in Section 5 of the paper.
A different picture of the frequency of ‘discriminatory’ job ads in China emerges
when we organize our data by firms rather than ads. Overall, 63,507 distinct firms placed
ads on Zhaopin during our sampling period. The median (mean) (maximum) number of
ads placed per firm was 4 (9.97) (6,316); the median (mean) (maximum) number of
distinct occupations advertised for over our entire sampling period (out of a possible 38)
29

With 38 occupations, 31 provinces, and 2 periods, there are 2356 possible cells. Later in the paper, we
also provide results for labor market indicators defined at the occupation*province*industry*period level.
30
In principle, it would be possible (if we resampled ads from Zhaopin) to compute the date when a firm’s
ad actually disappeared from Zhaopin.com, but conversations with Zhaopin officials suggest that this
would yield a considerably poorer measure of the vacancy’s duration, since many firms simply allow the
vacancy to remain on the site after it is filled. In fact, this practice is encouraged by Zhaopin, because it
raises the job ad count Zhaopin can advertise to prospective applicants.
31
For example, the correlation between an occupation’s mean educational requirement and the betweenperiod change our three measures of the supply of applications (MRR and the log of NCA and NCV
respectively) is -.27, -.32 and -.30 across our 38 occupations. Across China’s 31 provinces, the correlations
between these three labor supply measures and the province’s initial log GDP per capita were -.60, -.74 and
-.63 respectively. Thus, the declines in excess labor demand were largest in skilled occupations and highincome provinces.

13
was 2 (3.42) (36). Characteristics of these 63,507 firms’ hiring policies are summarized
in Table 3. According to Table 3, 18.7 percent of the firms in our data placed at least one
ad that invited only men to apply; for women this number was 23.5 percent. 29 percent
of firms requested beauty in at least one of their Zhaopin ads, and 9.7 percent advertised a
height requirement. Sixty-one percent placed an ad specifying at least one of the four
‘US-prohibited’ attributes in our data (gender, age, height and appearance). For obvious
reasons, these shares rise with the number of ads the firm placed on Zhaopin, and with
the number of distinct occupations for which it advertised on Zhaopin during our sample
period. Thus, for example, among firms that placed more than 50 ads, about half directed
at least one of their ads specifically at women; half did the same for men, and 36 percent
placed both male-only and female-only ads during our sample period. Ninety percent of
these firms requested a US-prohibited attribute in at least one ad.
Together, the statistics in Table 3 thus illustrate two additional features of
advertised discrimination in China. First, a large share of employers engage in what
some Western observers would call explicit discrimination. Second, advertised
discriminatory preferences are highly idiosyncratic, varying significantly across jobs
within the same firm. 32 This suggests that firms’ relative preferences for groups (vA – vB
in our model) likely vary not just in size but in sign across very detailed jobs within
firms.
Table 4 concludes our descriptive analysis of firms’ advertised job requirements
by presenting a correlation matrix among all of them. The pattern that emerges is clear.
First, aside from the mechanical negative correlation (at the ad level) between a
preference for men or women, all entries but one in rows 1-6 –which refer to the “U.S.
prohibited” requirements-- are positive. The same is true of the correlation between the
two “U.S. allowed” requirements (education and experience) in the bottom right of the
table. Finally, consider the 2×6 matrix of correlations between these two sets of
characteristics in the bottom left of the table. All but one of these 12 coefficients are
negative and statistically significant (the one positive correlation is between experience
and a preference for men). Thus, Chinese employers disproportionately advertise for USprohibited characteristics in jobs where US-allowed job requirements are low. A
particularly striking feature of the above pattern is that it holds for gender and age
preferences in either direction: When skill level is measured by education and experience
requirements, preferences for men and for women, and both minimum and maximum age
requirements, are all more common in less-skilled than more-skilled job advertisements.
Perhaps surprisingly, it follows that prohibiting ‘discriminatory’ ads in China would
disproportionately impact employers of less-skilled labor. 33
32

Quantitatively, two thirds of the variance in advertised preferences for men (and for women) in our data
is within firms. Since this share falls only marginally when occupation fixed effects are introduced, this
high within-firm variance is therefore not consistent with a model in which gender preferences are tied to
occupations in the same way in most firms, but firms hire different mixes of occupations. The unexplained
variance in advertised gender preferences however falls to one third when fixed effects for occupation*firm
cells are introduced. This indicates (a) that gender preferences for the same occupation vary considerably
across firms, and (b) that a typical firm’s gender preferences also vary substantially within our 38
occupational categories (presumably between more detailed jobs). Results are very similar for the all the
other ad characteristicss in Table 3 (please see the paper’s website for details).
33
In additional analysis available from the authors, we consider the likely impact of banning
‘discriminatory’ advertising in China by asking how accurately a jobseeker who observes all features of an

14
5. Labor Market Conditions and the Demand for Discrimination

Our goal in this section is to estimate the causal effects of labor market tightness,
as measured by MRR, LCA and LCV, on firms’ advertised hiring standards, including
‘discriminatory’ standards, where MRR, LCV and LCA represent conditions in the ad’s
occupation*province or occupation*industry*province cell.34 Since we include both
period effects, and fixed effects for the above cells, only the differential within-cell
temporal variation in market conditions between our two periods is used to identify the
effects of labor market conditions on ad content.
A natural concern with this exercise is that, in our theoretical model, M represents
labor market conditions that are exogenous to the firm which is placing an ad, while
MRR, LCA and LCV in our data –which measure excess demand in the local labor
market-- may also be correlated with unobserved determinants of the advertising firm’s
demand for labor. We approach this issue in several ways. First, while it is likely that
periods in which our indicators of excess demand in the labor market, --MRR, LCA and
LCV 35 —are high, will also be periods in which the firms posting ads in our sample
experience positive product demand shocks, we note that this is a concern only if those
unobserved product demand shocks affect the firm’s relative demand for different types
of labor. Unobserved demand shocks, if they impact the firm’s desire to hire men and
women, or attractive versus unattractive workers equally within an occupation, are not a
concern.
Second, if unobserved industry demand shocks do affect the firm’s relative
demand for labor of different types, theory offers some guidance regarding this effect’s
direction: If good product market conditions operate primarily by raising the price of the
firm’s output (thus raising both µA and µB equiproportionately), then µA – µB will tend to
be higher when our indicators of excess labor demand are high. Thus, if anything, our
estimates of the effects of MRR, LCA and LCV on the firm’s demand for its ‘preferred’
type of labor (whether this is beautiful workers, or well-educated workers) will be biased
in the direction of finding a positive effect. We will interpret our results with this in
mind. Finally, later in this section we isolate the effects of labor market conditions for
the advertised job that are driven by changes in demand outside the advertising firm’s
industry. These changes should be less correlated with changes in product demand at the
firm placing the ad.
Table 5 presents the results of our baseline specification, using the mean ad
renewal rate in an ad’s occupation*province*period cell as our indicator of labor market
conditions. Each column presents results for a different dependent variable; all
ad on Zhaopin other than gender, age, beauty and height would be able to predict those requirements.
Since all of these R2s are low, the impact of prohibiting a characteristic on the ‘information’ available to
jobseekers is roughly proportional to those characteristics’ unconditional variance. This means that (a)
considerable information would be lost from a ban, and (b) more information would be lost in ads for
unskilled jobs, since ‘discriminatory’ ads are more common for those jobs.
34
Our regressions also control for a direct indicator of the likely number of applications per position
(specifically the number of vacancies the firm is trying to fill with the ad). Although the variation in this
indicator is less clearly exogenous to the advertising firm, its estimated effects are also consistent with our
model.
35
LCA and LCV denote the logs of NCA and NCV respectively.

15
regressions include fixed effects for occupation*province and for period. Except for
experience, where --as predicted-- a high mean renewal rate reduces firms’ advertised
demands for experience, MRR has no statistically significant effect on any other ad
characteristics, including the US-prohibited characteristics and the education
requirement. It is worth noting that Table 5’s estimated effects for the six US-prohibited
characteristics are not only statistically indistinguishable from zero, but small in
magnitude. 36 Finally, we note that the p-value for a chi-squared test of the hypothesis
that all the US-prohibited attributes (columns 1-6) are unaffected by the mean renewal
rate is .6515. For the hypothesis that neither of the US-allowed features of job ads
(education and experience) were affected by MRR/10, this p-value is .0008. 37 This
insensitivity of advertised ‘discriminatory’ employer preferences, and sensitivity of
nondiscriminatory preferences, is mirrored in a wide variety of robustness checks below.
Before turning to those robustness checks, it is interesting to consider the
coefficients on some of the cross-sectional ‘control’ variables in Table 5. Like MRR, the
number of positions a firm is hoping to fill with the current ad is another indicator of our
theoretical construct M, because a higher number of positions to be filled implies a
correspondingly lower number of applications per vacancy. Thus we would expect firms
hiring for a large number of positions to reduce their hiring standards, thus imposing
fewer discriminatory restrictions and requiring lower levels of education and
experience. 38 Table 5 indicates that this is indeed the case for education and experience,
but not for the US-prohibited ad characteristics: Mirroring what we find for our ‘market
conditions variables (MRR, LCA and LCV), firms become choosier on education and
experience requirements, but not on their preferences for attributes like age, height and
gender, when workers are easier to find.
According to Becker’s (1971) model of taste-based discrimination, firms
operating in competitive product and capital markets should be less able to discriminate
than firms in product markets that are sheltered from competition or takeover. At the
same time, a number of authors, including Lawler and Bae (1998) have argued that
corporate culture affects a firm’s tendency to discriminate. For both these reasons it is
interesting to look at the correlation of firm ownership types with advertised
discrimination in our data. Consistent with the corporate culture hypothesis, firms with
some foreign ownership require considerably higher levels of “US-allowed”
qualifications (.85 years of education and half a year of experience) and are less likely
than the reference category (Chinese private-sector firms) to express preferences for all
US-prohibited attributes. The size, robustness and statistical significance of this effect on
the use of US-prohibited attributes dwarfs any effect of local labor market conditions
estimated in this paper. Like foreign-owned firms, Chinese State-Owned Enterprises
36

For example, recall from Table 2 that the mean decline in MRR/10 was about .4 (corresponding to a 27
percent decline in vacancy durations), and that the share of ads requesting men in our first sampling period
was .053. Applying the coefficient and standard error for MRR/10 in Table 5 indicates that with 95 percent
certainty, this 27 percent decline in vacancies neither reduced firms’ demand for men below .043, nor
raised it above .060.
37
These p-values adjust for clustering at the occupation-province level, as well as correlation of errors
across the 10 equations in Table 5. See Stata’s suest command.
38
A competing explanation of such a pattern is that heterogeneity in the jobs to be filled might rise with the
number of positions on offer, making a specific requirement less appropriate. This is at least partly
addressed by the fact that we restrict our sample to ads for a single occupation only.

16
require high levels of education and experience. Consistent with Becker’s hypothesis
(and with an employer taste for men and youth) however, they are more likely than
Chinese private-sector firms to prefer men, to disprefer women, and to specify a
maximum age. 39
A final set of cross-sectional ‘control’ variables of some interest are the fixed
effects related to occupation. To recover aggregate occupation effects, we estimated a
simpler version of the regressions in Table 5. 40 Figures 1-6 plot the resulting occupation
fixed effects against the occupation’s mean education requirement, for our six USprohibited requirements. Occupations are divided into two groups, based on our a priori
impression of whether they are likely to involve a considerable amount of customer
contact. The six customer-contact occupations, indicated by triangles, are sales, customer
service, hospitality/tourism/entertainment (“tourism”), editing/media/film/news
(“media”), retail, and “healthcare/beauty/fitness” (“beautyfit”). Symbol sizes are
proportional to the inverse of the variance of the estimated fixed effect, and a regression
line (estimated with these weights) and the 95% confidence band is shown.
Figures 1-6 illustrate once again that advertisements with ‘discriminatory’
employer preferences are disproportionally found in occupations requiring low education
levels: this is strikingly true for all such preferences. Inspection of the figures for outliers
yields no obvious results for the age restrictions (except possibly a disproportionate
advertising of age restrictions for higher management positions), but the following
occupations seem to stand out as positive outliers in firms’ demand for women, beauty
and height: retail, tourism, beauty/fitness, “administration” and perhaps customer
service. Of these, only administration was an occupation we did not classify as involving
customer contact. Subsequent inquiries into the nature of jobs in the administrative
category revealed that secretarial services are a major component. 41 We also note that
tourism and retail seem to be negative outliers in their demand for men. In sum, an
examination of cross-sectional occupational patterns suggests some support for the notion
that customers, plus persons who hire secretaries, prefer to interact with tall, attractive
women. 42
39

On the other hand, SOEs are less likely to request beauty and height and to specify a minimum age. We
note that the Chinese public sector also disproportionately prefers young men. Our findings regarding
gender, SOEs and the public sector are consistent with Meng (1998); Gustafsson and Li (2000)); Liu, Meng
and Zhang 2000; and Zhang, Han, Liu and Zhao (2008), who find that the share of the unadjusted gender
wage gap that is not accounted for by observable productivity-related characteristics in China is smaller in
market-oriented activities than state-owned ones.
40
Specifically, these regressions control for the number of positions advertised, firm size, firm ownership,
part-time jobs, fixed effects for period 2 and for number of positions not stated, plus a full set of province
and industry fixed effects. Measures of labor market conditions are not included because they do not have
a clear interpretation in the absence of occupation*province fixed effects. Skill indicators, such as
education, are not included so we can illustrate their effects in Figures 1-6.
41
Confirming a strong employer preference for women in these positions, Bertrand and Mullainathan
(2004) were forced to stop sending male resumes in response to administrative job ads due to extremely
low callback rates.
42
To test this hypothesis somewhat more formally, we re-estimated the regressions underlying Figs 1-6,
adding controls for education and experience requirements, and replacing the occupation fixed effects by a
single dummy variable for customer contact occupations. Customer-contact occupations were 2.0
percentage points less likely to request male applicants, 1.0 percentage points more likely to request female
applicants, 3.0 and 3.4 percentage points more likely to specify a minimum and maximum age respectively,

17
Turning back to the effects of labor market conditions on firms’ demand for
discrimination, Table 6 explores the effects of alternative indicators of those conditions.
Row 1 reproduces Table 5’s results for the mean renewal rate (MRR) at the occupation*
province*period level; Row 3 and 5 present coefficient estimates from regressions where
MRR is replaced by the log of the number of competing ads in the cell, and the log of the
competing vacancies (LCA and LCV respectively). Estimated effects of market
conditions on firms’ demands for education and experience are similar to row 1 (though
note that these are in different units), and become statistically significant for both
education and experience in the LCV specification. Rows 2, 4 and 6 of Table 6 change
the level at which the above labor market variables are calculated to the
occupation*industry*province*period. The advantage to doing this is a decline in
measurement error, if workers in a given occupation have industry-specific skills, for
example if computer and furniture salespeople are not perfect substitutes. Such a decline
in measurement error should reduce the standard errors on MRR, LCA and LCV, and
make these coefficients more negative. The disadvantage is that it may increase the
expected negative correlation between the hiring firm’s own demand for labor and MRR,
LCA and LCV (at least if firms raise their relative demands for their preferred worker
types when product demand is strong). This should make the estimated coefficients on
MRR, LCA and LCV less negative.
If anything, defining labor markets at the occupation*province*industry level
tends to reduce the standard errors of the coefficients on US-allowed ad characteristics,
increasing their statistical significance. Now, high vacancy rates (intense competition for
workers) lead to statistically significant declines in education requirements for two of the
measures, and significant declines in experience requirements for all three measures. In
all specifications, the data decisively reject the null hypothesis that both of these ad
characteristics are unaffected by labor market conditions. Together, these results suggest
that measurement error, rather than unobserved relative demand shocks, is the greater
concern with our baseline estimates. For the US-prohibited ad characteristics, on the
other hand, the estimated effects of labor market conditions are mostly insignificant, and
inconsistent in sign when they are significant, for all the labor measures in Table 6. For
the most part, tests of cross-equation restrictions do however reject the hypothesis that all
these coefficients are zero, though somewhat less decisively than for the US-allowed
coefficients.
Table 7 combines information from occupations and industries to compare the
effects of two competing labor market indicators in the same regression. One refers to
conditions in an ad’s own occupation*industry*region*period cell; this is the indicator
used in rows 2, 4 and 6 of Table 6. The other summarizes the conditions pertaining to
that same occupation in other industries in the same province (and period). As noted, the
idea is that, if other industries employing, say, software programmers, are expanding, this
will reduce the availability of software programmers to one’s own industry, without
necessarily being correlated with the state of product demand at the advertising firm. In
Table 7, the coefficients on conditions in the ad’s own occupation and industry are
similar to those in Table 6: US-allowed features of job ads respond to labor market
and 4.6 and 1.5 percentage points more likely to request beauty and height. All of these coefficients had pvalues of below .001. Recalling that the sample means of beauty and height are 8 and 2.4 percent
respectively, the effects are clearly large in magnitude as well.

18
conditions in the direction predicted by our simple search model, while US-prohibited
characteristics do not. Effects of conditions in other industries for the same occupation
on both types of ad characteristics are mostly insignificant, with the exception of
experience requirements, which are statistically significant in two of three cases. Still,
this effect on experience requirements provides additional support for the interpretation
of our estimated coefficients on MRR, LCA and LCV as responses of ad-posting firms to
supply shocks in the labor market where they are hiring.
Table 8 conducts three additional robustness checks, all of them now measuring
labor market conditions at the occupation*province *industry*period level, or finer. The
first asks whether our results change when we treat vacancies, rather than ads (which
sometimes announce multiple vacancies) as the unit of analysis. To address this issue,
Panel A of the Table restricts the sample to those ads which reported the number of
vacancies available (including one), and replicates the regression results in rows 2, 4 and
6 of Table 6 weighting each observation by the number of vacancies it represents. Panel
B of Table 8 addresses the concern that our results may be biased because, by
construction, the estimation sample consists disproportionately of job ads that took a long
time to fill. To address this concern, we constructed a subsample of ads that, almost
surely, were first posted on Zhaopin after the start of the observation period in which it
appears. The procedure for defining this sample is described in Appendix 2. We then reestimated rows 2, 4 and 6 of Table 6 on this subsample. Finally, Panel C pushes our
analysis of the effects of market conditions one step further by replacing the occupation
province*industry fixed effects in rows 2, 4 and 6 of Table 6 by occupation*province*
firm effects. These estimates remove any heterogeneity arising from a changing mix of
firms that were hiring on Zhaopin in our two time periods: identification now comes
from comparing the ads issued by the same firm, advertising for the same occupation in
the same province, before and after China’s recent labor market collapse.
Taken together, the results of these robustness checks are broadly similar, with
mostly insignificant and inconsistently-signed effects of labor market conditions on the
incidence of US-prohibited restrictions, and fairly consistent evidence that advertised
education and experience requirements are less restrictive in tight labor markets. This is
confirmed by tests of cross-equation restrictions: the null hypothesis that both of the USallowed ad characteristics are unresponsive to labor market conditions is rejected in all
specifications at the .005 level or better; the null hypothesis that all the US-prohibited
characteristics are unresponsive is not always rejected at conventional significance levels.
Finally, we note that the results in Table 8 (as well as previous tables) are most robust
when experience requirements are the dependent variable: in every specification, firms
reduce the amount of experience they require in their posted job advertisements in tight
labor markets. This seems sensible, since experience might be the easiest of the hiring
criteria to adjust in tight labor markets, compared for example to education requirements,
gender mix, and standards for employees’ physical appearance.
Our final set of robustness checks is summarized in Table 9. These address the
concern that our finding of an insignificant effect of labor market conditions on
advertised ‘discriminatory’ restrictions may be driven by the fact that some of those
restrictions are quite rare (in the case of height, comprising only two percent of ads).
Thus there may be little effect of market conditions on the demand for these

19
characteristics, simply because the vast majority of firms do not care about them (or care
in different directions, as in the case of gender). Columns 1-6 of Table 9 address this
question by restricting the estimation sample for each of the six US-prohibited
characteristics to occupations whose demands for the characteristic under study were in
the top quartile in period 1 of our sample. Thus, for example, column 1 asks whether
those occupations that were most inclined to explicitly seek male labor in the summer of
2008 were likely to intensify their requests for male labor when workers became much
easier to find six months later. Again, while there is the odd significantly negative
coefficient, there are some significant positive coefficients as well, and most coefficients
are statistically insignificant. The test statistics in column 9 fail to reject the null
hypothesis that all six coefficients are zero three of six times at the one-percent level.
Columns 7 and 8 address this question in a slightly different way for the one USprohibited ad characteristic, age, that we can measure in a (partially) continuous way.
Here, we restrict our sample to the approximately one quarter of ads that specified an age
preference, and regress the level of the minimum and maximum age (in years) on labor
market conditions. If firms that care about age become less ‘choosy’ regarding ages
when workers are hard to find, we would expect high levels of MRR, LCA and LCV to
reduce the minimum age, and to raise the maximum, thus widening the range of
acceptable ages. This is not what we see: Looking at the occupation*province*industry
based results (which arguably delineate labor markets more accurately), we find that the
both the minimum and maximum ages tend fall by about the same amount when
relatively few applications are available. While this might be interpreted as firms shifting
their recruiting towards (less-valued) younger workers in tight labor markets (and is
consistent with the trend towards lower experience requirements in those situations), this
hypothesis is hard to reconcile with the leftward movement (and indeed existence) of the
maximum age limit.
In sum, this section finds that firms reduce their advertised education and
experience requirements in tight local labor markets. This effect is most robust for the
case of experience, which is arguably the easiest of these job requirements to adjust in the
short run. In contrast, we do not detect any robust or consistent effect of labor market
conditions on firms’ advertised requirements for ‘US-prohibited’ employee attributes,
specifically gender, age, beauty and height. Indeed, compared to the effects of other
factors, such as foreign ownership of the firm, or attributes of the occupation such as the
amount of customer contact, effects of labor market conditions on the demand for USprohibited characteristics are miniscule. While we can do little more than speculate about
the possible reasons for this difference, one possibility might involve nonconvexities
associated with ‘appropriate’ employee types for a job: If, for example, all incumbent
employees in a job are male, the costs of hiring a single female for that job may greatly
exceed the expected net productivity difference between an individual male and female
applicant; among other possibilities, incumbents may harass (or customers may shun)
workers of a different type (Lindbeck and Snower, 1988). This meshes with the
suggestion of our search model, that productivity differentials would need to be quite
large to justify excluding one group from the application process completely. 43
43

It also echoes China’s own employment law (see footnote 2) which explicitly exempts jobs that are
‘claimed to be unsuitable for females by the country’ from antidiscrimination legislation, and with our own

20
6. Summary

We have studied patterns of firms’ advertised preferences for an employee’s
gender, age, physical appearance and height in a sample of internet job ads, and have
interpreted these patterns using a simple employer search model. We find that job
advertisements specifying these requirements are commonplace. Clearly, a large fraction
of Chinese employers find these characteristics to be useful screens, either because
employers value the characteristics intrinsically or because the characteristics signal other
desired attributes that are not easily measured at the time of hire. Further, our model
suggests that firms will only advertise these preferences when they are intense.
Consistent with our model, firms become less likely to request ‘US-prohibited’
employee attributes in their job ads as job skill levels rise. We find that discriminatory
restrictions are highly job-specific, with the same firm often imposing them in some
detailed jobs and not in others, or in different directions (e.g. against men or against
women) in different jobs. Our model also predicts that firms should relax both their
‘discriminatory’ and nondiscriminatory advertised job requirements in tight labor
markets. Using data from China’s recent labor market collapse, we find that only the
latter are sensitive to local, occupational labor market conditions. This lack of a response
to labor market conditions is particularly striking when compared to other estimated
effects, for example the large and robust differences between foreign- and domesticowned firms, which may capture, for example, the effects of corporate culture.
Our paper also contributes to the literature on employer search and recruitment.
We develop, to our knowledge, the first theoretical model of employers’ choice of
advertised hiring criteria, and conduct the first empirical study of the determinants of
these criteria, whether ‘discriminatory’ like gender, or not (like education). This very
simple model also provides a natural framework with which to study an old question in
labor economics –the effects of labor market tightness on hiring discrimination.
We conclude with a brief discussion of the main ‘fact’ that makes this paper
possible: why is it acceptable for employers to specify, say, a preferred employee gender
or age in some countries but not in others? While we cannot provide a definitive answer,
we offer two observations. One is our own result that employer preferences for age,
gender, beauty and height all decline with a job’s skill level. Thus, the benefits to
employers of expressing such preferences may be considerably lower in a highly-skilled
labor market like the U.S. than in a developing country like China. Second, we note that,
in contrast to the ‘US-allowed’ characteristics (education and experience), the ‘USprohibited’ characteristics are all ascriptive, in the sense there is little or nothing an
applicant can do to alter his or her gender, age, beauty, or height. 44 The notion that job
opportunities should not be allowed to depend on ascriptive (as opposed to earned)
characteristics may be a stronger feature of current American political culture than of
other cultures.

evidence that firms’ demands for gender and other US-prohibited characteristics vary considerably across
jobs within the firm.
44
That said, see Lee’s (2009) anecdotal account of efforts taken by Chinese job applicants to increase their
beauty and their height.

21
References
Altonji, J. and C. Pierret. “Employer Learning and Statistical Discrimination” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, Vol. 116, No. 1. (Feb., 2001), pp. 313-350
Arcidiacono, Peter and Robert A. Miller. “CCP Estimation of Dynamic Discrete Choice Modelswith
Unobserved Heterogeneity” Unpublished paper, Carnegie Mellon University, February 20, 2008
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Maitreesh Ghatak, and Jeanne Lafortune. “Marry for What: Caste and
Mate Selection in Modern India” NBER working paper no. 14958, May 2009.
Barron, John M, and John Bishop. “Extensive Search, Intensive Search, and Hiring Costs: New Evidence
on Employer Hiring Activity” Economic Inquiry. Vol. 23 (3). p 363-82. July 1985.
Barron, John M., John Bishop, and William C. Dunkelberg. “Employer Search: The Interviewing and
Hiring of New Employees”. Review of Economics and Statistics 67 (1) (Feb. 1985): 43-52.
Bergeron, Pierre-Jerome, Masoud Asgharian, and David B. Wolfson. “Covariate Bias Induced by LengthBiased Sampling of Failure Times” Journal of the American Statistical Association Vol. 103
(482). p 737-42. (June 2008).
Bertrand, Marianne, Lawrence Katz, and Claudia Goldin. “Dynamics of the Gender Gap for Young
Professionals in the Corporate and Financial Sectors”. NBER Working Paper No. 14681, January
2009.
Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan. "Are Emily And Greg More Employable Than Lakisha
And Jamal? A Field Experiment On Labor Market Discrimination," American Economic Review
94(4) (September 2004): 991-1013.
Black, Sandra E. and Elizabeth Brainerd. “Importing Equality? The Impact of Globalization on Gender
Discrimination” Industrial and Labor Relations Review. July 2004; 57(4): 540-59
Black, S. and P. Strachan. “The Division of Spoils: Rent-Sharing and Discrimination in a Regulated
Industry”. American Economic Review 91(4) (September 2001): 814-831.
Black, Sandra E. and Alexandra Spitz-Oener “Explaining Women’s Success: Technological Change and
the Skill Content of Women’s Work” NBER Working paper no. 13116, May 2007
Burdett, Kenneth and Elizabeth J. Cunningham. “Toward a Theory of Vacancies” Journal of Labor
Economics. July 1998; 16(3): 445-78
Case, A. and C Paxson, “Stature and Status: Height, Ability and Labor Market Outcomes” Journal of
Political Economy 116(3) (June 2008): 499- 532.
Cerella, J. “Age effects may be global, not local: comment” Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General (1991) (120): 215-23.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Jonathan Guryan. “Prejudice and Wages: An Empirical Assessment of
Becker’s The Economics of Discrimination” Journal of Political Economy, 2008, vol. 116, no. 5:
773-809
Charness, Gary, and Marie-Claire Villeval “Cooperation and Competition in Intergenerational
Experiments in the Field and the Laboratory” American Economic Review. Vol. 99 (3). p 956-78.
June 2009.

22
Couch, Kenneth A., and Robert Fairlie. “Last Hired, First Fired? Black-White Unemployment and the
Business Cycle”. unpublished paper, University of Connecticut, November 2005.
Darity, William A. Jr., and Patrick L. Mason. “Evidence on Discrimination in Employment: Codes of
Color, Codes of Gender”. Journal of Economic Perspectives 12(2) (Spring 1998):63-90.
Farber, H. “The Analysis of Inter-Firm Worker Mobility”. Journal of Labor Economics 12 (1994): 554593.
Freeman, Richard B. “Changes in the Labor Market for Black Americans, 1948-72”. Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity 1, (1973): 67-131.
Gibbons, R. and M. Waldman, "A Theory of Wage and Promotion Dynamics within Firms". Quarterly
Journal of Economics 114 (November 1999): 1321-1358.
Goldin, C. and C. Rouse. “Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of ‘Blind’ Auditions on Female
Musicians” American Economic Review September 2000; 90(4): 715-41
Gustafsson,Bjorn and Shi Li “Economic transformation and the gender earnings gap in urban China”
Journal of Population Economics (2000) 13: 305-329
Hamermesh, Daniel S. Beauty Pays. Princeton: Princeton University Press, forthcoming 2010.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. and Jeff E. Biddle. “Beauty and the Labor Market” The American Economic
Review, Vol. 84, No. 5 (Dec., 1994), pp. 1174-1194
Lang¸ Kevin, Michael Manove and William T. Dickens. “Racial Discrimination in Labor Markets with
Posted Wage Offers” American Economic Review. Vol. 95 (4). p 1327-40. September 2005.
Lawler, John J. and Johngseok Bae. “ Overt Employment Discrimination by Multinational Firms:
Cultural and Economic Influences in a Developing Country Industrial Relations, 37, 2, April
1998 (p 126-152)
Lazear, Edward P. “Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?” Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 87 (6). p
1261-84. December 1979.
Lee, Don. “Plastic Surgery Just to Get a Job”. Los Angeles Times, March 30, 2009. page B1.
Lindbeck, Assar, and Dennis J. Snower. “Cooperation, Harassment, and Involuntary Unemployment: An
Insider-Outsider Approach” American Economic Review, Vol. 78, No. 1 (Mar., 1988), pp. 167188
Liu, Pak-Wai, Xin Meng and Junsen Zhang. “Sectoral gender wage differentials and discrimination in the
transitional Chinese economy”. Journal of Population Economics (2000) 13: 331-352
Meng, Xin and Junsen Zhang. “The Two-Tier Labor Market in Urban China Occupational Segregation
and Wage Differentials between Urban Residents and Rural Migrants in Shanghai” Journal of
Comparative Economics 29, 485–504 (2001)
Meng, Xin “Male–female wage determination and gender wage discrimination in China’s rural industrial
sector” Labour Economics 5 (1998): 67–89.

23
Menzio, Guido. “A Theory of Partially Directed Search” Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 115 (5). p
748-69. October 2007.
Mobius, Markus M., and Tanya S. Rosenblat. “Why Beauty Matters” American Economic Review. Vol.
96 (1). p 222-35. March 2006.
Moen, Espen R. “Competitive Search Equilibrium” Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 105 (2). p 385411. April 1997.
Mortensen, Dale, and Christopher Pissaridies. “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the Theory of
Unemployment.” Review of Economic Studies. July 1994; 61(3): 397-415
Neumark, David. “Sex Discrimination in Restaurant Hiring: An Audit Study” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 111(3) (August 1996): 915-42.
Niederle, Muriel, and Lise Vesterlund. “Do Women Shy Away from Competition? Do Men Compete Too
Much?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Aug2007, Vol. 122 Issue 3, p1067-1101
Oaxaca, R. “Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labour Markets.” International Economic Review
14 (1973): 693-709
Oaxaca, Ronald, and Michael Ransom. " New Market Power Models and Sex Differences in Pay",
Princeton Industrial Relations Section working paper no. 540, December 2008.
Papalia, Diane et al., Adult Development and Aging (2nd edition) Boston: McGraw Hill, 2002.
Rosen, Asa. “An equilibrium search-matching model of discrimination.” European Economic Review 41
(1997) 1589-1613
Stigler, George J. “The Economics of Information”. Journal of Political Economy 69(3) (June 1961):
213-225.
Teulings, Coen N. and Pieter A. Gautier. “The Right Man for the Job“ The Review of Economic Studies,
Vol. 71, No. 2 (Apr., 2004), pp. 553-580
Van Ommeren, Jos and Giovanni Russo. “Firm Recruitment Behaviour: Sequential or Non-Sequential
Search?” IZA Discussion Paper No. 4008, February 2009
Van Ours, Jan, and Geert Ridder. “Job requirements and the recruitment of new employees” Economics
Letters 36 (1991): 213-218.
Van Ours, Jan, and Geert Ridder. “Vacancies and the Recruitment of New Employees”. Journal of Labor
Economics 10(2) (April 1992): 138-155.
Van Ours, Jan, and Geert Ridder. “Vacancy Durations: Search or Selection?” Oxford Bulletin of
Economics and Statistics 55(2) (1993).
Yinger, John. “Measuring Racial Discrimination with Fair Housing Audits: Caught in the Act.” American
Economic Review. Vol. 76 (5). p 881-93. December 1986.
Zhang, Junsen, Jun Han, Pak-Wai Liu and Yaohui Zhao. “Trends in the Gender Earnings Gap in Urban
China, 1988-2004” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 61, No. 2 (January 2008).

24

Table 1: Simulation Results: Critical Values of Group B’s mean productivity
disadvantage (%) for alternative parameter values:

Standard Deviation of Idiosyncratic Employee Value (σ):
.750 (base)
.550
.375
.200

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Application processing costs (cM) as a share of Total Employee
Net Value:
.0072 (base)
.020
.083
.167

297%
205%
128%
59%

237%
161%
98%
42%

153%
98%
55%
19%

84%
66%
32%
5%

Notes: Numbers in the table represent the percentage gap between the mean
productivities of the two groups (100*(μA – μB)/μA) at which a firm is indifferent between
excluding group B and not. σ=.750 implies that an applicant of a given type at the 95th
percentile of the productivity distribution is twice as productive as the mean for that type.
The remaining values of σ imply ratios of the 95th percentile to the mean of 1.74, 1.5, and
1.27 respectively.

25
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics
Period 1

Period 2

Combined

0.898
0.053
0.049

0.896
0.052†
0.052

0.897
0.053
0.050

0.762
0.158
0.193
0.113
24.59
35.57
11.51

0.755
0.174
0.200
0.129
24.59†
35.71
11.81

0.759
0.165
0.196
0.120
24.59
35.63
11.65

0.076
0.052
0.329
0.064

0.085†
0.063
0.338†
0.071

0.080
0.056
0.333
0.067

0.022
0.013
0.003
0.006
0.000
171.1
163.1

0.027
0.016
0.004
0.008
0.000†
170.7
162.7

0.024
0.014
0.003
0.007
0.000
170.9
162.9

0.208
0.006
0.090
0.370
0.316
0.009
0.001

0.221
0.011
0.103
0.372
0.281
0.011
0.001†

0.214
0.008
0.096
0.371
0.301
0.010
0.001

0.302
0.003
0.012
0.358
0.201
0.109
0.014

0.305
0.004
0.011
0.367
0.191
0.106
0.016

0.304
0.003
0.011
0.362
0.197
0.108
0.014

A. ADVERTISED JOB REQUIREMENTS

Gender requirement
No gender preference
Prefer male?
Prefer female?
Age requirement
No age restrictions
Minimum age requirement?
Maximum age requirement?
Both minimum and maximum age requirement
Minimum age, when required
Maximum age, when required
Age range, when maximum and minimum listed
Beauty requirement
Job requires beauty (“xingxiang”)
Requires beauty given preference for male
Requires beauty given preference for female
Requires beauty given no gender preference
Height requirement
Any height requirement?
Two gender-specific height requirements
A single height requirement and preference for men
A single height requirement and preference for women
One gender-independent height requirement
Minimum male height, when required (centimeters)
Minimum female height, when required (centimeters)
Advertised Education requirement
Unspecified
Grade 9
High school
Post secondary
University
Master's degree
PhD
Advertised Experience requirement
Unspecified
No experience
1 Year or less
1 to 3 years
3 to 5 years
5 to 10 years
10 Years or above

26
Period 1

Period 2

Combined

0.011

0.020

0.015

7.08
451.8

6.90
453.3†

7.01
452.4

0.502
0.259
0.100
0.085
0.039
0.012
0.002

0.515
0.244
0.094
0.085†
0.044
0.015
0.003

0.508
0.253
0.098
0.085
0.041
0.013
0.002

0.091
0.359
0.307
0.095
0.118
0.030

0.102
0.374
0.311
0.081
0.107
0.025

0.096
0.365
0.309
0.089
0.113
0.028

0.549
0.370
0.003
0.078
0.001

0.592
0.311
0.004
0.092
0.001

0.567
0.345
0.003
0.084
0.001

D. LABOR MARKET MEASURES:
Mean refreshments per ad in occupation*province cell (MRR)
Number of ads in occupation*province cell (NCA)
Number of vacancies in occupation*province cell (NCV)

14.87
4499
19185

10.90
2867
12275

13.19
3809
16262

N

365615

268049

633664

….Table 2, Continued
B. OTHER AD CHARACTERISTICS
Job is Part Time
Length of Job description:
Number of lines
Number of characters
Number of positions advertised:
Unspecified
1
2
3-5
6-15
16-50
51+
C. FIRM CHARACTERISTICS
Firm size (number of workers):
1-19
20-99
100-499
500-999
1,000-9,999
10,000 +
Firm ownership type:**
Private, Domestic
Foreign
NonProfit
State-Owned Enterprise
Government

Notes: Sample sizes vary slightly across rows; reported numbers are for gender restrictions. Period 1 is
May 16/08 - July 29/08; Period 2 is Dec 17/08 - Feb 28/09. † indicates the difference between periods is
not statistically significant at the 5% level.
* In inches, these are 5 feet 7 inches for men, and 5 feet 4 inches for women, respectively.
** “Private, Domestic” includes privately held companies, publicly-traded companies and reformed StateOwned Enterprises where a majority of shares are still owned by the state. “Foreign” includes Foreign
Direct Investment, joint ventures, plus a small number of representative offices.

27
Table 3: Prevalence of “Discriminatory” Job Ads, by Firm.
Share of Firms Specifying a Preference For:
Any
Gender

Gender
Men
Women

Both
Genders

Any Age
Preference

Age
Minimum Maximum
Age
Age

Both Min
and Max

Beauty

Height

Any USProhibited
Trait

N

A. Total Number of Ads
Placed by the Firm:
1
2-10
11-50
51 and over
All Firms

.1643
.3037
.5376
.6607
.3393

.0673
.1496
.3509
.5149
.1868

.0970
.2070
.3895
.5079
.2352

.0000
.0528
.2029
.3621
.0826

.2698
.4217
.7056
.8326
.4667

.1698
.3119
.5946
.7749
.3593

.2345
.3727
.6549
.7996
.4196

.1345
.2630
.5439
.7419
.3122

.1046
.2492
.5108
.6741
.2912

.0267
.0734
.1992
.2930
.0971

.3887
.5876
.8257
.8998
.6148

8650
40873
12407
1577
63507

B. Total Number of
Occupations Sought by
the Firm:
1
2-10
11-20
21 and over
All Firms:

.1680
.3905
.7365
.8349
.3393

.0716
.2126
.6167
.7890
.1868

.1048
.2735
.5456
.7064
.2352

.0085
.0956
.4258
.6606
.0826

.2937
.5184
.8678
.9633
.4667

.1994
.4033
.8000
.9541
.3593

.2558
.4669
.8320
.9174
.4196

.1616
.3519
.7642
.9083
.3122

.1324
.3383
.6606
.8532
.2912

.0424
.1082
.3217
.4587
.0971

.4109
.6845
.9189
.9817
.6148

18086
43217
2095
109
63507

28
Table 4: Pairwise Correlations Among Advertised Job Requirements

1. Prefer male?
2. Prefer female?
3. Any minimum age?
4. Any maximum age?
5. Requires beauty?
6. Any height requirement?
7. Years of education required
8. Years of experience required
Note: All p-values are less than .001.

Male

Female
(2)

Minimum
Age?
(3)

Maximum
Age?
(4)

(1)

-.0542
.1515
.2062
-.0204
.0472
-.0956
.0196

.1201
.1640
.2147
.1570
-.1248
-.0906

.5950
.1133
.1102
-.1335
-.0206

.1352
.1409
-.1437
-.0267

Beauty

Height

(5)

(6)

Education
(years)
(7)

.3282
-.1215
-.1087

-.1689
-.0731

.2528

29

Table 5: Effects of Mean Ad Renewal Rate and Firm Characteristics on Job Ad Content

Mean Renewal Rate/10
Number of Vacancies
Advertised/10
Log Firm Size
Firm Ownership Type:
Foreign Ownership

Non-profit
organization
State-owned
enterprise
Government
Period 2
Sample Size
R2

DEPENDENT VARIABLE:
(4)
(5)
(6)
Maximum
Request
Height
Age?
Beauty?
Requirement?

(1)
Prefer
male?

(2)
Prefer female?

(3)
Minimum
Age?

-.00337
(.00327)
-.00065**
(.00022)
.00178**
(.00037)

.00339
(.00319)
-.00007
(.00011)
-.00375**
(.00053)

-.00349
(.00974)
.00236*
(.00111)
.01646**
(.00152)

-.00394
(.01000)
.00136
(.00071)
.01236**
(.00145)

.00339
(.00502)
.00056
(.00034)
-.00224**
(.00060)

-.01790**
(.00141)
.01161
(.00744)
.00820**
(.00243)
.06937**
(.02377)
-.00149
(.00171)
633,617
.058

-.01602**
(.00185)
-.01963**
(.00679)
-.00977**
(.00251)
-.02959
(.02069)
.00267
(.00183)
633,617
.063

-.03854**
(.00372)
-.01275
(.01505)
-.01700**
(.00482)
-.05110
(.03803)
.01355**
(.00381)
633,617
.050

-.05961**
(.00387)
.06241**
(.01749)
.01234*
(.00488)
.14807**
(.05058)
.00216
(.00413)
633,617
.066

-.01911**
(.00257)
.00218
(.01024)
-.01698**
(.00306)
.07850
(.06795)
.00404
(.00216)
633,617
.097

(7)
Education
(years)

(8)
Experience
(years)

-.00256
(.00327)
.00070*
(.00034)
.00144**
(.00040)

.11269
(.09239)
-.04133*
(.01922)
.19397**
(.00941)

-.22332**
(.06253)
-.24196**
(.03783)
-.01586
(.00928)

-.00871**
(.00143)
.00573
(.00504)
-.00469**
(.00132)
.06160
(.04745)
.00254
(.00174)
633,617
.103

.84959**
(.04210)
.67614**
(.17786)
.22354**
(.04970)
1.22066
(.65169)
.03932
(.04380)
633,617
.190

.55510**
(.02782)
.31217**
(.10580)
.17736**
(.02778)
.28165
(.25142)
.01135
(.02326)
441,239
.129

** p<0.01, * p<0.05. OLS estimates. Regressions also control for a full set of occupation*province fixed effects, plus a dummy for part-time jobs and for number of
vacancies not specified. Standard errors are clustered at the occupation*province level. The omitted firm type is for-profit firms with no government or foreign connection.

30
Table 6: Effects of Alternative Measures of Labor Market Conditions (M) on Job Ad Content
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Male

Female

Maximum
Age?

Beauty

Height

Education

Experience

MEAN RENEWAL
RATE/10:
In occupation/province
cell
In occupation/province
/industry cell

Minimum
Age?

Pr (1)(6)=0

Pr (7)(8)=0

-.00336
(.00327)
-.00095
(.00153)

.00340
(.00318)
.00494*
(.00225)

-.00350
(.00973)
.00786*
(.00396)

-.00394
(.00999)
.00135
(.00426)

.00339
(.00501)
.00386
(.00257)

-.00255
(.00327)
-.00050
(.00115)

.11256
(.09230)
-.01165
(.03933)

-.22011**
(.06216)
-.10688**
(.02387)

.6515

0.0008

.0427

0.0000

LOG (COMPETING
ADS) :
In occupation/province
Cell
In occupation/province
/industry cell

.00094
(.00348)
-.00369*
(.00159)

.01391**
(.00316)
.00104
(.00168)

-.01554*
(.00669)
-.00310
(.00331)

-.00254
(.00704)
-.01008**
(.00340)

.00597
(.00522)
-.00228
(.00239)

.01016**
(.00353)
.00272
(.00145)

-.10504
(.09261)
-.13903**
(.03263)

-.30228**
(.05111)
-.08192**
(.02245)

.0000

.0000

.0004

.0000

LOG (COMPETING
VACANCIES) :
In occupation/province
cell
In occupation/province
/industry cell

-.00038
(.00164)
-.00080
(.00114)

.01043**
(.00208)
.00059
(.00134)

-.00611
(.00320)
.00139
(.00228)

.00752*
(.00371)
-.00101
(.00238)

.00320
(.00231)
-.00035
(.00170)

.00505**
(.00187)
.00401**
(.00108)

-.11309**
(.03949)
-.13113**
(.02221)

-.09302**
(.02248)
-.06002**
(.01451)

.0000

.0000

.0006

.0006

** p<0.01, * p<0.05. Regressions also control for a full set of occupation*province or occupation*province*industry fixed effects, firm type, firm size, plus
dummies for part-time jobs, period 2, and for number of vacancies not specified. Standard errors and p-values are clustered at the occupation*province or
occupation*province*industry level and adjusted for cross-equation correlations.

31
Table 7: Distinguishing the effects of ads in Own Industry versus other Industries
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Male

Female

Maximum
Age?

Beauty

Height

Education

Experience

MEAN RENEWAL
RATE:
In occupation/province
/industry
In occupation/province,
other industries

Minimum
Age?

Pr (1)(6)=0

Pr (7)(8)=0

-.00118
(.00154)
-.00008
(.00011)

.00480*
(.00227)
-.00009
(.00008)

.00805*
(.00400)
-.00035
(.00019)

.00106
(.00430)
.00010
(.00018)

.00398
(.00260)
-.00005
(.00009)

-.00076
(.00115)
-.00003
(.00006)

-.01017
(.03975)
.00285
(.00156)

-.10579**
(.02409)
-.00202*
(.00097)

.0289

.0001

.2000

.0157

LOG (COMPETING
ADS) :
In occupation/province
/industry
In occupation/province,
other industries

-.00374*
(.00160)
-.00002
(.00011)

.00104
(.00168)
-.00001
(.00008)

-.00371
(.00334)
-.00045*
(.00021)

-.01003**
(.00344)
.00005
(.00018)

-.00239
(.00241)
-.00008
(.00009)

.00278
(.00146)
.00006
(.00006)

-.14054**
(.03298)
-.00100
(.00153)

-.08603**
(.02266)
-.00279**
(.00103)

.0005

.0000

.0923

.0241

LOG (COMPETING
VACANCIES) :
In occupation/province
/industry
In occupation/province,
other industries

-.00094
(.00112)
.00000
(.00003)

.00050
(.00137)
.00000
(.00003)

.00078
(.00234)
-.00009*
(.00005)

-.00170
(.00233)
.00000
(.00005)

-.00053
(.00174)
.00002
(.00003)

.00372**
(.00103)
.00000
(.00002)

-.13011**
(.02307)
-.00027
(.00040)

-.05890**
(.01482)
-.00021
(.00032)

.0011

.0000

.5412

.6805

** p<0.01, * p<0.05. Regressions also control for a full set of occupation*province*industry fixed effects, plus a dummy for part-time jobs and for number of vacancies
not specified. Standard errors are clustered at the occupation*province*industry level. “Own” MRR, and “Other industry” LCA and LCV are divided by 10; “Other
industry” MRR is divided by 100.

32
Table 8: Additional Robustness Checks
A. Weight by Number
Of Vacancies:
Mean Renewal Rate/10
Log number of
Competing ads
Log number of
Competing Vacancies
B. Inflow Sample only:
Mean Renewal Rate/10
Log number of
Competing ads
Log number of
Competing Vacancies
C. Firm Fixed Effects:
Mean Renewal Rate/10
Log number of
Competing ads
Log number of
Competing Vacancies

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Male

Female

Height

Education

Experience

.01302
(.00864)
.01029
(.00907)
-.00004
(.00617)

Maximum
Age?
.04004*
(.01887)
-.00769
(.01610)
.01048
(.01625)

Beauty

-.00847
(.00469)
.00566
(.00453)
-.01310**
(.00433)

Minimum
Age?
.03158
(.02022)
-.01886
(.01617)
.02662
(.01911)

.03824*
(.01646)
.00025
(.01278)
.01295
(.01419)

.02053
(.01364)
.01292
(.01127)
.02573*
(.01125)

.25537
(.18998)
.07271
(.12606)
-.76032**
(.10092)

-.19572**
(.04481)
-.15610**
(.04734)
-.17683**
(.02853)

Pr (1)(6)=0
.0176

Pr (7)(8)=0
.0000

.2337

.0024

.0003

.0003

-.00163
(.00250)
-.00385
(.00238)
-.00041
(.00174)

.00474
(.00276)
-.00276
(.00223)
-.00145
(.00162)

.00697
(.00562)
-.00148
(.00440)
-.00064
(.00319)

.00239
(.00611)
-.00979*
(.00464)
-.00241
(.00310)

-.00004
(.00395)
-.00818**
(.00312)
-.00427
(.00223)

-.00250
(.00174)
.00093
(.00164)
.00321**
(.00118)

.09129
(.05217)
-.14707**
(.04542)
-.11528**
(.03008)

-.09186*
(.03612)
-.04395
(.02960)
-.05866**
(.01973)

.1297

.0029

.0061

.0028

.0042

.0042

-.00031
(.00316)
-.00235
(.00339)
.00070
(.00237)

.00258
(.00246)
.00654**
(.00250)
.00433*
(.00171)

.00273
(.00555)
-.02570**
(.00726)
-.00985*
(.00492)

.00330
(.00590)
-.01711*
(.00715)
-.00283
(.00502)

.00737
(.00431)
-.01255*
(.00556)
-.00936**
(.00344)

-.00458*
(.00203)
-.00170
(.00232)
-.00007
(.00132)

-.02040
(.06011)
.02268
(.04675)
.00047
(.03223)

-.22739**
(.05285)
-.32471**
(.05484)
-.16533**
(.03205)

.0697

.0001

.0018

.0000

.0025

.0025

** p<0.01, * p<0.05. All regressions also control for firm type, firm size, plus dummies for part-time jobs, period 2, and for number of vacancies not
specified. Panels A and B also control for a full set of occupation*province*industry fixed effects; Panel C for a full set of occupation*province*firm
effects. Standard errors are clustered at the occupation*province*industry or occupation*province*firm level.

33
Table 9: Sample Restricted to Occupations with High Period -1 Preferences for Each ‘Prohibited’ Attribute
DEPENDENT VARIABLE:
Sample: Occupations in Top Quartile of First-Period Preferences for
the Characteristic
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Sample: Ads with an
Age Preference
(7)
(8)

(9)

(10)

Male

Female

Maximum
Age?

Beauty

Height

MEAN RENEWAL
RATE/10:
In occupation/province
cell
In occupation/province
/industry cell

Minimum
Age?

Min Age
(years)

Max Age
(years)

Pr (1)(6)=0

Pr (7)(8)=0

-.00118
(.00883)
-.00174
(.00408)

.00779
(.00639)
.01054*
(.00516)

-.00781
(.01815)
.01608
(.00887)

-.02088
(.01849)
-.00144
(.00965)

.01410
(.01240)
.00792
(.00611)

-.00449
(.00752)
.00002
(.00309)

-.03943
(.11734)
-.01945
(.06882)

-.24112
(.22737)
-.09450
(.09029)

.1145

.5657

.0185

.5744

LOG (COMPETING
ADS) :
In occupation/province
Cell
In occupation/province
/industry cell

-.00175
(.00840)
-.00789*
(.00402)

.01962*
(.00919)
.00059
(.00428)

-.02546
(.01543)
.00275
(.00731)

.01553
(.01563)
.00311
(.00713)

.00057
(.01396)
-.01124
(.00645)

.02426**
(.00897)
.00376
(.00408)

-.22364
(.18257)
-.14863*
(.06297)

-.98697**
(.23504)
-.17312
(.09672)

.0007

.0001

.0347

.0443

LOG (COMPETING
VACANCIES) :
In occupation/province
cell
In occupation/province
/industry cell

-.00154
(.00330)
-.00254
(.00288)

.01820**
(.00528)
-.00079
(.00242)

-.00574
(.00501)
.00396
(.00447)

.01768*
(.00689)
.01066*
(.00459)

.00544
(.00536)
-.00395
(.00365)

.01159**
(.00333)
.00923**
(.00254)

-.21167**
(.06897)
-.24349**
(.04532)

-.58775**
(.09600)
-.26864**
(.06007)

.0000

.0000

.0000

.0000

** p<0.01, * p<0.05. Regressions also control for a full set of occupation*province or occupation*province*industry fixed effects, firm type, firm size, plus
dummies for part-time jobs, period 2, and for number of vacancies not specified. Standard errors and p-values are clustered at the occupation*province or
occupation*province*industry level. Occupations are weighted by total number of ads in computing quartiles.

34
Figure 1: Occupation Fixed Effects for US-Prohibited Characteristics,
By Education Requirement and Customer Contact
a)

.3

Preferences for jobmale
Occupation Fixed Effect
0
.1
.2

civil_serv
technical
unskilledL
transpo
primary

tourism

-.1

retail

other mfg const_mach
communic
energy
envir_prot
realestate
chemical
electronics
qualcontrol hi_mgmt
legalserv
cust_serv
trade
translation
research
admin
pharma
students
sales
computer
marketing
HR
temp
accounting
finance
media
art
consulting
beautyfit education

10

12

14
(mean) edyrs
NoContact
CustContact
95% CI

16

18

NoContact
CustContact
Fitted values

b)

.15

Preferences for jobfemale
admin

Occupation Fixed Effect
0
.05
.1

retail

beautyfit
tourism

unskilledL

cust_serv
accounting
temp
hi_mgmt
trade translation
consulting
other
education
HR
salesstudents
finance
marketing
transpo
pharma
media
chemical
legalserv
qualcontrol
research
mfg
primary
energy
computer
artrealestate
envir_prot
const_mach
electronics
communic
civil_serv

-.05

technical

10

12

14
(mean) edyrs
NoContact
CustContact
95% CI

16

18

NoContact
CustContact
Fitted values

Note: Symbol size is proportional to the inverse of the variance of the estimated fixed effect.

35
c)

Occupation Fixed Effect
0
.1

.2

Preferences for anyminage

unskilledL

retail
tourism

technical

12

transpo

civil_serv
marketing
consulting
sales
cust_servHR
temp
other
finance
trade
mfgstudents
realestate
accounting
beautyfit
primary
const_mach
qualcontrol
education
chemical
electronics
media
research
energy legalserv
communic
translation
art pharma
envir_prot
computer

-.1
10

hi_mgmt
admin

14
(mean) edyrs
NoContact
CustContact
95% CI

16

18

NoContact
CustContact
Fitted values

d)

.3

Preferences for anymaxage
Occupation Fixed Effect
-.1
0
.1
.2

unskilledL

retail
technical

tourism
transpo

admin

hi_mgmt

-.2

other primary
realestate
temp
cust_serv
finance
sales
energy
beautyfit
accounting
students
mfg marketing
HR
const_mach
consulting
chemical
trade
envir_prot
qualcontrol
electronics
media
education
translation
research
pharma
communic
legalserv
civil_serv
computer
art

10

12

14
(mean) edyrs
NoContact
CustContact
95% CI

16
NoContact
CustContact
Fitted values

18

36
e)

Occupation Fixed Effect
-.1
0
.1
.2

Preferences for beauty
admin

retail
tourism

beautyfit
consulting
education
temp
cust_serv
marketing
sales
civil_serv
finance
other
hi_mgmt
translation
students
media
trade
HR
pharma
transpo
legalserv research
realestate
primary
accounting
qualcontrol
chemical
mfg
const_mach
energy
electronics
envir_prot
computer
art communic

unskilledL

-.2

technical

10

12

14
(mean) edyrs
NoContact
CustContact
95% CI

16

18

NoContact
CustContact
Fitted values

f)

.3

Preferences for heightreqt
Occupation Fixed Effect
0
.1
.2

civil_serv
unskilledL

tourism

retail

-.1

technical

admin
temp
other
beautyfitstudents
media
consulting
cust_serv
transpo sales
marketing
education
pharma
hi_mgmt
finance
legalserv research
trade
HR
qualcontrol
translation
chemical
mfg
primary
accounting
electronics
computer
const_mach
communic
envir_prot
artrealestate
energy

10

12

14
(mean) edyrs
NoContact
CustContact
95% CI

16
NoContact
CustContact
Fitted values

18

37
Appendix 1: Proofs
Expected Value of the Maximum:

We begin by normalizing the value of the worker, defining uj ≡ Uj/β = vJ/β + ej,
where ej = εj/β follows a “standard” extreme value distribution with Var(ej) = π2/6 and
E(ej) = γ. This does not affect the firm’s optimal selection of a worker –the draw of ej
that maximizes u corresponds to the draw of εj that maximizes U-- and the maximized
value of U can be calculated as βu*, where u* is the maximized value of u. Further, this
normalization casts expresses the problem in a standard multinomial logit format and
allows us to draw on some results from that literature.
Among these, it is well known that the expected value of the maximum of vJ/β +
ej when ej is independently drawn J times from a “standard” extreme value distribution
is vJ/β + γ + log(n). 45 Multiplying through by β the expected maximum of U when the
firm samples from either the A or B pool separately thus equals vJ + βγ + βlog(J), as
claimed for these two strategies.
In general, the expected value of the highest uj in the “combined”, C sample,
uC* = uA*qA + uB*(1- qA), where uJ* is the expected productivity of the best overall
worker given the best overall worker is of type J, and qA is the probability that the best
overall worker turns out to be drawn from pool A. Using results from the MNL literature,
we know that uA* = vA/β + γ – log(pA ), where:
exp(v A  )
A
p 
A exp(v A  )  B exp(v B  )
is the probability that an individual type-A applicant turns out to be the best in the entire,
combined pool. Similarly, we have uB* = vB/β + γ – log(pB ), where:
pB 

exp(v B  )
.
A exp(v A  )  B exp(v B  )

Finally, the probability that the firm’s preferred applicant from this combined pool is
drawn from the A’s is just:
qA 

A exp(v A  )
 Aq A .
A exp(v A  )  B exp(v A  )

Note that, as the variance of individual productivity (β) falls towards zero, the probability
that the best overall worker will be from the preferred (A) group approaches one;
conversely as β approaches infinity, qA approaches the share of A’s in the population, i.e.
A/(A+B).
Combining all the necessary expressions and simplifying, the expected standardized
value of the best worker from the combined pool can be written as:
45

See Arcidiacono and Miller (2008, p. 8) for a general proof; our case is an application of their results to
the multinomial logit (MNL) case.

C

A

B

38

u * = γ + log [ Aexp(v / β) + Bexp(v / β) ] .

Letting δ = A/(A+B) ≡ A/M be the fraction of A’s in the combined pool, this becomes:
uC* = γ + log [ δ exp(vA/ β ) + (1-δ )exp(vB/ β ) ] + log M .

The corresponding maximized unstandardized value is therefore:
UC* = γ β + β log [ δ exp(vA/ β ) + (1-δ )exp(vB/ β ) ] + β log M .

Expressing this in terms of the means of the unstandardized distributions, µ J ≡ vJ + βγ,
yields after some algebra:

A 
  B 


U *   log  exp
  (1   ) exp     log M ,






C

as claimed. ■
Proof of Proposition 1

We recall first that the firm’s choices between the three recruitment strategies
yield the following levels of expected profits:
Strategy A: Invite A’s only:
Strategy B: Invite B’s only:
Strategy C: Invite all comers:

E() = µ A + βlog(A ) - cA
E() = µ B + βlog(B ) - cB
E() = µ C + βlog(M) - cM

where none of the µ’s depend on the number of applicants in either pool. Thus, the
profit-maximizing number of applicants if the firm could choose the number of
applications it receives --i.e. the n that maximizes βlog(n ) – cn-- therefore equals β/c ≡
N*, irrespective of whether the firm chooses strategy A, B or C. Thus the optimal sample
size rises with the variance of unobserved worker qualifications, β, and falls with
application processing costs.
Next, note that under free random disposal, firms will discard any applications in
excess of N* (in the ‘combined’ strategy C, we assume this leaves the firm with the same
share of As in its applicant pool as in the population, δ). Letting N be the number of
applications received by the firm, it follows that, for all three recruiting strategies, profits
will be increasing in N for N< N*, independent of N for N > N*, and (consequently)
nondecreasing in N overall, as depicted in Figure A1 below.
Figure A1: Profits as a Function of Applications Received under Alternative Recruiting
Strategies

39
Profits

A
C
B

N (number of applications received)
N'

N*

Now imagine that the firm is faced with fixed numbers of applicants under each of its
possible recruiting strategies: A, B, and M=A+B. The fact that the three above functions
are nondecreasing immediately implies that the firm will never choose recruiting strategy
B for any level of labor supply M: It is always dominated by the combined strategy C,
because (since A+B= M > B) firms receive more applications under strategy C, and
because profits are higher at any given number of applications.
Thus, the only comparison we need to make is between Strategies A and C. We
proceed by first noting that, as M rises from its minimum possible level, it must pass
through three regions:
Region 1: (both As and Bs are scarce): δM < M < N*
Region 2: (only As are scarce):
δM < N* < M
Region 3: (neither type is scarce):
N* < δM < M
Next, we show that the profit differential between strategies A and C is
nondecreasing in M. In addition the differential is strictly increasing in M in Regions 1
and 2, and does not vary with M in Region 3. To do this, we first define the functions
ΠK(n) as µK + βlog(n ) – cn, K  {A, B, C}, and their corresponding maxima, ΠK* =
ΠK(N*), then proceed by region:
Region 1 (δM <M< N*). In this case the difference in profits between strategies A and C
is given by:
ΠA(δM ) - ΠC(M) = µA - μC + βlog(δ) + (1-δ)cM ,

(A1)

which is increasing in M.
Region 2 (δM < N*< M). Now, the difference in profits between strategies A and C is
given by:
ΠA(δM ) - ΠC(N*) = µA + βlog(δM) – cδM - ΠC(N*)

(A2)

Because ΠC(N*) is independent of M, and because ΠA(δM ) = µA + βlog(δM) – cδM is
increasing in M when δM < N*, (A2) is also increasing in M.
Region 3 (N* < δM < M). The difference in profits between strategies A and C is given
by ΠA(N*) - ΠC(N*) = µA - μC, which is independent of M.

40
Combining our results for Regions 1-3, and verifying that profits do not fall over the
boundaries between these regions (this is straightforward), completes the proof that the
profit differential is nondecreasing in M. We now make use of this result.
Recall that the smallest possible value of M, Mmin, equals 1/ δ (corresponding to A= δM =
1), and that Assumption 1 guarantees that Mmin occupies Region 1. Substituting these
values into (1), the profit differential between strategies A and C is µA - μC + β log(δ ) +
c(1- δ )/ δ; firms will prefer to hire only As when the supply of applications is at a
minimum when:
µA - μC + β log(δ ) + c(1- δ )/ δ > 0

(A3)

Further, since the profit advantage of strategy A is nondecreasing in M, (A3) implies that
firms will choose strategy A at all other levels of M as well. This proves the first part of
the Proposition.
When (A3) is violated, ΠA- ΠC < 0 and firms prefer strategy C when M=Mmin .
But we know that ΠA- ΠC > 0 in Region 3. Thus, because ΠA- ΠC is monotonically
~
increasing throughout Regions 1 and 2, there must exist a critical value of M, M , below
which firms prefer strategy A and above which they prefer strategy C. This proves the
remainder of the Proposition. ■

Proof of Proposition 2

~
Depending on parameter values, M can fall either into Region 1 or 2. If it falls into
Region 1, then it is implicitly defined by the expression:
ΠA(δM ) - ΠC(M) = µA - μC + βlog(δ) + (1-δ)cM = 0, i.e.


  B 
 A 
   log   (1   )cM = 0
  (1   ) exp
  
  

 A   log  exp


which can in turn be rewritten:

  B   A 
   log   (1   )cM = 0.
  log   (1   ) exp





(A4)

To understand the comparative statics of optimal recruiting strategies, it is helpful to
consider the interpretation of the three terms in (A4). The first term equals µA - μC; it is
positive reflecting the direct advantage of Strategy A: the typical applicant is more
productive when hiring is restricted to the As. The second term is negative; this cost of
Strategy A reflects the loss of option value from sampling fewer applicants. This cost is
larger in absolute value the smaller the share of the As in the population and the greater
the variance in unobserved worker productivity. The final ter
m is positive,
reflecting the savings in application processing costs under Strategy A, relative to C. (It
literally equals the total cost of processing all the B candidates’ applications.)

41
Now, since the LHS of (A4) is strictly increasing in M, any parameter change that raises
~
the LHS will reduce the value of M . It follows immediately that increases in c reduce
~
M , and (given that the first term is positive) increases in µA - μB do the same. To see the
effect of the variance parameter, β, it is instructive to initially consider some limiting
cases. When the variance (β) approaches zero, both the first and second terms approach
zero, leaving only the third, positive term; thus Strategy A is preferred regardless of any
other parameter values. This makes sense: when worker productivity is perfectly
predicted by the worker’s type there is no point in interviewing any Bs because there is
no possibility any B will be better than the first A who is interviewed.
Conversely, as the variance (β) approaches infinity, term 1 approaches unity, while term
2 falls without limit towards minus infinity. Now, the option value of Combined strategy
C must therefore dominate, and A is dispreferred. Finally, to see that, in general, an
~
increase in β acts to reduce the LHS of (A4), thus raising M and making Strategy C more
“likely”, differentiate (A4) with respect to β to obtain:
 B  A 
 B  A 
LHS
(1   ) exp
  log   0
  log D  
(A5)







Since the middle term in (A5) is negative, the sign follows from the fact that

  B   A 
   .
D    (1   ) exp





~
~
Finally we turn to the case where M falls into Region 2. Now M is defined as the value
of M that sets (A2) equal to zero, i.e. that satisfies:
ΠA(δM ) - ΠC(N*) = μA +β log(δM) – cδM - µC -β log(N*) + cN* =0

(A6)

The fact that we are in region 2 implies that the LHS of (A6), like (A4), is monotonically
increasing in M. Thus any parameter change that raises the LHS will reduce the value of
~
M . To see how the preceding proofs are adapted to Region 2, consider the case of a
small increase in c. This reduces ΠA(δM) by δM, and reduces ΠC(N*) by (approximately,
ignoring integer issues in applying an envelope result to ΠC(N*)) by N*>δM, thus raising
~
the LHS, and reducing M . The comparative statics for µA - μB and β proceed
analogously. ■

Proof of Corollary:

We consider the case of Region 1 only for brevity, and thus focus on equation (A4). By
definition, the term (  B   A ) /  in A4 is unaffected by a neutral increase in skill
requirements. Thus, the only term affected by an increase in θ is β, which is proportional
to θ. Holding (  B   A ) /  constant, (A5) thus becomes:
LHS
  log D  log   0 .


42
Appendix 2: Data

As noted, our overall sample consists of all job ads which appeared on
Zhaopin.com between May 16 and July 29, 2008, and between Dec 17, 2008 and Feb 28,
2009. At the end of each day, our program automatically searches for job ads that were
posted on Zhaopin that day. The program starts at 11:30pm sharp each day for
consistency. On the first day of data collection, all ads that were posted that day were
kept. On subsequent days, all ads posted that day are compared with the master list of
previously-posted jobs; since many such jobs are just renewals that are re-posted
(employers can re-post and existing ad; this entails a small marginal financial cost but
does require action on the employer’s part), we do not download these refreshed jobs but
maintain a count of the number of renewals that occur during this time period. A similar
procedure was applied to the list of firms. As a result, our data have information on every
job that was posted or renewed during this time period, linked to information about the
firm posting the job. All of our regression analysis is restricted to the sample of jobs for
which we have matching firm information. The matching rate varies somewhat across
specifications but was about 80.2%
Age, gender and other job requirements were extracted from each job’s html file.
For example, in the case of gender, we look for “nue”(female) and “nan”(male)
characters in the job description section of the file. We then constructed a match table
summarizing about 1468 ways for a job ad to mention “nue”(female) and “nan”(male).
After that, we use a program and this match table to derive the gender discrimination
variable automatically. We consider our table quite exhaustive. In addition, we also
visually check all the job ads that mentioned gender in a way that did not match these
tables. Only about 100 jobs out of our entire sample fell into this category. For age
variables, we search for “sui” (year of age); our approach could therefore miss jobs that
ask for age only using numbers “25-35”. Therefore, the variables that we use here should
be interpreted as having very explicit requirements for gender, age and other
characteristics.
Occupation and industry categories are those supplied by Zhaopin.com (firms
choose from a list on the website when submitting their ad). Note that our occupation
and industry dummy variables are not mutually exclusive, as firms are allowed to check
multiple categories. (This is the case both when a single ad is for multiple vacancies and
when it is not). Finally, our data on job ads was merged with a number of province-level
characteristics, taken from 2000 Census and 2001 National Census of Basic Units of
China accessed on November 2 2008 through http://www.acmr.com.cn’s Support System
for China Statistics Application.
To construct our “inflow sample” of job ads, we first examined the empirical
distribution of dates that an ad first appears on the job site during our sampling period.
As Figure A1 (which refers to our first sampling window, in the summer of 2008) shows,
this distribution has a large spike on the first day we collected ads, then declines rapidly,
reflecting the fact that most jobs “posted today” after our first day of data collection were
in fact just repostings or renewals of jobs that had been posted earlier. After about a
month, however, the empirical distribution of new jobs (that we have not seen before on
the site) becomes quite constant. This suggests the sample of ads newly appearing on the
site after that time are essentially all new; we thus define our “inflow” sample as all ads

43
which appear in our data for the first time after June 1, 2008. For our second
observation window, this date was January 1, 2009.

0

number of newly-observed ads
50000
100000

150000

Figure A1: Flows of ads by date first observed

20

40

60
days since May 1, 2008

80

Notes:

-vertical line indicates June 1, the beginning of our “inflow sample”
-circled points show a weekend

100

