NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE INTERNAL GOVERNANCE OF FIRMS
Viral V. Acharya
Stewart C. Myers
Raghuram Rajan
Working Paper 15568
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15568
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2009

We thank Ashwini Agrawal, Franklin Allen, Effi Benmelech, John Coates, Douglas Diamond, Alex
Edmans, Maryam Farboodi, Milton Harris, Roni Kisin, Mark Rubinstein, Amit Seru, Jeremy Stein,
Raghu Sundaram, Rob Vishny, Michael Weisbach, Luigi Zingales; and seminar participants at AEA
Meetings (2010), Canadian Corporate Governance Institute, UC Berkeley, Chicago Booth, Harvard,
Michigan State, MIT, NBER Corporate Finance Workshop (Fall 2008), NBER Law and Economics
(Spring 2010), NYU Financial Economics Workshop, NYU-Stern, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,
Tuck, UCLA, and the Western Finance Association (WFA 2009) for helpful conversations and comments.
Ramin Baghai and Hanh Le provided excellent research assistance. Raghuram Rajan acknowledges
support from the Center for Research on Securities Prices at the University of Chicago, the National
Science Foundation, the Stigler Center, and the Initiative on Global Markets. Acharya is grateful for
research support from the ESRC (Grant No. R060230004 awarded to the London Business School
Corporate Governance Center). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Viral V. Acharya, Stewart C. Myers, and Raghuram Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Internal Governance of Firms
Viral V. Acharya, Stewart C. Myers, and Raghuram Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 15568
December 2009, Revised June 2014
JEL No. G31,G34,G35
ABSTRACT
We develop a model of internal governance where the self-serving actions of top management are
limited by the potential reaction of subordinates. Internal governance can mitigate agency problems
and ensure that firms have substantial value, even with little or no external governance by investors.
External governance, even if crude and uninformed, can complement internal governance and improve
efficiency. This leads to a theory of investment and dividend policy, where dividends are paid by self-interested
CEOs to maintain a balance between internal and external control.
Viral V. Acharya
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84
New York, NY 10012
and CEPR
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu
Stewart C. Myers
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-620
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
scmyers@mit.edu

Raghuram Rajan
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu

The people you pay are more important over time than the people who pay you. i
A public corporation is commonly viewed as an organization run by CEOs and monitored by a board
of directors on behalf of shareholders. This view separates decision management (by the CEO and
other managers) from decision control (by the board) and from investment and risk-bearing (by public
shareholders). This governance structure is viewed as reasonable and efficient (Fama and Jensen
(1983a, b) and Jensen (2000)), provided that decisions are made to maximize the value of
shareholders’ residual claim. Many public corporations thrive with this governance structure.
Yet the clear evidence that public corporations “work” has to be set against the equally clear
evidence that most shareholders have little control over boards (Monks (2008)) and that many boards
treat CEOs generously (Bebchuk and Fried (2004)). CEOs are self interested, not automatically
faithful servants of the shareholders (Jensen (1986, 1993); Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1990); and
Shleifer and Vishny (1989, 1997)). The market for corporate control can provide some discipline, but
it is hard to see it as effective in controlling operational decisions. How then can one reconcile the
survival and apparent efficiency of the public corporation with the weak channels through which it is
supposedly governed?
In this paper, we argue that there are important stakeholders in the firm, particularly
subordinate managers, who care about its future. These stakeholders, because of their power to
withdraw their contributions to the firm, can force the CEO to act in a more public-spirited and farsighted way, even if the CEO acts in his or her short-term self interest and shareholders are dispersed
and powerless. We call this process internal governance.
The main departure of this paper from most of the existing literature is to see the firm as a
composition of diverse agents with different horizons, different interests, and different opportunities
for misappropriation and growth. ii To understand how the differences among diverse agents lead to
internal governance, we first consider a partnership run by an old CEO who is about to retire. The
CEO has a young manager working under him who will be the future CEO. Three ingredients go into
producing the firm’s cash flow: the firm’s capital stock; the CEO’s ability to manage the firm, based

1

on his skill and firm-specific knowledge; and the young manager’s effort, which allows her to learn
and prepare for promotion.
We assume the CEO can commit to an investment plan, which means the CEO will leave
behind a predetermined amount of capital stock. The CEO can appropriate everything else: he can
divert cash out of the firm, consume perks, or convert cash to leisure by shirking. The CEO cannot
directly commit future CEOs to any course of action in this period or in the future. iii
Because the CEO has a short horizon, he could simply decide to take all of the cash flow,
investing nothing for the future. But, he needs the young manager’s effort in order to generate the
cash flow. If the manager sees that the CEO will leave nothing behind, she has scant incentive to
exert effort, and cash flow falls significantly. To forestall this, the CEO commits to investing some
fraction of current cash flow, building or enhancing the firm’s capital stock in order to create a future
for his young employee, thereby motivating her. This allows the firm to build substantial value,
despite being led by a sequence of myopic and rapacious CEOs. iv
We show that internal governance is most effective when both the CEO and the manager
contribute to the firm’s cash flows. If the CEO’s contributions dominate, he has no desire to limit his
capture of cash flow in order to provide incentives for the manager. If the manager’s contributions
dominate, she has little incentive to learn, because she cannot capture value today, and learning will
be of little use when she does become the CEO.
We extend the basic model by allowing the CEO to commit to sell the firm to the manager
when he retires. We show that if the manager’s ability to pay were not limited (because the manager
cannot fully borrow against future cash flows), then the CEO’s horizon can effectively be lengthened
to coincide with that of the firm. This rolling partnership, therefore, increases investment to a
constrained efficient level -- it essentially reduces the agency problem at the firm down to the problem
of incentivizing managerial effort. Of course, many junior managers will lack the wealth or borrowing
capacity to buy the firm from the CEO, and, therefore, the rolling partnership will often not be
feasible. Outside equity can help recover some of the effects of the rolling partnership, however. We
show that a combination of internal governance and a rudimentary form of outside governance by
shareholders can improve the efficiency of the firm dramatically.

2

To see the intuition, suppose the firm is a public corporation. Following Fluck (1998) and
Myers (2000), we assume that shareholders have only the crude but basic property right to take over
the firm and its capital stock, firing the CEO if necessary. In equilibrium, shareholders do not
intervene, because the CEO delivers just enough value to the shareholders to keep them at bay. Value
is delivered by paying out cash dividends or by investing cash to increase the capital stock -- a larger
capital stock increases the future value of shareholders’ claim.
Outside equity thus has no direct control over investment or effort decisions; it has no
operational influence. Even so, it can greatly enhance investment by the CEO and the value of the
firm. The CEO can sell a portion of the cash flow generated by future generations of CEOs to outside
shareholders; the future CEOs will pay outside shareholders the required return on financing raised.
Thus the CEO indirectly replicates the sale to the manager in a rolling partnership by using
shareholders as the intermediary. This gives the current CEO the incentive to invest more, as he forces
future generations of CEOs to pay for the investment he makes. The resulting steady-state capital
stock can be greater or less than the constrained efficient level. But it always is greater than in our
base case where the CEO cannot sell the firm to his manager.
We also obtain a theory of dividend policy. Shareholders do not care whether they are paid in
cash or by increases in the firm’s capital stock. Although the dollar paid out as dividends and the
dollar left behind as investment costs the same to the CEO, initially he prefers to compensate
shareholders by investing, because investment motivates greater effort by the manager. With
decreasing returns to investment, however, the rate of return on investment falls, and eventually the
CEO makes the manager worse off by investing more; the additional investment increases cash flows
in the next period, when the manager will be CEO, but it also increases shareholders’ claim. When
return on investment is low, the future cost to the manager of satisfying the shareholders can
dominate. Then, the current CEO will switch to paying dividends, not because shareholders prefer
dividends to capital gains, but because more investment will reduce the rents going to the manager
below her participation constraint. This then gives us a dividend policy that follows the life cycle of a
firm. No dividends are paid when the firm is young and investment profitable, but dividends
commence when the firm is mature. The firm starts paying out when additional investment would

3

impose too heavy a future burden on junior managers, who will have to meet the expectations of
outside shareholders.
We find that this combination of internal and external governance can encourage greater
investment and longer CEO horizons than with external governance only. The combination also
eliminates rents that would be extracted by future top management if there were only internal
governance.
We offer these models to make a general point: The traditional description of the firm falls
short on three counts. First, control need not be exerted just top down, or from outside; it can also be
asserted bottom-up. The CEO has to give his subordinates a reason to follow, else they can withdraw
their contributions to the firm. This is how the subordinates exert control over the CEO. Second, the
view that there is one residual claimant in the firm, the shareholder, is too narrow. Anyone who
shares in the rents or quasi-rents generated by the firm has some residual claim, and thus there is no
easy equivalence between maximizing shareholder value and maximizing efficiency. Third, the fact
that CEOs and managers get rents at different horizons means that each one has to pay attention to
others’ residual claims in order to elicit co-operation. The need for the CEO to take actions that limit
the agency problem associated with his subordinates’ effort in turn limits his incentive to
misappropriate – one agency problem checks another. The constraints that parties inside the firm
impose on each other ensure that the firm can function and survive, even if outside governance is
weak.
The rest of the paper is as follows. In section I, we present a simple two-period model of
internal governance. In section II, we extend the analysis to an overlapping generations model.
Section III examines rolling partnerships. Section IV explores external governance by public
shareholders and the relative merits of partnerships and public firms. Section V discusses how our
results relate to prior literature. We conclude in section VI.

I. A Two-period Example
Consider a firm with a CEO and a manager. The firm has some assets in place k0 . The CEO
controls the firm’s capital investment decisions in the current period and can either augment the

4

capital stock by new investment or run it down, for example by diverting assets out of the firm. Once
the CEO decides how much capital stock he will leave behind, he backs up his decision through
internal audit and accounting procedures sufficient to convince the manager that enough cash flows
and existing assets will be ring-fenced to commit the CEO to his decision.v
The manager then decides how much she will engage in firm-specific learning effort s at a
private cost, which for simplicity we also assume to be s . The firm generates a cash flow C (k0 , s ) in
the current period, which is increasing in capital stock this period and manager’s effort. At the end of
the period, the CEO walks off with all of the cash or capital that was not ring-fenced for investment.
Thus, if he leaves behind capital k at the end of the period, the CEO’s proceeds are

C ( k0 , s ) − ( k − k0 ) .
Since the manager receives no cash flow this period, her motivation to exert effort arises from
the franchise value she inherits next period. Let the franchise value, V (k , s ) , increase in next period’s
capital stock and the manager’s effort (learning) this period. The discount rate is r .
Given this two-period model of the firm, the CEO’s decision problem is

max C (k0 , s ) − (k − k0 )
k ≥0

s.t.

 1

s ∈ arg max sˆ 
V (k , sˆ) − sˆ 
 (1 + r )


Then, CEO’s first-order condition is given by

first-order condition

dC ds
− 1 =0 , and the manager’s effort s satisfies the
ds dk

dV
= (1 + r ) . Thus, the CEO has incentives to invest in this period only if
ds

investment motivates the manager to exert effort, that is, if and only if,

ds
> 0. Applying the
dk

implicit function theorem to manager’s first-order condition, the sensitivity of managerial effort to

 d 2V 


ds
dsdk 
CEO investment is
= −
 d 2V
dk
 2
 ds





.

5

Thus, assuming that the franchise value V (k , s ) is increasing and concave in s, the CEO has incentives

to invest in this period if and only if

d 2V
is positive, or in words, if and only if the firm’s capital
dsdk

stock and managerial effort are complements for its franchise value.
If this strategic complementarity condition is met, then the CEO, who is entirely selfish and
myopic, nevertheless invests for the future. By investing, the CEO improves the franchise value that
is inherited by the manager. This motivates the manager to exert greater effort in the current period,
enhancing CEO’s take-home compensation.
We call this result internal governance. Before proceeding further, however, it may be useful
to check our basic assumption that junior managers are younger than the CEO and likely to succeed
him or her. Standard & Poor's ExecuComp database provides annual data on the top five executives
in S&P 1500 Index U.S. firms from 1992. Table I shows that the executives other than the CEO are,
on average, 4 years younger than the CEO. The difference is similar across firm age quintiles and
across firm size quintiles, though CEOs in younger firms tend to be younger. Table II shows that
nearly 80% of new CEOs are appointed from the top 4 executives in the firm in the previous year (top
4 because one of the top 5 in the previous year is typically the old CEO). This suggests a high
frequency of internal promotion. Furthermore, the average tenure of the previous year’s top 5
executives after the new CEO is appointed is 3.1 years (Table 2, Panel B), suggesting that the old
Tables I
and II go
here

team typically outlasts the old CEO.
To derive the full implications of the model, we must endogenize the franchise value. We,
therefore, introduce an overlapping-generations model; where, in each period, the previous period’s
manager becomes the new (selfish and myopic) CEO. This is what we turn to now.

II. The Overlapping-generations Model
Consider a firm with a two-level managerial hierarchy. Each agent can work, at most, for two
periods. At the top of the hierarchy is a CEO who is old. In the second layer is a young manager who
will become CEO next period. We start with no outside investors, so it’s best for now to think of the
firm as an employee-financed partnership.

6

At the beginning of each period t, the current CEO commits to invest part of the period’s cash
flow. This determines the end-of-period capital stock kt . After the CEO commits to the capital stock,
the manager engages in firm-specific learning effort st at cost st . Learning also helps the manager
become more productive as CEO; it may be much harder to acquire the knowledge at the CEO level,
where vendors and customers will be far more circumspect and the CEO’s time more limited.
The timeline of the model is in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Model Timeline
________________________________________________________________
Period t

(1) CEO hires
manager.

Period t+1 …

(2) CEO
commits to
end-of-period
capital stock
kt .

(3) Manager
engages in
learning effort
st .

(4) Cash
generated.
Investment
made. CEO
gets residual.

(5) CEO
retires.
Manager
becomes
CEO,
and hires
a new
manager.
_________________________________________________________________
The firm generates cash flows at the end of each period t.

Ct (kt −1 , s CEO , st ) θt ( kt −1 ) [ f ( s CEO ) + g ( st )] ,
=
γ

(1.1)

where θt is a measure of how favorable the business environment is at time t and γ is a constant less
than one. The function f indicates the CEO’s contribution to cash flows, and its argument, s CEO , is
the firm-specific learning acquired by the CEO at (t − 1) when he was a young manager. The
function g captures the manager’s contribution to cash flows, where st is the learning effort the
manager exerts at time t. Both f and g are increasing and concave and obey INADA conditions.
This setup ensures the strategic complementarity of capital stock and managerial learning for firm
value. All agents maximize the present discounted value of their remaining lifetime income.
We assume for now that the manager’s wages are normalized to zero. The CEO appropriates

Ct − (kt − kt −1 ) , which is cash flow less investment. It will be convenient to say the CEO determines

7

investment, though technically he determines end-of-period capital stock. At the end of every period,
the current CEO retires, so he has no direct incentive to preserve firm value for the future. The
manager becomes the new CEO, because he is the only one with the relevant human capital to
succeed.
We assume no outside financing for the moment, leaving it for section III. We now solve the
model and see what it implies for CEO investment and managerial effort.
A. Analysis
A.1. First Best
We define two benchmark efficient cases where the CEO is assumed to be far-sighted, not
myopic, and invests for the long run. In the first benchmark, the first-best, the manager is also farsighted in her learning. In particular, the first-best (FB) outcome is investment and managerial
learning pairs (kt, st), for all t, that maximize the sum of all current and future cash flows net of
investment and learning effort:
∞

max ∑
{kt , st }

i =0

1 
γ
[ f ( st +i −1 ) + g ( st +i )] − (kt +i − kt +i −1 ) − st +i  .
θ k
i  t + i ( t + i −1 )

(1 + r )

Then differentiating with respect to kt , the first-best capital stock satisfies the condition:

θt +1 γ ( ktFB )

γ −1

[ f ( stFB ) + g ( stFB
r,
+1 )] =

(1.2)

which equates the marginal return on investment to the opportunity cost, and where stFB is the firstbest level of learning effort that satisfies:
γ
′ FB
θt (ktFB
−1 ) g ( st ) +

θt +1

(k )
1+ r

FB γ
t

(1.3)
1.
f ′( stFB ) =

Since γ < 1, the first-best level of capital stock increases with the prospective quality of the business
environment, θt +1 , but does not directly depend on the current business environment θt . In contrast,
the first-best level of managerial learning depends both on the current as well as the future business
environment, since it affects current as well as future cash flows.
A.2. Constrained Efficient Case: Long-term CEOs

8

As a second benchmark, we define the constrained efficient (CE) outcome as the investment
and managerial learning pairs (kt, st), for all t, that arise from (i) investment decision of benevolent
and long-term CEOs at each date t whose objective is to maximize the entire stream of cash flows net
of capital and managerial investments; and, (ii) learning in each period undertaken by managers who
will become the (long-term) CEOs next period, but who do not internalize the effect of their learning
on this period’s cash flows. In other words, under the constrained efficient outcome, the CEO at time
t maximizes the discounted sum of cash flows net of investment and learning costs, even while trying
to incentivize the manager. He solves:
∞

max ∑
kt

i =0

1 
γ
[ f ( st +i −1 ) + g ( st +i )] − (kt +i − kt +i −1 ) − st +i  ,
θ k
i  t + i ( t + i −1 )

(1 + r )

recognizing the moral hazard in the choice of managerial effort:

st ∈ arg max
sˆt

1 
γ
θt +1 ( kt ) [ f ( sˆt ) + g ( st +1 )] − (kt +1 − kt )  − sˆt .

(1 + r ) 

Then, the constrained efficient capital stock can be shown to satisfy the condition

θt +1 γ ( kt )

γ −1

CE
[ f ( stCE ) + g ( stCE
+1 )] + (1 + r )θ t ( kt −1 ) g '( st )

γ

dstCE
=
r,
dkt

(1.4)

which when compared to the first-best shows that the CEO invests not just to boost next period cash
flow but potentially also to boost managerial learning in this period (if

dstCE
> 0) . Note that stCE is
dkt

the constrained efficient level of learning effort that satisfies the first-order condition of the manager
in period t,

θt +1

(k )
1+ r

CE γ
t

f ′( stCE ) = 1. vi Thus, in contrast to the first best, the constrained efficient

level of managerial learning depends directly only on the future business environment, because the
manager ignores the effect of her learning on the current cash flows. As in the first best case, the
constrained efficient level of capital stock increases with the prospective quality of the business
environment, θt +1 , but does not depend directly on the current business environment θt . However,
there is an indirect dependence of capital stock on the current business environment θt since the CEO
may use capital stock to motivate managers who under-invest in learning from standpoint of the firm.

9

Indeed, this channel will be the only channel that motivates the CEO to invest if he were myopic, as
we consider next.
A.3. Myopic CEO Case
In the case of firm with myopic CEOs, there is yet another source of moral hazard. In
addition to the manager having too little incentive to learn, there is no direct rationale for the current
CEO to commit to leave behind any capital stock, because that generates cash returns only after he
has retired. However, as we saw in the two-period example, there is an indirect link because the
CEO’s investment affects the future income of the manager, and therefore the manager’s incentive to
engage in learning effort, which in turn affects the firm’s cash flows today.
The CEO’s income is extracted from the current period’s cash flow, net of investment.

θt ( kt −1 ) [ f ( s CEO ) + g ( st )] − (kt − kt −1 )
γ

(1.5)

Here st is the manager’s equilibrium learning and s CEO is the CEO’s learning in the previous period (t
− 1) when he was the manager. Differentiating w.r.t. kt , we see that the CEO’s marginal net return
from investing is

θt ( kt −1 ) g ′
γ

dst
− 1.
dkt

(1.6)

This net return depends on current business conditions θt and capital stock kt −1 , because
these determine the cash flow impact of any increase in the manager’s learning effort induced by CEO
investment. It also depends critically on how the manager’s optimal learning effort varies with
investment, that is, on

dst
. As we saw with the two-period example, the sensitivity of the manager’s
dkt

effort to firm investment is the channel through which the CEO’s investment feeds back into
contemporaneous cash flows. And unlike in the constrained efficient case, this is the only reason why
the myopic CEO invests for the future.
To see how this sensitivity is determined, as in the constrained efficient case, the manager
chooses st to maximize her future rents as the CEO. She maximizes

10

1 
γ
θt +1 ( kt ) [ f ( st ) + g ( st +1 )] − (kt +1 − kt )  − st .

1+ r 
Differentiating and setting the result equal to zero, we get

 1+ r
st = f ′−1 
 θ ( k )γ
 t +1 t

θt +1
1+ r

(1.7)

( kt )

γ

f ′( st ) = 1 . So


 . Since f ′ is decreasing, learning is greater if the future is discounted less



(lower r), if the expected future environment θt +1 is better, and if the CEO leaves behind more capital
stock kt . Now totally differentiating the first order condition and rearranging, we obtain

dst −γ f ′
which is positive, implying that even a myopic CEO has incentives to invest for the
=
dkt kt f ′′
future in order to motivate his manager today. This mechanism drives internal governance.
B. Specializing Functions
In order to illustrate implications of the overlapping-generations model and provide closedform expressions for CEOs’ investment and managers’ effort, we make specific assumptions on
CEOs’ and managers’ contributions to firm’s cash flows. We retain these assumptions in subsection
C below.
Assume that the CEO and manager could each generate a cash flow h(s) if they were assigned
all the tasks in the firm, depending on their learning s. vii The fraction of tasks assigned to the CEO is

δ . The CEO’s contribution to cash flows is f ( s ) = δ h( s ), and the manager’s contribution is
h( st )
g ( s )= (1 − δ )h( s ) . We set=

b −1
1
(a + bst ) b with a ≥ 0 and b > 1. To ensure convergence
b −1

to steady state, we will assume 1 − γ b > 0 .
We analyze only the case with myopic CEOs, leaving details for the first-best and constrained
efficient outcomes to the online appendix. Substituting the specific functional forms in the first order
conditions for the manager and solving, we get:

−a 1  θt +1δ
γ
st
=
+ 
( kt )  .
b b  1+ r

b

11

(1.8)

Using the first order condition for the CEO and (1.8), we get the law of motion for the firm’s capital
stock as
1

b −1 1+γ −γ b
γ

 θt +1δ  
1+γ −γ b .
=
kt θt (1 − δ )γ 
k
(
)

1
t
−

 1 + r  


(1.9)

The current business environment θt and the beginning-of-period capital stock kt −1 influence
the end-of-period capital stock kt , even though they have no effect on the returns produced by that
capital stock, which are driven by θt +1 . The intuition is simple: end-of-period capital adds to the
CEO’s income only by enhancing his subordinate’s learning effort today. That matters more for
current cash flows if today’s business environment is good or if the current capital stock is high. Put
another way, appropriating an additional dollar is more attractive for the CEO if today’s environment
is bad or if the firm’s capital stock is small, because the associated decline in effort by his employee
does less absolute damage; “tunneling” is more likely in small firms during a severe downturn.
C. Decentralization of Tasks in an Internally Governed Firm
How important should the CEO’s contribution to generating current cash flows be relative to
the manager’s contribution? Should the firm be designed so that the CEO makes all cash-flow
relevant contributions ( δ = 1 ), or completely decentralized ( δ = 0 ); whereby, the CEO only makes
investment decisions and does not undertake tasks (or make decisions) that contribute to current cash
flows? We evaluate choices in the steady state, θt +=
kt −1∀t .
θ=
θ and k=
t
1
t
Consider first the constrained efficient steady state capital stock. We show in the online
appendix that

γ

θ δ
=
k CE 
1 + (b − 1)(1 + r )(1 − δ ) ) 
b −1 (
 r (b − 1)(1 + r )

b

( b −1)

1
1−γ b

.

(1.10)

The steady state constrained efficient capital stock increases in the CEO’s share of activity, δ . If the
CEO internalizes the cash flows generated by future CEOs, it is best to address the managerial moral
hazard problem by making the CEO the major contributor to cash flows. This way, the current

12

manager has the strongest incentive to invest in learning, since all the cash flows resulting from this
learning will be realized only when she is the CEO and thus fully internalized by her.
Contrast this with the first best steady state capital stock, where (see online appendix)
1

b −1 1−γ b
γ θ b  δ
 
FB
(1.11)
=
+ (1 − δ )   .
k


 
 r (b − 1)  1 + r
Here the steady state capital stock falls with δ . The manager’s effort falls off as more of the returns

to effort get postponed to the future, when she becomes the CEO. Hence optimal capital investment
also falls. The ratio of steady state capital stocks,

k CE
, thus increases in δ , approaching 1 as δ → 1 .
k FB

Thus the constrained efficient outcome converges to first best when the CEO is responsible for the
bulk of value added. In practice, founder-owned and managed firms are likely to resemble our
constrained efficient firm, because the founder internalizes the value generated by future CEOs (his
descendants). Our model suggests the founder should not give up tasks to his progeny when he is at
the helm but give them all up when they take over. viii
Let us now turn to how tasks might be allocated when CEOs are myopic. Substituting

k=
kt −1∀t in Eq. (1.9) and simplifying, we get
t
1


θ b  1−γ b
=
k SS γ (1 − δ ) δ b −1
.
(1 + r )b −1 


(1.12)

Comparing with the first best, we get



r (1 − δ ) δ
k
=
b −1 
FB
k
 ( b − 1)(δ + (1 − δ )(1 + r ) ) 
b −1

SS

1
1−γ b

.

(1.13)

It is easy to see that this ratio is zero when δ = 0 and when δ = 1 and is maximized in between. In
other words, the ratio of the steady-state capital stock with myopic CEOs relative to the efficient
capital stock goes to zero when the CEO contributes nothing to current cash flow ( δ → 0 ) or the
manager contributes nothing ( δ → 1 ). The intuition is interesting. If δ is very high, the CEO does
not really need the manager’s effort, and hence sees little need to invest. If δ is very low, today’s
manager, who reaps the benefit of her effort only when she is the CEO, sees little merit in effort,

13

because that effort will do little to enhance her future rents. Thus the ratio is maximized at a positive,
intermediate level of δ . We get a similar interior maximum when we compare the ratios of cash

k SS
flows or cash flows net of effort and investment. Also, not surprisingly, CE < 1 for all δ (see online
k
appendix).
Our main result for the steady-state comparisons can be summarized as:
Proposition 1:
When the CEO has a long term horizon, it is efficient for the CEO to make all cash-flow relevant
contributions ( δ = 1 is optimal). When the CEO is myopic, firm value is maximized when the CEO’s
contribution to the firm’s cash flows is neither too large nor too small relative to manager’s
contribution ( 0 < δ < 1 ). For a given contribution of CEO to cash flows (given δ ), the myopic firm’s
CEO invests less than the long-term CEO.
Put differently, internal governance is obviously unnecessary when the CEO has the long
term interests of the firm at heart, as might be the case with entrepreneurial founders who see the firm
as a labor of love or their bequest to future generations. There is no need for the manager to make
substantial contributions, unless the CEO is overwhelmed by the magnitude of his tasks. The founder
can afford to hoard tasks. Hoarding may be efficient, because the next generation has the maximum
incentive to hone their skills, as they anticipate the time they take control. But as we move away from
founders to more professional CEOs, who may have shorter horizons, more cash flow-critical tasks
should be allocated to the manager so that she can exert internal governance over the CEO. In other
words, when a family enterprise moves to using professional top management, it may also want more
delegation of tasks lower down. ix Of course, an alternative to reducing δ might be to increase the
myopic CEO’s horizon. We will consider this shortly.
D. Essential Aspects of the Mechanism of Internal Governance
We have assumed a CEO who is selfish, myopic, and unconstrained by external governance.
The future welfare of the firm or its employees has no weight in his objective function. All this can
be relaxed. Also, none of what the CEO does need be illegal. In a similar vein, the “CEO” can be a

14

stand-in for top management, while the “manager” could stand for critical employees outside the topmanagement suite.
But what precisely are necessary conditions for internal governance to work and for it to be
an important support to corporate performance? Consider the necessary ingredients: First, the CEO
should believe that undertaking future-oriented actions will increase current cash flows, and thus his
welfare. This requires key stakeholders like customers and employees (Hirschman (1970), Titman
(1984)) to be interested in the future, even if the CEO is not. Customers are, however, typically at a
distance, and leaving aside the purchase of high-value durable goods, are unlikely to be appropriately
informed or concerned about a seller’s future health.
This then leaves employees, particularly early- or mid-career managers, as the stakeholders
most concerned, informed, and able to act against short-sighted CEOs. They can be a reliable part of
a mechanism of internal governance only if they have a stake in the future of the firm. This requires
some firm-specific rents (or quasi-rents), which can come from some firm-specific ability or costs of
leaving the firm, such as the costs of moving house and family. The absence of such rents, either
because external governance severely limits what employees can appropriate, or because employees
are interchangeable across firms, would render internal governance ineffective. x
Do we need the actions (investment and effort) to be staggered? If there are contemporaneous
complementarities between CEO actions and managerial actions, the former could spur the latter.
However, for this to be effective in improving manager incentives, the CEO should also commit to
paying the manager an appropriate share of current rents. This may be difficult, since learning effort
is hard to contract on. xi Our model (also see Prendergast (1993)) suggests that the rewards to learning
may be prospective control rents from promotion in the firm, which suggests a model where CEO
actions, such as investment, have long term effects.
In summary, the existence of future firm-specific rents can make employees far more
effective in exerting internal governance. However, they do not do this by asserting “voice” in
Hirschman’s terminology (probably an easy way to get fired), but by reducing effort. None of this
needs any coordination on the part of employees, or any appeal to the board of directors, or to external
governance.

15

III. Partnerships and Efficiency
In sections I and II, the manager earned rents in the future as CEO, but did not pay for these
prospective rents other than by incurring a cost for learning effort. The CEO would like to extract
these rents by bargaining down the manager’s wage. He could do so if he could get aspiring
managers with independent wealth, or with the ability to borrow against personal income, to bid for
the position (and the right to succeed the CEO). The resultant negative wage (relative to the
normalized wage of zero) would essentially be the price at which he sells the firm to the manager.
How would decisions change?
Suppose the CEO sets the manager’s wage wt at the same time as he commits to investment.
In a competitive labor market for managers, the CEO can charge the manager an amount that sets her
exactly at the reservation level of zero. This amount is the present value of the manager’s future cash
flow as the CEO minus her current investment in learning:

=
wt (kt )

1 
γ
θt +1 ( kt ) [ f ( st ) + g ( st +1 )] − (kt +1 − kt ) + wt +1 (kt +1 )  − st .

1+ r 

How does this affect the CEO’s investment? The CEO’s objective is

max θt ( kt −1 ) [ f ( s CEO ) + g ( stSB )] − (kt − kt −1 ) + wt (kt )
γ

kt

Substituting for wt ( kt ), and in turn for wt +1 ( kt +1 ), and so on, we can see that the CEO’s objective
takes the form of the entire present discounted sum of value created by the firm, which means he
chooses the firm-value maximizing kt given managerial response st ( kt ).
Of course, we do not quite achieve first best because when choosing effort, the manager still
does not internalize the cash flow appropriated by the current CEO. But we do achieve the constrained
efficient outcome. The CEO “sells” the firm to the manager as in Kreps (1990).xii The manager in turn
anticipates that she will sell the firm when she is the CEO to the next manager at the price that
internalizes all effects of that period’s investment choice, and so on. The firm now becomes a rolling
partnership where senior partners sell the firm to junior partners. We summarize this discussion as
follows:

16

Proposition 2: When there are no constraints on junior managers’ ability to borrow against future
returns to their human capital and managers are hired in a competitive labor market, a “rolling
partnership” – a private firm where the CEO commits to selling the firm to the hired manager –
attains the efficient investment, limited only by the moral hazard problem of managerial effort.
Many law firms are examples of rolling partnerships, in which associates put in long hours
and sweat equity, hoping to become senior partners who can collect rents generated by the firm’s
franchise value and the next generation of associates. But law firms do not require an expensive stock
of capital. Managers in more capital-intensive firms will find it hard to raise sufficient money solely
by sweat equity, and the usual moral hazard problems will complicate attempts to borrow against
future rents. xiii One could think of the retiring CEO (retiring senior partners) accepting a promissory
note from the manager (junior partners) in return for turning the firm over, but that would require the
old CEO to retain some ability to enforce claims on cash flows. But once we allow outsiders to have
some power of enforcement over cash flows, we enter the realm of external financing.

IV. External Governance
A. Outside Equity
Assume now that the manager has no wealth and cannot borrow. Hence, the CEO can reduce
his cost of investment only if the firm can raise outside financing. This, in turn, is feasible only if
investors have some meaningful property rights. For simplicity, we examine equity financing only. xiv
Following Fluck (1998) and Myers (2000), outside shareholders can take over the assets of the firm at
the beginning of period t realizing

β ( 0 ≤ β < 1 ) per dollar of capital stock. If, however, the CEO can

make a dividend commitment (see below) that satisfies them, they go away and return one period
later, when they can threaten to take over the assets at that time. Shareholders have no control over
any decisions the CEO makes in between. Think of β as a governance parameter, with 1 – β
measuring the costs to public shareholders of exercising their property rights. A lower β also
reduces the market capitalization of the firm and the amount that shareholders are willing to invest. A
private firm or partnership, where outside equity have no property rights, has β = 0.

17

The CEO can issue additional equity (inflows) or pay dividends (outflows). The amount
raised through additional equity adds to the cash flow that the CEO can appropriate. As before, the
CEO makes a commitment at the beginning of the period. This is now the sum of the capital stock and
the dividend (if any) rather than the capital stock alone. The committed dividend is paid out to
shareholders at the end of the period, when cash flows are generated. It will be convenient in what
follows to focus on the dividend net of equity issues. Let that net dividend payout be dt .
We first analyze the net dividend and investment decisions of a public going concern (that is,
subsequent to an initial public offering (IPO)). Then we analyze the CEO’s decisions and the value of
the firm at IPO. The timeline for a public going concern is given in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Timeline with Outside Equity
___________________________________________________________________
Period t

(1) CEO hires
manager.

Period t+1 …

(2) CEO
commits to
end-of-period
capital stock
kt and net

(3) Manager
engages in
learning effort
st .

(4) Cash
generated.
Equity raised.
Dividend paid.
Investment
made. CEO
gets residual.

(5) CEO
retires.
Manager
becomes
CEO,
and hires
payout dt .
a new
manager.
___________________________________________________________________
Again the CEO has to commit to the end of period capital stock kt , but now the commitment
is made plain to the junior manager as well as shareholders. Note that the commitment to the manager
makes monitoring and control by outside shareholders less stressful. They can depend on the junior
manager to track and confirm investment. Internal governance reassures shareholders that cash flow
is actually invested.
B. Investment and Payout
The cash flow the CEO now has to leave behind is (kt − kt −1 ) + dt , which is smaller than the
new investment (kt − kt −1 ) , whenever the net dividend is negative. xv The ability to issue equity thus
allows the CEO to internalize some of the future cash flows the firm will generate, much as he did in

18

the rolling partnership with the sale to the manager. In a sense, the CEO sells a stake in the firm to
new equity holders, who then collect from future CEOs. Equity holders thus serve as intermediaries
between successive generations of CEOs.
This then implies two additional constraints in the CEO’s maximization problem. First, equity
holders have to be happy accepting the net dividend and coming back next period with the right to
seize assets rather than taking over today. Investment gives shareholders an additional future claim on
assets amounting to β ( kt − kt −1 ) . They also receive a net dividend (possibly negative) of dt . This
total payoff to existing shareholders must exceed their required reservation payoff of r β kt −1 .
Second, the need to meet equity’s reservation payoff can reduce the manager’s payoff next period
when she becomes CEO. We therefore need to check whether the manager’s participation constraint
is met. The CEO’s maximization problem is thus given
by max θt ( kt −1 ) [ f ( s CEO ) + g ( st )] − ( kt − kt −1 ) − dt ,
γ

kt , dt

β (kt − kt −1 ) + dt ≥ r β kt −1

s.t.

st ∈ arg max
sˆt

=
and U (kt )

(2.1)
(2.2)

1 
γ
θt +1 ( kt ) [ f ( sˆt ) + g ( st +1 )] − (kt +1 − kt ) − dt +1 )  − sˆt


(1 + r )

1 
γ
θt +1 ( kt ) [ f ( st ) + g ( st +1 )] − (kt +1 − kt ) − dt +1  − st ≥ 0


(1 + r )

(2.3)

(2.4)

Eq. (2.4) is the manager’s participation constraint. Let us now see how these additional constraints,
and the change in the maximization problem, alter our description of firm behavior.
B.1. The CEO’s Incentive to Invest and the Manager’s Incentive to Exert Effort
The CEO has no reason to overpay outside equity, so (2.2) will hold with equality. The net
dividend is dt = r β kt −1 − β (kt − kt −1 ) . In the early stages of a firm’s life cycle, when it is investing
heavily and growing rapidly, investment alone may give shareholders more than their minimum
required rate of return. The CEO can offset this by reducing his effective investment through a
negative net dividend, that is, an equity issue. As growth slows and the firm’s capital stock rises

19

relative to investment, the net dividend will have to turn positive; the firm will have to pay out cash to
shareholders.
Turn now to the CEO’s maximization problem. The value he has to leave behind is

(kt − kt −1 ) + dt , which equals (1 − β )(kt − kt −1 ) + r β kt −1 on substituting for dt . Essentially, the CEO
can raise β of every dollar invested from outside equity, so his marginal personal cost of investing an
additional dollar -- his co-investment -- is only (1 − β ) . Assuming the manager’s participation
constraint is satisfied, the return for the CEO from increasing capital stock is now

θt ktγ−1 g ′

dst
− (1 − β ) , which exceeds the return he would have obtained in the case without outside
dkt

equity (where β = 0 ). Also, with a higher capital stock, the manager’s incentive to exert effort is
higher.
Proposition 3: The capital stock, ktSE , and managerial effort, stSE , in a public going concern both
increase with the governance parameter β . Other things equal, in a public firm ( β ∈ (0,1] ) they are
both higher than in a private firm ( β = 0 ).
In the limiting case, when β = 1 , the CEO does not need to sacrifice any current cash flows in
order to invest. Investment can be fully financed by shareholders. He would then choose an extremely
high level of investment were it not for the manager’s participation constraint. xvi Also note that,
provided the manager’s participation constraint is slack, the CEO would never pay a cash dividend. A
dollar invested to increase capital stock satisfies shareholders just as well as a dollar paid in dividends,
but has the added benefit of increasing the manager’s incentives to exert effort. To see that we obtain
positive cash dividends when governance β is high, we have to turn to the manager’s participation
constraint.
B.2. The Manager’s Participation Constraint
Substituting for the net dividend condition [dt +1 =r β kt − β (kt +1 − kt )] in (2.4) and
differentiating w.r.t. kt , we get

20

=
U ′(kt )

(

1
θt +1γ kt γ −1 ( f ( st ) + g ( st +1 ) )  + (1 − β ) − β r
1+ r

)

(2.5)

where the derivatives with respect to st , kt +1 and st +1 drop out due to the Envelope Theorem. A
greater capital stock left behind by the current CEO has three effects on the manager’s cash flows next
period, as reflected on the right hand side of (2.5). The term in square brackets is the cash return on
additional capital next period. The second term 1 – β is the amount next period’s CEO can appropriate
from every dollar of additional capital left to him. The third term βr is the return she has to pay equity
to continue.
When β <

1
, the right hand side of (2.5) is always positive and the participation
(1 + r )

constraint is never hit. Intuitively, with weak governance not only does next period’s CEO have more
to appropriate from any capital stock left behind, but also equity holders can extract less. So, next
period’s CEO is always made better off if the current CEO invests more. In this case, the current CEO
will choose kt such that θt ktγ−1 g ′

dst
− 1 + β =0 , and then set net dividends
dkt

dt = r β kt −1 − β (kt − kt −1 ) .
However, when external governance is strong, with β >

1
, the right hand side of (2.5)
(1 + r )

can turn negative. For example, when β =1, next period’s CEO has to pay r out of cash flows for
every additional dollar of capital stock she inherits but cannot appropriate any of it. If the cash flow
produced by the marginal capital invested is sufficiently low, additional investment today can reduce
the cash that next period’s CEO gets, because the additional capital stock increases the capacity of
outside equity to extract value by more than it increases the capacity of the next period CEO to
generate cash. Since additional end-of-period capital stock also increases the manager’s effort, her
utility can be reduced by an increase in capital stock (both because future cash flows net of equity
payout are lower and her effort is higher). When her utility falls to zero (her participation level), the
current CEO cannot invest any more without losing the manager and will therefore pay out cash
dividends.

21

We can state all this more formally for the case where business conditions are
stable: θt= θ ∀ t . For β >

1
, let the manager’s utility function be well behaved so that
(1 + r )

lim U (k ) > 0 , lim U (k ) < 0 , U ′′(k ) < 0 , and U ′(k ) < 0 for some k. Let β be sufficiently high that
k →0

k →∞

the steady state capital stock, k SE , ignoring the participation constraint, is such that U (k SE ) < 0 .
This steady state cannot be attained, however, because the manager will stop participating long before
the capital stock reaches k SE . Let k * be such that in steady state (with capital stock remaining
unchanging in the future) we would have U (k * ) = 0 . Let tˆ be the first period where the CEO would
have set capital stock ktˆ > k * , were it not for the manger’s participation constraint.
Proposition 4: For any public firm financed with outside equity, there exists a critical value




1
,1 such that if and only if β > β * , the firm reaches a steady state in which the
 (1 + r ) 

β* ∈

equilibrium utility for all future CEOs is zero (they are at their participation constraint and earn no
rents net of effort). The steady state is hit in the first period tˆ when ktˆSE > k * and k * is such
that U (k * ) = 0 .
(i)

The steady state capital stock is k * in period tˆ and after, and the steady state dividend is

d * = r β k * in period tˆ + 1 and after. In period tˆ , the net dividend (dividend net of equity
issuances) is [r β k tˆSE
− β (k * − k tˆSE
)] , which is a cash dividend if positive and an equity issue
−1
−1
if negative.
(ii)

− β (k tSE − k tSE
)] .
The net dividend in all other cases is [r β k tSE
−1
−1

Proof: As partly explained in the text and the rest available in the online appendix.
The proposition then suggests the life cycle pattern of net dividend payments and investment
that is empirically observed, even for firms with strong external governance, In the early stages of a
firm’s life cycle, when kt is low, capital investment will grow at a rate greater than (1+r). In these
cases, the firm’s net dividend payment is negative, that is, it raises external financing and does not pay

22

out a cash dividend. As the firm becomes more mature and rates of return fall, the net dividend
becomes less negative -- the reliance on external capital falls. Eventually external issues cease as the
firm starts paying positive dividends.
In the special case when the firm’s governance parameter is high, the firm’s capital stock may
quickly reach a high enough value that investing more would de-motivate the manager by violating
her participation constraint. In these circumstances, the CEO will stop investing, the capital stock will
stabilize, future CEOs will also all be at their participation constraint, and the firm will make a steady
cash dividend payout to investors.
C. Initial Public Offering
Let us see what happens earlier, when the CEO takes the firm public by an IPO (say) in
period τ . In keeping with the spirit of our analysis, the CEO appropriates the proceeds from the
offering entirely. The CEO chooses investment kτ to maximize

θ ( kτ −1 ) [ f ( s CEO ) + g ( sτ )] − (kτ − kτ −1 ) + β kτ
γ

(2.6)

External governance allows outside shareholders to get value equal to share β of the capital stock
next period. The first-order condition for the CEO’s investment is given by

θ ( kτ −1 ) g ′( sτ )
γ

dsτ
−1+ β .
dkτ

(2.7)

Hence, as in the case of the ongoing concern, the CEO at the time of IPO also has a greater incentive
to invest (for any initial level of capital stock) compared to the situation without outside equity. This
is because a higher end-of-period capital stock also increases the proceeds he gets from the IPO. The
ability to “sell” the firm lengthens the CEO’s horizon. xvii
D. Example
Consider a numerical example with our specializing functions where we use the parameter
values (1+r)–1 = 0.95, γ = 0.2, (b-1)/b = 0.3, a = 0, and θ = 1. We also assume equal share of cash
flows between the CEO and the manager ( δ = 0.5 ). Suppose the CEO decides to take the private
firm public at τ =10, after it has reached (its private firm) steady state capital stock, kτ −1 = 0.026. We

23

consider two values of the governance parameter: β = 0.5 and β = 0.9999 (to approximate the
limiting case where shareholders can intervene costlessly and will finance 100% of new investment).
Figure 3 shows that when β = 0.5 , investment grows more than two-fold at the IPO to k10IPO = 0.054
and converges in eight more periods to a steady-state value of 0.067. Clearly, the IPO has boosted
investment substantially (and also boosted managerial effort). The CEO would have little incentive to
invest this much, were it not for the added incentive coming from the extra equity value he can raise
through the IPO. Figure 4 shows that this effect is especially powerful as external governance
improves. When β = 0.9999 , the investment at the IPO grows to 102.96, which is also its steadystate value.
Figures 3
through 7
go here.

It is interesting to also examine the dividend policy of the firm post IPO. Figures 5 and 6
illustrate that when the firm is in its growth phase, its net dividend is negative as the firm invests at a
fast pace. Eventually, once the firm reaches the steady state, net dividend becomes positive. No
further capital issues are needed and the firm starts paying out a cash dividend. This dividend policy
mirrors well the life-cycle of equity issues and dividends observed for young firms that go public,
grow and eventually reach maturity.
Finally, what is the current manager’s utility over these growth phases and as a function of the
external governance? Figure 7 plots this utility net of the effort incurred on learning as a manager.
When β = 0.5 , this net utility (U(k)) rises steadily to a new steady state. Managers are able to extract
rents in equilibrium. While this is beneficial for managers, it leads to lower investment. By contrast,
when the external governance is relatively strong, the manager’s net utility rises sharply in the IPO
period but that of successive managers reaches the reservation level of zero. Once this happens, each
current CEO cannot grow capital any further (Figure 4) without violating his manager’s participation
constraint (Figure 7) and thus is forced to pay outside equity cash dividends (Figure 6).
E. Discussion
E.1. How Do Internal Governance and External Governance Interact?
We have earlier considered the case of only internal governance. Relative to that, the IPO
expands investment and managerial effort for two reasons. First, the IPO changes the CEO’s

24

investment incentives in the period of the IPO. (We do not model when the CEO decides to undertake
the IPO, though this is an interesting extension.) But, the boost to capital stock given by the IPO alone
would not be enough for sustained growth, for in the absence of outside equity, both capital stock and
effort would subsequently decline to the steady state consistent with internal governance only.
Outside equity prevents such a decline: Subsequent CEOs are required to compensate outside equity,
but allowed to defer payment by building additional capital stock. This immediately alters the
investment incentives of future CEOs, ensuring also that managerial effort remains high. As a result,
the IPO potentially moves the firm to a better equilibrium.
What if we only had external governance? Clearly, the CEO would have no reason to invest
for the future. He would be willing to commit to leaving behind only so much cash as to pay
shareholders their opportunity cost, that is (1 + r ) β kt −1 . Because a dollar of capital stock is worth
only β dollars to outside shareholders, the CEO is better off liquidating the capital stock and paying
out β dollars in cash rather than leaving any capital behind. So a firm with a myopic CEO would not
last beyond one period if only external governance were available. Both internal and external
governance are required to take the public firm to a better equilibrium. xviii
E.2. External Governance and Rents
In the steady state for the public firm with a high governance parameter (high β ), the steady
state CEO gets no rents. His participation constraint is just met – he appropriates just enough, after
paying the required dividend, to compensate for his effort as manager in the previous period. But
because he can appropriate all the cash flows at the margin, he has the maximum possible incentive to
exercise effort. The firm cannot give him a better incentive scheme based on cash compensation.
The reason why CEO rents are reduced to zero, despite a succession of myopic and rapacious
CEOs, is interesting. Each CEO cares only about his take, and about the manager only to the extent
that his decisions affect the manager’s effort. By increasing capital stock, the CEO raises managerial
effort but also the capacity of shareholders to extract their return. Eventually, the rents of the future
CEO will fall with more investment, even as the manager’s effort keeps increasing, but the current
CEO is not concerned – he is doing to his successor only what his predecessor did to him. The self

25

interest of each CEO works on behalf of outside shareholders and ensures that future managerial rents
are driven to zero. All this happens in a setting where outside shareholders have no way of affecting
operating or investment decisions, and no direct way to limit the capture of cash flow by the CEO.
Even as future CEOs get reduced to their participation constraint when governance is good,
the founding CEO can appropriate a substantial portion of the cash flows generated over time by
future CEOs by undertaking an IPO. This then gives him strong incentives to be an entrepreneur and
bring together the sources of the firm’s net present value – patents, processes, or people. Thus, the
difference in wealth between innovative entrepreneurs and professional managers is substantial. By
contrast, when public firms have poor external governance, future CEOs appropriate a significant
portion of future cash flows, investment ramps up slowly, and the founding CEO has lower incentives
to innovate. The difference in wealth between innovative entrepreneurs and professional managers is
now smaller.
E.3. Private Partnerships and Public Firms
We showed in section III that a rolling partnership achieves the constrained efficient level of
investment, that is, the investment that would obtain when CEOs have long-term horizons and the
only source of inefficiency is that the manager does not have the full incentive to exert effort because
she does not internalize current period cash flows. The rolling partnership achieved this outcome by
requiring that the manager buy the firm -- at a competitive price – from the current CEO when he
retires. We also showed in this section that in case of the externally governed firm, when the external
governance parameter is sufficiently high, investment is constrained only by manager’s participant
constraint. Thus, in both cases, the equilibrium rent earned by managers in the steady state is zero.
Does this imply that the externally governed firm also reaches the constrained efficient level of
investment? The answer is no.
In the case of rolling partnership, the current CEO receives the entire future stream of rents
generated by the firm when his manager commits to buying him out. The current CEO then chooses
investment to maximize his own proceeds, which is tantamount to maximizing the firm value taking
account also of all the learning effort incurred by current and future managers.

26

Consider now the externally governed firm with perfect governance ( β = 1) . The CEO faces
no cost of investment whatsoever, because additional capital stock is fully paid for by external
shareholders. Furthermore, the CEO does not internalize the effort costs incurred by the manager,
which increase with investment. Thus, the CEO prefers to increase investment substantially and is
only stopped by the need to provide his manager the incentive to participate. Thus, for sufficiently
high external governance parameters, the public firm can over-exert its managers without optimally
internalizing their effort choices. It can be shown formally that a (weak) sufficient condition for this to
be the case is that external governance be sufficiently high and the CEO’s contribution to cash flows
relative to that of the manager be sufficiently high too. The formal condition is provided in the online
appendix.
Proposition 5: For external governance β sufficiently close to one and CEO’s contribution to cash
flows δ also sufficiently close to one , we have k * ( β ) > k CE , s* ( β ) > s CE , and CF * ( β ) < CF CE ,
that is, the externally governed firm invests more, exerts employees more and produces a smaller
steady-state cash flow compared to a rolling partnership (the constrained efficient case).
Proof: Available in the online appendix.
So given managerial effort, a private firm, where the manager buys the firm from the CEO and sells it
in turn to her manager when she retires would be better than a public firm under the same
circumstances. Indeed, Guinnane et al. (2007) argue that the limited private partnership form proved
far more popular than the public firm structure for substantial periods in the history of several
European countries. Of course, when the manager in a private firm is severely wealth constrained, the
public firm can produce far greater value than the private firm, despite the additional distortions it
introduces.
F. Other Empirical Implications
Let us turn to the empirical implications of our work. Other things equal, internal governance
should help improve outcomes. xix Some factors that should enhance a firm’s capacity for internal
governance include relatively young employees with substantial firm-specific human capital, in an
industry which typically emphasizes internal promotions and long term employment. We should find

27

that internally governed firms tend to have longer horizons, as evidenced for example in greater
research and development and lower propensity to use accounting artifice to boost profits temporarily.
While we have argued that internal and external governance are typically complements,
internal governance can be effective when there is a breakdown of external governance. Firms that
score more strongly on internal governance factors should do better in sectors where it is difficult for
external governance to play a role – sectors such as services where the firm’s franchise value is tied
up with human capital and external monitoring and control of management’s performance is difficult.
We mentioned law firms as an example.xx Sectors that are stronger in factors promoting internal
governance should be more likely to emerge and expand in countries that score poorly on external
governance. Conversely, for a given quality of internal governance, better governed industries or
countries will have higher equity valuations at their IPOs. Not only will equity reflect more of the
value added by the firm’s assets and operations, but also the life-cycle rents of future CEOs will be
driven to zero, which will also contribute to equity values.
Exogenous changes in internal governance factors should be associated with a change in a
firm’s performance. For example, as a firm’s employees age relative to top management, and both age
in absolute terms, the firm should become more short-term oriented, and deteriorate in overall
performance. Similarly, an acquisition by a firm with low internal governance attributes of a target
that is in a sector that is especially reliant on internal governance should lead to a more significant
deterioration in the performance of the target, and a worse market reception for the announcement of
the acquisition.
In human capital intensive industries, where employees account for a substantial portion of
value added and thus get high wages, managers are likely to have the wealth to buy the firm from the
CEO. The typical firm will be structured as a rolling partnership. In capital intensive industries, where
much of the value added comes from real assets, the manager’s relatively lower wage will make it
harder for her to buy the firm, and public firms will be the norm. This suggests an additional rationale
for the association of public firms with capital intensive sectors – it is not just that capital intensive
firms give outsider investors stronger control rights, it is also that they are harder to sell directly to

28

internal owners. This also means that an increase in minimum optimal scale or capital requirements
will typically force more firms to go public – though other theories will deliver this prediction.
Finally, because the CEO in a public firm internalizes future cash flows through the ability to
issue equity, a temporary change in current business conditions should have weaker effect on his
investment incentives than in an internally governed firm (one without the option of a rolling
partnership) where current business conditions are an important factor in determining the CEO’s
incentive to invest. Thus investment in industries and countries where internal governance prevails
will be much more subject to fluctuations in business conditions (and hence more volatile) than
investment in countries where external governance is strong. Booms will be stronger and busts more
prolonged in the former.

V. Relationship to Literature
Our model resembles Fama (1980), where concerns about the adverse reputational
consequences of misappropriation on his post-retirement career keep the CEO on the straight and
narrow. In contrast to the ex-post settling up in that model, the settling up in our model is
contemporaneous and by parties whose interests are intimately involved – employees endogenously
penalize excessive misappropriation. The difference is important, for instance, in explaining the
effects of external finance (section III).
We are, of course, not the first to analyze the phenomenon of internal governance. Fama and
Jensen (1983 a, b), as well as Hansmann (1996), refer to mutual or internal monitoring, though they
do not undertake a detailed analysis. Landier, Sraer, and Thesmar (2006) appeal to the independence
of top executives (as measured by their having preceded the CEO into the firm). Instead, we rely on
their self interest -- the fact that they typically have career concerns inside the firm. The mechanism
through which they have impact in our model is not through coordinated action or through appeal to a
board of directors, but through their propensity to get de-motivated. This is neither exit nor voice, in
the felicitous terminology of Hirschman (1970), nor active whistle-blowing as in Dyck, Morse, and
Zingales (2007); but, an uncoordinated, even implicit, strike.

29

Allen and Gale (2000, Chapter 12) also consider a model with overlapping generations of
short-term CEO and managers vying for the CEO role next period. Allen and Gale assume
complementarities between the CEO and managers in cash flow production, which gives the CEO the
need to elicit co-operation and lengthens the effective horizon of decision-making. They explain
based on the model the relative merits of the “stakeholder” focus of governance of Japanese firms at
one extreme and the “shareholder” focus of Anglo-Saxon firms at the other extreme, with French and
German firms somewhere in between. xxi
Similar to Allen and Gale (2000), Landier, Sraer, and Thesmar (2008) focus on situations
where CEO and manager actions are complementary, and examine the role of optimal dissent in an
organization. It is easier for a CEO to persuade the manager to follow him down the wrong path when
they have similar private preferences over projects. Managers with different preferences would place
greater constraints on the CEO, but at the cost of them being less enthusiastic when the CEO’s correct
project choice accords with his own preferences.
Finally, implicit in our framework is a theory of the firm and its boundaries. In our view, the
firm is an agglomeration of assets and specialized human capital which give it unique capabilities
(Penrose (1959), Grossman and Hart (1986), Hart and Moore (1990), and Rajan and Zingales (1998,
2001)). The literature suggests the ability to control access to the rents the firm generates is top
management’s source of control. In this paper, we focus on the bottom-up influence over firm actions,
exercised by those who have access but do not yet have explicit control, because of their ability to
affect the firm’s rents.

V. Conclusion
We have probably only touched the range of phenomena that are affected by internal
governance. For instance, the breakdown of internal governance may explain the increasing evidence
of agency problems in financial firms in the recent crisis. When capital is relatively scarce and
allocated based on detailed information available only within a firm, employees of financial firms are
relatively immobile. Each one cares about the longer term future of their own firm, and has an
incentive to monitor the actions of both colleagues and superiors, especially if the firm is a rolling

30

partnership. As the firm switches to a limited liability public firm, and as capital becomes more
widely available, employees become more mobile, and care less about the long term future of their
firm. The internal pressure to worry about the long term, or to discipline rogue units, becomes weaker.
There is also a rich interaction between the internal structure of firms and the strength of
internal governance. For example, we have focused on the case of only one manager. What if multiple
managers competed in a tournament for the CEO position? What if the CEO foreswore competition
amongst his subordinates and instituted a succession plan? Which structure would provide better
internal governance? Under what circumstances? These questions suggest many interesting avenues
for research. We have just touched the surface in this paper.

31

References
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 2000, Comparing Financial Systems (MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA).
Allen, Franklin, Elena Carletti, and Robert Marquez, 2009, Stakeholder capitalism, corporate
governance and firm value, Working paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Ang , James S., and Gregory L. Nagel, 2010, The financial outcome of hiring a CEO from outside the
firm, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1657027.
Bebchuk, Lucian A., and Jesse M. Fried, 2004, Pay without Performance: The Unfilfilled Promise of
Executive Compensation (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA).
Donaldson, Gordon, 1984, Managing Corporate Wealth: The Operation of a Comprehensive
Financial Goals System (Praeger, New York, NY).
Donaldson, Gordon, and Jay W. Lorsch, 1983, Decision Making at the Top (Basic Books, New York,
NY).
Dyck, Alexander, Adair Morse, and Luigi Zingales, 2010, Who blows the whistle on corporate fraud?,
Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Fama, Eugene F., 1980, Agency problems and the theory of the firm, Journal of Political Economy
88, 288-307.
Fama, Eugene F., and Michael C. Jensen, 1983a, Separation of ownership and control, Journal of Law
and Economics 26, 301-325.
Fama, Eugene F., and Michael C. Jensen, 1983b, Agency problems and residual claims, Journal of
Law and Economics 26, 327-349.
Fluck, Zsuzsanna, 1998, Optimal financial contracting: Debt versus outside equity, Review of
Financial Studies 11, 383-418.
Gomes, Armando, 2000, Going public without governance: Managerial reputation effects, Journal of
Finance 55, 615-646.
Graham, John R., Campbell R. Harvey, and Manju Puri, 2010, Capital allocation and delegation of
decision-making authority within firms, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1527098.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart, 1986, The costs and benefits of ownership: A theory of
vertical and lateral integration, Journal of Political Economy 94, 691-719.
Guinnane, Timothy, Ron Harris, Naomi R. Lamoureaux, and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, 2007,
Ownership and control in the entrepreneurial firm: An international history of private limited
companies, Yale University Center Discussion Paper No. 959.
Hansmann, Henry, 1996, The Ownership of Enterprise (The Belknap Press of Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA).
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1990, Property rights and the nature of the firm, Journal of Political
Economy 98, 1119-1158.

32

Hellmann, Thomas, and Manju Puri, 2002, Venture capital and the professionalization of start-up
firms: Empirical evidence, Journal of Finance 57, 169-197.
Hirschman, Albert O., 1970, Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: Response to Declines in Firms, Organizations
and States (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA).
Hirota, Shinichi, and Kohei Kawamura, 2007, Managerial control inside the firm, Journal of the
Japanese and International Economies 21, 324-335.
Huson, Mark R., Paul H. Malatesta, and Robert Parrino, 2004. Managerial succession and firm
performance, Journal of Financial Economics 74, 237-275.
Jensen, Michael C., 1986, Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers, American
Economic Review 76, 323-329.
Jensen, Michael C., 1993, The modern industrial revolution, exit, and the failure of internal control
systems, Journal of Finance 48, 831-880.
Jensen, Michael C., 2000, A Theory of the Firm: Governance, Residual Claims, and Organizational
Forms (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA).
Kreps, David M., 1990, Corporate culture and economic theory, in James E. Alt and Kenneth A.
Shepsle, eds.: Perspectives on Positive Political Economy (Cambridge University Press, New York,
NY).
Lambrecht, Bart M., and Stewart C. Myers, 2008, Debt and managerial rents in a real-options model
of the firm, Journal of Financial Economics 89, 209-231.
Landier, Augustin, David Sraer, and David Thesmar, 2006, Bottom-up corporate governance,
Working paper, New York University.
Landier, Augustin, David Sraer, and David Thesmar, 2009, Optimal dissent in organizations, Review
of Economic Studies 76, 761-794.
Lorsch, Jay W., and Thomas J. Tierney, 2002, Aligning the Stars: How to Succeed when Professionals
Drive Results (Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA).
Monks, Robert A. G., 2008, Corpocracy: How CEOs and the Business Roundtable Hijacked the
World’s Greatest Wealth Machine – And How to Get It Back (John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ).
Morck, Randall, Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1990, Do managerial objectives drive bad
acquisitions? Journal of Finance 45, 31-48.
Morrison, Alan D., and William J. Wilhelm Jr., 2004, Partnership firms, reputation, and human
capital, American Economic Review 94, 1682-1692.
Myers, Stewart C., 2000, Outside equity, Journal of Finance 55, 1005-1037.
Penrose, Edith T., 1959, The Theory of the Growth of the Firm (Blackwell, Oxford, UK).
Prendergast, Canice, 1993, The role of promotion in inducing specific human capital acquisition,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 523-534.
Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, 1998, Power in a theory of the firm, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 113, 387-432.

33

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, 2001, The firm as a dedicated hierarchy: A theory of the
origins and growth of firms, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 805-851.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1989, Management entrenchment: The case of managerspecific investments, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 123-139.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, A survey of corporate governance, Journal of Finance
52, 737-783.
Titman, Sheridan, 1984, The effect of capital structure on a firm's liquidation decision, Journal of
Financial Economics 13, 137-151.

34

Table I: Age difference between CEO and other top executives
This table presents a comparison of the age of CEOs as well as non-CEO top executives. The
data is from ExecuComp. The dataset spans the years 1992-2008 and consists of 184,464
executive-year observations. A few executives have more than one observation per year
(these are executives that are, for example, CEOs in one firm and VPs in another firm in the
same year). In order to obtain a unique observation for each executive and year, the
following sample selection is performed: if an executive has a CEO position and another
position in a given year, we keep the CEO observation; if an executive has two non-CEO
observations in a given year, we keep the first of the two for each year. This results in 1,278
(less than 1%) observations being deleted; the final number of executive-year observations is
183,186. To generate a measure for the founder-status of a CEO, data on the founding year
of a company is obtained from Jay Ritter’s homepage
(http://bear.warrington.ufl.edu/ritter/FoundingDates.htm); this dataset covers firms that had
IPOs in 1975 or thereafter. In statistics that rely on the identification of founder-status, only
ExecuComp firms which can be matched to Jay Ritter’s founding year data are retained in the
sample (79,718 executive-year observations). A “founder-CEO” is defined as a CEO who
became CEO at the time of the company’s founding. Once such a founder-CEO leaves the
company for another one, the status switches to “non-founder” in the new company. The
measurement of firm age also relies on the match with Jay Ritter’s founding year data; firm
age is defined as the difference between the current year and the founding year. The cut-offs
for the firm age quintiles are based on the unconditional sample distribution; a given firm
may therefore migrate from one firm age quintile to the next over the sample period. Firm
size quintiles are based on total assets from Compustat. Size quintile cut-offs are based on the
unconditional sample distribution; a given firm may migrate from one size quintile to another
over the sample period if its assets change sufficiently over time. Segment data is obtained
from the Compustat segments file; the merged sample consists of 161,863 executive-year
observations. Multi-segment firms are defined as firms which have more than one business
segment.

35

Overall sample
Founder CEO
Non-Founder CEO
Youngest firm age quintile (age < 13)
Firm age quintile 2
Firm age quintile 3
Firm age quintile 4
Oldest firm age quintile (age > 41)
Smallest size quintile (assets < 342 mn)
Size quintile 2
Size quintile 3
Size quintile 4
Largest size quintile (assets > 7127 mn)

CEO Age

Obns.

Non-CEO
Age

Obns.

55.6
55.4
53.8
51.1
53.0
54.1
55.9
56.2
54.0
55.3
55.8
55.9
56.9

25336
1745
9139
2070
2225
2254
2151
2184
4504
5176
5215
5166
5247

51.6
N/A
50.0
47.6
49.0
49.9
51.3
52.6
49.6
50.9
51.9
52.6
53.5

42686
N/A
21341
4393
4290
4459
4364
3835
8891
9355
8461
7816
8098

Age Difference
(CEO vs. nonCEO)
4.0
N/A
3.8
3.5
4.0
4.2
4.6
3.7
4.4
4.4
3.9
3.3
3.4

Age difference between CEO and non-CEO top executives is statistically significant at the1% level in all cases.

Table II: Internal Succession of firms – Who is the next CEO?
In Panel A, this table presents the share of occurrences when a new CEO comes from the pool of
recent (non-CEO) top-executives of the firm. Panel B shows the average tenure of non-CEO top
executives in firms with new CEOs versus all firms. Data description is as in Table 1. All
variables are constructed annually; the time-series averages of these variables across the sample
period are reported in the table.
Panel A: Nb. (new CEO_t) is the number of new CEOs, i.e. CEOs who were not CEOs of that
company in the preceding year. Nb. (New CEO_t from non-CEO exec_[t-1]) is the number of
new CEOs who were non-CEO executives of the same company in the preceding year.
Prob(New CEO_t from non-CEO exec_[t-1]) is the ratio of Nb. (New CEO_t from non-CEO
exec_[t-1]) to Nb. (new CEO_t). The sample spans 1993-2008.
Panel B: We report the average tenure of non-CEO executives when there is a new CEO in the
firm; i.e. when there is a new CEO in a given firm in year t, the average number of consecutive
years that non-CEO top executives remain in the firm from year t onwards is calculated. To
avoid problems due to truncation, this sample is from 1993 to 2000.
Panel A
Nb. (new
CEO_t)

Overall sample
Founder CEO
Non-Founder CEO
Youngest firm age quintile (age < 13)
Firm age quintile 2
Firm age quintile 3
Firm age quintile 4
Oldest firm age quintile (age > 41)
Smallest size quintile (assets < 342 mn)
Size quintile 2
Size quintile 3
Size quintile 4
Largest size quintile (assets > 7127 mn)

356.2
N/A
146.9
46.9
33.3
29.9
27.0
29.8
92.5
76.4
70.9
61.9
54.1

Nb. (New CEO_t

Prob(New CEO_t

from non-CEO
exec_[t-1])
289.1
N/A
115.6
38.6
26.8
22.8
21.4
24.1
76.2
62.6
56.8
49.9
42.7

from non-CEO
exec_[t-1])
0.794
N/A
0.780
0.798
0.769
0.782
0.814
0.798
0.775
0.795
0.786
0.800
0.802

37

Panel B
Avg. tenure of nonCEO
execs in the firm when
there
is a new CEO
3.1
N/A
2.9
2.6
2.9
3.1
3.4
3.5
3.0
3.3
3.0
3.3
3.1

38

39

40

41

42

Footnotes
i

J. W. Lorsch and T. J. Tierney (2002), p. 64.

ii

The survey evidence in Graham, Harvey and Puri (2010) suggests that managers other than the CEO

perform important functions, especially in large and complex firms.
iii

It is hard to write contracts that specify future investment, since both the quantity and design of

investment should depend on the arrival of opportunities, on forecasted business conditions and on the
CEO’s business judgment, which are nearly impossible to measure or verify. Managers’ learning effort is
equally hard to contract on, though it can be rewarded ex post through promotion (Prendergast (1993)).
However, we do not require explicit contracting here. All we need is some mechanism to make
investment visible and credible to the junior manager.
iv

Of course, most CEOs are not the caricatures that economic models like ours make them out to be, yet it

is reassuring that even though we imbue them with no redeeming qualities, our model still has them
investing for the future. In particular, while our CEO is myopic and self-interested, he acts as if he cares
about his subordinates and the survival of the firm. This reduced form appears to describe well the
observed behavior of CEOs. Donaldson and Lorsch (1983) conclude from interviews that continuity of
the firm is CEOs’ primary objective. Donaldson (1985) describes top management’s objective as
maximizing corporate wealth, not shareholder value.
v

So at the beginning of the period, a new CEO can appropriate both capital stock and cash flows. This is

not critical; with some added notation, we can handle situations where the CEO can take only cash flows,
not capital. Also, internal auditing and accounting procedures may not be necessary to commit the CEO
to invest. The manager is an insider who can observe investment first-hand. But there has to be some way
for the CEO to commit investment before the manager commits effort.
vi

We show in the online appendix that the structure of the problem essentially ensures that we can ignore

the effect of this period’s choice of capital on all future periods’ choice of variables.

43

vii

None of the results that follow depend on the CEO and manager being equally productive. We can

allow the CEO to be more productive than the manager, but this would make it harder to see the effects of
increasing δ , the relative allocation of tasks.
viii

The analysis can be repeated with cash flows (and cash flows net of investment and effort) to obtain

similar conclusions.
ix

One implication would then be that in larger and more complex family owned firms where the ageing

founder cannot possibly do all the tasks, the transition to internal governance as professional CEOs are
brought in will be easier (also see Hellmann and Puri (2002) on the “professionalization” of firms).
x

If CEOs could be hired in a competitive market and firm-specific knowledge had little value, then

clearly the manager would see few rents in the future and would not exert effort. Internal governance
would break down. Similarly, if the manager could take his expertise elsewhere and be adequately
rewarded, he would have the incentive to exercise effort regardless of what the CEO did, and internal
governance would again break down. Finally, we have not modeled the bargaining game between the
manager and the CEO, both at the time of hiring and at the time of promotion. Clearly, the extent of labor
market competition at each stage will affect the precise solution, but the qualitative results we obtain will
not be greatly affected.
xi

Internal governance would break down if the CEO could pay for current performance and fully motivate

the manager, without having to resort to indirect methods like investment. It is hard in many
circumstances, however, for the CEO to commit to reward effort adequately (see Prendergast (1993)).
Therefore implicit in our model is the notion that much of employee motivation comes from the prospect
of a long term career in the firm, including promotion. This is why we emphasize the control rents that the
employee gets from moving up in the firm, which are typically non-contractible, rather than immediate
pay.
xii

Kreps (1990) focuses on the role played by reputation in lengthening decision-making horizons of

myopic agents. In particular, he considers a model where an overlapping set of managers co-operate, by
44

mutually trusting each other, since a manager next period “buys” the reputational capital of the current
manager and this sale incentivizes the current manager for the long run, preventing defections motivated
by his short-termism. See also Gomes (2000) and Morrison and Wilhelm (2004).
xiii

Lambrecht and Myers (2008) point out that corporate borrowing may allow managers to monetize

future rents, because corporate borrowing is senior to rents as well as shareholder returns. We leave the
choice of debt vs. equity financing to future research, however.
xiv

Equity and debt are distinguishable even in a risk-free setting. We model equity as having absolute

property rights and the ability to intervene in any period, but at a cost. Debt has contractual rights and can
intervene only if the contract is breached. See Myers (2000).
xv

A seasoned equity issue will only be possible if new equity expects to get back what it puts in. Given

equity’s fixed control rights, a seasoned equity issuance will subtract an equivalent amount from what can
be extracted by all equity holders. Therefore a seasoned equity issuance is exactly equivalent to a negative
dividend from the perspective of existing equity holders – it dilutes their stake.
xvi

The invested amount is not unbounded. The CEO invests only if it encourages the manager to exert

more effort. If the CEO were to invest an infinite amount, the manager would not be able to generate
enough cash next period to pay equity their required rate of return. So equity investors would intervene
and liquidate the firm, and today’s manager would have no incentive to exercise effort. So even ignoring
the manager’s participation constraint, the highest amount the CEO will invest, even though investment is
free of cost to him, is the amount that will allow the manager to commit dividends and future capital stock
when he is CEO that just prevents equity holders from intervening. The need to meet the manager’s
participation constraint will further limit the CEO’s investment.
xvii

There are obvious parallels between equity compensation and the “stake” the CEO has in an IPO. An

equity stake works well in lengthening CEO horizons only when the CEO has a large stake and the firm is
well governed (high β ). Even so, the CEO only sees the cash flows equity can extract rather than the

45

entire cash flows of the firm. So, moderate CEO equity holdings in the typical large public firm are
unlikely to resolve the CEO’s incentive problem fully.
xviii

Myers (2000) and follow-on papers – Lambrecht and Myers (2008), for example – avoids this

problem by assuming a coalition of managers who maximize the present value of current and all future
rents. This paper can be viewed as an investigation of how that coalition forms and survives.
xix

This does not, of course, mean that firms that choose CEOs internally should do better. After all, the

factors that make a firm choose internally (or not) should also affect outcomes, in addition to the choice
itself. Indeed, the evidence on whether internal CEOs improve firm value or not is mixed (see, for
example, Huson, Malatesta, and Parrino (2004), which says there is little difference in performance
between firms that appoint internal CEOs and firms that appoint external CEOs, and Ang and Nagel
(2010), which says that internal CEOs perform better than external CEOs.
xx

Note that we are not arguing that internal monitoring and control of performance in the service sector is

hard – the billable hours each lawyer produces and the nature of his clients’ experience is easily
ascertained. The real problem is external monitoring, since the quality of the services provided customers
is hard to communicate in an objective way.
xxi

Allen, Carletti, and Marquez (2007) explore a related theme and study the effect of stakeholder

capitalism in a setting where firms’ concerns about employees and suppliers soften competition in product
markets and enhance shareholder value. See also Hirota and Kawamura (2007).

46

