NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CREDITOR RIGHTS AND CORPORATE RISK-TAKING
Viral V. Acharya
Yakov Amihud
Lubomir Litov
Working Paper 15569
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15569

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
2009 that helped improve the paper by Barry
We acknowledge with gratitude commentsDecember
and suggestions
Adler, Kenneth Ahern, Reena Aggarwal, Franklin Allen, Heitor Almeida, Meghana Ayyagari, Moshe
Barniv, Bo Becker, Sreedhar Bharath, Bernie Black, Long Chen, Sid Chib, Jonathan Cohn, Jeff Coles,
Phil Dybvig, Espen Eckbo, Alex Edmans, Isil Erel, Mara Faccio, Mike Faulkender, Julian Franks,
Radha Gopalan, Todd Gormley, Bill Greene, Todd Henderson, Joel Houston, Kose John, Lutz Johanning,
Ohad Kadan, Anzhela Kniazeva, Diana Kniazeva, William Megginson, Todd Milbourn, Natalie Moyen,
Ed Morrison, Holger Mueller, Harold Mulherin, Paige Ouimet, Troy Paredes, Katharina Pistor, Amiyatosh
Purnanandam, Stefano Rossi, Antoinette Schoar, Alan Schwartz, Oren Sussman, Anjan Thakor, Rohan
Williamson, Daniel Wolfenzon, Jeff Wurgler, David Yermack, Bernie Yeung, the seminar participants
at Washington University in Saint Louis, NYU Salomon Center corporate governance seminar, University
of Michigan, Tel Aviv University, Bar Ilan Iniversity, Hebrew University, Interdisciplinary Center
in Herzliya the 2008 Conference on Law and Economics at the University of Pennsylvania, Cornell
University’s Empirical Legal Studies Conference, 2009 UNC-Duke Corporate Finance Conference,
University of Gent’s Bankruptcy and Reorganization Conference and especially an anonymous referee
whose insightful comments and suggestions greatly helped improve this paper. We thank Simeon Djankov
and Caralee McLeish for providing access to their creditor rights data. Rong Leng provided excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Viral V. Acharya, Yakov Amihud, and Lubomir Litov. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Creditor rights and corporate risk-taking
Viral V. Acharya, Yakov Amihud, and Lubomir Litov
NBER Working Paper No. 15569
December 2009
JEL No. G31,G32,G33,G34
ABSTRACT
We analyze the link between creditor rights and firms’ investment policies, proposing that stronger
creditor rights in bankruptcy reduce corporate risk-taking. In cross-country analysis, we find that stronger
creditor rights induce greater propensity of firms to engage in diversifying acquisitions, which result
in poorer operating and stock-market abnormal performance. In countries with strong creditor rights,
firms also have lower cash flow risk and lower leverage, and there is greater propensity of firms with
low-recovery assets to acquire targets with high-recovery assets. These relationships are strongest
in countries where management is dismissed in reorganization, and are observed in time-series analysis
around changes in creditor rights. Our results question the value of strong creditor rights as they have
an adverse effect on firms by inhibiting management from undertaking risky investments.

Viral V. Acharya
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
vacharya@london.edu
Yakov Amihud
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012
yamihud@stern.nyu.edu

Lubomir Litov
John M. Olin School of Business
Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, MO 63130
litov@wustl.edu

1. Introduction

Through history, default on debt incurred harsh punishment. In biblical time and in
ancient Greece, defaulted debtors were enslaved for a number of years or until the debt
was fully discharged and during some periods in Rome, default met with physical
punishment. 1 The United Kingdom had debtors’ prisons until their abolishment in the
1869 Debtors Act. Now, the norm of limited liability reduces creditor rights by limiting
the ability to purse debtors when they default on promised payments. 2 Smith and Warner
(1979) document that creditors impose restrictions on financial policies of firms through
covenants, even prior to default, in order to control managerial actions that could reduce
firm value. But Schwartz (1997, p. 127) points out: “When a firm becomes insolvent,
however, the state-supplied dispute resolution procedure—the bankruptcy system and
court—is mandatory; parties cannot contract in the lending agreement for an alternative
procedure.” This means that bankruptcy laws which uniformly apply to all firms and
have precedence over private firm-specific contracts may lead to inefficient outcomes for
some firms. 3
In this paper, we study the effect of creditor rights in bankruptcy on corporate
risk-taking. In particular, we ask: What effect does the strength of creditor rights have
on firms’ investment decisions? While a harsh penalty in default reduces fraud and
opportunistic behavior by debtors, might it also inhibit entrepreneurial, bona-fide risky
investment?
Research on creditor rights mainly analyzes their effect on financing policies. For
example, Djankov, McLeish, and Shleifer (2007, 2008) find that stronger creditor rights
encourage greater supply of credit as measured by aggregate lending. 4 This evidence
supports the view that strong creditor rights help expand the financing capacity of firms
1

In 450 BC: The Twelve Tablets, Section III, Debt. Penalties ranged from imprisonment to extracting part of the body.
Europe still has relatively stricter penalties upon bankruptcy, as noted in The Economist, 23 March 2002, Fear of
Failure – Europe’s fear of bankruptcie: “In Europe, by contrast [to the United States], failed firms face bigger hurdles.
First, in the continent that created the debtor’s prison, insolvency is still tainted with moral failure. In some countries,
company directors are personally liable for bankruptcy. That steeply raises the penalties for failure – and so deters
entrepreneurs from taking risks.”
3
This is why Schwartz (1997) proposes that the state avails to firms a menu of several bankruptcy procedures. Then,
allowing parties flexibility in contracting for preferred bankruptcy procedures alleviates underinvestment arising due to
strong creditor rights.
4
Haselmann, Pistor and Vig (2006) find that the improvement in enforcement of creditor rights in Central and East
European countries through the creation of a collateral registry boosted lending.
2

2

by limiting the ability of owners to opportunistically expropriate firm value, and thereby
reduce the costs that result from the conflict of interests between owners and providers of
debt capital (Jensen and Meckling (1976)). Other studies, such as Acharya, Sundaram
and John (2004) show theoretically and empirically that corporate leverage responds
negatively to stronger creditor rights, relatively more so for firms with greater specificity
of assets. Vig (2007) finds that in India, improvement in the rights of secured creditors
lowered the usage of secured corporate debt.
In contrast, this paper studies the link between creditor rights and corporate
investment policy, and the effect of creditor rights on firms’ demand for credit. We
propose that stronger creditor rights induce firms to make risk-reducing investments such
as diversifying acquisitions that are potentially inefficient and value-reducing. The reason
is that strong creditor rights in default can lead to inefficient liquidation that extinguishes
the continuation option of firm’s enterprise and hurts stockholders. Also, creditor rights
that mandate the dismissal of management impose an additional private cost on
managers. To avoid these costs, shareholders and managers lower the likelihood of
distress by diversifying or reducing cash flow risk. Such risk reduction can result in value
loss and foregoing of profitable investments, and thereby strong creditor rights can result
in dead-weight costs to firms and to the economy at large. We also propose that while
stronger creditor rights increase the propensity to lend, they may reduce the firms’
willingness to borrow, resulting in lower overall level of corporate debt.
Our empirical analysis studies the effects of creditor rights on the risk-taking
activities of firms. We use as an explanatory variable the variation of creditor rights
across countries in their bankruptcy codes, documented by La Porta et al. (1998), which
are largely a function of the country’s legal origin and exogenous to the nature of the
country’s overall corporate investments.
We employ several different measures of corporate risk-taking and examine their
relationship to creditor rights across countries and over time. We find the following:

3

(1) Stronger creditor rights in a country are associated with a greater propensity to do
diversifying acquisitions, across industries as well as across countries. 5 The
value effect of diversifying acquisitions – as measured by abnormal stock-market
returns at the acquisition announcement – is negative for countries with stronger
creditor rights. And, diversifying acquisitions in countries with stronger creditor
rights are associated with lower subsequent profitability, measured by the return
on assets (ROA). These results are obtained after accounting for the selection of
the type of acquisition (diversifying or focusing) by the firm. Such negative
value and operating performance effects associated with stronger creditor rights
are not observed for focusing acquisitions.

(2) In countries with stronger creditor rights, firms choose a mode of operation that
reduces cash flow risk, measured by the standard deviation of firms’ ROA.

We obtain these results both in tests at the level of individual acquisitions or firms
and at an aggregate country level. Overall, these results are strongest (statistically as well
as economically) for the creditor rights corresponding to (i) whether there is no automatic
stay on the debtor’s assets in bankruptcy and (ii) whether management is dismissed in
bankruptcy. For example, dismissal in bankruptcy reduces the likelihood of a merger
being in the same industry by 6.6% (based on Table 3) where the standard deviation of
this likelihood across countries is 10.3%, and it lowers the cash flow risk measured at the
country level by around 3% (based on Table 5), where the cross-country standard
deviation of cash flow risk is 2%. Thus, the effect of creditor rights on corporate
investment policy and corporate risk taking seems large. We also examine the effect of
creditor rights at the industry level because countries differ in the composition of their
industries, and industries may differ in the propensity to diversify or reduce risk. We
obtain that the findings in (1) and (2) above still hold. In addition, we find that

5

We focus on M&As because they provide a unique opportunity to observe a major corporate investment and its effect
on corporate risk – whether the acquisition is diversifying (across industries) or focusing (within-industry). In M&As,
we can also identify whether the assets in which the company invests are of high or low recovery value. Also
important for our setting, corporate investment in the form of M&A decisions is not tainted by cross-country
differences in reporting practices that affect other measures of investment such as capital expenditures and R&D.

4

(3) In countries with stronger creditor rights, companies have lower financial
leverage, after controlling for both country-level and firm-level variables that
affect leverage. These results are notable because proponents of stronger creditor
rights posit that they have a positive effect on lending. However, stronger
creditor rights may inhibit borrowing, resulting in overall lower corporate
leverage.

(4) In countries with strong creditor rights, target firms whose assets have high
recovery value in default 6 (or distress) are more likely to be acquired by firms
whose assets have low recovery value. This is because a high recovery value of
assets enables firms in distress to defer default by liquidating some of these assets
and using the proceeds to service debt. Thus, by acquiring a high-recovery
target, a low-recovery firm reduces or defers the likelihood of default in case of
distress.

(5) Finally, all of the above effects of stronger creditor rights – greater propensity to
engage in diversifying acquisitions, the resulting reduced value and operating
performance, lower cash flow risk, lower financial leverage, and greater
propensity of low recovery firms to acquire high recovery targets – are also
observed with a strengthening (and vice-versa for weakening) of a country’s
creditor rights.
The corporate choice of risk affects corporate value because if managers seek to
reduce risk in countries with strong creditor rights, they may choose to diversify even if
that does hurts firm value. The effect of corporate diversification on corporate value is a
subject of debate. For example, Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1990), Comment and
Jarrell (1995) and Moeller and Schlingemann (2005) show that diversifying mergers
result in reduction in value. Moreover, Berger and Ofek (1995) show that diversified
conglomerates have significant value discount compared to the conglomerate’s imputed
6
Assets with high recovery value have lower costs of liquidation. These assets lose less of their value in distressed
sales and, following the definition of Shleifer and Vishny (1992), have lower specificity in that they are fungible across
industries and hence trade at prices that are close to their value in best use. Our exact measure of high-recovery
industries is based on the realized recovery rates on debt of defaulted firms in different industries documented by
Acharya, Bharath and Srinivasan (2007).

5

value if its divisions were valued according to their standalone counterparts in the
industry. However, Campa and Kedia (2002) and Villalonga (2004) find that the
diversification discount disappears after addressing endogeneity econometrically, which
means that business segments acquired by conglomerates are inferior to their industry’s
standalone counterparts. These results are recently overturned by Ammann, Hoechle and
Schmid (2008), Laeven and Levine (2007) and Schmid and Walter (2009) who affirm the
existence of a discount in industrial and financial conglomerates.
Diversification can be beneficial in countries with under-developed capital
markets, because internal capital markets in conglomerates may substitute for outside
capital markets, helping to overcome the problems of asymmetric information and moral
hazard that limit external finance. But conglomerates may also reduce value because of
inefficient subsidization of poorly performing groups by better performing ones, in what
Scharfstein and Stein (2002) call the “dark side” of internal capital markets. Indeed
Berger and Ofek (1995) find that conglomerates overinvest in segments whose industry
has poor investment opportunity, and Lamont (1997), Scharfstein (1998), Shin and Stulz
(1998), Rajan, Servaes and Zingales (2000) and Lamont and Polk (2002) find evidence of
inefficient investment in conglomerates. Comment and Jarrell (1995, p. 68) also question
the link between conglomerates and internal capital markets, showing that “diversified
firms do not rely any less on external capital market transactions” than do undiversified
firms. 7
The effect of conglomeration is also debatable in emerging markets where
external capital markets malfunction. Khanna and Palepu (2000) find that in India, most
diversified business groups add value, measured by Tobin’s q, which contrasts the results
obtained in the U.S. 8 However, Lins and Servaes (2002) reject the theory on the benefits
of internal capital markets. They analyze over 1000 firms from seven emerging markets
in 1995 and find that diversification leads to discount. Lee, Peng and Lee (2008), who

7

However, there is some ongoing debate here too. Analyzing plant-level data, Maksimovic and Phillips (2002) suggest
that the conglomerate discount results from lower productivity of some peripheral segments, whereas its main segments
are as efficient as their stand-alone industry counterparts. This, in their view, implies that the conglomerate discount is
endogenous and not a result of agency problems.
8
Analyzing 1309 Indian firms in 1993 which are about equally divided between diversified and focused firms, Khanna
and Palepu (2000, p. 887): “Firms affiliated with a large majority of diversified Indian business groups have lower
Tobin’s q measures than unaffiliated focused firms, but those firms affiliated with the most highly diversified Indian
business groups have higher Tobin’s q measures than all the other firms in the economy.”

6

study business groups (chaebols) in Korea over the period 1984-1996, find that the effect
of diversification on value has changed over time. In the early period, the extent of
diversification in the business groups was value increasing, whereas in the more recent
period diversification led to a discount. They explain this change by improvements in the
institutional setting: liberalization of capital markets and transitions in the product and
labor markets, have made internal capital markets less important for raising capital.
Notably, the recent period in the study of Lee et al., where diversification discount exists,
corresponds to the beginning of our study’s sample period. Our study tests directly the
consequences of diversifying acquisitions as a function of the country’s creditor rights.

Relation to earlier studies on the effects of creditor rights. On the theoretical
front, Adler (1992) suggests that while strong creditor rights induce the manager to
increase the firm’s risk as the firm approaches default, their ex-ante effect is to reduce
risk to avoid insolvency. Manso (2005) proposes that penalizing failing entrepreneurs,
for example, through tough bankruptcy procedures, inhibits innovation. Acharya and
Subramanian (2009b) also argue theoretically that strong creditor rights can deter
financial leverage and risk taking in industries that are inherently more innovative.
Adler, Capcun and Weiss (2007) propose that the recent strengthening of creditor rights
in the U.S. has induced firms to delay default, which could destroy value. Our empirical
evidence is consistent with the ex-ante risk-reducing effect of strong creditor rights,
assumed in this literature.
Empirically, Acharya and Subramanian (2009a) find that in countries with
stronger creditor rights, technologically innovative industries innovate less, employ lower
financial leverage, and importantly for welfare conclusions, also grow slower. 9 Chava
and Roberts (2008) and Nini, Smith and Sufi (2008) find that restrictive debt covenants
and enforcement of covenant violations, which provide firm-specific creditor rights,
inhibit capital investment. These findings point at potentially harmful effects of creditor
rights for risky investment.

9

There is an inverse relationship between the strictness of personal bankruptcy laws and entrepreneurship, as reflected
in the extent of self employment. See Fan and White (2004) and Armour and Cumming (2005).

7

Our findings that diversification is driven by the managerial agency problem is
consistent with Amihud and Lev’s (1981) suggestion that diversification may reflect
managerial motivation to reduce risk rather than a value-maximizing decision. 10 Tufano
(1996) studies hedging by 50 publicly traded gold-mining firms in the U.S. and Canada
and finds that firms with greater managerial stock ownership hedge more, suggesting that
managerial risk-aversion drives hedging. Tufano (1998) suggests an alternative channel
whereby hedging benefits management by reducing the discipline imposed by accessing
external capital markets for finance.
The outline of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents a model that motivates
the causal effect of creditor rights on corporate investment choice. Section 3 discusses the
data and empirical design and presents the results of our tests. Section 4 offers
concluding remarks.

2. Theoretical motivation

We present a stylized model to analyze the effect of creditor rights on ownermanager’s risk-taking incentives. The model examines the effect of reorganization
outcomes for management and shareholders of a distressed firm on the ex-ante
investments of the firm. Figure 1 presents the time-line of the model.

INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE.

Consider a firm at date 0 that is run by an owner/entrepreneur (the “manager” of
the firm). The firm has made some past investment (say I units) and has some existing
debt in place of face value F which is maturing at date 1. 11 The manager owns all equity
of the firm. The manager can choose at date 0 the risk of the firm’s future cash flows to
be realized from this investment at date 1. We adopt the technology for choice of risk
from a part of the banking literature, starting with the models of Blum (1999, 2002) and
10

Comment and Jarrell (1995) show that focused firms (firms whose revenue is concentrated in a fewer business
segments) have significantly higher idiosyncratic risk. Hence, diversifying acquisitions are known to reduce risk by
reducing revenue concentration but their incidence has not yet been linked to the strength of creditor rights.
11
We do not model the choice of leverage, but we control for potential endogeneity of leverage to creditor rights.

8

Allen and Gale (2000). The risk choices at date 0 are indexed by y ≥ 0, which represents
the firm’s cash flow in case the investment succeeds at date 1. Success is likely with
probability p(y), where 0 < p(y) < 1, p’(y) < 0, and p’’(y) < 0.

With remaining

likelihood, [1 – p(y)], the investment fails at date 1 and produces cash flow of zero. Thus,
y is also an index for the risk of default of the firm: Greater y reduces the likelihood of
success p(y) (in a concave fashion). Agents are risk-neutral and the risk-free rate of
interest is zero.
At date 0, the owner/manager makes the choice of risk, maximizing equity value
net of creditor payments, and anticipating the outcomes from resolution of distress (if
any) at date 1.
In case of default at date 1, the continuation prospects of the firm depend upon
managerial ability. Managerial ability at date 1 may be either high or low with equal
probabilities. We assume that neither the manager nor the firm’s board of directors that
hires her know this ability unless it is investigated at date 1, as we explain below. Also,
for simplicity, we assume that managerial ability does not affect the date-0 investment.
In other words, managers are assumed to be randomly endowed at date 1 to be high or
low type with equal likelihood. Managerial ability does affect firm’s outcomes at date 1
in case of default. In particular, if there is default at date 1, then a firm operating under a
high-ability manager yields cash flow of H while a low-ability manager yields zero cash
flow. If the firm is liquidated to outsiders and ceases to exist, it will fetch cash flow of L.
We assume that 2L < F < H.
These assumptions on managerial ability are arguably simplistic, but they offer
the following advantages.

First, they rule out signaling of ability by managers (or

conversely, hiding of lack of ability) through the choice of risk. Second, they also rule
out learning by firms about ability of managers through first-period outcomes. Third, and
more importantly, they capture the notion of “ability” in that if the firm ends up in default
at date 1 (which is outside of managerial control given the choice of risk at date 0), then
the type of manager affects the firm’s ability to turn around.
Consistent with managerial type being most relevant when firm is in default, any
investigations of this type also occur only in distress. The following are the possible

9

outcomes upon default at date 1, which occurs if the realization from the investment is
zero:

(1) With probability r (r > 0), the firm is liquidated to outsiders by creditors, which
yields L. This may occur due to failure amongst the different creditors of the firm
to agree on a reorganization outcome (we discuss below possible explanations for
such a failure).
(2) With probability q (q > 0), creditors investigate the type of management and find
it out. Then, if the manager’s ability is found to be low, the manager is dismissed
and the firm is liquidated, realizing cash flow of L. If the manager’s ability is
found to be high, the firm continues with the current manager and realizes cash
flow H. The likelihood of each such event occurring is 0.5.
(3) With the remaining probability of (1 – q – r) (assumed positive), creditors are
unable to learn managerial type. If the firm continues with the current manager,
the cash flows are H or 0 with probability of 0.5. If H is sufficiently high
compared to proceeds from liquidation (we assumed that 0.5H > L), creditors are
better off if the firm continues compared to liquidation even if the manager type
in unknown. Therefore, creditors agree to a reorganization proceeding with the
current manager. Notably, if the manager turns out to be of bad type, assets that
are used for one more period have depreciated and become worthless. Thus,
continuing for another period makes the firm forego the ability to liquidate the
assets to outsiders for L.

Assumption (2) is consistent with empirical evidence. For example, Eckbo and
Thornburn (2003) find that in Sweden, where creditor rights include the automatic firing
of the manager in default, the rehiring probability of dismissed managers increases in a
measure of managerial ability. 12

12

In particular, Eckbo and Thornburn (2003) find that managerial ability (based on trustee assessment that the
bankruptcy was not due to managerial incompetence or economic crime) is increasing in the firm industry-adjusted prebankruptcy operating performance and the recovery rate of its debt, and decreasing in the trustee’s evaluation of the
manager and in the delay from insolvency to filing.

10

If manager is found to be of low ability and is dismissed (probability of 0.5q) or
the firm fails to reorganize and is liquidated (probability of r), managers are assumed to
suffer a private or personal cost of m > 0 due to loss of reputation or private benefits of
control. This assumption is consistent with empirical evidence. Gilson (1989), Baird and
Rasmussen (2006) and Ozelge (2007) find that upon distress, there is a significantly
higher probability of top-management dismissal, especially due to direct intervention by
lending banks, compared to firms not in distress. Gilson documents that the likelihood of
managerial dismissal in leveraged firms following adverse stock performance is almost
thrice as high as that in firms that are not distressed, and that managers dismissed in
distress suffer a significant private cost in the form of diminished future employment
opportunities. Eckbo and Thornburn (2003) also find that in Sweden, managers of
bankrupt companies suffer a median (abnormal) income loss of 47%. We also assume
that business failure which might occur if a low-quality manager continues does not incur
the cost m that is incurred as a result of forced dismissal by creditors. And, if the firm
continues without knowing the manager’s ability (with probability 0.5(1 – q – r)) and the
manager turns out to be of low ability, we assume for simplicity that the manager has
received private benefits of control for one additional period which offset the private cost
suffered when the type is revealed at the end.
The assumed inefficiency in reorganization, which leads to liquidation rather than
continuation, reflects creditors’ failure to reach an agreement amongst themselves
regarding bankruptcy proceedings. For example, suppose that firm’s debt of face value F
consists of secured debt of amount F1 and unsecured debt of amount (F - F1), where F1 <
L. Suppose also that secured creditors have claim to all assets of the firm and there is no
automatic stay on secured creditors’ rights. Then, because secured creditors are fully
covered under liquidation but face some default risk in case firm is continued (and
managerial type turns out to be low), they have incentives to liquidate the firm. In
contrast, unsecured creditors value the continuation outcome. Thus, there is a conflict of
interest amongst creditors whether to expend any time and effort in learning about
managerial type at all: secured creditors may just prefer to seize and liquidate the assets.
Such reorganization failure is also more likely if reorganization petition requires majority
consent of creditors and secured (or more generally, senior) creditors can block
11

continuation in favor of liquidation. Another possibility (outside of our model) is that
firm’s continuation requires additional financing, but due to debt overhang problem, this
can be raised only if the firm can arrange supra-priority financing, such as the debtor-inpossession financing in the United States. However, if creditor rights do not allow
secured creditors’ claims to be subordinated in this way, then no continuation may be
feasible, resulting in liquidation of the firm.
We assume that the probabilities q and r reflect the law on creditor rights in
which the firm operates. These parameters map directly into their empirical counterparts
of creditor right scores (as measured, for example, in LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer,
and Vishny (1998)). The empirical counterpart for q is the score MANAGES, which
equals 1 if management is dismissed in bankruptcy. The counterpart for r is the set of
other creditor right scores, namely AUTOSTAY, SECURED and REORG.

These

correspond to there being no automatic stay on assets of the debtor in bankruptcy (so that
creditors can seize assets right away if they wish to), secured creditors being paid first,
and reorganization requiring creditors’ consent, which as explained above could lead to
failure to reorganize due to disagreement amongst creditors. 13 In our model, while the
creditor right to dismiss management leads to more information about managerial type
and therefore better continuation and liquidation decisions, the other three creditor rights
may result in inefficient liquidations of the firm. However, all these creditor rights
impose a private cost on management and induce in them aversion to risk (even though
they are endowed with a risk-neutral preference in our model). We derive this result next.
In the presence of leverage and risk of default, the owner/manager chooses the
risk y to maximize the expected value of equity net of the private costs from distress,
given as:
p(y) [y – F] + [1 – p(y)] [ – (r + 0.5 q) m + (0.5 q + 0.5(1 – q – r)) (H – F) ]. (1)
This expression reflects the fact that management suffers a private cost m when the firm
is liquidated – either due to failure to reorganize or due to revelation of his type being
low - and has residual value in distress in other cases provided there is excess cash flow
after creditors are paid off. This latter scenario has a probability of (0.5 q + 0.5(1 – q –r))

13

Schwartz (2001, p. 128) points out that “without a bankruptcy procedure, creditors acting individually may force
liquidations, thereby preventing the reorganization of viable but temporarily insolvent firms.”

12

because there is excess cash flow after paying creditors only if managerial type is
discovered by creditors to be high and firm is continued (probability of 0.5 q) or if
managerial type is not discovered but it turns out ex post to be high.
The optimal choice of risk for the levered firm y* is thus given by the first-order
condition:
p(y) + p’(y) [ y – F + (r + 0.5 q) m – 0.5 (1 – r) (H – F) ] = 0 ,

(2)

and, the second-order derivative is
2 p’(y) + p’’(y) [ y – F + (r + 0.5 q) m – 0.5 (1 – r) (H – F)] .

(3)

Note that p’(y) < 0 at the optimal risk choice y*, so we must have
[ y – F + (r + 0.5 q) m – 0.5 (1 – r) (H – F)] > 0 ,

(4)

so that the second-order derivative above is negative and the first-order condition indeed
gives the optimum that maximizes the objective of manager. To see this, note that
because p(y) > 0 and p’(y) < 0, the expression p(y) + p’(y) [y – x] is greater than zero for
all y ≤ x. Hence, the solution to the equation p(y) + p’(y) [y – x] = 0 must satisfy y > x.
The three terms after y inside [.] in the condition (4) for y* illustrate the additional
effects on risk-taking for a levered firm. The first term, –F, reflects the fact that a levered
firm has incentives to shift risk given equity’s “option” like payoff at date 1. This effect
is not however sensitive to creditor right parameters q and r. The second term (r + 0.5
q)m reflects the risk-aversion induced in managerial objective by the fact that
management suffers a private cost upon being dismissed. The manager is risk neutral, but
the personal cost that he endures because of dismissal in bankruptcy makes his reward
function concave, making him averse to risk. This effect is increasing in r, the failure of
creditors to agree on reorganization, and also increasing in q, the likelihood that
management is dismissed in bankruptcy, both assumed to be a property of the creditor
rights of the country. The third term – 0.5 (1 – r) (H – F) also corresponds to a riskshifting incentive. This is the “option” effect from date 2 when the firm is continued.
Crucially, the magnitude of this effect diminishes in r, the likelihood that creditors fail to
allow the firm to efficiently reorganize in bankruptcy.
To summarize, creditor rights that enable dismissal of management in bankruptcy
and that are less likely to lead to a reorganization outcome discourage ex-ante risk-taking
by firm’s management.
13

We prove these two results formally as follows. Denoting the first-order condition
for management’s optimization as f (y*(q,r), q, r) = 0, the second-order condition implies
δf / δy < 0. In turn, taking the derivative of f with respect to q or r, and applying the
implicit-function theorem gives
(i) sign (dy* / dq) = sign (δf / δq), which is negative because

(5)

δf / δq = p’(y) m < 0,
and, similarly,
(ii) sign (dy* / dr) = sign (δf / δr), which is also negative because

(6)

δf / δr = p’(y) [ m + 0.5 (H – F)] < 0.
Thus, the risk that a levered firm undertakes declines in the likelihood that management
is dismissed in bankruptcy and that reorganizations promoting continuations of the firm
do not materialize. These two implications constitute the foundation of our empirical
investigation.

3. Hypotheses, Data and Empirical Design

Motivated by the model’s results, we examine the following five hypotheses
concerning the effects of creditor rights on corporate propensity to take risk by testing
four hypotheses, using data on corporate behavior and creditor rights from 38 countries.

Hypothesis I: The propensity to do diversifying acquisitions increases in the strength of
the country’s creditor rights.

Hypothesis II: The firm’s cash flow risk, measured as the volatility of its cash-flow-toassets ratio, is decreasing in the strength of the country’s creditor rights.

Hypothesis III: The firm’s leverage (debt-to-assets ratio) is decreasing in the strength of
the country’s creditor rights.

Hypothesis IV: In countries with strong creditor rights, target firms in high-recovery
industries are more likely to be acquired by firms in low-recovery industry.
14

The first hypothesis is tested primarily for diversification across industries, but we
also test it for cross-border acquisitions, which are a form of diversification.

The second

hypothesis tests a broader implication of creditor rights for corporate risk taking,
examining whether companies’ cash flow risk is decreasing in creditor rights. And the
third hypothesis complements these tests by looking at financial leverage of firms in
countries as a function of creditor rights.
The fourth hypothesis examines the effect of creditor rights on the choice of
assets by acquirers. A firm with high-recovery assets can liquidate some of them in time
of distress and use the proceeds to defer default. High-recovery assets lose less of their
value in distressed sale and fetch prices that are closer to their value in best use (using the
notion of “asset specificity” from Shleifer and Vishny (1992)). Bidder firms with lowrecovery assets are therefore more vulnerable to default risk because they are less able to
defer default by asset liquidation. Indeed, Berger, Ofek and Swary (1996) find that a
high recovery value of assets (imputed from book value items) has particularly high value
for firms in financial distress. Also, Eckbo and Thornburn’s (2003) study suggests that it
is in managerial interest to increase the recovery rate of debt in default (which is related
to assets’ characteristics), because the probability of rehiring managers who are
automatically dismissed in bankruptcy is an increasing function of the recovery rate of
the firm’s debt.
We test these effects of creditor rights both in the cross-section of countries and in
time-series, around changes in creditor rights of a country. The main tests are conducted
in a transaction- or firm-level cross-section. We also do the tests in aggregate countrylevel and industry-level values for the variables that we test.
These four hypotheses relate creditor rights to the corporate risk taking. The
question is whether creditor rights induce corporate managers to trade off value for lower
risk when doing acquisitions, that is, whether managers give up value in order to gain
lower risk in countries with stronger creditor rights. We propose the following:

15

Hypothesis V: In countries with stronger creditor rights, diversifying acquisitions have
lower post-merger profitability and lower value. There is no such negative effect of
strong creditor rights in case of focusing acquisitions.

This hypothesis is tested using two measures of performance around the time of
acquisitions: the post-merger return on assets (ROA) compared to the ROA in the year
before the acquisition, and the change in the acquirer’s stock price (cumulative abnormal
return) at the announcement of the acquisition.
The data in our analysis include country variables – legal and economic – and
data on individual companies and acquisition transactions. Table 1 describes how the
variables are constructed and the data sources.

INSERT TABLE 1 HERE

3.1. Creditor Rights
We use the data on creditor rights from LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and
Vishny (1998), who record creditor rights provisions in a cross-country sample as of
1994. The variable CRIGHTS is the sum of four provisions: AUTOSTAY, the absence of
automatic stay on the assets of the debtor in reorganization; REORG, the requirement of
creditors’ consent or minimum dividend for a debtor to file for reorganization;
SECURED, ranking secured creditors first in the disposition of assets of the bankrupt
firm upon filing for reorganization; and MANAGES, the removal of management from
managing the activities of the firm upon filing for reorganization.

Each of these

provisions takes a value of 1, if it is present in the country’s bankruptcy code or zero if it
is absent. Consequently, the range of values for CRIGHTS is 0 through 4. In our 38country sample (see Table 2), the mean of CRIGHTS is 2.08 with standard deviation of
1.28. As a robustness check, we use the creditor rights data of Djankov et al. (2007) to
re-estimate our models and to examine the effects of changes in creditor rights.

3.2. Creditor rights and diversification in M&A activity

16

Our first set of tests is based on measuring corporate risk reduction through
diversifying acquisitions. The data on acquisitions is obtained from the Securities Data
Corporation (SDC)’s Platinum Mergers & Acquisitions database for the period 19942004. Our sample consists of 38 countries with data on creditor rights as of 1994 and that
satisfy the requirements on transactions specified below. First, we only include mergers
where both the acquirer and the target are under the same jurisdiction as it applies to
creditor rights.

Separately, we present evidence on the effect of creditor rights on

geographic diversification, using cross-border transactions. We exclude acquisitions
where the acquirer is in the financial industry (SIC header 6), which includes acquirers in
LBOs, or a regulated industry (SIC headers 48 and 49). We further exclude transactions
where the acquirer and the target are the same company (repurchases recorded as
acquisitions), transactions where the acquirer is a mutual company, investment company,
subsidiary, or state-owned enterprise, and transactions in which the percentage acquired
from the target is less than 20 percent. 14 Finally, we begin by including only countries
with at least 50 transactions that satisfy the above criteria, but additional data requirement
on transaction value reduces the sample size for some countries.

INSERT TABLE 2 HERE.

We test Hypothesis I by estimating the likelihood of same-industry acquisition in
a country as a function of the creditor rights in that country, controlling for other
variables. By our hypothesis, this likelihood should be negatively related to creditor
rights. We define a diversifying acquisition as one where the acquirer and target are not
in the same industry (using 2-digit SIC code). 15 We do the analysis at both the individual
acquisitions level (Table 3) and at the aggregate country level, examining the proportion
of the same-industry domestic mergers among all domestic mergers in the sample period.
The main explanatory variable in our analysis is CRIGHTS, the aggregate
measure of creditor rights from La Porta et al. (1998), and its components, AUTOSTAY,
14
Our results are robust to setting the cutoff at 10% acquired or to adopting more conservative criteria, following
Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz (2004), of the acquisition being at least 51% of the target company, the transaction
value is at least 1 million US$, the transaction represents at least 1% of the total assets of the acquirer, and the
transaction is completed within three years of the announcement of the deal.
15
The results are qualitatively similar when we employ industry classification at the 3-digit SIC level.

17

REORG, SECURED and MANAGES. We predict that the coefficient of CRIGHTS is
negative, that is, there is lower likelihood of same-industry mergers in countries with
stronger creditor rights.
The control variables include shareholder rights index, SHRIGHTS (obtained from
LaPorta et al. (1998)). If diversifying (focusing) mergers are in shareholder interest, after
controlling for creditor rights, this variable should have a negative (positive) coefficient.
We also include variables that proxy for the development and efficiency of the capital
market (see La Porta et al., 1997): Log(Market Cap), the value of securities on the
national stock markets in 1994 in U.S. dollars, in logarithm, 16 Accounting Disclosure,
measured by the extent to which the firm’s financial statement includes 90 items (as of
1994), and Rule of Law, an index that captures better enforcement of legal rights in a
country (from La Porta et al. (1998).) The effect of these variables should be positive if
the internal capital markets in conglomerates substitute for less-efficient outside capital
markets. Similarly, Emerging Market dummy variable (= 1 if the country has GDP-percapita below the sample median) should have a negative coefficient if internal capital
markets in conglomerates are valuable.

Flexibility to Fire (an index of rules and

regulations reflecting the ease of firing workers) proxies for the efficiency of the labor
market, which may affect the type of mergers. Legal Origin influences a number of
institutional variables in a country including creditor- and shareholder rights (La Porta et
al., 1998) and also interacts with the likelihood of bankruptcies (Claessens and Klapper,
2005). The sources for these three legal control variables are Levine and Demirguc-Kunt
(2001) and La Porta et al. (1998).
Additional controls are the country’s macroeconomic volatility, MacroRisk,
measured by the standard deviation of quarterly changes in the country’s index of
industrial production. It has negative coefficient if managers in riskier countries do more
diversifying mergers. We also include the country’s average real GDP per-capita over
1994-2000 (in logarithm) from the Penn World Table Version 6.1 as a proxy for the
degree of economic development, because developed and developing countries may have

16

Our results are robust to an alternative definition of capital market development, using the ratio of the market
capitalization to the GDP as of 1994. However, this definition of capital market development ranks Malaysia, Hong
Kong and South Africa at the top while the U.S. ranks in eighth place, after Chile; and, equally strangely, Japan is
ranked thirteenth, after Thailand and the Philippines.

18

different investment opportunity sets. The model also includes Transaction Value (the
amount paid in U.S. dollars, in logarithm) and firms’ leverage.
We include the leverage of both the acquirer and the target firms because in
acquiring the equity of the target firm the acquirer should take into account the target’s
financial risk. Leverage represents financial distress risk which induces diversifying
mergers, and therefore we expect the coefficients of leverage to be negative.

In

estimation, we face a data limitation. Over 45% of the acquirers in our sample and 88%
of the target firms do not have accounting information. Consequently, leverage data on
both acquirer and target are available for only 2,586 transactions, about 8% of the sample
(without the U.S. and the U.K, we have only 746 transactions with leverage data.) In
addition, a firm’s leverage in any country is partly endogenous to the country’s creditor
rights. We therefore use estimated leverage variables, derived from an instrumental
variables regression. For all transactions with data on leverage (defined as total liabilities
net of equity and deferred taxes, divided by total assets) for both acquirer and target, we
estimate a regression of acquiring firm’s leverage on all country-level control variables
and on two exogenous variables, the ranks (in quartiles) of the U.S. median leverage and
the U.S. median tangibility (the ratio of fixed assets to total assets) for the industry of
acquiring firm over the years 1992-2004. The U.S. has low level of creditor rights
(CRIGHTS = 1) which implies under our hypotheses a less-constrained choice of
leverage, and it has the most data on all industries, making the estimation more reliable.
Thus, the leverage of an acquirer firm in any industry in any country is imputed based on
the estimated leverage in that country and industry, obtained from a model of the
acquirer’s leverage as a function of two exogenous industry variables, using U.S. data,
and of the acquirer’s own country’s exogenous control variables. Target firms’ leverage
is imputed in a similar way. We estimate a leverage model for targets for which we have
data, and then use this model to impute the leverage of any target in a country and
industry.
We estimate a probit model where the dependent variable pertains to transaction j
in country c,
Pr(same industry merger)j,c = α*CRIGHTSc+ control variables.

(7)
19

The dependent variable equals 1 if acquirer and target are in the same 2-digit industry.
Our hypothesis implies that α < 0. The model includes year dummy variables and the
estimation clusters standard errors by country.

INSERT TABLE 3 HERE.

The results in Table 3 support our hypothesis. The coefficient of CRIGHTS is negative
and statistically significant (column 1), meaning that stronger creditor rights are
associated with greater propensity to diversify (lower probability of same-industry
merger). The results remain the same when we exclude the U.S. (column 6) or both the
U.S. and the U.K. (column 7), that have by far the largest number of acquisitions. The
creditor rights component with the most negative effect is MANAGES, underscoring the
importance of managerial dismissal in bankruptcy as an inducement to diversify. Based
on Columns (1), (6) and (7) of Table 3, the marginal effect of CRIGHTS on the
propensity to acquire same-industry target, evaluated at mean CRIGHTS (“local
elasticity”), is –9.49%, and it is –16.48% when excluding the U.S. and the U.K.
Notably, shareholder rights have quite the opposite effect than that of creditor
rights. The variable SHRIGHTS has a positive effect which is significant when the U.S. is
excluded, suggesting that shareholders’ interests induce focusing acquisitions, after
controlling for the effect of creditor rights. As to the importance of internal capital
markets in conglomerates, we obtain mixed results. The coefficient of Log(Market Cap)
is positive, meaning that in countries with developed capital markets, there is a greater
likelihood of focusing acquisitions and conglomerate mergers are hence less needed.
However, this coefficient becomes negative and insignificant when excluding the U.S.
and the U.K. Other results are inconsistent with the importance of internal capital markets
in conglomerates: The positive coefficient of Emerging Market (the poorer countries) and
the negative coefficient of GDP per capita mean that diversification is more likely in
richer countries, where capital markets are more developed,

Also, Accounting

Disclosure, an aspect of developed capital market, has negative effect which implies
more conglomerate mergers in countries with developed capital markets. However, the
20

positive coefficient of Rule of Law, which may be associated with capital market
development, is consistent with the importance of internal capital markets in countries
with inefficient outside markets. The variable Flexibility to Fire has insignificant effect
when excluding the U.S. and the U.K.

The effect of the country’s MacroRisk is

inconclusive, switching signs and changing significance depending on whether the U.S.
and the U.K. are included or not. Target’s Leverage has a significant negative effect on
the propensity to do same-industry mergers, suggesting that high financial distress risk
induces diversifying acquisitions.
The elasticity of the target leverage (evaluated at the mean of this variable) is
-2.96, meaning that a 1% increase in the target leverage ratio reduces the likelihood of
same-industry merger by about 3%. Reinforcing this effect, Acquirer’s leverage too has
negative and marginally significant coefficient when excluding the U.S. and the U.K. 17
The coefficients of French and German Legal Origin are both negative and significant,
but this is driven by the U.S. data. When the U.S. is excluded, the coefficients turn
positive.
A concern in our analysis is the endogeneity of creditor rights. For example, it
could be that a country’s culture affects both its choice of creditor rights and its corporate
behavior. We do two tests to examine the culture effect. Stulz and Williamson (2003)
observe that creditor rights are affected by whether a country’s dominant religion is
protestant or catholic, and Licht et al. (2005) report that creditor rights are significantly
correlated with a country’s Uncertainty Avoidance index, estimated by Geert Hofstede in
the 1970s in a survey of IBM employees, and defined to be “the extent to which members
of a culture feel threatened by uncertain or unknown situations” (Hofstede 2001, p. 161).
In our first test, we add to the model of Table 3 religion dummy variables that
reflect the religious composition of the country’s population. We obtain that their effect is
insignificant while the effect of creditor rights remains unchanged. We then re-estimate
the model, adding the country’s Uncertainty Avoidance index described above. In our
sample, the correlation between creditor rights and Uncertainty Avoidance is -0.43, and is

17

The fact that both target’s and acquirer’s leverage induce diversifying acquisitions is consistent with our focus on the
managerial agency problem, and potentially inconsistent with the view of the importance of agency problems between
creditors and shareholders. The latter would imply that higher acquirer leverage leads to risk-taking incentives, and
thereby, induce focusing acquisitions.

21

statistically significant. In estimating the model, we obtain that the coefficient of
Uncertainty Avoidance is negative but insignificant: it is -0.006 (t = 1.34) for all countries
and -0.002 (t = 0.51) when excluding the U.S. and the U.K. This means that the
country’s uncertainty avoidance induces acquirers to diversify, similar to the effect of
creditor rights. Still, the effect of creditor rights remains negative and highly significant
as before. The coefficient of CRIGHTS is -0.273 (t = 7.11) for all countries, and it is 0.427 (t = 3.72) without the U.S. and the U.K. We hence conclude that the effect of
creditor rights on the propensity to diversify is distinct from the cultural effect of
uncertainty avoidance.
In our second test we compare the propensity to do same-industry acquisitions in
the U.S. and the U.K. alone. These countries have great similarity in their legal systems,
financial development and business culture, yet they are quite different in their creditor
rights: CRIGHTS = 1 for the U.S. while for the U.K., CRIGHTS = 4. In particular, the
manager in the U.K. is dismissed in bankruptcy and the firm is run by a court-appointed
trustee, while in the U.S. debtor remains in possession. This gives debtors in the U.K.
stronger incentive to avoid default. We then estimate model (7) only for the observations
from the U.S. and the U.K. The regression includes a dummy variable that equals 1 for
acquisitions in the U.K. and 0 for the U.S., and we include as control variables firmspecific and acquisition-specific variables, as well as year dummy variables. The
estimated coefficient of the U.K. dummy variable is negative and significant: it is -0.503
with t = 9.94 (the standard error is clustered by country). We conclude that even in these
two culturally-similar countries, creditor rights have a significant negative effect on the
propensity to do same-industry acquisitions.
We do five robustness checks, for which we report the main findings. In the first,
we control for the effect of antitrust laws on the propensity to do same-industry mergers
by adding the country’s index of the competition law as it pertains to mergers from
Hylton and Deng (2007). 18 It summarizes four items with different point score for each,
18

Hylton and Deng (2007, p. 21) define this variable as follows: "The Merger Score attempts to measure the size of the
competition law net applied to mergers. It is the sum of the scores for two parts of each country's merger law; the part
governing merger notification requirements, and the part governing the assessment of mergers. It excludes points
assigned to defenses, such as efficiency or public-interest defenses. The countries with mandatory-premerger
notification requirements tend to have the highest merger scores." It is available for the end of our sample period (for
2004). Hylton and Deng’s list includes 35 countries that overlap with ours, to which we add data on Hong Kong and
Singapore (the latter has data for 2006). We miss data for Malaysia.

22

and its value ranges from 0 to 7, where a higher score means a more stringent law. The
mean score of this index is 5.3 and the median is 6.0. We find that this variable is not
statistically significant. Still, the coefficient of CRIGHTS is negative and significant (t =
6.36 for all countries, t = 3.66 when excluding the U.S. and the U.K.)

In the second

robustness check, we admit to the sample only acquisitions of at least 90% of the target.
Then, the coefficient of CRIGHTS is –0.141 with t = 5.11 (29,002 observations), and
when excluding the U.S. and the U.K., the coefficient of CRIGHTS is –0.251 with t =
3.73 (12,415 observations). In the third test, we control for the form of financing by
adding a dummy variable that equals 1 for cash-only transactions. This variable is
naturally endogenous. Its effect is insignificant in all regressions, while the coefficient of
CRIGHTS remains negative and highly significant. In the fourth robustness check, we reestimate model (7) using the data from Djankov et al. (2007) on creditor rights, which
slightly differ from that in La Porta et al. (1988) and include changes in creditor rights for
five countries in our sample of 38. In this regression, the level of CRIGHTS in any year
is the level for that entire year. In cases of a mid-year change, we use the level of creditor
rights that existed in the year before the change. The estimation results are qualitatively
similar to those reported in Table 3. The coefficient of CRIGHTS is -0.155 (t = 4.88) for
the entire sample, and -0.183 (t = 2.50) when excluding the U.S. and the U.K. As in
Table 3, the strongest effect comes from the component MANAGES whose coefficient is 0.600 with t = 5.18. In the fifth and last robustness check, we replace the Rule of Law
index by Berkowitz, Pistor and Richard’s (2003) Legality index, the first principal
component of three proxies of legality developed by Kaufmann, Kraay and ZoidoLobatón (1999): Government Effectiveness, Rule of Law and Control of Corruption. Its
correlation with the Rule of Law variable that we use is 0.972. Including Legality in the
estimation model in lieu of Rule of Law, its coefficient is 0.232 (t = 6.65) while the
coefficient of CRIGHT is -0.258 (t = 6.59), quite similar in magnitude and significance
to that reported in Table 3. Without the U.S. and the U.K., the coefficient is -0.424 (t =
3.67). We then add to this regression an interaction term, CRIGHTS*Legality (Legality is
demeaned) and obtain that its coefficient is insignificant (-0.005 with t = 0.15), while the
coefficient of CRIGHTS remains practically the same in magnitude and significance.
When excluding the U.S. and the U.K., the coefficient of the interaction term is negative
23

and significant, -0.122 (t = 2.64) while the coefficient of CRIGHTS remains similar to
that before, both in magnitude and levels of significance.

Country-level estimation of cross-industry acquisitions. Reverting to the
analysis of within-country mergers, we test our hypothesis at the aggregate country level,
where each country is one observation. The advantage here is that large and small
countries are treated alike. The shortcoming is that, as Holderness (2009) points out, it
may be inappropriate to infer individual firm behavior from aggregate data because firmlevel and transaction-level variables are omitted, which can cause bias if these variables
are correlated with country-level variables. With this caveat in mind, we find that the
country-level results on the effects of creditor rights are consistent with those obtained
from the preceding individual-transaction regressions, thus supporting our conclusions.
We calculate for each country c the measure SAMEc = [(# of mergers in the same
2-digit SIC code industry) / (# of all domestic mergers)]. Figure 2 plots the variable
SAME for different countries as a function of their CRIGHTS, showing the negative
relationship between the extent of same-industry mergers and strength of creditor rights.
We then estimate the following model by the tobit method, with 38 observations
(countries):
SAMEc = β0 + β1*CRIGHTSc + country-level control variables.

(8)

For sake of parsimony, we present only the coefficients of the creditor rights variable and
its components:
CRIGHTS

–0.030 (t = 3.28).

AUTOSTAY

–0.056 (t = 2.48).

REORG

–0.017 (t = 0.74).

SECURED

–0.022 (t = 1.25).

MANAGES

–0.100 (t = 4.41).

The results again support our hypothesis.

The coefficient of creditor right

(CRIGHTS) is negative and significant and, as in Table 3, the most important component
is MANAGES, the indicator of managerial dismissal in bankruptcy.

In contrast to the
24

negative coefficient of CRIGHTS, the coefficient of shareholder rights is positive and
significant suggesting that focusing mergers are in shareholder interest, after controlling
for creditor rights. As a robustness test, we re-estimate the regression using creditor rights
index that reflects the different level of creditor rights for some countries in some years
(due to changes over time), using data from Djankov et al. (2007). CRIGHTS here is the
average of the CRIGHTS index of the country over the sample period, weighted by the
number of transactions in the years following the year of change relative to the total
number of transactions in the country (assuming that the effect of a change is reflected in
transactions in subsequent years). The coefficient of this creditor rights variable is -0.020
(t = 2.18), again consistent with our hypothesis. Finally, we add to the model the
Hoftede’s culture-based variable, Uncertainty Avoidance. Its coefficient is -0.001 with t
= 0.81, insignificant, while the coefficient of CRIGHTS remains negative and significant:
-0.031 (t = 3.71).

In a further robustness check we add as explanatory variable the merger-related
antitrust index of Hylton and Deng (2007). Its coefficient is statistically insignificant,
while the coefficient of CRIGHTS remains negative and significant. Further, we split the
sample period into two, 1994-1999 and 2000-2004, calculate SAMEc for each subperiod
and estimate the relationship between SAMEc and CRIGHTSc across countries for both
subperiods. We exclude a sub-period for a given country if it has less than 30 transactions
in that sub-period. The results again support our hypothesis: the coefficient of CRIGHTS
is negative and significant: -0.025 (t = 2.05).

Cross-border acquisitions: So far we have analyzed industrial diversification in
domestic acquisitions. We now analyze geographic diversification by studying crossborder acquisitions. In this regression, the dependent variable takes value of 1 if both
bidder and target are in the same country (analogous to the earlier analysis where bidder
and target are in the same industry), and a value of 0 for cross-border acquisition. We
use the creditor rights in the country of the acquirer, which is assumed to make the
acquisition decision and whose interests dictate its nature. 19
19

The analysis includes

The target may in fact be outside of the sample of countries for which we have data on creditor rights.

25

acquirers from the 38 countries in our sample, while the target firms can be from any
country. The estimation is similar to that of Table 3. We have 52,975 acquisitions which
satisfy our criteria and 20,638 acquisitions when excluding acquirers from the U.S. and
the U.K.
The estimation results support our hypothesis on the negative effect of creditor
rights on same-country acquisitions.

To economize in space, we present only the

coefficients of the creditor rights variable and its components.
CRIGHTS

–0.111 (t = 5.23). [Excl. the U.S. and the U.K.: –0.064 (t = 2.95).]

AUTOSTAY

–0.235 (t = 4.25).

REORG

–0.331 (t = 7.01).

SECURED

–0.018 (t = 0.23).

MANAGES

–0.201 (t = 2.66).

Again, the coefficient of shareholder rights (SRIGHTS) has the opposite sign – it is
positive – and it is significant (t = 2.71) when we exclude the U.S. and the U.K.

Diversification across industry lines of business. Firms can also diversify by
developing their own lines of business in different industries. We now study the
relationship between creditor rights and the number of segments, or industry lines of
business, that firms have. Segment data are available in the Compustat North America
Segment file, which confines the sample to firms that file such reports by the U.S. rules. 20
These include non-U.S. firms whose stock is traded in the U.S. through ADRs (American
Depository Receipts) or that are listed in the U.S. or report by U.S. rules to abide by the
securities laws, as well as Canadian firms. Surely, this sample is limited to selected firms
from foreign countries whose characteristics (like size, visibility or type of business)
make their securities trade in the U.S., or to non-U.S. firms that choose to be covered by
the U.S. financial reporting rules. With this caveat in mind, we analyze the data on the
effect of creditor rights on the firms’ tendency to diversify across lines of business.
The sample consists of 836 firms from 21 countries in the manufacturing
industries (SIC codes 1000 through 3999), excluding the U.S., with 4,520 firm-years of
20

Foreign firms listing in the U.S. are required to file with the SEC and reconcile with the U.S. GAAP and FASB rules
(in particular, SFAS 131 and its predecessor, SFAS 14, regarding the reporting of segments data) in their annual
reports.

26

reporting between 1992 and 2005. We also require that firms have leverage data in either
the Compustat North America or the Compustat Global Vantage databases, and as before
we require at least six firms with data in a country. Because Canadian firms constitute
about half of the firm-years in our sample, we repeat our estimation for a sample of 20
countries with 2,132 firm years that excludes Canadian firms.
We estimate two models:
(i)

Probit regression, where the dependent variable equals 1 if the firm has more
than one business segment and 0 otherwise, and

(ii)

OLS estimation, where the dependent variable is log(number of segments).

The regression model includes the explanatory variables that appear in Table 3, with the
firm leverage being estimated and instrumented with the same variables.
We hypothesize that coefficient of CRIGHTS is positive, i.e., creditor rights
induce firms to diversify across lines of business (internally or by acquisitions). This is
indeed what we find. The coefficients of CRIGHTS are as follows: 21
Probit estimation: 0.346 (t = 2.94). Excluding Canada: 0.236 (t = 3.45).
OLS estimation: 0.110 (t = 3.72). Excluding Canada: 0.106 (t = 2.51).
These results further support our main hypothesis that stronger creditor rights
induce firms to reduce their risk through diversification.

3.3. Value effects of creditor rights in diversifying acquisitions

There is a debate on the effect of diversification on corporate value, with the
preponderance of evidence suggesting that it is value-reducing (see our review in the
introduction). Here, we examine the effect of diversification on corporate performance
only to the extent of its interaction with creditor rights. We hypothesize that diversifying
acquisitions lead to lower performance in countries with stronger creditor rights. While
some diversifying acquisitions are undertaken for economic reasons (to improve the
acquirer’s performance), others are motivated by the manager’s desire to avoid the threat

21

The complete regression results are available from the authors upon request. The standard errors are clustered by
country, and we add year dummy variables.

27

posed by strong creditor rights. Managers then face a tradeoff and may sacrifice corporate
performance to reduce

their personal costs in default. This incentive to undertake

diversifying acquisitions even if they hurt performance increases as creditor rights are
stronger. In testing this hypothesis we present as benchmark the performance-creditor
rights relationship in focusing (i.e., same-industry) acquisitions, which are more likely to
be done for economic reasons (such as synergy) and therefore we do not expect creditor
rights to have negative effect.
First, we examine the acquiring firms’ return on assets (ROA) in the three years
after the acquisition compared to the ROA in the year before the acquisition. Second, we
examine the acquirer’s stock price change, measured as the cumulative abnormal return
(CAR) over a seven-day window surrounding the acquisition announcement.

We

estimate the following model separately for focusing and for diversifying acquisitions:

Performancej,c = a1*CRIGHTSc + control variables.

(9)

In the first test, Performancej,c is measured by dROA(k)j,c = ROAj,c(t+k) – ROAj,c(t-1), the
change in the return on assets of acquirer firm j in country c, k year(s) after the
acquisition compared to one year before it. ROAj,c(t+k) = (EBITDA /ASSETS)j,c,t+k and t is
the effective year of the acquisition. (ROAj,c,t is winzorized, 1% in each tail.) The data
source is Compustat Global Vantage and all data are annual. EBITDAj,c,t is earnings
before interest, taxes and depreciation and amortization (the sum of data items #14 and
#11), which is unaffected by methods of accounting depreciation that differ across
countries, and ASSETSi,c,t is the contemporaneous total assets (data item #89). The use
ROA as performance measure follows Healy, Palepu and Ruback (1992) who suggest that
this measure is unaffected by the method of accounting used in mergers. The control
variables include all the country variables used in the previous analyses and
Log(transaction Value). We add the inverse Mill’s ratio from the probit regression
presented in Table 3 to control for the endogeneity of the decision to diversify. The
model includes industry fixed effects to control for industry-wide changes in profitability.
We estimate the model for one, two and three years after the merger (k = 1, 2, 3).

28

INSERT TABLE 4 HERE.

The coefficient a1 measures the extent to which the post-merger change in the
acquirer’s ROA is affected by the country’s creditor rights. Our hypothesis is:
For diversifying acquisitions, a1 < 0 because managers may sacrifice corporate
performance to attain lower risk.
For focusing (same-industry) acquisitions, a1 ≥ 0.
The results in Table 4, columns (1)-(6), support our hypothesis. The coefficient
a1 is negative and highly significant in all diversifying mergers for all three post-merger
horizons, both for entire sample and for the sample that excludes the U.S. and the U.K.
That is, the acquirer’s post-merger performance is significantly lower in countries with
stronger creditor rights up to three years after the merger, compared to its performance in
the pre-merger year. For focusing (same-industry) acquisitions, the coefficient a1 is not
significantly different from zero, again consistent with our hypothesis. We conclude that
diversifying acquisitions that seem to be motivated by stronger creditor rights are
followed by worsening of corporate performance.
As a robustness check, we re-estimate the model using the creditor rights variable
from Djankov et al. (2007). The results are again qualitatively the same. For example,
for dROA(1), the coefficient of CRIGHTS for diversifying acquisitions is -0.0166 (t =
2.73) while for focusing acquisitions, the coefficient is 0.0092 (t = 1.31).
When we exclude the U.S. and the U.K. (which have by far the largest number of
observations), the results remain qualitatively the same. For diversifying acquisitions, the
coefficients of CRIGHTS in model (9) for dROA(1)j,c is -0.015 (t = 3.43), for dROA(2)j,c it
is -0.017 (t = 4.07) and for dROA(3)j,c it is -0.013 (t = 4.17). In contrast, for sameindustry acquisitions, the coefficients of CRIGHTS are all insignificantly different from
zero. Again, the results suggest that diversifying acquisitions hurt performance in
countries with strong creditor rights.
In the second test, Performancej,c is the acquirer’s CAR, the cumulative abnormal
return over days t-3 to t+3, where day t is the announcement day. We use this relatively
wide time window because in some countries, (i) low stock liquidity causes a slower
adjustment of stock prices to the information after the announcement, and (ii) lax
29

enforcement of insider trading rules may cause trading on the information a couple of
days prior to the formal announcement. The daily abnormal return is the difference
between the daily stock return and the market-model expected return, where the market
model parameters are estimated from a regression of weekly stock returns on the
country’s index. The parameter estimation uses 105 weeks of data with no less than 52
weeks, up to 9 weeks before the week of the acquisition announcement. The cumulative
abnormal return is calculated over the seven days surrounding the announcement day.
The resulting sample of firms’ CAR is then winsorized at 1% at both tails. The results on
the effect of creditor rights on CAR support our hypothesis and are consistent with the
results on post-acquisition changes in the acquirer’s ROA. As presented in Table 4,
columns (7)-(8), diversifying acquisitions lower the acquirer’s value in countries with
stronger creditor rights: the coefficient a1 of CRIGHTS in model (9) is negative and
significant for diversifying acquisitions (column (8)), -0.013 (t = 5.14), meaning a loss of
1.3% in value upon the announcement of such deals for any unit of CRIGHTS, while for
focusing (same-industry) acquisitions (column 7) it is positive, 0.011 (t = 1.65) The
results are similar when we exclude the U.S. and the U.K., which have relatively very
large number of cases. 22 Then, the coefficient of CRIGHTS in diversifying acquisitions
is -0.011 (t = 2.40), which is significant, while in focusing acquisitions it is 0.002 (t =
0.26), insignificant.

We again test the difference between the U.S. and the U.K. that have very similar
culture, legal system and capital market, while their have very different creditor rights:
for the U.S., CRIGHTS = 1 whereas for the U.K. CRIGHTS = 4.

We estimate a

regression of CAR as a dependent variable in a model similar to that in Table 4, with
these two countries only, replacing CRIGHTS by a dummy variable UK which equals 1
for a U.K. acquirer and 0 for a U.S. acquirer, and excluding country-related variables.
The results are:
Diversifying acquisitions:

The coefficient of UK is –0.017, t = 34.52.

Focusing acquisitions:

The coefficient of UK is 0.071, t = 5.89.

22

The results are qualitatively similar when using Djanov et al.’s (2007) on CRIGHTS. The coefficient of CRIGHTS in
the diversifying acquisitions model is -0.007 (t = 3.36) and it is 0.004 (t = 0.53) for same-industry acquisitions.

30

These results demonstrate the value effect of diversifying acquisitions conditional
on creditor rights. Strong creditor rights induce managers to undertake risk-reducing
acquisitions, even if they result in post-acquisition decline in profitability and in value
loss, in order to reduce the threat posed by default.

3.4. Creditor rights and firms’ cash flow risk
We now test hypothesis II on the relationship between corporate cash flow risk
and creditor rights. In addition to doing diversifying acquisitions, firms can reduce their
risk by other means which are not directly observed. We therefore measure directly the
level of corporate risk and relate it to the creditor rights in the country.
The risk of operating cash flows of firm j in country c, RISKj,c, is the standard
deviation of the industry-adjusted firm’s return on assets. We calculated the annual
ROAj,c,t, described in the previous section, for the period 1992-2005, and winsorized the
entire sample at 0.5% in both tails of the distribution to account for possible data errors
and large outliers. Then we subtract from ROAj,c,t the median ROA of its industry (2-digit
SIC code) for that year, and calculate the standard deviation of the resulting industryadjusted series. The entire sample of RISKj,c is again winsorized at 1% in both tails of its
distribution to eliminate outliers. We include only firms in the manufacturing industries
with data for at least eight years. We exclude utilities and financial firms which are
regulated in many countries, and this could affect their risk.

We estimate the effect of creditor rights on firms’ risk in the following model:
RISKj,c = γ*CRIGHTSc + control variables.

(10)

Our hypothesis implies γ < 0. We again estimate this model at both the firm level
(Table 5) and the country level, the latter using the median risk of the firms in the
country. The control variables are those used in Table 3, but also adding firm size (the
logarithm of firm’s initial total assets, as of the beginning of its data in our sample) which
negatively correlates with risk.

31

We estimate the model of single-firm risk level as a panel regression, with
country-clustered standard errors. This regression includes 35 countries due to
insufficient data in three countries (we required at least 6 firms with the required series of
accounting data in a country), giving us a total of 5,394 firms for the firm-level analysis.

INSERT TABLE 5 HERE.
The results in Table 5 support our hypothesis: the coefficient γ of RISKj,c on
CRIGHTSc is negative and statistically significant. Based on model (1), one standard
deviation increase in the strength of the creditors’ rights (CRIGHTSc) leads to a decrease
in RISKj,c of 13.1% of its mean. As in the earlier results on same-industry mergers (Table
3), the most significant component of CRIGHTS that negatively affect RISK is
managerial dismissal (MANAGES). The addition of that provision alone decreases RISKj,c
by 34.1% of its mean, based on model (5). The results on the effect of CRIGHTS are
qualitatively unchanged when excluding the U.S. and the U.K. (columns (6) and (7)).
Among the control variables, firms with high financial risk, measured by higher
leverage choose to have lower cash flow risk. Leverage is instrumented because of its
endogeneity; the instruments are, as in Table 3, the country control variables and two
exogenous variables, the U.S. industry rank of leverage and tangibility, for the industry to
which firm j belongs. Large firms have lower risk, as expected. As to country variables,
higher Macro Risk has positive effect on RISKj,c, as expected, although its significant is
marginal when excluding the U.S. and the U.K.

The effect of capital market

development, as measured by Log(Market Cap), is positive although it is insignificant
when excluding the U.S. and the U.K. The coefficient of Flexibility to fire is positive,
but becomes negative and insignificant in the next estimation of the model in a countrylevel regression.
As a robustness test, we control for cultural differences between countries by
adding to the model the culture-based variable Uncertainty Avoidance from Hofstede
(2001), expecting its effect to be negative. Indeed, its coefficient is -0.0001, but t = 0.09,
insignificant. Without the U.S. and the U.K., its coefficient is -0.0001 with t = 0.17. The

32

effect of creditor rights on RISK is unaltered. In this regression, the coefficient of
CRIGHTS is -0.006 (t = 2.88), and without the U.S. and the U.K. it is -0.0054 (t = 2.40).
Next, we do country-level tests of the RISK-CRIGHTS relationship, where each
country is a single observation and they are all treated alike. The dependent variable,
RISK*c, is the country average of the individual firms’ industry-adjusted risk, RISKj,c.
The coefficients of interest, γ of CRIGHTS and its components in model (10), are:
CRIGHTS

–0.007 (t = 3.35).

AUTOSTAY

–0.015 (t = 2.12).

REORG

–0.001 (t = 0.15).

SECURED

–0.010 (t = 1.49).

MANAGES

–0.023 (t = 3.50)

The results again support our hypothesis. The coefficient of CRIGHTS is negative and
significant at better than 5%, even though we have only 22 degrees of freedom. As
before, the strongest effect is due to the managerial dismissal component (MANAGES),
with lack of stay on secured creditors (AUTOSTAY) being also significantly negative. Of
the country control variables, notably Log(Market Cap) retains its negative effect, though
its statistical significance is marginal. When adding the variable Uncertainty Avoidance
to the model, we obtain that its coefficient is negative, -0.0003 with t = 2.02, statistically
significant. Yet, the effect of creditor rights remains negative and significant as before.
The coefficient of CRIGHTS is -0.0063 with t = 4.00.
We thus find support through an independent test for the hypothesis that in
countries with stronger creditor rights, firms have lower cash flow risk.

3.5. Industry-adjusted propensity to reduce risk
Countries differ in their industrial composition, which may affect the propensity
to do same-industry mergers and may affect the average firms risk in the country. We
therefore estimate our model at the industry level, employing the Rajan-Zingales (1998)
methodology. The model uses as benchmark the inherent propensity to do same-industry
acquisitions or the inherent level of firm risk by using the relevant variable from
industries in the U.S., which has the most data on firms and is among the least
constrained countries in terms of creditor rights. We estimate two models:
33

SAMEk,c = β0 +β1*SAMEk,US + β2*CRIGHTSdmc*SAMEk,US +Country fixed effects (11)
where SAMEk,US is the proportion in the U.S. of firms in industry k acquiring firms in the
same industry (using 2-digit SIC code), calculated for the period 1994-1997, and SAMEk,c
is similarly the proportion of same-industry acquisitions of acquirers in industry k in
country c for the subsequent period, 1998-2004. CRIGHTSdmc is the de-meaned value of
CRIGHTSc, obtained by subtracting the overall mean CRIGHTS. We include an industry
from a given country if it has at least six qualified transactions during the period 19982004. The estimation is done by the tobit method. The second model is,
RISKk,c = δ0 + δ1*RISKk,US + δ2* CRIGHTSdmc*RISKk,US + Country fixed effects (12)
where RISKk,US is the median risk level in industry k in the U.S., calculated for the 19921998, and RISKk,c is the median risk in the same industry in country c, calculated over
the subsequent period 1999-2005. 23
In both models, we expect that the coefficient of the interaction between creditor
rights and the inherent variable to be negative. Indeed, this is what we obtain:
For model (11): β1 = 1.310 (t = 9.83), β2 = –0.263 (t = 7.56), R2 = 25.0%.
For model (12): δ1 = 0.862 (t = 4.49), δ2 = –0.158 (t = 2.16), R2 = 30.2%.
The negative and significant coefficients β2 and δ2 imply that across countries
creditor rights reduce the tendency of firms in industries to do same-industry acquisitions
relative to the inherent such tendency in these industries, and reduce the risk of firms in
industries relative to the inherent risk in these industries.

3.6.

Creditor rights and financial leverage
Corporate managers can also reduce their exposure to the costs resulting from

stronger creditor rights by reducing their financial leverage. Lower leverage reduces the

23

The results are qualitatively unchanged when the variables for both the U.S. and all other countries are calculated
over the entire sample period, 1992-2005.

34

likelihood of incurring the costs associated with bankruptcy for any given level of
corporate activity and risk. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that stronger creditor rights
reduce the corporate demand for leverage. This hypothesis is in contrast with that of La
Porta et al. (1998) who suggest that stronger creditor rights increase the supply of funds
by lenders whose rights are better protected in bankruptcy.
The question is: given the conflicting effects of stronger creditor rights on demand
and supply of leverage, what is the equilibrium level of leverage as a function of creditor
rights? If the perceived cost by corporate managers of stronger creditor rights outweighs
the benefit of greater supply of credit that the stronger creditor rights generate, there
should be a negative relationship between creditor rights and corporate leverage. This is
the hypothesis that we test. We estimate the model
Leveragej,t,c = δ*CRIGHTSc + control variables.

(13)

Leveragej,t,c is the industry-adjusted debt-to-asset ratio (in book value) of firm j in year t
in country c, where debt is total liabilities minus equity and minus deferred taxes. We
calculate each firm’s annual leverage and winsorize the data at 1% in both tails of its
distribution to eliminate outliers. Then we subtract from it the year’s median industry
leverage (using 2-digit SIC code) to create the industry-adjusted firm’s leverage. The
sample of firms is the same as in the tests of cash flow risk. The sample includes 36,237
firm years with leverage data, of which 17,304 are in countries excluding the U.S. and the
U.K. The regression includes all country variables and company-specific variables that
appear in Table 5 (the cash flow risk estimation) and additional variables that are used in
studies of leverage: country corporate tax rate in each year, company asset’s tangibility,
company size (assets in U.S. dollars) and company profitability, measured by
EBITDA/Assets. The company control variables are lagged one year relative to the
estimated leverage variables, as are the country tax rates. 24 The regression includes year
fixed effects and standard errors are clustered by country. 25

24

Data on the country tax rates ends in 2002, and is then applied for 2003-2005.
Clustering can be done instead by firms, given that the observations are firm-years. When we do that, we obtain
smaller standard errors than those reported, and consequently, the t-statistics are greater. For example, the t-statistic of
the coefficient of CRIGHTS for the entire sample is 8.96, and that of CRIGHTS is the sample that excludes the U.S. and
25

35

INSERT TABLE 6 HERE.
Our hypothesis is that in model (13), δ < 0, i.e., stronger creditor rights induce
corporate managers to reduce financial risk by reducing corporate leverage. The results
in Table 6 support this hypothesis: the coefficient of CRIGHTS is negative and
significant. In the sample of all countries, the coefficient of CRIGHTS is -0.022 with t =
5.20, and in a sample of 36 countries, after excluding the U.S. and the U.K., it is -0.018
with t = 3.42. Based on model (1), one standard deviation increase in CRIGHTSc leads to
an additional decrease in leverage of 19.6% below its average. All four categories of
creditor rights have negative and significant coefficients, attesting to the consistency in
the negative effect of creditor rights on leverage. Among these, the addition of the
managerial dismissal provision decreases leverage by an additional 31.3% below its
average, based on model (5).
We get similar results in a robustness test that employs Djankov et al.’s (2007)
data on creditor rights. In the sample of all countries, the coefficient of CRIGHTS is
-0.018 with t = 3.52, and after excluding the U.S. and the U.K., it is -0.013 with t = 4.59.
A second robustness test examines the effect of Hofstede’s Uncertainty Avoidance index
of the country, because it could be that the culture in a country affects both its law
regarding creditor rights and the propensity of its business managers to borrow and
assume financial risk. Adding Uncertainty Avoidance to the control variables in model
(13) and Table 6, we obtain that its coefficient is negative, -0.0001, but it is insignificant
(t = 0.56). Excluding the U.S. and the U.K., the coefficient is 0.0002 (t = 0.75). Yet, the
negative and significant effect of CRIGHTS is unaltered: its coefficient is then -0.0221 (t
= 5.54) and excluding the U.S. and the U.K., the coefficient is -0.0163 (t = 3.04).
We also test our hypothesis at the country level. In every year we calculate the
average industry-adjusted leverage ratio for the country and then do a regression of the
country’s average leverage on the creditor rights in the country as well as on all the
country variables and on year dummy variables. The results are consistent with those

the U.K. is 4.77. In Table 8, we present clustering by country, which is more conservative and consistent with the
clustering in the other estimations.

36

obtained in the firm-level test. We present here for brevity the coefficients of creditor
rights and its components:
CRIGHTS:

–0.019 (t = 9.32).

AUTOSTAY: –0.015 (t = 3.01).
REORG:

–0.027 (t = 6.92).

SECURED:

–0. 032 (t = 6.06).

MANAGES:

–0.018 (t = 3.05).

Moreover, most of the control variables preserve their signs and significance. The
exceptions are average tangibility and average profitability that now become insignificant
as compared to the firm-level leverage regressions. On the other hand, country-level
variables such as accounting disclosure, rule of law and log GDP per capita become more
significant. The question is whether the level of leverage matters from an economic
perspective, given Modigliani and Miller’s (1958) theorem of the irrelevance of leverage
in a frictionless world. But if leverage (at some level) were not beneficial, its level would
not have declined when its cost rises in the face of stronger creditor rights. The negative
relationship between leverage and creditor rights that we estimate suggests that firms are
willing to forego some of the benefits of leverage when faced with stronger creditor
rights.

3.7. Risk reduction and industry recovery rates
Our final test of the effect of creditor rights on corporate behavior, which is
different from the tests done so far, examines the choice of target in a merger or
acquisition in terms of the recovery rate of its assets in default (henceforth recovery). The
recovery here is the extent to which the price of the assets sold in distress is close to the
value of the asset in its best use, following the definition of (inverse of) asset-specificity
in Shleifer and Vishny (1992). A firm with high-recovery assets can better deal with
financial distress by partially liquidating such assets and using the proceeds to defer
default. Assume that the firm would default without the asset sale and the use of the
proceeds to service the debt. Then, the call option which is embedded in the firm’s equity
would expire out of the money and thus become worthless. Then, extending the life of the
37

option by servicing the debt from liquidated assets makes equity more valuable. This
analysis assumes that the firm’s volatility does not decline appreciably. If the cash
obtained from liquidating risky assets is kept in the firm, for example to satisfy a working
capital covenant restriction, the firm’s volatility will decline and the net effect on the
equity value is uncertain. If a risk-averse manager’s objective is to reduce volatility,
again high-recovery assets become attractive when strong creditor rights threaten the
manager’s survival. Thus, management of an acquirer firm in a low-recovery industry,
being more vulnerable to default risk, would seek high-recovery assets that enhance the
firm’s chances of survival.
We thus test whether creditor rights influence the type of target firm that a lowrecover bidder seeks. We denote the event of low-recovery acquirer (AL) buying highrecovery target (TH) by AL∩TH, and the probability of this event occurring among all
acquisitions of high-recovery target by Pr(AL∩TH|TH). We estimate the determinants
the likelihood of low-recovery firm acquiring high-recovery target by the model

Pr(AL∩TH|TH)j,c = b*CRIGHTSc+ control variables.

(14)

We hypothesize that b > 0: stronger creditor rights induce acquirers in low- recovery
industries to buy target firms in high-recovery industries.

We assign to firms the

recovery level of the industry in which they operate, using the data in Acharya, Bharath
and Srinivasan (2007, Table 2) which employs historical experience on defaults in the
U.S. over the period 1982-1999. Low recovery industries (in terms of 2-SIC code
headers) are: transportation (37, 40, 41, 42, 44, 45, 46, 47), high technology and office
equipment (35, 36, 38), consumer/service sector (52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 72, 73,
75, 76, 78, 79), and leisure time/media (27, 48, 70). High recovery industries are: energy
and natural resources (10, 12, 13, 14, 24), building products/ homebuilders (8, 15, 17, 24,
28, 29, 32, 34), and healthcare/chemicals (28, 80.) 26

In the estimation model, the

universe is all targets with high recovery, and the bidders are either low recovery

26

We alternatively follow Dyck and Zingales (2004), characterizing as low recovery rate industries the following ones:
mining, manufacturing, and transportation. Our results are similar.

38

(dependent variable = 1), or high recovery (dependent variable = 0). The control variables
used are those used in Tables 3 and 5.

INSERT TABLE 7 HERE

The results in Table 7 support our hypothesis. The coefficient of CRIGHTS is
positive and significant for the entire sample as well as when excluding the U.S. and the
U.K., which constitute more than half the sample (columns (6-10)). That is, stronger
creditor rights induce greater likelihood of acquisition of high- recovery targets by lowrecovery firms. All components of creditor rights have positive coefficients, and except
for the component that secured are paid first (SECURED) they are statistically
significant. The relatively large coefficient of managerial dismissal component
(MANAGES) underscores the evidence in Eckbo and Thornburn (2003) cited before. The
MacroRisk has a positive effect on the likelihood of low-recovery firms acquiring highrecovery firms, which is consistent with the view that such acquisitions are desired as
means to reduce risk.
We also estimate the model as a country-level regression, where the dependent
variable is the proportion of all high-recovery targets in the country acquired by lowrecovery bidders (we use logistic transformation). In this regression, each country is a
single observation, regardless of the number of transactions in it. For sake of parsimony,
we do not present the table. The results are consistent with those of single-acquisition
regressions. The coefficient of CRIGHTS is 0.288 with t = 3.37, highly significant. 27
This test provides additional evidence that creditor rights affect the choice of
investment – here, an acquisition target – particularly by low-recovery acquirers, which
seek to acquire high-recovery targets.

27

We further conduct a test in the spirit of this hypothesis, examining the proportion among all low-recovery bidders
that seek high-recovery targets. In this regression, the effect of CRIGHTS is not statistically significant.

39

3.8. The effects of changes in creditor rights
Our analysis has shown a cross-country relationship between creditor rights and a
number of variables: acquisitions type (focusing or diversifying, or merging low-recovery
acquirer with high-recovery target), post-acquisition change in performance and
corporate leverage. This section tests the effect of creditor rights on these variables over
time, exploiting seven changes in creditor rights that occurred in six countries: Indonesia,
Israel, Japan (two changes), Sweden, Thailand and Russia, 28 documented in Djankov et
al. (2007). These changes imply a decrease in CRIGHTS by one unit, except for the 2002
change in Japan that raised CRIGHTS by one unit. The changes were motivated by
financial crises (Indonesia, Russia, Sweden and Thailand), the need to collect tax
(Russia) or emulation of the U.S. in the transformation from a centrally-controlled
economy, and in case of Israel, to explicitly promote risk-taking and entrepreneurship.
We estimate the following regression, a variant of model (7):
DepVarj,c = α*ΔCRIGHTSc + control variables.

(15)

DepVar is (i) the probability of same-industry acquisitions, Pr(same industry);(ii) the
probability of same-country acquisition, Pr(same country); (iii) the change in acquirer’s
ROA k years after the acquisition, dROA(k) = ROA(t+k) - ROA(t-1); (iv) the cumulative
abnormal return on the acquirer’s stock from 3 days before the acquisition announcement
to 3 days after the announcement, CAR (t-3 to t+3); (v) corporate Leverage; and (vi) the
probability of a low-recovery acquirer buying a high-recovery target, Pr(AL∩TH|TH)j,c.
If creditor rights became weaker, we set ΔCRIGHTSc = 0 for the years that follow the
year of change and set ΔCRIGHTSc = 1 for the period that precedes it (including the
change year), when CRIGHTSc are stronger. Analogously, ΔCRIGHTSc = 1 during the
period following the year of strengthening of creditor rights and ΔCRIGHTSc = 0
beforehand. As discussed, all changes in CRIGHTSc during the sample period but one
made them weaker. For most countries in our sample (with no changes in creditor rights),
ΔCRIGHTS = 0 for the entire sample period. The control variables are Transaction Value

28

Russia is included only in this table’s regressions, not in any other estimation, because it has a unique legal origin. Its
inclusion with a unique dummy variable for its legal origin will not change any of the results reported.

40

(in logarithm), with year fixed effects, industry fixed effect (except for (vi)) and,
importantly, country fixed effects which account for all country-based variables, in line
with the difference-in-differences methodology. In the Leverage equation, we add
leverage-related firm-specific variables: Tangibility, Log(assets) and EBITDA/Assets. We
estimate the regressions on the probability of focusing acquisitions by the probit method
and the other models by OLS, with standard errors clustered at the country level to
account for potential within-country correlation in the residuals.

INSERT TABLE 8 HERE.

By our hypotheses on the effect of creditor rights, we expect that in model (15)
α < 0 for the first five dependent variables, and we expect α > 0 for Pr(AL∩TH|TH)j,c.
The regression results in Table 8 support our hypothesis.
(i)

DepVar = Pr(same industry). The coefficient of ΔCRIGHTSc is negative and

statistically significant: α = –0.145 (t = 6.19). This means that weakening of creditor
rights significantly increases the likelihood of same-industry mergers and reduces the
extent of diversifying, risk-reducing mergers. The marginal effect from this regression is
-0.057, i.e., an increase in the strength of the creditor rights by one provision is associated
with a statistically significant drop in the probability of a same industry merger by 5.7%.
(ii) DepVar = Pr(same country): α = –0.213 (t = 2.83). Weakening of creditor rights
reduces the likelihood of cross-country mergers.
(iii) DepVar = dROA(1), dROA(2) and dROA(3): The coefficients of ΔCRIGHTSc are,
respectively, α = -0.042 (t = 5.78), α = -0.051 (t = 9.22) and α = -0.023 (t = 4.98). All
coefficients are negative, as expected, and significant. The negative and significant
coefficient for dROA(1), for example, means that in countries where creditor rights were
weakened, acquirers were induced to make more profitable acquisitions than they used to
before the weakening of creditor rights and the improvement in their ROA was 0.042.
Notably, in this regression we include all acquisitions, not only the diversifying ones,
because of the self-selection in diversification. When including only diversifying
mergers, the three coefficients of ΔCRIGHTSc are slightly more negative: -0.062 (t =
6.87), -0.069 (t = 9.24) and α = -0.027 (t = 4.30).
41

(iv) DepVar = CAR(t-3 to t+3): The negative and significant coefficient of ΔCRIGHTSc,
α = –0.005 (t = 3.31),

means after creditor rights were weakened, acquisitions

contributed more value-enhancing, the improvement being 0.5% of the acquirer’s value.
When estimating the model with diversifying acquisitions only (which is subject to
selection), the coefficient of ΔCRIGHTSc is again slightly more negative, -0.008 (t =
3.08).
(v) DepVar = Leverage: α = –0.061 (t = 2.05). Weakening of creditor rights makes firms
increase their leverage.
(vi) DepVar = (AL∩TH|TH) (the likelihood of a high-recovery target being acquired by a
low-recovery firm): α = 0.147 (t = 1.08). Strengthening creditor rights increases the
propensity of firms with low-recovery assets to seek and buy target firms with highrecovery assets. In this case, the coefficient is not statistically significant.
The results on the effects of changes in creditor rights are consistent with those
obtained in the cross-section analysis and thus support our hypotheses on the effects of
creditor rights.

4. Conclusion and Discussion

We find that stronger creditor rights in a country induce firms to reduce risk. This
is achieved by doing diversifying acquisitions, which result in loss of value and operating
performance, and by undertaking lower cash flow and financial risk. Thus, creditor rights
have real effect on corporate decisions and firm value.
Stronger creditor rights are means to mitigate stockholders’ expropriation or riskshifting tendencies that benefit them at the expense of bondholders (and that may be
costly to the firm), and thereby they facilitate raising external capital. Our findings could
thus be construed as confirming that creditor rights do what they are expected to do:
inhibit excessive risk taking by companies. However, stronger creditor rights induce
managers to reduce risk and stifle even non-opportunistic risk taking that is beneficial to
all claimholders. Thus, strong creditor rights have a “dark side” to them by reducing
managerial incentives to undertake value-enhancing but risky projects. The question is
how to strike a balance between these two effects of creditor rights, the first ex post and
42

the latter ex ante. In this paper, we highlight the ex-ante aspect, namely the inhibiting
effect of creditor rights on risk taking by companies: corporate investments in countries
with stronger creditor rights are more risk reducing, as reflected in diversifying
acquisition and in lower volatility of operating cash flows. We also show that stronger
creditor rights have negative effects on corporate profitability (return on assets) and
company value in the case of diversifying acquisitions.
It is argued that lenient bankruptcy laws may inhibit the supply of lending and
make it harder to raise capital. However, creditor rights that are too strong inhibits firms’
demand for borrowing and on balance, corporate leverage is lower in countries with
stronger creditor rights.
This tradeoff suggests that stronger creditor rights are not always optimal. The
optimal level of creditor rights should balance their positive effect on the supply of debt
against their negative effect on corporate risk taking and operating performance, as well
as on the demand for debt. In future work, it would be interesting to assess directly this
important tradeoff.

43

References
Acharya, V., Bharath, S., Srinivasan, A., 2007. Does industry-wide distress affect
defaulted firms? Evidence from creditor recoveries. Journal of Financial Economics 85,
787-821.
Acharya, V., Sundaram, R., John, K., 2004. Cross-country variations in capital structures:
The role of bankruptcy codes. Working paper, New York University.
Acharya, V., Subramanian, K., 2009a. Bankruptcy codes and innovation, Review of
Financial Studies, Forthcoming.
Acharya, V., Subramanian, K., 2009b. Bankruptcy codes and innovation: A model.
Review of Financial Studies online, forthcoming.
Adler, B. E., 1992. Bankruptcy and risk allocation. Cornell Law Review 77, 439-489.
Adler, B., Capkun, V., Weiss, L.A., 2007. Value destruction in the new era of Chapter
11. Working paper, NYU Law School.
Allen, F., Gale, D., 2000. Comparing Financial Systems. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Amihud, Y., B. Lev., 1981. Risk reduction as a managerial motive for conglomerate
mergers. Bell Journal of Economics 12, 605-618.
Ammann, M., Hoechle, D., Schmid, M., 2008. Is there really no conglomerate discount?
Working Paper, University of St. Gallen.
Armour, J., Cumming, D.J., 2005. Bankruptcy law and entrepreneurship, Working Paper,
University of Cambridge Faculty of Law.
Baird, D.G., Rasmussen, R.K., 2006. The prime directive. Working Paper, University of
Chicago.
Berger, P.G., Ofek, E., 1995. Diversification’s effect on firm value. Journal of Financial
Economics 37, 39–65.
Berger, P. G., Ofek, E., Swary, I., 1996. Investor valuation of the abandonment option.
Journal of Financial Economics 42, 257-287.
Berkowitz, D., Pistor, K., Richard, J., 2003. Economic development, legality, and the
transplant effect. European Economic Review 47, 165-195.

Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., Mullainathan, S., 2004. How much should we trust differencesin-differences estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 249-75.

44

Blum, J., 1999. Do capital adequacy requirements reduce risks in banking? Journal of
Banking and Finance 23, 755–71.
Blum, J., 2002. Subordinated debt, market discipline, and banks’ risk taking. Journal of
Banking and Finance 26, 1427-1441.
Campa, J.M., Kedia, S., 2002. Explaining the diversification discount. Journal of
Finance 57, 1731–1762.
Chava, S., Roberts, M., 2008. How does financing affect investment? The role of debt
covenants. Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Claessens, S., Klapper, L.F., 2005. Bankruptcy around the world: Explanations of its
relative use. American Law and Economic Review 7, 253-283.
Comment, R., Jarrell, G.A., 1995. Corporate focus and stock returns. Journal of Financial
Economics 37, 67-87.
Djankov, S., McLeish, C., Shleifer, A., 2007. Private credit in 129 countries. Journal of
Financial Economics 84, 299-329.
Dyck, A., Zingales, L., 2004, Private benefits of control: an international comparison,
Journal of Finance 59: 537-600.
Eckbo, B. E., Thornburn, K.S., 2003. Control benefits and CEO discipline in automatic
bankruptcy auctions. Journal of Financial Economics 69, 227-258.
Gilson, S., 1989. Management turnover and financial distress. Journal of Financial
Economics 25, 241-262.
Fan, W., White, M.J., 2003. Personal bankruptcy and the level of entrepreneurial activity.
Journal of Law and Economics 46, 543-567.
Haselmann, R., Pistor, K., Vig, V., 2006. How law affects lending. Working Paper,
Columbia Law School.
Healy, P.M., Palepu, K.G., Ruback, R.S., 1992. Does corporate performance improve
after mergers? Journal of Financial Economics 31, 135-175.
Hofstede, G. H., 2001. Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviors,
Institutions, and Organizations Across Nations (2nd ed.). Sage Publications, California.
Holderness, C.G., 2009. Do differences in legal protections explain differences in
ownership concentration? Working paper, Boston Collge.

45

Hylton, K., Deng, F., 2007. Antitrust around the world: An empirical analysis of the
scope of competition laws and their effects. Antitrust Law Journal, forthcoming
John, K., Litov, L., Yeung, B., 2008. Corporate governance and managerial risk-taking.
Journal of Finance 63: 1679-1728.
Kaufmann, D., Kraay, A., Zoido-Lobatón, P., 1999. Aggregating Governance Indicators.
Washington D.C.: The World Bank.
Khanna, T., Palepu, K., 2000. Is group affiliation profitable in emerging markets? An
analysis of diversified Indian business groups. Journal of Finance 55, 867–891.
Laeven, L., Levine, R., 2007. Is there a diversification discount in financial
conglomerates? Journal of Financial Economics 85, 331-367.
Lamont, O., 1997. Cash flow and investment: evidence from internal capital markets.
Journal of Finance 52, 83–109.
Lamont, O., Polk, C., 2002. Does diversification destroy value? Evidence from the
industry shocks. Journal of Financial Economics 63, 51-77.
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1997. Legal determinants of
external finance. Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1998. Law and finance.
Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.
Lee, K., Peng, M.W., Lee, K., 2008. From diversification premium to diversification
discount during institutional transitions. Journal of World Business 43, 47–65.
Levine, R., Demirguc-Kunt, A., 2001. Financial Structure and Economic Growth: A
Cross-Country Comparison of Banks, Markets and Development, MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.
Licht A., Goldschmidt C., Schwartz, S. , 2005. Culture, law, and corporate governance.
International Review of Law and Economics 25, 229–255
Lins, K., Servaes, H., 2002. Is corporate diversification beneficial in emerging markets.
Financial Management 31, 5-31.
Manso, G., 2005. Motivating Innovation. Working Paper, MIT.
Maximovic, V., Phillips, G., 2002. Do conglomerate firms allocate resources inefficiently
across industries? Theory and evidence. Journal of Finance 57, 721-767.

46

Modigliani, F., Miller, M., 1958. The Cost of Capital, Corporate Finance and the Theory
of Investment. American Economic Review 48, 261-297.
Moeller, S.B., Schlingemann, F.B., 2005. Global diversification and bidder gains: A
comparison between cross-border and domestic acquisitions. Journal of Banking and
Finance 29, 533-564.
Moeller, S.B., Schlingemann, F.B., Stulz, R., 2004. Firm size and the gains from
acquisitions. Journal of Financial Economics 73, 201–228.
Morck, R., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1990. Do managerial objectives drive bad
acquisitions? Journal of Finance 45, 31-48.
Nini, G., Smith, D., Sufi, A., 2006. Creditor control rights and firm investment policy,
Working paper, University of Chicago.
Ozelge, S., 2007. The role of banks and private lenders in forced CEO turnover. Working
Paper, New York University.
Rajan, R., Zingales, L., 1998. Financial dependence and growth. American Economic
Review 88, 559-586.
Rajan, R., Servaes, H., Zingales, L., 2000. The cost of diversity: Diversification discount
and inefficient investment. Journal of Finance 55, 35–80.
Scharfstein, D.S., 1998. The dark side of internal capital markets II. NBER working
paper 6352.
Scharfstein, D.S., Stein, J.C., 2002. The dark side of internal capital markets: divisional
rent-seeking and inefficient investment. Journal of Finance 55, 1537-1564.
Schmid, M.M., Walter, I., 2009. Do financial conglomerates create or destroy economic
value? Journal of Financial Intermediation, 18, 193–216.
Schwartz, A., 1997. Contracting about bankruptcy. Journal of Law, Economics and
Organization 13, 127-146.
Shin, H., Stulz, R., 1998. Are internal capital markets efficient? Quarterly Journal of
Economics 113, 531–552.
Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1992, Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market
equilibrium approach, Journal of Finance 47, 1343-1366.
Smith, C.W., Warner, J.B., 1979. On financial contracting, an analysis of bond
covenants. Journal of Financial Economics 7, 117-161.

47

Stulz, R., Williamson, R., 2003. Culture, openness, and finance. Journal of Financial
Economics 70, 313-349.
Tufano, P., 1996. Who manages risk? An empirical examination of risk management
practices in the gold mining industry. Journal of Finance, 51, 1097-1137.
Tufano, P., 1998. Agency costs of corporate risk management. Financial Management 27,
Spring, 67-77.
Vig, V., 2007. Access to collateral and corporate debt structure: Evidence from natural
experiment. Working Paper, London Business School.
Villalonga, B., 2004. Does diversification cause the diversification discount? Financial
Management 33, 5-27.

48

Table 1. Variable Definitions
Main Variables
Risk-reduction
measures
PROP
Firm risk (RISK)

Country risk (RISK* )
Creditor- Rights Variables
Creditor rights (CRIGHTS)
No automatic stay (AUTOSTAY)

Reorganization (REORG)

Secured debt first (SECURED)

No management stay (MANAGES)

Control Variables
Log(GDP-per-capita)
Macroeconomic Risk (MacroRisk)

Rule of Law (LAW)
Legal Origins
Shareholder rights (SHRIGHTS)

Accounting Disclosure

Source

Logistic transformation of the share of same industry mergers, per country. We define it as follows: PROP = ln [SAME/(1-SAME)].
SAME is the proportion of same 2-digit SIC code industry mergers and acquisitions.
RISKj,c is the standard deviation of firm j in country c of ROAj,c,t , where ROAj,c,t = EBITDAj,c,t / ASSETSj,c,t . t is the year, and we
require at least 8 years of data. Data are for the period 1992-2005. The entire data of ROAi,c,t is winsorized at 0.5% in both tails to
account for extreme observations. The entire firm sample of RISKi,c is then winsorized at 1% in both sides of the sample distribution.
The measure is similar to the one used in John et al. (2008).

SDC Platinum Mergers &
Acquisitions.
Compustat Global Industrial/
Commercial Annual Database.

The average of RISKj,c across firms in country c.

An index aggregating creditor rights, following La Porta et al. (1998). It is the sum of the four indexes that follow. CRIGHTS then
ranges between 0 and 4.
Equals one if the reorganization procedure does not impose an automatic stay on the assets of the firm upon filing the reorganization
petition, creditors are able to seize their collateral after the reorganization petition is approved. It equals zero if such restriction does
exist in the law.
Equals one if the reorganization procedure imposes restrictions, such as creditors’ consent or minimum dividend for a debtor to be
able to file for reorganization. It equals zero for countries without such restriction.
Equals one if secured creditors are ranked first in the distribution of the proceeds that result from the disposition of the assets of a
bankrupt firm, as opposed to other creditors such as employees or government. Equals zero if non-secured creditors, such as the
government and workers, are given absolute priority.
Equals one if an official is appointed by the court, or by the creditors, is responsible for the operation of the business during
reorganization, that is management does not retain administration of its property pending the resolution of the reorganization.
Equivalently, this variable equals one if the debtor does not keep the administration of its property pending the resolution of the
reorganization process, and zero otherwise.
Natural logarithm of the average real GDP per capita in US dollars, 1994-2000.
The standard deviation of the quarterly growth in real industrial production for each country in the period 1990-2004. For some
countries, we use instead the index of manufacturing production: Argentina, Chile, Greece, Hong Kong, Indonesia, New Zealand,
Peru, Philippines, Singapore and South Africa. For Argentina, Canada, Taiwan and Thailand, data are from the international database
of Global Insight. The variable is measured in decimal points.
The assessment of the law and order tradition of the country. Calculated as “average of the months of April and October of the
monthly index between 1982 and 1995. Scale from zero to 10, with lower scores for less tradition for law and order.”
A dummy variable that identifies the legal origin of the Company law or Commercial Code of each country. The detailed origins are
French, German, Nordic (default is Common)
An index that aggregates shareholder rights. “The index is formed by adding one when: (1) the country allows shareholders to mail
their proxy vote to the firm, (2) shareholders are not required to deposit their shares prior to the general shareholders’ meeting, (3)
cumulative voting or proportional representation of minorities in the board of directors is allowed, (4) an oppressed minorities
mechanism is in place, (5) the minimum percentage of share capital that entitles a shareholder to call for an extraordinary
shareholders’ meeting is less than or equal to 10 percent (the sample median), or (6) shareholders have preemptive rights that can be
waived only by a shareholders’ vote. The index ranges from zero to six.”
An index created by the examination of the annual report in 1994 of companies across countries on their inclusion or omission of 90
line items.

49

La Porta et al. (1998), Djankov,
McLeish, and Shleifer (2007)
La Porta et al.
(1998)
La Porta et al.
(1998)
La Porta et al.
(1998)
La Porta et al.
(1998)

Penn World Tables, Version 6.1
International Financial Statistics
of IMF.

International Country Risk
Guide; La Porta et al. (1998).
La Porta et al. (1998) and the
CIA Factbook 2003.
Quotation is from La Porta et al.
(1998).

International Accounting and
Auditing Trends, Center for
International Financial Analysis
and Research

Table 1 (continued)
Emerging Markets
Flexibility to Fire

Dummy variable equal to one if the country’s GDP-per-capita (in US$, average over 1994-2000) is less than the median for the
sample of countries.
An index of the ease to fire workers based on a study of the employment laws. (divided by 100.)

Country corporate tax

The annual top corporate tax rate for 1992-2002, per country.

Log(Market Cap)

The logarithm of the stock market capitalization in U.S. dollars in 1994.

ROA
Leverage

EBITDA/Assets
Ratio of total debt to total assets in book value. Debt is total liabilities minus equity and minus deferred taxes. Leverage data are
winsorized in the entire population at 1% in each tail.
The amount paid in U.S. dollars.

Transaction Value

Cumulative Abnormal Return (-3
to+3)

Tangibility

Cumulative abnormal return computed over the seven day window surrounding the event date. The estimation of equity betas uses
105 weeks but requires not less than 52 weeks of data, up to 9 weeks before the week of the acquisition announcement. We use as
market indices the corresponding countries’ main stock exchange indices. The resulting sample of firms’ CAR is then winsorized at
1% at both tails.
Net fixed (tangible) assets / Total Assets

50

Penn World Tables, Version 6.1
Doing Business Report, 2004, The
World Bank
World Tax Database at the
University of Michigan.
World Market Indicators database,
The World Bank
Compustat Global Vantage and
Compustat Global Vantage
SDC Platinum Mergers &
Acquisitions.

Datastream

Compustat Global Vantage

Table 2. Overall descriptive statistics
Table 2 describes the total number of domestic mergers in the sample countries for 1994-2004 that enter Table 3 regressions. The sample
presented consists of the countries for which we have La Porta et al. (1998) data on creditor rights. We exclude countries that have less than 50
qualified transactions in the sample period. A transaction is qualified if the percentage of acquired shares is at least 20%. We exclude financial
industry (SIC header 6) and regulated industry companies (SIC headers 48 and 49) from the country transaction count. The mergers and
acquisition data is from SDC Platinum Mergers and Acquisitions database. The year of creditor rights change is the one from the Djankov et
al. (2007) study. We also present data on the average country cash flow risk proxy, RISK*.
Acquirer’s
Country

# Same
Industry
Mergers

Cash flow
Risk Proxy

Shareholder
Rights

Creditor
Rights

Macroeconom
ic Volatility

COUNT

Year of creditor
rights change

# Mergers

LAW
CHANGE

$ GDP per capita

SAME

RISK

SHRIGHTS

CRIGHTS

MacroRisk

GDP

66

55.33%

0.058

4

1

0.07

$7,801

Australia

-

1,618

61.72%

0.121

4

1

0.04

$20,948

Austria

-

14

64.52%

0.036

2

3

0.09

$26,220

Belgium

-

49

57.54%

0.043

0

2

0.08

$24,649

Brazil

-

143

70.26%

0.07

3

1

0.03

$4,143

Canada

-

2,071

61.37%

0.094

5

1

0.01

$20,647

Chile

-

41

61.84%

0.033

5

2

0.04

$4,604

Denmark

-

80

56.47%

0.049

2

3

0.07

$32,434

Finland

-

154

54.60%

0.054

3

1

0.08

$23,856

France

-

434

59.79%

0.045

3

0

0.1

$24,033

Germany

-

201

55.31%

0.057

1

3

0.04

$26,443

Greece

-

70

47.22%

0.043

2

1

0.06

$11,219

Hong Kong

-

190

34.11%

0.064

5

4

0.13

$23,850

India

-

236

57.87%

0.051

5

4

0.07

$423

1998

39

60.53%

.

2

4

0.07

$868

-

92

63.59%

.

4

1

0.08

$21,376

Argentina

Indonesia
Ireland
Israel

1995

73

45.45%

0.075

3

4

0.02

$16,391

Italy

-

333

53.31%

0.038

1

2

0.12

$19,814

Japan

2000 and 2002

1,771

46.80%

0.022

4

2

0.03

$36,616

Malaysia

-

369

25.27%

0.066

4

4

0.05

$3,982

Mexico

-

82

62.59%

0.049

1

0

0.03

$4,421

Netherlands

-

101

57.80%

0.059

2

2

0.11

$24,802

New Zealand

98

57.73%

0.073

4

3

0.06

$15,528

Norway

-

130

58.94%

0.079

4

2

0.07

$33,844

Peru

-

26

68.63%

0.058

3

0

0.07

$2,296

Philippines

-

42

56.00%

0.08

3

0

0.18

$1,041

Portugal

-

56

65.31%

0.036

3

1

0.06

$10,782

Singapore

-

243

32.19%

0.064

4

4

0.06

$22,916
$3,413

South Africa

372

49.84%

0.061

5

3

0.02

South Korea

-

198

32.48%

0.051

2

3

0.06

$9,545

Spain

-

338

64.08%

0.04

4

2

0.08

$14,535

1995

186

58.53%

0.067

3

2

0.16

$26,812

Switzerland

-

38

57.67%

0.046

2

1

0.07

$37,908

Taiwan

-

52

44.90%

0.039

3

2

0.06

$12,580

Thailand

1999

83

43.95%

0.065

2

3

0.05

$2,396

-

17

50.00%

0.097

2

2

0.07

$2,810

5,624

58.61%

0.071

5

4

0.05

$21,767

17,491

59.07%

0.088

5

1

0.01

$30,899

Sweden

Turkey
United
Kingdom

-

United States

51

Table 3. Merger-level analysis: proportion of same-industry mergers
The table presents the coefficient estimates from probit regressions. The dependent variable equals 1 if both acquirer and target are in the same
industry, using 2-digit SIC code. A country is included in our sample if it has at least 50 qualified transactions over the sample period. A
transaction is included if the percentage of acquired shares is at least 20%. Excluded are transactions where the acquirer is from the financial
industry (SIC header 6) or regulated industry (SIC headers 48 and 49). CRIGHTS are as of 1994. The control variables include shareholder rights,
rule of law, macroeconomic risk, legal origins, the logarithm of the stock market capitalization, the index of flexibility to fire, the quality of
accounting disclosure, an emerging market indicator, the logarithm of average real GDP-per-capita (1994-2000) in US$, the logarithm of
transaction value, and the imputed leverage for the acquirer and the target (the predictors are the U.S. industry quartile rank of the median
leverage and median tangibility, and all exogenous control variables). All variables are defined in Table 1. The regressions include year fixed
effects (not reported). Models (1) through (5) include all countries. Model (6) excludes the U.S. Model (7) excludes both the U.S. and the U.K.
The t-statistics in parentheses are based on robust estimation of standard errors with errors cluster-adjusted at the country level. ***, **, and *
indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Sample period is 1994-2004.
Variable
CRIGHTS

(1)
-0.245***
(6.33)

(2)

All countries
(3)

(4)

-0.524***
(5.18)

REORG

-0.318***
(3.78)

SECURED

0.022
(0.91)
0.293***
(6.48)
0.836**
(2.15)

-0.002
(0.08)
0.247***
(5.94)
1.077***
(2.68)

0.012
(0.46)
0.266***
(6.01)
1.37***
(3.32)

0.029
(1.16)
0.207***
(5.56)
0.993**
(2.41)

-0.848***
(6.89)
0.143***
(5.38)
0.225***
(6.20)
-0.262
(0.67)

-0.026***
(4.46)
0.661***
(5.99)
0.375***
(5.79)
-0.388***
(2.87)
-0.613***
(9.32)
1.167***
(5.3)
-0.207
(0.22)
-0.178***
(3.37)

-0.033***
(5.23)
0.421***
(4.75)
0.544***
(7.85)
-0.189*
(1.71)
-0.86***
(9.96)
0.903***
(4.49)
-2.945***
(3.18)
-0.199***
(3.71)

-0.030***
(4.82)
0.505***
(5.27)
0.362***
(5.66)
-0.305**
(2.52)
-0.950***
(10.58)
1.245***
(5.33)
-1.841**
(1.96)
-0.097**
(2.04)

-0.047***
(6.26)
0.303***
(4.25)
0.445***
(6.87)
-0.224**
(2.10)
-0.968***
(10.49)
1.097***
(5.10)
-6.312***
(6.76)
-0.055
(1.20)

-0.011**
(2.21)
0.653***
(6.08)
0.026
(0.34)
0.0004
(0.01)
0.101
(1.00)
1.212***
(5.70)
-0.803
(0.97)
-0.152***
(3.09)

-0.024***
(3.09)
1.932***
(3.42)
0.952***
(4.13)
0.213
(1.61)
1.087**
(2.35)
2.458***
(3.33)
4.755**
(2.15)
-0.423***
(3.13)

-0.035***
(4.31)
0.956**
(2.58)
0.600***
(4.33)
0.009
(0.07)
0.673*
(1.69)
1.393**
(2.58)
1.765
(1.13)
-0.354***
(3.35)

0.086***
(5.41)

0.090***
(5.47)

0.091***
(5.47)

0.096***
(5.52)

0.083***
(5.30)

0.083**
(2.29)

0.064***
(2.85)

MANAGES

Log (Market cap)
Flexibility to fire
Accounting
disclosure
Emerging Market
Rule of Law
French Legal Origin
German Legal Origin
Nordic Legal Origin
MacroRisk
Log(GDP perCapita)
Log(Transaction
Value)

Exclude U.S.
and U.K.
(7)
-0.420***
(3.56)

-0.415***
(5.74)

AUTOSTAY

SHRIGHTS

(5)

Exclude U.S.
(6)
-0.411***
(3.66)

0.218***
(4.00)
0.134***
(3.09)
0.503
(1.17)

0.112***
(2.88)
-0.035
(0.87)
-0.449
(0.94)

52

Table 3 (continued)
Acquirer’s Leverage
(imputed)
Target’s Leverage
(imputed)
Number of countries
Observations
Chi-squared

1.746*
(1.69)

1.755
(1.68)

1.734
(1.64)

1.737
(1.64)

1.754*
(1.70)

-0.486
(0.35)

-1.376*
(1.75)

-7.647***
(6.13)
38
33,221
4,449.7

-7.861***
(6.14)
38
33,221
4,279.3

-8.062***
(6.17)
38
33,221
1,696.8

-8.251***
(6.17)
38
33,221
1,375.8

-7.584***
(6.09)
38
33,221
5,870.4

-13.957***
(3.51)
37
15,730
1,838.4

-7.700**
(2.57)
36
10,106
2,079.4

53

Table 4. Effects of creditor rights on performance for focusing and diversifying mergers. The table includes two performance variables: (1)
dROA(k) = ROA(t+k)-ROA(t-1), where ROA is Return on Assets = EBITDA/ASSETS, and t is the year of the merger. (2) Cumulative abnormal
returns on the acquirer’s stock, CAR, from 3 days before the merger announcement to 3 days after the merger announcement. Abnormal returns
are calculated from a market model whose parameters are estimated from weekly returns and market model for each country using 105 weeks but
not less than 52 weeks, up to 9 weeks before the week of the merger announcement. We include year and industry fixed effects (not reported). To
account for the choice of type of acquisition, we add the inverse Mill’s ratio, computed using probit model (1) in Table 3 for regressions that
include all countries. The t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on robust standard errors cluster-adjusted at the country level. The ***, **, and *
indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
ROA(t+1) -ROA(t-1)
ROA(t+2) -ROA(t-1)
ROA(t+3) -ROA(t-1)
CAR (t-3 to t+3)

CRIGHTS

Focusing

Diversify

Focusing

Diversify

Focusing

Diversify

Focusing

Div.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.011

-0.013***

0.0003
(0.02)

SRIGHTS
Log(Market cap)

Flexibility to fire

Accounting disclosure

Emerging markets

Rule of Law

French Legal Origin

German Legal Origin

Nordic Legal Origin

MacroRisk

-0.028

***

(8.20)

0.026

-0.031

(1.30)

***

(10.28)

-0.017
(0.98)

-0.030

***

(8.84)

(1.65)
*

(5.14)

0.004

0.009

-0.008

-0.007

0.012

-0.003

-0.008

(0.37)

(1.44)

(0.61)

(1.27)

(1.03)

(0.45)

(1.74)

(0.56)

0.001

-0.007

-0.019

-0.003

0.030

-0.002

-0.017**

0.004

(0.11)

(0.93)

(0.90)

(0.49)

(1.49)

(0.26)

(2.31)

(1.49)

-0.124

0.041

-0.258

0.042

0.237

(0.77)

(0.76)

(1.03)

(0.79)

(1.11)
*

**

0.002

0.041

-0.173

-0.033

(0.79)

(2.41)

(1.13)

0.001

0.0001

0.002

0.0003

-0.004

-0.001

0.002

-0.0001

(0.44)

(0.06)

(0.76)

(0.26)

(1.79)

(0.79)

(1.62)

(0.18)

**

0.022***

0.025

0.006

-0.078

0.008

0.103

0.002

-0.051

(0.47)

(0.38)

(0.94)

(0.48)

(1.43)

(0.13)

(2.2)

(2.89)

-0.021

-0.019

-0.079

0.019

0.062

0.016

-0.058

0.02*

(0.44)

(0.69)

(1.06)

(0.92)

(1.02)

(0.82)

(1.53)

(1.87)

0.037

-0.026

-0.034

-0.021

0.065

-0.025

-0.032

0.019

(0.86)

(1.34)

(0.50)

(1.34)

(1.35)

(1.39)

(1.28)

(1.66)

*

0.055

0.003

0.079

(1.35)

(0.27)

(1.13)
*

0.005

-0.062

-0.006

0.049

(0.44)

(1.16)

(0.53)

(1.96)
**

0.013**
(2.34)
0.047***

0.020

-0.024

-0.145

-0.026

0.093

-0.021

-0.047

(0.42)

(0.85)

(1.84)

(1.02)

(1.23)

(0.72)

(2.32)

(2.98)

-0.427

-0.161

0.279

-0.058

0.105

-0.169

0.780

(0.27)

(1.0)

(1.09)

(4.08)

(1.04)

(0.92)

(1.45)

(0.63)

Log GDP per capita

0.001

0.013

0.022

-0.012

-0.006

-0.009

0.015

-0.02**

(0.13)

(0.85)

(1.06)

(0.95)

(0.4)

(0.73)

(1.10)

(2.22)

Log(Transaction Value)

-0.002

-0.003

-0.009

-0.003

0.009

-0.001

-0.005

0.002***

(0.37)

(0.95)

(0.93)

(0.72)

(1.21)

(0.3)

(1.32)

(2.66)

Dummy: Target is public

Inverse Mill's Ratio

-0.619

***

0.004

-0.005

0.011

-0.001

0.006

-0.003

(0.63)

(1.57)

(1.29)

(0.39)

(1.25)

(0.78)
*

-0.016

***

(5.01)
**

-0.017**
(2.48)

-0.082

0.040

-0.573

0.053

0.618

0.092

-0.434

0.014

(0.21)

(1.08)

(0.9)

(1.08)

(1.25)

(1.96)

(2.01)

(0.65)

Observations

8,788

5,752

8,198

5,491

7,742

4,770

7,500

5,725

R-squared

8.8%

11.7%

8.5%

15.0%

4.2%

13.6%

1.6%

2.0%

54

Table 5. Cash flow risk and creditor rights: RISK at firm level
The dependent variable, industry-adjusted RISK, is the standard deviation of the firm’s annual ROA defined as EBITDA/ASSETS (see definition in
Table 1) minus that year’s median industry ROA (2-digit SIC code). The sample period is 1992-2005. Included are companies from the
manufacturing industry only (SIC 2000 – 3999). We present the second stage estimation from the 2SLS system where we treat firm leverage as
endogenous. We instrument leverage with the quartile ranks of the U.S. industry median leverage and tangibility. The t-statistics (in parentheses)
are based on robust standard errors cluster-adjusted at the country level. The ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.

Variable
(1)
CRIGHTS

(2)

All countries
(3)

(4)

AUTOSTAY

Accounting disclosure
Emerging Market
Rule of Law
French Legal Origin
German Legal Origin
Nordic Legal Origin
MacroRisk
Log GDP per capita
Leverage (Instrumented)
Log(Initial total assets)
Observations
Centered R-squared
Number of countries

-0.006***
(2.69)

-0.004
(1.62)
0.003
(1.21)
0.06***
(3.03)
-0.0003
(0.66)
0.012
(1.52)
0.012
(1.35)
-0.037***
(4.45)
-0.025***
(2.67)
-0.021**
(2.04)
0.100*
(1.73)
0.002
(0.53)
-0.125***
(3.28)
-0.006***

-0.005*
(1.89)
0.003
(0.74)
0.055***
(2.69)
-0.0004
(0.74)
0.009
(1.00)
0.013
(1.26)
-0.037***
(4.38)
-0.022**
(2.14)
-0.021*
(1.91)
0.109*
(1.74)
0.0004
(0.09)
-0.149***
(3.06)
-0.004**

(3.32)
3,812
52.9%
34

(2.53)
3,385
49.8%
33

-0.006
(1.15)

-0.005
(1.61)
0.006***
(3.10)
0.066***
(3.22)
-0.001
(1.17)
0.011
(1.30)
0.010
(0.98)
-0.036***
(4.00)
-0.024***
(3.41)
-0.016
(1.45)
0.101
(1.67)
0.004
(0.68)
-0.145***
(4.17)
-0.010**

-0.005*
(1.80)
0.007***
(3.04)
0.075***
(3.73)
-0.001
(1.17)
0.007
(0.71)
0.012
(0.91)
-0.034***
(3.73)
-0.029***
(3.95)
-0.021*
(1.84)
0.086
(1.30)
0.004
(0.61)
-0.151***
(4.01)
-0.01**

-0.003
(1.16)
0.006***
(2.64)
0.081***
(3.69)
-0.0005
(0.96)
0.001
(0.10)
0.005
(0.47)
-0.032***
(3.49)
-0.029***
(4.08)
-0.02*
(1.70)
0.096
(1.45)
0.008
(1.26)
-0.153***
(3.85)
-0.01**

-0.003
(1.29)
0.006***
(2.76)
0.077***
(3.75)
-0.001
(1.08)
-0.001
(0.15)
0.005
(0.43)
-0.033***
(3.67)
-0.029***
(4.31)
-0.02*
(1.73)
0.081
(1.27)
0.008
(1.26)
-0.157***
(3.64)
-0.010**

-0.022***
(3.74)
-0.003
(1.22)
0.006***
(3.59)
0.041*
(1.93)
-0.0003
(0.64)
0.014*
(1.83)
-0.001
(0.13)
-0.03***
(2.88)
-0.010
(1.14)
-0.012
(0.98)
0.116
(1.56)
0.006
(0.87)
-0.150***
(4.15)
-0.01**

(2.55)
5,394
49.7%
35

(2.46)
5,394
48.2%
35

(2.45)
5,394
47.9%
35

(2.39)
5,394
46.9%
35

(2.45)
5,394
48.7%
35

MANAGES

Flexibility to fire

-0.006***
(2.67)

-0.005
(0.84)

SECURED

Log (Market cap)

Exclude U.S.
and U.K.
(7)

-0.011
(1.52)

REORG

SHRIGHTS

(5)

-0.006***
(2.75)

Exclude U.S.
(6)

55

Table 6. Leverage and creditor rights: leverage at firm level
The dependent variable is industry-adjusted leverage, defined as leverage (defined in Table 1) minus that year’s median industry leverage (2-digit
SIC code). The sample period is 1992-2005. The estimation includes year fixed effects. Included are companies from the manufacturing industry
only (SIC 2000 – 3999). Data requirements are as for Table 5, and there are 35 countries. The t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on robust
standard errors cluster-adjusted at the country level. The ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
All countries
Exclude U.S. Exclude U.S.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Variable
CRIGHTS
-0.022***
-0.017***
-0.018***
(5.20)
(3.65)
(3.42)
**
AUTOSTAY
-0.037
(2.45)
REORG
-0.049***
(4.66)
SECURED
-0.042**
(2.61)
MANAGES
-0.041***
(3.10)
***
***
*
SHRIGHTS
-0.011
-0.014
-0.005
-0.009
-0.006
-0.009**
-0.009**
(3.15)
(2.96)
(1.37)
(1.71)
(1.48)
(2.57)
(2.61)
Log (Market cap)
0.014***
0.017***
0.015***
0.021***
0.013**
0.003
0.002
(2.96)
(3.22)
(3.52)
(3.44)
(2.31)
(0.43)
(0.34)
Flexibility to fire
-0.001*
-0.001
-0.001
-0.001
-0.001
-0.001*
-0.001*
(1.88)
(0.75)
(0.99)
(0.64)
(1.22)
(1.76)
(1.71)
Accounting disclosure
-0.004***
-0.004***
-0.004***
-0.005***
-0.003***
-0.003**
-0.003***
(3.89)
(4.43)
(4)
(4.32)
(3.24)
(2.57)
(2.72)
0.046
0.053*
0.052
0.029
0.032
0.035
Emerging Market
0.058**
(2.14)
(1.4)
(1.76)
(1.48)
(0.95)
(1.61)
(1.57)
Rule of Law
0.062***
0.057**
0.066***
0.07**
0.013
0.047**
0.05**
(2.76)
(2.08)
(2.9)
(2.04)
(0.39)
(1.98)
(2.12)
French Legal Origin
-0.039**
-0.035
-0.009
-0.020
-0.030
-0.032**
-0.032**
(2.23)
(1.67)
(0.73)
(1.06)
(1.38)
(2.14)
(2.13)
German Legal Origin
-0.074***
-0.098***
-0.087***
-0.092***
-0.063***
-0.05**
-0.048**
(9.02)
(9.46)
(8.93)
(9.18)
(4.01)
(2.37)
(2.24)
Nordic Legal Origin
0.030
0.024
0.052***
0.055*
0.027
0.014
0.016
(1.42)
(0.98)
(2.82)
(1.92)
(0.97)
(0.74)
(0.85)
MacroRisk
-0.101
-0.177
-0.134
-0.35**
-0.145
-0.120
-0.116
(0.78)
(1.08)
(1.11)
(2.3)
(1.05)
(1.02)
(0.95)
Log GDP per capita
-0.017
-0.011
-0.012
-0.010
-0.002
-0.023**
-0.024**
(1.31)
(0.72)
(0.95)
(0.69)
(0.13)
(2.25)
(2.31)
-0.001
-0.001**
-0.001
-0.001
-0.001
-0.001
Country Corporate Taxes
-0.001*
(1.75)
(1.29)
(2.07)
(0.97)
(1.13)
(1.04)
(1.08)
Tangibility (t-1)
0.188***
0.186***
0.184***
0.188***
0.189***
0.176***
0.186***
(10.67)
(10.62)
(10.35)
(10.97)
(10.81)
(6.3)
(6.12)
Log(assets, in US$) (t-1)
0.024***
0.024***
0.024***
0.024***
0.024***
0.028***
0.028***
(7.55)
(7.46)
(7.66)
(7.37)
(7.35)
(8.75)
(7.83)
EBITDA/ Assets (t-1)
-0.155***
-0.156***
-0.154***
-0.159***
-0.158***
-0.157***
-0.177***
(9.20)
(9.26)
(9.26)
(9.71)
(9.27)
(3.36)
(3.40)
Observations
36,237
36,237
36,237
36,237
36,237
18,920
17,297
R-squared
17.4%
17.0%
17.4%
16.9%
17.1%
20.6%
20.2%

56

Table 7. Recovery rates and mergers and acquisitions
The table presents coefficient estimates of probit models. The dependent variable equals 1 if Prob(TH∩AL|TH) = 1, i.e., if the target is in a highrecovery industry and the acquirer is in a low-recovery industry. The universe is all target firms in high recovery industry. Included are all
transactions where the percentage of acquired shares is at least 20%. Excluded are transactions involving acquirers that are financial industry (SIC
header 6) or regulated industry companies (SIC headers 48 and 49). The following industries are classified as low recovery (2-SIC code headers):
transportation (37, 40, 41, 42, 44, 45, 46, 47), high technology and office equipment (35, 36, 38), consumer/ service sector (52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57,
58, 59, 72, 73, 75, 76, 78, 79), or leisure time/ media (27, 48, 70). The following industries are classified as high recovery (2-SIC code headers):
energy and natural resources (10, 12, 13, 14, 24), building products/ homebuilders (8, 15, 17, 24, 28, 29, 32, 34), or healthcare/ chemicals (28,
80). This classification follows Acharya, Bharath and Srinivasan (2007). All variables are defined in Table 1. The leverage of acquirer and target
are calculated as in Table 3. The sample period is 1994-2004. The absolute values of the t-statistics are shown in parentheses below the
coefficients and are based on robust standard errors that are cluster-adjusted at the country level. We include a year fixed effect (not reported). ***,
**
, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, correspondingly.
All countries
Excluding the U.S. & U.K.
Variables
(1)

CRIGHTS

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.915***
(6.30)
0.277*
(1.93)

(imputed)

Target’s
Leverage
(imputed)

# of countries
Observations
Chi-squared

(9)

(10)

0.492***
(2.64)
0.51**
(2.33)

0.124
(0.60)

-0.107*
(1.65)
0.083
(1.17)
-1.250
(1.34)
-0.05***
(3.73)
-0.162
(1.02)
0.190
(1.01)
-0.405
(1.44)
-0.257**
(2.08)
0.733**
(2.00)
5.734*
(1.94)
0.249*
(1.75)

0.016
(0.22)
-0.615***
(6.49)
-2.379**
(2.32)
0.018
(1.15)
-1.138***
(5.69)
-0.56**
(2.33)
0.317
(1.04)
1.483***
(9.38)
-2.317***
(4.46)
9.374***
(3.01)
0.600***
(3.47)

-0.114*
(1.71)
0.12*
(1.86)
-1.716
(1.52)
-0.045***
(3.38)
-0.059
(0.49)
0.225
(1.18)
-0.418
(1.52)
-0.099
(0.94)
0.817**
(2.26)
6.488**
(2.42)
0.173
(1.29)

-0.118
(1.54)
0.165**
(2.27)
-1.305
(0.99)
-0.034***
(3.05)
0.027
(0.21)
0.161
(0.76)
-0.538
(1.59)
-0.084
(0.62)
0.982**
(2.08)
9.048***
(3.92)
0.156
(0.99)

0.619***
(3.50)
-0.22***
(2.71)
0.116*
(1.90)
-0.274
(0.33)
-0.056***
(4.51)
-0.259
(1.68)
0.424**
(2.05)
-0.72***
(2.69)
-0.871***
(3.57)
0.670*
(1.79)
4.761
(1.68)
0.272**
(1.98)

0.015
(1.49)

-0.136***
(6.45)

0.017*
(1.70)

0.019*
(1.95)

0.017*
(1.7)

0.073***
(3.11)

0.076***
(3.23)

0.077***
(3.22)

0.074***
(3.14)

0.085***
(3.65)

-12.99***
(9.47)

-26.83***
(7.03)

-12.88***
(9.25)

-12.71***
(9.08)

-12.96***
(9.4)

-15.25***
(12.8)

-14.80***
(12.65)

-14.84***
(12.04)

-14.72***
(11.71)

-15.17***
(12.37)

5.838***
(9.03)
38
6,495
28,376.0

32.688***
(14.58)
38
6,495
6,360.2

5.658***
(8.66)
38
6,495
43,325.1

5.342***
(7.66)
38
6,495
13,403.8

5.762***
(8.83)
38
6,495
12,529.0

10.807***
(7.75)
36
2,599
27,974.7

10.217***
(7.22)
36
2,599
6,449.9

10.046***
(6.62)
36
2,599
15,708.8

9.833***
(6.93)
36
2,599
9,494.0

10.133***
(7.45)
36
2,599
13,115.9

MANAGES

Log GDP per
capita
Log
(Transaction
Value)
Acquirer’s
Leverage

(8)

0.425**
(2.38)

SECURED

French Legal
Origin
German Legal
Origin
Nordic Legal
Origin
MacroRisk

(7)

0.354
(4.56)

REORG

Log (Market
cap)
Flexibility to
fire
Accounting
disclosure
Emerging
Markets
Rule of Law

(6)
***

0.128
(2.45)

AUTOSTAY

SHRIGHTS

(5)

**

-0.18***
(3.32)
0.283***
(2.94)
-0.497
(0.67)
-0.035***
(3.23)
-0.453
(1.47)
0.186
(0.81)
-0.330
(1.09)
-1.118***
(3.65)
0.156
(0.35)
3.149
(1.15)
0.3**
(2.32)

-0.191***
(2.81)
0.25**
(2.13)
-1.108
(1.12)
-0.039***
(3.12)
-0.492
(1.44)
-0.209
(0.8)
-0.849**
(2.49)
-1.017***
(2.70)
0.289
(0.58)
5.129*
(1.7)
0.363**
(2.09)

-0.165**
(2.33)
0.205**
(2.05)
-1.496
(1.67)
-0.039***
(3.6)
-0.345
(0.99)
0.107
(0.44)
-0.579
(1.63)
-0.578
(1.32)
0.112
(0.25)
5.223**
(1.99)
0.211
(1.57)

-0.211***
(3.35)
0.081
(0.66)
-1.456
(1.21)
-0.036***
(3.45)
-0.84**
(2.31)
-0.145
(0.55)
-0.707**
(2.14)
-0.868*
(1.90)
-0.218
(0.48)
5.228*
(1.79)
0.222
(1.25)

1.466***
(5.25)
-0.357***
(5.81)
0.416***
(3.47)
1.86**
(2.16)
-0.048***
(5.23)
-0.157
(0.49)
0.909***
(3.15)
-0.774**
(2.57)
-2.025***
(6.15)
0.279
(0.57)
4.462
(1.6)
0.249**
(2.05)

57

Table 8. The effect of changes in Creditor rights
The creditor rights change dummy, ΔCRIGHTS, equals one after the year of change from a period of stronger creditor rights and zero otherwise,
and it equals zero after the year of change from a period of weaker creditor rights, and one otherwise. It equals zero for the control sample of no
change in creditor rights. Included are all merger and acquisitions where the acquired percentage shares is at least 20%, the transaction has a
disclosed value, and the time changes in creditor rights are available in Djankov et al. (2007). We exclude transactions where the acquirer is in the
financial industry (SIC header 6) or regulated industry (SIC headers 48 and 49). The sample period is 1994-2004. Models (1), (2) and (8) are
estimated by the probit method and the rest are estimated by OLS. The dummy variable to measure the probability of same-industry acquisition,
Pr(SAME), equals 1 when bidder and target are in the same industry. The dummy variable to measure the probability of an acquisition of highrecovery target by a low-recover acquirer, Pr(AL∩TH|TH), equals 1 when, among all acquisitions of target firms whose assets have high recovery
value, the bidder firm’s assets have low recovery value. For regression (2) only, we include all cross-country and within-country mergers that meet
the requirements above. The post-acquisition change in return on assets is dROA(k) = ROA(t+k) – ROA(t-1), where k = 1, 2, or 3, calculated for
each merger with available data, where t is the effective year of the merger. CAR is the cumulative abnormal returns on the acquirer stock from 3
days before the acquisition announcement to 3 days after it. Leverage is the ratio of total debt to total assets in book value. The t-statistics are in
parentheses. The standard errors are cluster-adjusted at the country level. Included (but not reported for brevity) are fixed effects for country, year
and industry (2-digit SIC code – acquirer’s industry for models (1) through (6)), following the difference-in-differences methodology of Bertrand,
Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004). Model (8) does not include industry fixed effects, in line with Table 7. *** , **, and * indicate significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
Part I. Mutivariate Analysis

Variable

ΔCRIGHTS c,t
Log (Transaction Value)

Pr(SameIndustry)

Pr(SameCountry)

dROA(1)

dROA(2)

dROA(3)

CAR
(t-3 to t+3)

Leverage

Prob(TH ∩
AL|TH)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.145***
(6.19)
0.028*
(2.52)

-0.213***
(2.83)
-0.07**
(2.22)

-0.042***
(5.78)
-0.002*
(1.75)

-0.051***
(9.22)
-0.002
(1.03)

-0.023***
(4.93)
-0.001*
(1.73)

-0.005**
(3.31)
-0.001
(1.07)

Tangibilityt-1

-

-

-

-

-

-

Log(assets, in US$ t-1

-

-

-

-

-

-

EBITDA/ Assetst-1

-

-

-

-

-

-

Country,
year,
industry
33,221

Country,
year,
industry
52,756

Country,
year,
industry
14,540

Country,
year,
industry
13,689

Country,
year,
industry
12,512

Country,
year,
industry
13,225

Fixed Effects
Observations

Part II: Details of changes
Country
Indonesia
Israel

-0.035**
(2.53)
0.174***
(9.83)
0.019***
(7.11)
-0.163***
(10.16)
Country,
year,
industry
36,237

Year of law change
1998
1995

Detail of change
Change to SECURED = 0
Change to AUTOSTAY = 0

Japan

2000 and 2002

2000: Change to SECURED = 0
2002: Change to AUTOSTAY = 1

Russia
Sweden

1998
1995

Thailand

1999

0.147
(1.08)
-0.057
(7.73)
Country,
year
6,495

1998: Change to MANAGES = 0.
Change to REORG = 0.
Change to REORG = 0.

58

Figure 1. Timeline of the model.

Type turns out
H>F
to be high

0.5
Management
type is not
revealed
(1-q-r)
p(y)

Continuation

y
0.5
q

1-p(y)

t=1

Type is high

Continuation

Management
type is
revealed

0
Failure to
reorganize

H>F

Liquidation
0.5

r
t=0

Type turns out 0 < F
to be low

0.5

Type is low
Manager
dismissed

L<F
Liquidation

L<F

Default and Reorganization/Liquidation

Manager chooses
the riskiness of the
leveraged firm, y.

The firm’s cashflow
is realised to be
high or low.

The firm has debt of
face value F
payable next
period.

There is default on
firm’s debt in low
state.

With probability r,
creditors of the firm fail
to reach any
agreement to
reorganize and firm is
liquidated.
Management suffers a
private cost of m.
Otherwise, managerial
type is investigated.

With probability q,
managerial type is
revealed during
investigation.
If type is low (probability
0.5), the firm is efficiently
liquidated and
management suffers a
private cost of m.
Otherwise, it is continued.

With remaining
probability (1-q-r),
management type
remains uncertain
and firm is continued.
If type turns out to be
high, the output is H.
Otherwise, it is 0.

59

.8

Figure 2. The share of same-industry mergers in a country, SAME, and creditor rights, CRIGHTS.
The fitted line represents the slope from a Tobit regression of the fraction of same industry mergers in a country on aconstant and
the creditor rights index. The slope coefficient is -0.043 with t = 3.94.

BRA

PER

.6

MEX
FRA

ESP
CHL
NOR
SWE
NLD
BEL

GRC

TUR
JPN
TWN

AUT
IDN
GBR
IND

NZL
DNK
DEU

ITA
ZAF
ISR

THA

.4

PHL

PRT
IRL
AUS
CAN
USA
CHE
ARG
FIN

HKG
SGP

KOR

.2

MYS

0

1

2
Creditor Rights

3

4

60

