                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      NATIONAL BORDERS, CONFLICT AND PEACE

                                          Enrico Spolaore

                                       Working Paper 15560
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15560


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2009




Prepared for the Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Conflict and Peace, edited by Michelle R.
Garfinkel and Stergios Skaperdas. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Enrico Spolaore. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
National Borders, Conflict and Peace
Enrico Spolaore
NBER Working Paper No. 15560
December 2009
JEL No. D74,F51,F59,H56

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper reviews the economics approach to conflict and national borders. The paper provides a
summary of ideas and concepts from the economics literature on the size of nations; illustrates them
within an analytical framework where populations engage in conflict over borders and resources, and
may form non-aggression pacts, military alliances, and political unions; and discusses extensions and
directions for further research.


Enrico Spolaore
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Braker Hall
8 Upper Campus Road
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
enrico.spolaore@tufts.edu
1        Introduction

Conflict and defense have historically played a central role in the determination of national borders.
Historians and political scientists have extensively studied "how wars made states, and vice versa"
(Tilly 1992, p. 67), emphasizing that "modern states were largely built as military enterprises"
(Colomer 2007, p. 33).1 Security concerns have influenced philosophical discussions of the ideal
size of a political system since classical times, when Plato wrote that "the number of citizens
must be suﬃcient to defend themselves against the injustice of their neighbors" (The Laws, Book
V).2 Machiavelli claimed that "the cause of the disunion of republics is usually idleness and peace;
the cause of union is fear and war" (Discourses on Livy, II, 2), echoing a view often referred to
as "Sallust’s Theorem" (Wood 1995; Evrigenis 2008) after the Roman historian Gaius Sallustius
Crispus, who linked the internal cohesion of the Roman Republic before the destruction of Chartage
to "fear of the enemy" (metus hostilis).
        In modern times, military threats and opportunities have been singled out as key factors in
the formation of political unions and federations (e.g., Riker 1964), such as the United States,
Switzerland, and Germany, whose borders, as Otto von Bismarck famously stated in 1862, were to
be decided "not by speeches and the decisions of majorities [...] but by iron and blood."
        In recent decades - especially after the end of the Cold War - dramatic breakups of countries
and increasing demand for separatism have renewed interest in the formation and redrawing of
national borders, not only among historians and political commentators, but also within the field
of political economics. A new analytical literature has been developed, providing formal models
where national borders are not taken as given, but are the endogenous outcomes of decisions by
agents who interact with each other while pursuing their goals under constraints. Contributions to
this literature include Alesina and Spolaore (1997, 2003), Alesina, Spolaore and Wacziarg (2000,
2005), Bolton and Roland (1997), Bordignon and Brusco (2001), Ellingsen (1998), Goyal and Staal
(2004), Le Breton and Weber (2003), and others; overviews are provided by Bolton, Roland and
Spolaore (1996) and Spolaore (2006).
        Several of these contributions have focused on peaceful border redrawing through voting or
unilateral secessions in the absence of conflict. A small but growing number of studies, however,

    1
        See also Bean (1973) and Tilly (1975). For a recent discussion of the literature on warfare and modern state
formation from a political-science perspective see Spruyt (2007).
    2
        The philosophical and political literature on the size of political systems is discussed in Dahl and Tufte (1973).




                                                              1
has begun to introduce conflict and security considerations explicitly in the theoretical framework,
therefore linking the economic literature on endogenous national borders to the expanding literature
on the economics of conflict and peace, which is the subject of this Handbook. In particular,
international conflict and defense are at the center of the analysis of national borders in Alesina
and Spolaore (2005, 2006) and Spolaore (2004), and are also modeled by Wittman (2000). A formal
analysis of civil conflict and secessions has been developed by Spolaore (2008).3
        This line of work is related to other areas of research, such as the formal study of conflict by
international-relations scholars (e.g., Powell 1999), and the economic analysis of military alliances,
pioneered by Olson and Zeckhauser (1966). However, unlike more traditional studies, which have
typically taken the identity of states engaging in conflict as given, a central objective of the new
political-economy literature on nations is to endogenize (explain) sovereign states themselves, and
to study how their number, size, and shape are aﬀected by conflict, defense and security.
        Section 2 overviews some key ideas and questions about the relation between conflict and the size
of nations.4 Section 3 presents a simplified model that illustrates decisions over military spending,
economies of scale in security, and incentives to form alliances and political unions. Section 4
discusses various topics on conflict and national borders in light of contributions from the political
economics literature. Section 5 comments on directions for further research.




2        Conflict, Defense, and the Size of Nations: an Overview


2.1        The Fundamental Trade-oﬀ


What determines the number and size of nations? From an economics perspective, a fruitful starting
point is the consideration of benefits and costs associated with a larger national size. A central
role for states is the supply of public goods to their citizens: a legal and justice system, security
and crime prevention, public health, protection against catastrophic events (such as earthquakes
and hurricanes), and so on. Providing public goods comes with economies of scale. Typically,

    3
        A related literature has focused on the implications of internal distributional conflict for the organization of
jurisdictions (e.g., Wärneryd, 1998).
    4
        In this chapter we use "nation" as equivalent to "sovereign state," as commonly understood in English when
speaking of international relations or the United Nations.



                                                             2
public goods, unlike private goods, are non-rival in consumption: each citizen can benefit from
them without reducing the benefits for other citizens. Even when the costs of publicly provided
goods go up with the size of population (say, because of congestion or increasing administrative
costs), some components of these costs are independent of the number of users. In general, publicly
provided goods are cheaper per person when more taxpayers pay for them. Empirically, the share of
government spending over total income is decreasing in population: states with smaller populations
tend to have proportionally larger governments (for a discussion, see Alesina and Spolaore, 2003,
chapter 10).
       Defense and security have historically been among the most important public goods provided
by governments. Because of economies of scale, in principle larger country can provide cheaper and
more eﬀective security to their citizens. Empirically, the relationship between defense spending and
country size is complex for various reasons, including the existence of international alliances and
the fact that some larger countries may provide defense for smaller countries, as the United States
within NATO. At the same time, larger, more powerful states may obtain additional economic and
political benefits from their leading position.5
       In summary, all things considered, the provision of public goods - including defense and security
- is associated with actual or potential benefits of scale.
       A larger size, however, comes with costs as well as benefits. Some of these costs may be due
to coordination and congestion problems that arise when states become larger. More importantly,
an expansion of national borders may raise political costs, stemming from higher heterogeneity in
larger communities. In particular, an expansion of national borders is likely to bring about more
heterogeneity of preferences for public policies and types of governments across diﬀerent groups
of citizens. As borders include more heterogeneous populations - with diﬀerent cultures, values,
norms, habits, languages, religions, ethnicities - disagreements over the fundamental characteristics
of the state are more likely to emerge and harder to reconcile. Being part of the same coun-
try implies sharing jointly-supplied public goods and policies in ways that cannot always satisfy
everybody’s preferences. At the same time, diversity may also generate direct economic benefits
through learning, specialization, and exchange of ideas. Successful societies manage to minimize
the political costs of heterogeneity while maximizing the benefits from a diverse pool of preferences,
skills, and endowments. Nonetheless, all other things being equal, heterogeneity of preferences over

   5
       A further complication arises if the returns from foreign aggression are also increasing in a country’s size - for
instance, in its capital stock, as in Thomson’s (1976) classic analysis of optimal defense spending and taxation.


                                                             3
government policies and political costs tend to increase as states become larger and expand their
borders.
   On balance, there is a trade-oﬀ between economies of scale and heterogeneity of preferences
over public policies. Such trade-oﬀ has played a central role in the economic literature on the size
of nations (e.g., in Alesina and Spolaore 1997, 2003; Le Breton and Weber 2003; Wittman 2000).
When economies of scale become more prominent compared to heterogeneity costs, larger political
systems are more likely to emerge. In contrast, a drop in the benefits from size or an increase in
heterogeneity costs will bring about political disintegration.
   This trade-oﬀ has immediate implications for the relation between conflict and national borders.
In a more bellicose world, when external threats loom large and security concerns are paramount,
larger and more centralized political unions have an advantage in terms of defense provision. Con-
versely, a reduction in international conflict, all other things being equal, will lower the incentives
to form larger political unions (Alesina and Spolaore 2005, 2006 and Spolaore, 2004).


2.2   A Few Questions

The trade-oﬀ between economies of scale in defense and heterogeneity costs provides a useful
framework to study the relationship between international conflict and the size of nations. However,
it is only the first step towards a theoretical and empirical exploration of this topic. The costs and
benefits of defense and military power are diﬃcult to model and elusive to measure. They depend
on strategic interactions among political actors within and across countries, and entail complex
relations with political, economic, and institutional variables. While several insights have been
gained on these issues, the analytical study of conflict, defense and national borders is only in
its infancy, and key questions have only recently begun to be addressed with the tools of modern
economic analysis. Here is a selective summary of these questions.

   (a) Military power, economies of scale in defense, alliances and political unions. Defense and
military power are not standard public goods. Their costs and benefits depend not only on their
provision within a given sovereign state, but also on other states’ supplies, and, more generally, on
strategic interactions within and across national borders. For example, small states can enter into
various forms of decentralized military alliances, or merge into a centralized political union. How do
economies of scale in defense and security diﬀer across diﬀerent institutional arrangements? How
does the possibility of forming decentralized alliances aﬀect the incentives for political unification?

                                                  4
   (b) Endogenous political disintegration and international conflict. While conflict and defense
aﬀect the number and size of nations, changes in national borders conversely influence the patterns
of conflict and defense. In the long run, conflict, defense, and national borders are all jointly-
determined endogenous variables, and the change of these variables over time must be studied
within a general equilibrium setting. For example, what happens to defense spending and observed
conflict following the breakup of larger political units, which perhaps occurred in direct response
to changes in the perceived importance of conflict and security?

   (c) Conflict, democracy, and openness: implications for the number and size of nations. The
costs and benefits of defense and military power may depend on democratic constraints and interna-
tional openness, as suggested by an extensive literature on the "liberal peace," which can be traced
back to Montesquieu (1748) and Kant (1795) (e.g., see Oneal and Russett, 1999). At the same time,
the literature on the formation and breakup of nations has stressed the role of variables such as
democratization and economic globalization, in addition to conflict and security. Nonetheless, the
links among conflict, democracy, openness and the size of nations remain relatively unexplored. Do
democratization, globalization and lower international conflict go hand in hand with the creation
of smaller states? Does the formation of larger political unions is associated with dictatorial rulers,
barriers to trade, and a more bellicose world? Could we have multiple equilibria in these variables?
How would societies transition from one equilibrium to the other over time?

   (d) Civil conflict and secessions. As mentioned above, while political integration may bring
about economies of scale in defense and better protection against external threats, an expansion
of borders also tends to raise heterogeneity costs within each country. An important question is
whether such heterogeneity is associated with a higher likelihood of civil conflict over domestic
policies, or even disagreement over borders themselves (e.g., separatist wars). A related question is
whether a reduction in international conflict may increase confrontation within each state. While
there is an extensive literature on civil and ethnic conflict, much work still needs to be done
to understand the links between civil conflict, external threats, separatism, and the endogenous
formation of nations.

   These questions will motivate the following sections. Some of the issues under (a) will be
illustrated within a simple model in Section 3, while the questions under (b), (c) and (d) will be
discussed with reference to the literature in Section 4.


                                                  5
3        Conflict, Alliances, and Political Unions

We now present a simple analytical framework to organize ideas and illustrate the basic logic of
military spending decisions, economies of scale in security, and incentives to form alliances and
political unions.



3.1        The Basic Setting


Consider a world with three homogeneous populations (, , and ) of equal size (normalized to
one). Each population is located at a vertex of an equilateral triangle of length equal to  (Figure
1). The segment  measures the territory located between each pair.  denotes the total amount
of territory controlled by each population , so that:

                                                    +  +  = 3                                                  (1)



                                             [INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE]



        The territory between each pair of populations  and  is valuable to them because it contains
resources (land and other inputs) that can be used by either  or  to produce output.6 Each unit
of territory produces one unit of output. However, in order to control some territory populations
must spend resources to build their military capabilities (weapons). Output can be used either for
consumption ( ) or to build weapons ( ). Hence, population  ’s consumption  is equal to the
territory it controls  minus its military spending  :7

                                                        =  −                                                    (2)

    6
        To keep the analysis simple, we assume that the territory located between populations  and  is of no value to
the the third population  6=   , or, equivalently, that population  is unable or unwilling to control any fraction of
territory between populations  and . Therefore, 0 ≤  ≤ 2 for  =   . An economic interpretaion of this
restriction is that production in each territory requires specific inappropriable inputs that only the local populations
possess. A diﬀerent interpretation is that the "territory" between two populations is a metaphor for a more general
set of "common issues" under dispute between those two populations, along the lines of the model in Spolaore and
Wacziarg (2009b).
    7
        Notice that all variables are in per capita terms, as population size is normalized to one.



                                                              6
In the presence of conflict and appropriation, the territory located between populations  and 
is divided between them in proportion to their military strength. Specifically, if population i’s
weapons are  and population ’s are  , population ’s share of territory will be

                                                                    
                                                 (   ) =                                                         (3)
                                                                   + 

 (   ) is an instance of a contest success function, increasing in ’s weapons  and decreasing
in ’s weapons  .  (   ) can be interpreted as the probability that population  would win
complete control over the territory, should a war erupt between  and . For simplicity, we assume
that no actual war occurs, but that the territory is divided "under the shadow of power": each
population controls a share of territory equal to what it could expect to win in case of war. In other
terms, when there is conflict and appropriation, the border between populations is determined by
their relative military power. For example, if population  has twice as many weapons as population
, it will control 23 of the territory between  and , while population  will control the remaining
                                                                                2
13, and the border between the two populations will be at a distance               from population  and
                                                                                 3
                
at a distance      from population .
                3
     This technology of conflict is a special case of a ratio contest success function in which population
                                               
’s probability of success is a function of        (Tullock, 1980).8 The function could be generalized
                                               
                                                                                              
to allow for a higher marginal impact of investment in weapons:  (   ) =                       ,with
                                                                                           + 
 ≥ 1. As shown by Skaperdas (1998) in a diﬀerent setting, the parameter  has implications for
alliance formation. In general, a higher  would strengthen the incentives to form alliances and
unions. Here we abstract from this eﬀect and assume  = 19
       How much territory will each population control? How much will each population consume?
We are now ready to consider equilibrium outcomes under diﬀerent institutional arrangements.
First, we derive equilibria when the three populations form three independent sovereign states, and

   8
       An alternative specification, also used in the formal literature, is the logistic or diﬀerence function, where popu-
lation ’s probability of success is a function of  −  . For discussions of alternative specifications see Hirshleifer
(1989) and Garfinkel and Skaperdas (2007).
   9
       In Skaperdas (1998)   1 is indeed necessary for the formation of stable alliances. In our setting this is not the
case, because of diﬀerent assumptions about conflict over resources between pairs of populations and institutional
characteristics of allliances and unions. Garfinkel (2004a, 2004b) also studies models of alliance formation and conflict
where stable alliances may form when  = 1. In her analyses, though, a crucial role is played by conflict over resource
redistribution within alliances. We will return to the issue of internal conflict at the end of this chapter and in the
next section.


                                                              7
each state acquires and defends its territory on its own. Then, we study how equilibria diﬀer under
various forms of cooperation, such as (a) a non-aggression pact between two states, (b) a military
alliance, and (c) a full political union.



3.2       Military Spending, Borders, and Consumption under Alternative Institu-
          tional Arrangements


Three independent states

       Assume that each population forms its own independent state. Each state  invests in its own
weapons  , taking the weapons of the other two states  and  as given. We assume that a state’s
military capabilities are used to set the borders with both enemies simultaneously.10 Each state 
chooses  to maximize its population’s consumption, given by

                                                          
                                       =            +         −                                              (4)
                                                +      + 

       The Nash-equilibrium levels of military spending are:

                                                                       
                                             =  =  =                                                   (5)
                                                                       2

In this symmetric equilibrium, all states are equally powerful, and each state obtains half a share
of the territory under dispute with each of its two neighbors. Hence, each population controls a
territory of size , produces  units of output, consumes half of those units, and uses the other
half to build weapons. In this equilibrium with three independent states consumption per capita is

                                                                  
                                                =   =  =                                                   (6)
                                                                      2

        Clearly, military spending is a net loss for each population, as it diverts valuable resources

  10
       This assumption is reasonable given that no actual wars take place in our model, but borders are set "under
the shadow of power." If borders were determined by actual wars, taking place simultaneously between all pairs of
states, we would have to specify how each state were to divide its military capabilities between its two fronts. In the
symmetric case of three independent states, each state would divide its weapons equally between the two fronts, and
the results would be unchanged. We will abstract from these complications in the rest of the analysis, and always
assume that a state’s military power can be used against all its enemies simultaneously (a form of economies of scope
in defense).




                                                          8
from consumption. The three populations would be better oﬀ if they could commit to full disar-
mament ( =  =  = 0), while dividing the world territory equally and peacefully among
themselves. Then, they would obtain the same land distribution as they get under conflict, but
                                                  
enjoy twice as much consumption ( rather than ). Unfortunately, this first-best outcome is
                                                   2
not a Nash equilibrium: in the absence of some external commitment technology, the three states
cannot credibly commit to global (multilateral) disarmament. In the rest of the chapter we will
rule out any multilateral cooperation, but will consider diﬀerent scenarios for bilateral cooperation.

   Non-aggression pact

   Consider the possibility of a credible non-aggression pact between two states (to fix ideas, 
and ). That is, suppose that only states  and  can credibly commit not to use force against
each other, and to divide the territory located between them peacefully and equally (so that each
             
will obtain ). At the same time, they continue to use their individual military capabilities to set
             2
territorial disputes with the third state (). In other words,  and  can form a non-aggression
pact, but not an active military alliance (each is on its own against state ). Then, each state
 =   chooses its  to maximize:

                                                  
                                     =     +         −                                       (7)
                                           2     + 

while state  maximizes:

                                                  
                               =            +         −                                     (8)
                                        +      + 

The Nash-equilibrium levels of weapons are:


                                                           2
                                          =  =                                            (9)
                                                            9

and
                                                      4
                                              =                                              (10)
                                                       9
In equilibrium all three states spend less on weapons than they would have in the absence of this
bilateral non-aggression pact. Not surprisingly, the reduction is especially dramatic for  and :
                                                    
without the pact each of them would have spent         in defense (half of their output), rather than
                                                    2
2
     In this equilibrium, interestingly,  and  are weaker than , and, as a result, each of them
 9
controls less territory than in the previous equilibrium ( has twice as many weapons as each of

                                                  9
the two other states, and hence it controls 23 of the territory located between  and , and 23 of
the territory between  and ) On net, the pact is a good deal for  and . The loss of territory
to  is more than oﬀset by the gain in terms of lower military spending, and consumption in the
two countries is higher than it would be without the pact:11

                                             2    11           
                               =   =         + −   =        =   =                                          (11)
                                               2  3  9    18               2



       In sum, a bilateral non-aggression pact allows significant net savings in defense spending, al-
though at the cost of less eﬀective protection against external aggression.

       Military alliance

       We now consider the case when, in addition to entering a non-aggression pact with each other,
 and  can credibly commit to join forces against  while still maintaining their independence.12
Specifically, we suppose that (i) military spending remains decentralized across states: each state
autonomously decides its own level of military spending and pays for it, but (ii) control over territory
is determined by the aggregate military power of the alliance relative to the third state. Therefore:
                                                      + 
                                         =     +              −                                                (12)
                                               2     +  + 
                                                      + 
                                        =     +              −                                                 (13)
                                              2     +  + 
                                                       
                                           = 2              −                                                  (14)
                                                   +  + 
Each state continues to choose its weapons taking the weapons of the other two states as given. In
particular, each ally takes the other ally’s weapons as given, and does not internalize the benefits
that its own weapons provide to the other ally. Weapons in equilibrium are
                                                                      
                                                    =  =                                                    (15)
                                                                      9
                                                                 4
                                                        =                                                       (16)
                                                                  9
  11
     also gains when  and  form a non-aggression pact between themselves: it obtains a larger extent of territory
                                                                           4          
while also saving in weapons relative to the previous equilibrium. ( =      = ).
                                                                            9           2
  12
       Here we abstract from the possibility that the two states can commit to join forces against a third state, but are
unable to commit not to attack each other. The issue of intra-alliance (or, later, intra-state) conflict is an important
one, and we will turn to it later.


                                                            10
                                                                              2
The aggregate level of military spending within an alliance ( +  =       ) is the same as the
                                                                               9

sum of the weapons of the two states when they only form a non-aggression pact. Hence, a military
alliance provides the same protection against  that each state provided for itself when it was part
of a mere non-aggression pact. However, such military power is now obtained with a lower level of
military spending per capita. This is a clear instance of economies of scale in defense and security.
Consequently, consumption is higher in an active military alliance than in a non-aggression pact:

                                     13           11
                        =   =     + − =        =   =                                     (17)
                                    2  3 9   18                18

Notwithstanding such economies of scale, the alliance still provides only imperfect protection against
. Even though each state can rely on the size and resources of two populations, aggregate military
power is "undersupplied." This is an example of the well-known issue of free riding within decen-
tralized military alliances, as each member fails to internalize the overall benefits that its military
spending provides to the whole alliance (Olson and Zeckhauser, 1966). In order to internalize the
full benefits and costs of military spending, the two populations would have to form a centralized
political union. We consider such an institutional arrangement next.

   Political union

   Finally, suppose that populations  and  form a full political union, where decisions over
military spending are centralized. The union’s military capabilities  are decided jointly by the
two populations in order to maximize their aggregate consumption, and their costs are shared
equally within the union. That is,  is chosen to maximize:

                                                    
                                +  = 2[     +         ] −                                  (18)
                                              2     + 

while state  maximizes:
                                                 
                                      = 2           −                                        (19)
                                                + 
The Nash-equilibrium outcomes are
                                                         
                                           ∗ = ∗ =                                            (20)
                                                         2
Now the whole union controls a territory of size 2 (all territory between  and , half the territory
between  and , and half the territory between  and ). This means that the union provides
as much protection against foreign aggression as an independent state (in the absence of a non-
aggression pact or a decentralized alliance). But now this protection is provided at half the cost

                                                  11
                                             
per capita:     =    rather than  =  = If the two populations share costs and benefits
             2    4                             2
from military power equally, each population consumes

                                                                  3
                                              =   =−            =                                              (21)
                                                                   4    4
                               
This level of consumption   =   is higher than in any of the other three arrangements (in
contrast, population ’s consumption is the same as in the case when it is one of three fully
independent states).13
       In sum, in this setting a political union provides cheaper protection to its citizens than they
would get from a smaller sovereign state, and better protection than they would get from a decen-
tralized alliance.



3.3       Trade-oﬀ between Benefits of Scale in Defense and Heterogeneity Costs


We have seen that, in the presence of conflict and appropriation, cooperation in security reduces
the need for expensive military capabilities and/or spreads their costs over a larger number of
people. The largest gains are obtained by forming a full political union, while more modest gains
are associated with a non-aggression pact or a decentralized alliance. Nonetheless, even though a
centralized defense is the most eﬀective form of protection against external threats, these defense
benefits may not come for free. As we have mentioned in Section 2, at the center of the literature
on endogenous national borders is the idea that forming a political union may entail substantial
political costs. When they form a political union, populations  and  may face a loss of utility
from sharing a common government, foreign policy, tax system, and so on, insofar as preferences
over public policies diﬀer across the two populations. In general, whether a political union is formed

  13
       The fact that a political union provides a higher level of consumption to its members relative to the other
arrangements should not be viewed as a necessary implication of the definition of a political union. Even though the
political union indeed maximizes aggregate consumption of its members, it takes the behavior of state  as given,
and, therefore, does not fully internalizes the eﬀects of its decisions over ’s behavior. In principle, a union could end
up lowering its members consumption (relative to alternative arrangements) if state  were to react to the union’s
formation by increasing its military spending to such an extent that it would oﬀset the other two populations’ gains
from forming a union. This could happen, for instance, if  were to obtain much higher gains from conflict than
either  or  - in other words, if the gains from conflict were to be greatly asymmetric across populations. We do
not pursue these alternative specifications here.




                                                           12
will depend on the trade-oﬀ between economies of scale in defense and heterogeneity costs. Suppose
that utility for each population  is
                                                      =  +                                                    (22)

where  is private consumption (as before), and  is the utility from the services of a public
good ("the government"). When population  is politically independent, it can choose its favored
type of government, providing utility  . When forming a union with the other population, each
population must compromise and accept a less preferred type of government, providing utility
   .14 The diﬀerence between  and  captures heterogeneity costs :

                                                      ≡  −                                                     (23)

             In equilibrium, total utility in a union is
                                                      3        3
                                      =  =       +  =    +  −                                          (24)
                                                       4         4
while utility in the case of full independence is
                                                                 
                                                 =  =      +                                              (25)
                                                                 4
When non-aggression pacts and decentralized alliances are not available, and the only choice avail-

able to the two populations is between full independence and political union, a union will be formed
if and only if  =    =  - i.e., if and only if the heterogeneity costs are smaller than
the net gains from political unification in terms of higher consumption:15
                                                                       
                                                    −  =                                                  (26)
                                                                       4
By contrast, if we assume that the two populations can choose whether to form a political union
or a decentralized alliance, the condition for a political union becomes much more stringent:16
  14
       In the literature on endogneous borders preferences over diﬀerent types of government have often been given a
spatial interpretation (for a discussion see Alesina and Spolaore, 2003, chapters 2 and 3; and Spolaore, 2006). For
example, within our model we could assume that each population prefers to locate the state’s "capital" as close as
possible to its own vertex ( or ), and that the capital of a political union is located at its geographical center, half
way between  and .
  15
       For simplicty, we abstract from other benefits from political unions, such as economies of scale in the provision
of non-defense public goods.  could re-interpreted as heterogeneity costs net of those additional benefits.
  16
       We abstact from heterogeneity costs in decentralized alliances. In principle, political costs may also arise in a
decentralized alliance, but they are likely to be much smaller, as each population keeps full independence, chooses its
weapons autonomously, and pays for them.


                                                            13
                                                            
                                           −  =                                        (27)
                                                            36
This implies that international changes that facilitate the formation of decentralized alliances will
bring about the breakup of political unions with higher heterogeneity costs (high ) or less at stake
in terms of defense and security (low ). In contrast, political unions with lower heterogeneity costs
(low ) or more at stake in case of conflict (high ) will stick together even when decentralized
alliances become feasible.

   Heterogeneity costs and domestic conflict

   A very important issue is the extent to which alliances or political unions actually succeed at
eliminating conflict among their own members. In the analysis above we have abstracted from
the possibility that populations may continue to use military force against each other even after
they join an alliance or a political union. Clearly, the net benefits from forming a union would be
aﬀected if populations had to invest additional valuable resources to aﬀect domestic outcomes in
their favor. Such costs from internal conflict over resources or public policies could be viewed as
additional heterogeneity costs from forming a union. For example, suppose that government policies
within the political union are decided by a "domestic contest" between the two populations, where
population  invests  units of output to build its own domestic-conflict capabilities, while 
                                                                
invests  , and ’s probability of winning the contest is             . Assume that each population
                                                              + 
obtains utility  if it wins the contest, but utility  −2 if the other population wins the contest
and imposes its own preferred government policies. If no resources are invested in domestic-conflict
capabilities by either population, each population has a 12 chance to have its preferred policies
chosen, and, in expectation, it obtains utility from government service equal to  =  −. Then,
in the absence of domestic-conflict activities, the overall utility from a political union is

                                                     3
                                      =  =      +  −                                  (28)
                                                      4

as in the analysis above, when we assumed no domestic conflict. In contrast, when both populations
invest in domestic-conflict capabilities, overall utility will be lower, because of lower consumption.
Each population within the union maximizes

                                                                3
                       =            + (1 −         )( − 2) +    −                       (29)
                              +             +                4



                                                  14
which implies equilibrium investment in domestic-conflict capabilities equal to

                                            ∗    ∗       
                                            =  =                                              (30)
                                                         2
Hence, overall utility in a political union with domestic conflict is
                                                      3        3
                                   =  =      +  −                                   (31)
                                                       4         2
    That is, domestic conflict multiplies the losses from heterogeneity. In our example, heterogeneity
                                                                              3
costs equal to  in the absence of domestic conflict become 50% larger (         ) as a consequence of
                                                                               2
domestic conflict. This implies that, for a given level of preference heterogeneity, a political union
subject to internal conflict would be formed only for higher returns from international military
power (in our setting, a higher ).
    In sum, both international conflict and domestic conflict aﬀect the incentives to form a political
union. To keep things simple, we have modeled the two eﬀects separately: the extent of domestic
conflict is not directly influenced by the extent of international conflict, and vice versa. In more
complex settings, though, a larger external threat may directly aﬀect the extent of internal conflict
within a political union. More generally, in this section we have illustrated the logic of the trade-oﬀ
between economies of scale in security and heterogeneity costs within a very simple framework,
abstracting from several variables and channels that may aﬀect the relation between conflict and
national borders. We will discuss some of those eﬀects and extensions in the rest of this chapter.



4     The Political Economics of Conflict, Peace and National Bor-
      ders

In this section we discuss the connections between conflict and national borders in light of recent
political-economy contributions. In particular, we consider analyses that have focused on systemic
eﬀects when conflict and national borders are determined endogenously; the role of democratization
and international economic integration; and the political economy of civil conflict and secessions.



4.1   International Conflict and the Number and Size of Nations


The relationship between international conflict and national borders is studied by Alesina and
Spolaore (2005, 2006). In those papers the equilibrium number and size of nations is influenced by

                                                  15
the need for government to protect the interests of its citizens in a bellicose world. Larger national
states emerge when national military power is more important in the settlement of international
disputes. In contrast, a reduction in the importance of international conflict lowers the incentives
to form larger political unions, and brings about the formation of smaller, more numerous states.
   Nonetheless, a decrease in the importance of military force may not reduce the total number
of violent conflicts in the world. When borders are formed endogenously, a lower role for defense
and security, by bringing about the creation of more numerous states, can paradoxically increase
the number of observed instances of international conflict in the world. This is because, even if the
use of force is less likely in each specific international dispute, the higher number of states raises
the probability that some of those states may engage in conflict with each other.
   Alesina and Spolaore (2006) show that a lower probability of having to use force in international
relations increases the number of nations in equilibrium, and can lead to an increase in the number
of international interactions that are resolved by force. Whether the total number of international
conflicts increases or decreases will depend on the average size of nations before political disintegra-
tion. The actual number of international conflicts will decrease only if the average size of nations
before the breakup is already suﬃciently small. In contrast, the breakup of larger political unions
tends to be associated with an increase in the number of observed conflicts. A similar eﬀect is
derived for defense spending per capita, which may increase in a world of smaller countries even as
military power becomes less important in the settling of international disputes, therefore reducing
or even eliminating a "peace dividend" in terms of lower defense spending per capita.
   Alesina and Spolaore (2005) study a more complex setting in which states may engage in
open wars, which entail direct costs in terms of havoc and destruction, in addition to the costs
of weapons, or may settle international disputes through peaceful bargaining, where each state’s
bargaining position depends on its relative investment in military capabilities. Diﬀerent regions
may choose to remain independent or to join their neighbors in centralized political unions. In
equilibrium, the probability that wars occur and the returns to defense spending are endogenously
determined. Improvements in the enforcement of national control rights over resources will reduce
the need for defense and force, and may therefore cause breakups of nations, possibly leading to
more wars in equilibrium.



4.2   Conflict, Democracy, and National Borders



                                                  16
The connection between democracy and conflict is at the center of an extensive literature in in-
ternational relations and political economy. Specifically, as already mentioned in Section 2, this
relation is part of the liberal peace view that democracy and trade should reduce the risk of inter-
national conflict. Nonetheless, the links among democratization, conflict, and the size of nations
are relatively unexplored.
       The trade-oﬀ between costs and benefits of national size depends not only on the degree of
heterogeneity of preferences but also on the political regime through which preferences are turned
into policies. Rent-seeking dictators that are less concerned with the preferences of their subjects
may pursue expansionary policies leading to the formation of ineﬃciently large countries and em-
pires. In contrast, democratization raises the importance of citizens’ diverse preferences over public
policies, therefore leading to more demand for political autonomy and independence (Alesina and
Spolaore, 1997).17
       In addition, as documented in the vast literature on the "democratic peace," dictators tend to
be more willing than democratic governments to engage in military conflict against their neighbors
(for example, see Oneal and Russett 1999, Bueno de Mesquita et al. 1999, and, for a critical view,
Gowa 2000). Then, democratization may lead to secessions and formation of smaller countries for
two reasons: because it raises the importance of heterogeneity costs, and because it reduces the
benefits from military power.
       An original theory of the shape and size of nations in a world of rent-seeking Leviathans was
provided by David Friedman (1977), who argued that national borders in such a world would max-
imize the wealth of rulers. Alesina and Spolaore (1997), in their formal analysis of endogenous
national borders, compare democratic outcomes (when borders are determined by majority voting)
with equilibrium outcomes when the number and size of nations is determined by Leviathans who
maximize their rents (as in Friedman’s theory).18 In Alesina and Spolaore’s framework Leviathans
face a "no-insurrection" constraint: in order to continue their rule, Leviathans must maintain a
fraction  of the population above a minimum level of welfare. The parameter  can be interpreted
as a measure of democratic responsiveness. An undemocratic dictator can ignore the preferences
of most subjects (  12). As  increases, Leviathans become more concerned with larger sec-

  17
       For a discussion of the relation between democratization and the size of countries see also Lake and O’Mahony
(2004).
  18
       Economic analyses of the expansion of empires were also provided by Findlay (1996) and Grossman and Mendoza
(2004).



                                                          17
tors of the populations, and gain relatively smaller rents when they extend borders, because they
must compensate a larger fraction of the population for higher heterogeneity costs. In general,
democratization (a higher ) will be associated with smaller states in a world of rent-maximizing
Leviathans. Alesina and Spolaore (2003, chapter 7, and 2006) have extended this analysis to study
how democratic constraints interact with international conflict in a world of Leviathans, and have
shown that democratization has a smaller eﬀect on borders at higher levels of conflict, while conflict
has a smaller eﬀect on borders at higher levels of democracy. In other words, in a very bellicose
world democratization is less important in reducing the size of nations, while in a more democratic
world, international conflict is less important in determining national borders.



4.3   International Openness, Conflict and Peace, and Political Disintegration


The relation between international openness and national size has received significant attention
in the literature. Less attention though has been given to the connection between openness and
national borders in a world of conflict and appropriation, when conflict, trade and borders are all
endogenous variables and aﬀect each other in equilibrium.
   Analyses of the size of nations have pointed out that the trade-oﬀ between benefits and costs
of national size is also a function of the degree of international economic integration (Alesina
and Spolaore 1997, 2003; Alesina, Spolaore and Wacziarg 2000, 2005; see also Wittman 2000 and
Hiscox 2003). Relevant economic size may or may not coincide with the political size of a state
as defined by its national borders. Larger states mean larger domestic markets when political
borders imply barriers to international exchange. In contrast, market size and political size would
be uncorrelated in a world of perfect free trade in which political borders imposed no costs on
international transactions. If market size matters for economic performance, small countries can
prosper in a world of free trade, while a large size is more important economically in a world
of protectionism. Empirically, the eﬀect of size on economic performance tends to be higher for
countries that are less open, and the eﬀect of openness is much larger for smaller countries (Alesina,
Spolaore and Wacziarg 2000, 2005; Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2005). As international economic
integration increases, the benefits of a large national size are reduced, and political disintegration
becomes less costly. Conversely, smaller countries tend to benefit from more international openness.
Therefore, economic integration and political disintegration go hand in hand (Alesina, Spolaore and
Wacziarg, 2000).

                                                 18
   As in the case of democratization, an additional eﬀect of international trade on the incentives
to form larger nations emerges if economic integration also reduces international conflict between
trading partners, as argued by the supporters of the liberal peace hypothesis (economic contribu-
tions on the empirics of trade and conflict include, for instance, Polacheck 1980 and Martin, Mayer
and Thoenig 2008).
   A study of the interconnections among economic integration, international conflict, and the size
of nations is provided in Spolaore (2004). When conflict interacts with trade, multiple equilibria
in conflict, openness and size of political units are possible. Other things being equal, smaller
countries tend to be more open and less likely to engage in conflict. At the same time, in a world
of high openness and low conflict, political size will matter less, therefore justifying smaller states
in equilibrium. In another equilibrium, though, the world could be formed by larger political units,
with less international economic integration and a more prominent use of force in the resolution
of international disputes. In such a world of higher conflict and more protectionism, there would
be higher benefits associated with larger domestic markets and economies of scale in defense and
security. This, in turn, will induce people to form larger political units in equilibrium. Then,
for given fundamentals in terms of productive and conflict technology and preferences, alternative
geopolitical outcomes are possible. In more recent decades, the world has moved towards higher
political decentralization, relatively lower international conflict, and higher international economic
integration. However, this analysis suggests that this same world, with the same fundamentals,
could take a diﬀerent path, with fewer political, military and economic blocs, less open and more
hostile to each other. In sum, the study of endogenous national borders suggests that either devel-
opment could be self-fulfilling, and that international coordination of strategies and expectations
may play a crucial role in the determination of long-run outcomes.



4.4   Civil Conflict, External Threats, and Secessions


Civil and ethnic conflicts have been extensively studied by sociologists and political scientists (e.g.,
Horowitz 1985; Fearon and Laitin 2003) and, increasingly, by economists (e.g., Collier 2001; Mon-
talvo and Reynal-Querol 2005). While most of these studies consider conflict within given borders,
a few have explicitly focused on ethnic conflict, reconfiguration of borders, and political partitions.
In particular, Sambanis (2000) finds that, in general, partitions do not seem to prevent recurrence
of ethnic war, and writes that "[e]ven if this solution reduces the incidence of internal war, it will al-

                                                   19
most certainly increase the incidence of international war," an observation which is consistent with
the predictions of the models of international conflict discussed above. For a general discussion
from an international-relations perspective see also Fearon (2004). In addition, some researchers
have begun to investigate the eﬀects of post-conflict partition on economic and policy outcomes,
including the provision of public goods; for instance, Swee (2009) studies the eﬀects of the partition
which ended the Bosnian War on the post-war local provision of schooling.
       An issue that is especially relevant from the perspective of this chapter is the relation between
external threats and internal national cohesion. As mentioned in the Introduction, the idea that
conflict with foreigners reduces or eliminates domestic conflict has a long historical pedigree, going
back to classical times.19 Does a higher likelihood of conflict with foreign enemies reduce the extent
of domestic conflict? If it does, through what mechanisms? More broadly, what are the implications
of the relations between international conflict, civil conflict, and the formation of alliances and
political unions? Analyses of alliance formation in formal models of conflict and appropriation
(both within and across alliances) are provided by Garfinkel (2004a, 2004b), who also studies the
relation between external threats and domestic conflict (Garfinkel 2004c). A theoretical analysis of
the interaction between inter—group and intra-group conflict is provided by Münster (2007).
       A contribution more specifically focused on endogenous national formation in the presence of
civil conflict is Spolaore (2008), who provides a formal analysis of borders when secessions are the
direct outcome of civil conflict between two regions within a unified country. Spending on civil-
conflict capabilities and the probability of secession are endogenous variables, which depend on (a)
the incentives to secede and (b) the incentives to oppose secession attempts. Such incentives, in
turn, depend on our familiar set of factors: heterogeneity costs, economies of scale in the provision
of public goods, and the relative size of the two regions (a larger region, or "center" and a smaller
region, or "periphery"). In particular, Spolaore (2008) shows that separatist conflict tends to
be more intense when the two regions are of roughly equal size, consistently with the empirical
literature on civil and ethnic conflict (e.g., see Horowitz 1985 and Collier 2001). In this context,
external threats do not necessarily reduce the intensity of separatist conflict within a country.
While external threats reduce the periphery’s incentives to secede, they also strengthens the center’s

  19
       For example, as already mentioned, For example, Sallust in The War with Jugurtha wrote: "before the destruction
of Carthage the people and senate of Rome together governed the republic peacefully and with moderation. There
was no strife among the citizens either for glory or for power; fear of the enemy (metus hostilis) preserved the good
morals of the state." (cited in Wood 1995, p. 177; see also Evrigenis 2008).



                                                           20
incentives to resist the periphery’s secession. This eﬀect may lead to more diversion of resources
towards civil conflict in the aggregate. Finally, the possibility of civil conflict over government
policies after borders have been determined (as in the stylized model at the end of Section 3)
reduces both the incentives to secede in the smaller region and the benefits from union in the
larger region. In fact, the perspective of civil conflict over government policies may even induce
a "secession of the center." This is consistent with the general point that civil conflict tends to
magnify heterogeneity costs and to increase the probability of secessions.




5         Directions for Further Research

An economics approach to conflict, peace and national borders provides insights that complement
the understanding obtained from more traditional historical and political studies. Part of the value
added from formal economic analysis is the ability to model complex decisions and interactions in
relatively simple and stark ways, highlighting the logic of key mechanisms and eﬀects. In this spirit,
most of the political-economy analyses have been conducted using stylized theoretical models.
         A priority now is to bring these hypotheses and insights to the data, and link the theoretical
framework more closely with the historical record. This is not an easy step, given the diﬃculty
of collecting the relevant data and, perhaps more importantly, of identifying causal relations when
almost every key variable is endogenous. Systematic empirical analyses of the connections between
conflict and endogenous national borders are still to be developed, building on the vast empirical
literature on the determinants of conflict and wars.
         An especially diﬃcult task is to measure relevant heterogeneity of preferences and character-
istics across individuals, regions, and populations. Valuable information is provided by measures
of ethnolinguistic fractionalization, introduced in the economic literature by Mauro (1995), but
such variables proxy only imperfectly for the extent and intensity of preference heterogeneity that
are likely to aﬀect the determination of national borders.20 More recent economic contributions
have considered direct measures of long-term cultural and historical distances across populations.
Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009a) have introduced a novel way to measure the eﬀects of long-term cul-
tural and historical relatedness on economic outcomes, by exploiting the information from genetic
distance among human populations. Desmet et al. (2007) have provided an interesting empirical

    20
         For a recent theoretical and empirical analysis of the origins of ethnolinguistic diversity see Michalopoulos (2008).


                                                               21
analysis of the connection between genetic distance and cultural distance, measured by diﬀerent
answers to a series of questions from the World Value Survey, and have argued that such measures
can be used as proxies for preference heterogeneity, and hence can shed insights on the stability of
national borders within Europe.
   A recent empirical contribution directly focused on the determinants of conflict and wars is
Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009b), who show that populations that are more closely related genetically
- and hence, on average, culturally and historically - are more likely to engage in interstate conflict
and wars, even after controlling for a wide range of geographic measures, measures of linguistic and
religious distance, and other factors that aﬀect interstate conflict, including trade and democracy.
These findings as consistent with a theoretical framework in which the degree of relatedness between
populations has a positive eﬀect on their conflict propensities because closely related populations,
on average, tend to share common traits and preferences, to interact with each other more, and to
care about a larger set of common issues. Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009b) also document that (i) the
eﬀect of relatedness are robust to controlling for trade and democracy variables, and (ii) the eﬀects of
trade and democracy on conflict hold even after controlling for relatedness. These estimates provide
evidence against the premise that closely related populations fight less with each other, and show
that the pacifying eﬀects of bilateral trade and democracy survive when controlling for measures of
historical and cultural relatedness. This line of investigation may have implications for the relation
between civil conflict and heterogeneity within countries. More generally, the availability of these
novel measures of long-term relatedness, and the emerging evidence of robust links between such
measures and economic and political outcomes (including conflict and war), point to a promising
area for future research, with the potential to illuminate several issues and questions discussed
in this chapter. An especially relevant extension would be to study the determinants and eﬀects
of conflict - both within and across states - taking into account not only how relatedness aﬀects
conflict, but also how conflict and relatedness together aﬀect the endogenous formation of national
borders, and vice versa.
   In sum, only the very first steps have been taken towards a systematic theoretical and empirical
analysis of conflict, peace and national borders from an economics perspective. This whole set of
topics constitutes a fascinating and promising area for future research.




                                                  22
   References

   Alesina, A. and E. Spolaore (1997). On the number and size of nations. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112(4): 1027-1056

   Alesina, A. and E. Spolaore (2003). The Size of Nations. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA

   Alesina, A. and E. Spolaore (2005). War, peace and the size of countries. Journal of Public
Economics 89(7): 1333-1354

   Alesina, A. and E. Spolaore (2006). Conflict, defense spending, and the number of nations.
European Economic Review 50(1): 91-120
   Alesina, A., E. Spolaore and R. Wacziarg (2000). Economic integration and political disinte-
gration. American Economic Review 90(5): 1276-1296

   Alesina, A., E. Spolaore and R. Wacziarg (2005). Trade, growth, and the size of countries. In
P. Aghion and S. Durlauf (eds) Handbook of Economic Growth. North Holland, Amsterdam

   Bean, R. (1973), War and the birth of the nation state, Journal ofEconomic History, 33: 203-21,
   Bolton, P. and G. Roland (1997). The breakups of nations: a political economy analysis.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4): 1057-89

   Bolton, P., G. Roland and E. Spolaore (1996). Economic theories of the breakup and integration
of nations. European Economic Review, 40: 697-705.

   Bordignon, M. and S. Brusco (2001). Optimal secession rules. European Economic Review, 45:
1811-34

   Bueno de Mesquita, B., J. D. Morrow, R. M. Siverson, A. Smith (1999). An institutional
explanation of the democratic peace. American Political Science Review, 93 (4): 791-807.

   Collier, P. (2001). The economic causes of civil conflict and their implications for policy. In: C.
A. Crocker, F. O. Hampson, and P. R. Aall (eds.) Turbulent Peace: The Challenges of Managing
International Conflict. U.S. Institute of Peace Press, Washington D.C

   Colomer, J. M. (2007). Great Empires, Small Nations. The Uncertain Future of the Sovereign
State. New York: Routledge.

   Dahl, R.A. and E.R. Tufte (1973). Size and Democracy, Stanford: Stanford University Press.

   Desmet, K., M. Le Breton, I. Ortuno-Ortin and S. Weber (2006). Nation formation and genetic
diversity. CEPR Discussion Paper 5918, November.



                                                 23
   Ellingsen, T. (1998). Externalities and internalities: A model of political integration. Journal
of Public Economics 68(2): 251-68

   Evrigenis, I. (2008). Fear of Enemies and Collective Action. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

   Fearon, J. (2004). Separatist wars, partition, and world order. Security Studies, 3(4): 394-415

   Fearon, J. and D. Laitin (2003). Ethnicity, insurgency, and civil war. American Political Science
Review 97(1): 75-90

   Findlay, R. (1996). Towards a model of territorial expansion and the limits of empires. In M.
Garfinkel and S. Skaperdas (eds.) The Political Economy of Conflict and Appropriation. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge UK

   Friedman, D. (1977). A theory of the size and shape of nations. Journal of Political Economy
85: 59-77.

   Garfinkel, M. R. (2004a). Stable alliance formation in distributional conflict. European Journal
of Political Economy 20: 829-852

   Garfinkel, M. R. (2004b). On the stable formation of groups: Managing the conflict within.
Conflict Management and Peace Science 21: 43-68
   Garfinkel, M. R. (2004c). Global threats and the domestic struggle for power. European Journal
of Political Economy 20: 495-508

   Garfinkel, M. R. and S. Skaperdas (2007). Economics of conflict: An overview. In K. Hartley
and T. Sandler (eds) Handbook of Defense Economics, Volume 2, North Holland, Amsterdam.

   Goyal, S. ad K. Staal (2004). The political economy of regionalism. European Economic Review
48: 563—593

   Gowa, J. (2000), Ballots and Bullets: The Elusive Democratic Peace, Princeton University
Press, Princeton.

   Grossman, H.I. and J. Mendoza (2004). Annexation or conquest? The building of the Roman
Empire. Mimeo, Brown University.

   Hiscox, M. (2003) Political integration and disintegration in the global economy. In: M. Kahler
and D. Lake (eds) Globalizing Authority. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ

   Hirshleifer, J. (1989) Conflict and rent-seeking success functions: Ratio versus diﬀerence models
of relative success. Public Choice 63: 101-112


                                                 24
   Horowitz, D .L. (1985) Ethnic Groups in Conflict. University of California Press, Berkeley, CA

   Kant, I. (1795). Toward Perpetual Peace, New Haven: Yale University Press, 2006.
   Lake, D. and A. O’Mahony (2004) The incredible shrinking state: explaining the territorial size
of countries. Journal of Conflict Resolution 48(5): 699-722

   LeBreton, M. and S. Weber (2003), The Art of making everybody happy: how to prevent a
secession. IMF Staﬀ Papers 50(3): 403-435

   Martin, P., T. Mayer and M. Thoening (2008). Made trade not war? Review of Economic
Studies, 75: 865-900.

   Mauro, P. (1995) Corruption and growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 110(3): 681-712,

   Michalopoulos, S. (2008). The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity. Theory and Evidence.
Discussion paper no 0725, Tufts University.

   Montalvo J. G. and M. Reynal-Querol (2005). Ethnic polarization, potential conflict and civil
war. American Economic Review, 95(3): 796-816

   Montesquieu, C. de (1748), The Spirit of the Laws, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1989.

   Münster, J. (2007). Simultaneous inter- and intra-group conflicts. Economic Theory, 32(2):
333-352

   Olson, M. and R. Zeckhauser (1966). An economic theory of alliances, Review of Economics
and Statistics, 48, 266-79.

   Oneal, J. R. and B. M. Russett (1999). The Kantian peace: the pacific benefits of democracy,
interdependence, and international organizations, World Politics 52 (1): 1-37.

   Polachek, S. (1980), Conflict and trade. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 24: 55-78

   Powell, R. (1999), In the Shadow of Power: States and Strategies in International Politics.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ

   Riker, W. (1964). Federalism. New York: Little Brown.

   Sambanis, N. (2000) Partition as a solution to ethnic war. An empirical critique of the theoret-
ical literature. World Politics 52(4): 437-83

   Skaperdas, S. (1998). On the formation of alliances in conflict and contests. Public. Choice, 96
(1-2): 25-42



                                                25
   Spolaore, E. (2004). Economic Integration, international conflict and political unions. Rivista
di Politica Economica 94: 3-50
   Spolaore, E. (2006) National borders and the size of nations. In B. R. Weingast and D. A.
Wittman (eds) The Oxford Handbook of Political Economy. Oxford University Press, Oxford

   Spolaore, E. (2008). Civil conflict and secessions. Economics of Governance, 9 (1): 45-63

   Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2005). Borders and Growth. Journal of Economic Growth.
10(4): 331-386

   Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2009a). The diﬀusion of development, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 124(2): 469-529

   Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2009b), War and relatedness. NBER working paper no.15095,
June.

   Spruyt, H. (2007), War, trade and state formation, in C. Boix and S. C. Stokes (eds.). The
Oxford Handbook of Comparative Politics. Oxford University Press, Oxford

   Swee, E. (2009), Together or Separate? Post-Conflict Partition, Ethnic Homogenization, and
the Provision of Public Schooling, University of Toronto.

   Thomson, E. A. (1976). Taxation and National Defense. Journal of Political Economy 82(4):
755-782.

   Tilly, C. (ed.) (1975), The Formation of National States in Western Europe. Princeton Uni-
versity Press, Princeton.

   Tilly, C. (1990), Coercion, Capital and European States, AD 990-1990. Blackwell, Cambridge,
MA

   Tullock, G. (1980) Eﬃcient rent seeking. In: J. M. Buchanan, R.D. Tollison, and G. Tullock
(eds) Toward a Theory of the Rent-Seeking Society. Texas A&M University Press, College Station

   Wärneryd, K. (1998). Distributional conflict and jurisdictional organization. Journal of Public
Economics, 69(3): 435-450

   Wittman, D. A. (2000). The wealth and size of nations. Journal of Conflict Resolution 6:
885-895
   Wood, N. (1995). Sallust’s theorem: a comment on ‘fear’ in Western political thought. History
of Political Thought, 16(2): 174-189.




                                                26
            C




    R              R




A                      B

              R



        Figure 1
