                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              QUANTITATIVE EASING:
                    A RATIONALE AND SOME EVIDENCE FROM JAPAN

                                           Volker Wieland

                                        Working Paper 15565
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15565


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2009




This paper was prepared for the NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2009. Volker Wieland
thanks the European Central Bank for support as Duisenberg Research Fellow while the initial presentation
for the ISOM conference in June 2009 in Cyprus was prepared. The help of Alberto Musso from the
European Central Bank in collecting data on Japan is gratefully acknowledged. Helpful comments
by conference participants, and in particular by Huw Pill, Vincent Reinhart, Frank Smets, Christian
Thimann and Athanasios Orphanides were highly appreciated. The usual disclaimer applies. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Volker Wieland. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Quantitative Easing: A Rationale and Some Evidence from Japan
Volker Wieland
NBER Working Paper No. 15565
December 2009
JEL No. E31,E52,E58,E61

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper reviews the rationale for quantitative easing when central bank policy rates reach near zero
levels in light of recent announcements regarding direct asset purchases by the Bank of England, the
Bank of Japan, the U.S. Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank. Empirical evidence from
the previous period of quantitative easing in Japan between 2001 and 2006 is presented. During this
earlier period the Bank of Japan was able to expand the monetary base very quickly and significantly.
Quantitative easing translated into a greater and more lasting expansion of M1 relative to nominal
GDP. Deflation subsided by 2005. As soon as inflation appeared to stabilize near a rate of zero, the
Bank of Japan rapidly reduced the monetary base as a share of nominal income as it had announced
in 2001. The Bank was able to exit from extensive quantitative easing within less than a year. Some
implications for the current situation in Europe and the United States are discussed.


Volker Wieland
Goethe University Frankfurt
House of Finance, PF H 31
D-60323 Frankfurt/Main
wieland@wiwi.uni-frankfurt.de
       Following the dramatic worsening of the global financial crisis in the fall of 2008,

many central banks in leading industrial economies quickly moved to slash the policy rate on

overnight repurchasing agreements and ease credit for liquidity-hungry banks. As policy rates

reached near zero levels, central banks proceeded to provide further monetary

accommodation. On March 5, 2009, for example, the Bank of England reduced its policy rate

to ½ percent and announced that it would “undertake a programme of asset purchases of £75

billion financed by the issuance of central bank reserves.” Shortly thereafter, on March 18,

the Federal Reserve anticipated publicly that economic conditions would require keeping the

policy rate at 0 to ¼ percent for an extended period of time and announced additional

measures to increase its balance sheet. In particular, the FOMC announced that it would

“purchase an additional $750 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities, bringing its total

purchases of these securities to up to $1.25 trillion this year, and increase its purchases of

agency debt this year by up to $100 billion to a total of up to $200 billion. Moreover, to help

improve conditions in private credit markets, the Committee decided to purchase up to $300

billion of longer-term Treasury securities over the next six months.”

       The Bank of England referred to its policy as “quantitative easing” noting that it

simply shifted the instrument of monetary policy from the policy rate, which is the price of

money, to the quantity of money provided. It also clarified that its policy objective remained

unchanged and it considered influencing the quantity of money directly as a different means

of reaching the same end. The Federal Reserve continued to use the term “credit easing” to

describe its collection of measures and emphasized the effects that the composition of its

balance sheet would have on credit availability. Even so, it extensively used direct asset

purchases to support the magnitude of its balance sheet.

       The European Central Bank stayed on the sidelines for a bit longer, but eventually

announced direct purchases of covered bonds on May 7, 2009. However, the extent of direct



                                                2
asset purchases was much smaller than in the case of the other central banks. Instead, the ECB

relied more heavily on the effect of an expansion of its repo operations to a 1-year horizon.

       For long-time observers of the Japanese economy such central bank announcements

are very familiar. Japanese money market rates fell below 1 percent in 1995 and declined

towards zero by 1999. As the economy continued to experience severe recessionary and

deflationary pressures the Bank of Japan ventured into new territory. On March 19, 2001, it

announced „New Procedures for Money Market Operations and Monetary Easing”. These

procedures included a number of measures targeted at the price of money, the quantity of

money provided and the composition of assets purchased by the central bank. The main

operating target for money market operations was changed from the current uncollateralized

overnight call rate to the outstanding balance of the current accounts at the Bank of Japan.

The Bank informed the public that it anticipated the policy rate to stay close to zero for an

extended period. Furthermore, it announced that it would increase its balance sheet and

purchase assets directly, including outright purchases of government bonds. Importantly, the

Bank of Japan made clear that “the new procedures for money market operations continue to

be in place until the consumer price index (excl. perishables, on a nationwide statistics)

registers stably at zero percent or an increase year on year. “



I. The Rationale for Quantitative Easing

       The implications of near zero nominal interest rates for monetary policy effectiveness,

the dangers of deflation and the resulting rationale for quantitative easing were laid out and

analyzed in Orphanides and Wieland (1998, 2000) and Coenen and Wieland (2003, 2004). As

long as savers have the option to choose cash – a zero-interest-bearing asset – as a store of

value, a rate of zero percent constitutes an important speed limit for monetary policy. In

severe recessions that are accompanied by low inflation or deflation a central bank would like

to engineer a reduction of the real interest rate in order to boost aggregate demand. However,

                                                3
it may not be able to accomplish this objective, because it cannot lower the nominal interest

rate below zero. Orphanides and Wieland (1998) evaluated the impact of the zero bound in an

empirically estimated, dynamic and stochastic macroeconomic model.1 This model

incorporates forward-looking behaviour by consumers and price setters but also allows for the

existence of price rigidities and inflation stickiness. Orphanides and Wieland (1998) then

showed that the zero bound represents a quantitatively important constraint on monetary

policy in an environment of near zero steady-state inflation. Recessions and deflationary

episodes would be significantly deeper than in the absence of such a floor on nominal interest

rates.

         Orphanides and Wieland (2000) study the optimal design of monetary policy in

periods of near zero interest rates using a simple stylized macroeconomic model. Their paper

outlines a decision framework for quantitative monetary policy. Prescriptions for interest rate

policy are translated into prescriptions for base money. Of course, in normal times, when the

interest rate prescriptions are positive, central banks prefer to use an interest rate rather than a

monetary quantity as operating target. Interest rates are much easier to observe and control on

a continuous basis than monetary quantities. However, in unusual times, when nominal rates

are stuck at zero, the quantity of base money remains available as a tool for gauging the extent

of monetary easing. Thus, Orphanides and Wieland propose that monetary policy operations

be shifted to the quantity of money provided whenever overnight policy rates register near

zero. They also illustrate the usefulness of a measure such as the Marshallian k that puts the

quantity of nominal money into perspective relative to nominal income.

         Orphanides and Wieland (2000) also note that interest rates for longer durations or the

exchange rate could replace the overnight rate as a gauge of monetary operations. Quantity

measures, however, remain of interest as they serve to highlight channels of monetary policy

transmission that remain available when the interest rate channel is rendered inactive at the
1
 The model was re-estimated and a revised, shortened version of the paper published as Coenen, Orphanides and
Wieland (2004).

                                                     4
zero interest floor. For example, the central bank can steer the overall magnitude of real

balances in the economy as well as the relative magnitudes vis-à-vis other assets and

currencies by providing more base money. Thereby, , it can still exert an influence on

aggregate demand and inflation by exploiting real balance and portfolio balance effects. These

effects work through overall wealth and the relative supplies of various assets or currencies.

       To illustrate the procedure of shifting the central bank’s operating target from a policy

rate to a monetary quantity, consider a central bank that pursues a systematic interest rate

policy similar to Taylor’s rule:

                        it = r * + π t + απ (π t − π * ) − α y ( yt − yt* )                      (1)

       Here, it stands for the policy rate in period t, πt and π* refer to the current rate of

inflation and the inflation target, respectively, while yt and y* denote current and potential

output. r* represents the long-run equilibrium real interest rate. Thus, the central bank raises

or lowers the nominal interest rate in response to deviations of inflation from its target and

output from potential. The extent of the policy response is governed by the coefficients απ and

αy. Taylor (1993) chooses values of o 0.5 and sets the equilibrium real rate and inflation target

both to 2 per cent.

       To achieve the operating target for the policy rate defined by equation (1), the central

bank conducts open market operations. These operations also influence the quantity of base

money. Thus, in principle the interest rate equation could be related to a policy prescription

for the quantity of base money, or a measure such as the Marshallian k. The relationship of

this ratio to the inflation and output gaps may then be described as follows:

                  base money
                               = kt = k * + κ π (π t − π * ) − κ y ( yt − yt* )                  (2)
                nominal income

       Here, κπ and κy constitute parameters governing the responsiveness of the Marshallian

k that are consistent with the response coefficients in the interest rate rule. Of course, in

normal times, equation (1) provides a much better guide for policy, because the quantity of


                                                       5
money will also fluctuate due to unforeseen demand shocks and policy control errors. When

the interest rate is stuck at zero, however, equation (2) can still provide guidance for policy.

        Orphanides and Wieland show that the optimal policy response is nonlinear, because

the effectiveness of policy is reduced with near zero interest rates. Thus, optimal values of κπ

and κy are much bigger in a situation when the interest rate is near zero than in normal

circumstances. The optimal policy expressed in base money exhibits a kink at the point when

the interest rate reaches zero. It provides a motivation for more aggressive expansion of the

central bank balance sheet in such circumstances. Orphanides and Wieland also identify a

second source of nonlinearity, namely the uncertainty about the magnitude of real-balance and

portfolio-balance effects. If these remaining channels for monetary policy transmission are

estimated with less precision than the usual interest rate channel, then it would be preferable

for the central bank to use up the room for interest rate easing pre-emptively, whenever it

expects to enter a period of deflation.2

         Coenen and Wieland (2003) estimate a dynamic, stochastic, three-country model of

the United States, the Eurozone and Japan in order to assess the impact of the zero bound

under alternative policies such as those proposed by Orphanides and Wieland (2000). 3 They

investigate a scenario in which the Japanese economy is hit by a severe recession and

deflation and compare Taylor’s rule (i.e. equation (1) with Taylor’s original coefficients) to a

rule that shifts to the quantity of base money at the zero interest floor such as equation (2).

         Figure 1 compares the output gap and inflation in simulations with the zero bound

(thick solid line) and in the absence of this constraint (thin solid line). The recession cum

deflation episode is caused by an unfortunate sequence of negative demand and cost-push

shocks. However, the inability of the central bank to lower nominal interest rates below zero

renders the outcome considerably worse than it would have been without such a constraint.

2
 Bernanke (2002) referred to this rationale for pre-emptive interest rate easing.
3
 Coenen and Wieland (2004) further study the relative benefits of exchange rate policy as suggested by
Svensson (2001) and McCallum (2002) and price-level targeting as proposed by Eggertson and Woodford
(2003) to avoid a deflationary trap and ameliorate the negative effects of the zero bound.

                                                     6
With the nominal rate bounded at zero, deflationary shocks increase the real interest rate and

exchange rate and thereby worsen the recession and deflation. This mechanism is potentially

self-reinforcing and suggests the possibility of a deflationary spiral and collapse of the

economy. In the simulation, however, keeping the nominal interest rate at zero for 10 years is

sufficient to return the economy to steady state eventually. This recovery may be accelerated

substantially by a monetary policy that expands the central bank balance sheet aggressively.




        As shown in Figure 2, a policy rule such as equation (2) with a strengthened response

of base money in a period with zero interest rates improves outcomes and ameliorates the

effect of the zero bound (thin solid line). The mechanism of recovery is apparent from the

impact of base money creation on inflation expectations and real interest rates. Turning to

Figure 3 it can be seen that in the absence of a quantitative policy response the real interest

rate rises during the deflation (thick solid line). The expansion in base money reduces


                                                7
deflationary expectations via real-balance, portfolio-balance and expectations channels.

Consequently, real interest rates remain more moderate (thin solid line). Inflation and positive

nominal interest rates return more quickly.

       The policy rule with base money ensures that self-fulfilling deflationary spirals do not

emerge. A deflation scare would be met with an expansion of base money. The expansion of

nominal money balances in conjunction with any expectations-induced drop in the price level

would imply a rapid increase in real balances, which in turn would stabilize the economy and

render the expectation of a deflationary spiral untenable.




                                               8
II. The Impact of Quantitative Easing on Money Growth and Inflation in Japan

       Having established the circumstances under which quantitative easing can reduce the

depth of an economic downturn in the presence of low interest rates and the use of such a

policy by the Bank of Japan in 2001, it is of interest to investigate the Japanese experience.

The following three questions are of immediate importance. Did the Bank of Japan increase

base money sufficiently so that it implied an expansion relative to nominal income, that is an

expansion in the Marshallian k? Did it succeed in creating an overall greater supply of money

as measured, for example, by M1, and was the quantitative monetary expansion ultimately

followed by a return of inflation?

       Figure 4 shows the relationship between the overnight money market rate (vertical

axis) and the ratio of base money and nominal income (horizontal axis) in Japan from 1981 to

2008. The observations shown are annual averages. In the years prior to 1997 the Bank of


                                                9
Japan’s policy is easily understood from the movements in the money market interest rate. In

this period, the ratio of the monetary base to nominal income typically varied inversely with

the money market rate as suggested by standard money demand theory.




       From 1998 onwards the money market rate remained constant near zero and

uninformative with regard to the operations of the Bank of Japan. However, the impact of

monetary policy measures is seen clearly from the Marshallian k. The Bank of Japan steadily

expanded the monetary base relative to nominal income from 1998 to 2001. This expansion

intensified dramatically with the announcement of the policy of “quantitative easing”. By

2002 base money jumped to 18 percent of nominal income and averaged 20 percent by 2005.

The arrow pointing to the right in Figure 4 indicates the extent of base money creation over



                                              10
the years from 1998 to 2005. Thus, the answer to the first question posed above is a

resounding yes. Interestingly, the Bank of Japan was also able to exit from the period of

quantitative monetary accommodation quite rapidly in 2006. As indicated by the lower arrow

pointing to the left the Marshallian k was reduced to around 17 percent by 2007 and averaged

near that level in 2008.




       Figure 5 compares the time path of base money (thick solid line) and M1 (thin solid

line) relative to nominal income. As base money grew, so did M1. In fact, between 2001 and

2005 it increased by more than 30 percent of nominal income. Thus, the expansion of base

money engineered by the central bank induced additional deposit creation by banks and led to

an even greater expansion in the broader monetary aggregate. This expansion came to a halt

in 2006. However, the ratio of M1 to nominal income did not decline when the Bank of Japan

reduced the monetary base in 2006 and 2007.


                                              11
       What about inflation? Figure 6 shows the time path of the ratio of base money to

nominal income (thick solid line) together with consumer price inflation (thin solid line).

Clearly, between 1999 and 2000 the rate of change in the price level had moved into negative

territory. With its announcement in March 2001, the Bank of Japan attempted to influence

longer run inflation expectations by stating that it would stick with its new measures until




consumer price inflation would register stably at zero percent or an increase year on year. In

2001 the cosumer price index continued to fall at a slowly increasing rate. By February 2002

it was at -1.6 percent. However, as the central bank continued to expand base money

dramatically throughout 2002, the rate of price change moved back towards zero. By 2006 it

appeared to have stabilized around zero percent or a slightly positive rate. Thus, in 2006 the

Bank of Japan removed the quantitative monetary stimulus as announced and it did so rather

quickly. Clearly, Japan did not experience the self-reinforcing process of accelerating

deflation and deepening recession that is typically associated with a liquidity trap. The return




                                               12
of price stability coincided with the sustained shift of the Bank of Japan to quantitative

monetary policy and direct asset purchases.

           Of course, establishing evidence of causality between quantitative easing and

inflation would require further detailed empirical analysis. However, the following

observations appear in order. The Bank of Japan’s vigorous quantitative easing did not

stimulate a dangerous surge of inflation beyond the announced objective of zero percent.

Thus, exiting from a period of quantitative easing in time and preventing significant

overshooting of inflation is possible. In light of the recent re-emergence of deflation in the

course of the global financial crisis of 2007-09, however, one might have wished that the

Bank of Japan would have allowed a greater increase in inflation and nominal interest rates so

as to establish some buffer space for future deflationary shocks. In fact, already in 1997-98

commentators had proposed a positive inflation target for Japan. A much-cited example is

Krugman (1998). Orphanides and Wieland (1998) suggested that a 2 percent inflation target

would provide an appropriate buffer together with an equilibrium real interest rate of 1 to 2

percent.



III. Some Remarks on the Policy Measures of the ECB and the Fed in Spring 2009



       In the first half of 2009, many central banks around the world took steps to influence

the quantity of money that were similar to those undertaken by the Bank of Japan in 2001.

Focusing on two of these central banks, the Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank I

will remark on some aspects of their decision making.

       First, it is of interest to check what a standard benchmark such as Taylor’s rule would

prescribe with regard to the setting of the policy rate in the first quarter of 2009. This means

using equation (1) with the original coefficients of ½ on the inflation and output gaps and

values of the equilibrium real interest rate and the inflation target equal to 2 percent. While

                                                13
the Fed has not stated an explicit inflation target, the ECB’s price stability objective is defined

as close to but below 2 percent.

       CPI inflation in the first quarter of 2009 was 0.9 percent in the euro area and -0.2

percent in the United States. While the ECB defines its price stability objective in terms of

the overall CPI, the FOMC tends to focus on the PCE deflator which registered at 0.4 percent

in the first quarter. With regard to the output gap, neither the ECB nor the Fed publishes its

estimate in real time. Comparable estimates of this gap are available from the International

Monetary Fund (2009). In April the IMF published output gap estimates of -4.1 percent in the

United States and -4.3 percent in the euro area for the year of 2009. Using these estimates

one can obtain interest rate prescriptions from Taylor’s rule of 0.2 percent for the euro area

and -1.3 percent for the United States (or -0.4 percent with the PCE deflator).

       Against the background of such Taylor rule prescriptions it is not surprising that the

Fed moved towards quantitative easing earlier than the ECB. Even so, the ECB’s policy rate

of 1 percent remained rather high in light of the Taylor rule prescription and the case for pre-

emptive policy easing discussed in the preceding section. Technically, the ECB has let the

market rate move in the band between its repo rate of one percent and the deposit rate of ¼

percent. This was accomplished by full allotment to banks demanding funds at the repo rate

and by abstaining from fine-tuning, liquidity absorbing measures. Arguably, this approach

induced some degree of uncertainty about the ECB’s operating target in the money market

compared to the past. Rather than using the remaining room for lowering the overnight policy

rate, the ECB chose to offer 1-year repos at the same rate of one percent with full allotment

starting in June. This measure added downward pressure to overnight money market rates

within the corridor set by repo and deposit rates. Additional easing could have been provided

by lowering the deposit rate and thereby raising the incentive for banks to lend to other banks

in the interbank market. The ECB’s direct asset purchases remained modest in magnitude.



                                                14
However, it was useful for market observers to learn that the ECB would have the instruments

and willingness to engage in quantitative easing.

       The Federal Reserve pursued its approach of credit or quantitative easing rather

forcefully. In this regard, an important question for market observers concerns the

appropriate magnitude of balance sheet expansion. The Fed has initiated a significant number

of new tools and asset purchase programs. However, it has refrained from explaining what

effect it would expect from a particular amount of direct asset purchases and what effect it

would consider appropriate. In this manner, policy has shifted from rates to quantities but has

abandoned the notion of a precisely quantified operating target. An operating target could in

principle be stated for the overall quantity of base money. Consistent with the Fed’s reliance

on the effects of the composition of asset purchases in particular markets such operating

targets could also be stated with regard to the particular premia the Fed is hoping to influence.

       The arguments and evidence presented in this note suggest that quantitative easing can

be a powerful tool for avoiding deflation. A note of caution, however, is in order. In 2002,

then-Governor Bernanke noted: “Japan’s economy faces some significant barriers to growth

besides deflation, including massive financial problems in the banking and corporate sectors

and a large overhang of government debt”. This warning is not without some relevance for

the United States and other economies in the year 2009.



References



Bernanke, Ben, (2002), Deflation: “Making Sure “It” Doesn’t Happen Here”, Speech before

       the National Economists Club, Washington, DC, November 21, 2002.

Coenen, Gunter and Volker Wieland, (2004), "Exchange Rate Policy and the Zero Bound on

       Nominal Interest Rates, American Economic Review, 94(2), May 2004.



                                               15
Coenen, Gunter and Volker Wieland, (2003), “The Zero-Interest-Rate Bound and the Role of

       the Exchange Rate for Monetary Policy in Japan”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 50

       (5), July 2003.

Coenen, Gunter, Orphanides, Athanasios, and Volker Wieland, (2004), "Price Stability and

       Monetary Policy Effectiveness when Nominal Interest Rates are Bounded at Zero,”

       Berkeley Electronic Press: Advances in Macroeconomics, Vol. 4, Issue 1, Article 1,

       January 2004. (revised version of Orphanides, A. and V. Wieland, June 1998.)

Eggertson, Gauti and Michael Woodford, (2003), “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and

       Optimal Monetary Policy”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (1), 2003.

Krugman, Paul, (1998), “It’s Baack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap”,

       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (2), 1998.

McCallum, Bennett, (2002), “Inflation Targeting and the Liquidity Trap,” in Norman Loayza

       and Raimundo Soto, eds, Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance, Challenges,

       Santiago, Central Bank of Chile.

Orphanides, Athanasios and Volker Wieland, (1998), "Price Stability and Monetary Policy

       Effectiveness when Nominal Interest Rates are Bounded at Zero,” Finance and

       Economics Discussion Series, No. 1998-35, Federal Reserve Board, June 1998.

Orphanides A. and V. Wieland (2000), “Efficient monetary policy design near price stability”,

       Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, Volume 14, pp. 327-365.

Svensson, Lars E. O., (2001), “The Zero Bound in an Open Economy: A Foolproof Way of

       Escaping from the Liquidity Trap”, Monetary and Economic Studies, February 2001,

       19, Special Edition.

Taylor, John B., (1993), “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice”, Carnegie-Rochester

       Conference Series on Public Policy, 39, December 93.




                                             16
