                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    LABOR SUPPLY HETEROGENEITY AND MACROECONOMIC CO-MOVEMENT

                                           Stefano Eusepi
                                           Bruce Preston

                                        Working Paper 15561
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15561


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2009




The authors thank Gianluca Violante for his help with the Consumer Expenditure Survey data, Stefania
Albanesi, Roc Armenter, Carlos Carvalho and Aysegul Sahin for extensive comments and discussions.
The Authors also thank seminar participants at Columbia University, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta,
La Trobe University, Midwest Macroeconomics Meeting 2009, SED 2009, the Southern Workshop
in Macroeconomics 2009, the European Economic Association and Econometric Society European
Meeting 2009, The University of Adelaide, University of Auckland, University of New South Wales
and The University of Melbourne. The views expressed in the paper are those of the authors and are
not necessarily reflective of views at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The usual caveat applies.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Stefano Eusepi and Bruce Preston. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Labor Supply Heterogeneity and Macroeconomic Co-movement
Stefano Eusepi and Bruce Preston
NBER Working Paper No. 15561
December 2009
JEL No. E13,E24,E32

                                            ABSTRACT

Standard real-business-cycle models must rely on total factor productivity (TFP) shocks to explain
the observed co-movement between consumption, investment and hours worked. This paper shows
that a neoclassical model consistent with observed heterogeneity in labor supply and consumption,
can generate co-movement in absence of TFP shocks. Intertemporal substitution of goods and leisure
induces co-movement over the business cycle through heterogeneity in consumption behavior of employed
and unemployed workers. The result is due to two model features that are introduced to capture important
characteristics of US labor market data. First, individual consumption is affected by the number of
hours worked with employed consuming more on average than unemployed. Second, changes in the
employment rate, a central explanator of total hours variation, then affects aggregate consumption.
Demand shocks --- such as shifts in the marginal efficiency of investment, government spending shocks
and news shocks --- are shown to generate economic fluctuations consistent with observed business
cycles.


Stefano Eusepi
Macroeconomic and Monetary Studies Function
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Libery street
New York, NY 10045-0001
stefano.eusepi@ny.frb.org

Bruce Preston
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
bp2121@columbia.edu
1         Introduction
Standard neoclassical business-cycle models of the kind proposed by Kydland and Prescott
(1982) must rely on ‡uctuations in total factor productivity (TFP) to explain the observed
co-movement between consumption, investment and hours worked — see Barro and King
(1984). Intertemporal substitution of goods and leisure is the central determinant of equilib-
rium business cycles. Benchmark assumptions on preferences and technology, and constant
TFP, predict that any change in consumption induces opposite movements in hours worked
and investment. This “co-movement problem”has received much attention in the business-
cycle literature interested in non-TFP-based explanations of ‡uctuations, such as variations
in the marginal e¢ ciency of investment due to …nancial frictions, or shifts in expectations
generated by news about the future.1 For example, the former induce substitution between
investment and current consumption and leisure. And positive ‘news’shocks about future
productivity induce strong wealth e¤ects, increasing consumption and leisure at the expense
of investment. The co-movement problem is also relevant to policy debate on the size of the
…scal multiplier, as negative co-movement following a …scal expansion implies a multiplier
which is less than one.
        This paper shows that a model consistent with two empirical regularities in U.S. labor
market data can generate co-movement in absence of TFP shocks. First, employed con-
sume more than the non-employed and, second, variations in employment are the primary
determinant of variations in total hours worked. These characteristics are captured by the
following model assumptions. As predicted by theories of time allocation — for example
Becker (1965) — individual consumption is a¤ected by the number of hours worked: the
employed consume more than the non-employed in compensation for supplying labor. In
addition, the extensive margin of labor supply is modeled as costly labor market participa-
tion. Intertemporal substitution of goods and leisure then induces co-movement over the
business cycle through a composition e¤ect engendered by heterogeneity in the consumption
behavior of employed and non-employed workers.
        A widely adopted class of preferences is used, which are separable across time, but non-
separable over consumption and leisure. Preferences are restricted to imply: i) constant
    1
   As noted by Campbell (1994), the standard RBC model with TFP shocks also fails to deliver co-
movement if the shock is more persistent than a random walk.


                                                 1
hours worked on the balanced-growth path; ii) a constant consumption intertemporal elas-
ticity of substitution; iii) a constant Frisch elasticity of labor supply on both the intensive
and extensive margins; and iv) that consumption and hours are complements. This pref-
erence speci…cation implies that, despite the assumption of full insurance, employed agents
consume more than non-employed agents. It can be interpreted as a reduced-form repre-
sentation of a more complicated decision problem with home production. Increases in labor
supply increase resources devoted to market consumption. Preferences of this kind have
been employed to resolve various puzzles in the consumption literature; to amplify technol-
ogy shocks; and to improve empirical correspondence of model predicted movements in the
marginal product of labor and the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and
leisure.2
       The adopted preferences have the additional advantage of being, in principle, consistent
with evidence on the magnitude of wealth e¤ects on labor supply provided by Kimball
and Shapiro (2008). This contrasts with preferences proposed by Greenwood, Hercowitz,
and Hu¤man (1988), which, by eliminating such wealth e¤ects by assumption, have been
successfully employed to resolve questions of co-movement in classical theory.3 The intent
here is to calibrate the model to observable characteristics of the labor market and only
then assess properties relating to co-movement.
       Two restrictions on the analysis enhance the generality of our …ndings. First, the analysis
remains strictly within the purview of neoclassical theory. While not denying that various
market ine¢ ciencies and frictions may be relevant for co-movement, such approaches often
rely either on the absence of optimal policy and at times quite speci…c choices of policy; the
introduction of parameters which, unrestricted, can be varied to deliver desired properties;
or on the magnitudes of ine¢ ciencies which are not directly observable.4 Determining a
framework that generates co-movement without such additional assumptions has appeal,
understanding that richer models incorporating a neoclassical core will likely inherit these
   2
     See, respectively, Basu and Kimball (2000), King and Rebelo (1999) and Hall (2009). Other recent
papers employing non-separable preferences include Baxter and Jermann (1999), Dotsey and King (2006),
Shimer (2009) and Trabandt and Uhlig (2006).
   3
     Jaimovich and Rebelo (2008) propose this class preferences to resolve the comovement problem arising
from news shocks. Other examples include Monacelli and Perotti (2008) and Chen and Song (2007).
   4
     See, for example, Chen and Song (2007), Christiano, Ilut, Motto, and Rostagno (2007) and Den Haan
and Kaltenbrunner (2007).




                                                   2
properties.5 Second, our approach abjures reliance on movements in current total factor
productivity in contrast to other recent papers that adopt economy-wide increasing returns
in production.6 This renders co-movement di¢ cult for the same reason that variations in
TFP are centrally located in classical theory.
       In a special case of our model, analytical results are provided on the parametric require-
ments for co-movement. Co-movement is shown to hinge on the magnitude of the consump-
tion di¤erential between the employed and unemployed and the relative importance of the
intensive and extensive margin of labor supply. Enriching the model with variable capacity
utilization and habit formation are, either individually or in combination, shown to weaken
the requirements for co-movement; but are by no means necessary for our central results. In
all cases, heterogeneity together with hours variation on the extensive margin engenders co-
movement. Both are necessary. Bilbiie (2009) shows that non-separability in consumption
and leisure in a representative agent model cannot generate co-movement without violating
concavity of the utility function or the assumption of normality of consumption. And models
with heterogeneous employment decisions and full insurance, such as Rogerson (1988), im-
ply consumption is equalized across agents so that variations in employment do not produce
composition e¤ects on aggregate consumption.
       Armed with these insights, properties of the general model are evaluated numerically.
The model is calibrated to U.S. data. Matching certain model characteristics with corre-
sponding data characteristics requires exploration of micro data. First, the steady-state
ratio of unemployed-to-employed consumption — a key quantity in our model — is inferred
from Consumer Expenditure Survey data on household consumption at di¤erent levels of
labor supply. Second, the consumption intertemporal elasticity of substitution, chosen to
deliver model consistency with the value of non-work activities suggested by Hall (2006)
and Shimer (2005), is in line with empirical evidence and the range of values frequently
used in macroeconomics. The calibration ensures preferences satisfy concavity of the utility
function and normality of consumption and leisure. Third, the employment response to the
   5
      More richly speci…ed models with separable preferences, that include nominal and real frictions, can
mitigate but not fully resolve these shortcomings — see Smets and Wouters (2007) and Justiniano, Primiceri,
and Tambalotti (2008).
    6
      See, for example, Comin, Gertler, and Santacreu (2009) and Li and Mehkari (2009). Again, the plausi-
bility of such mechanisms is not denied. However, it is not obvious that demand-side shocks should only be
source of business-cycle co-movement to the extent that they generate su¢ ciently large shifts in TFP.



                                                    3
wage rate is determined to be consistent with the observed contribution of intensive and
extensive margins to total variation in hours worked.
    Model dynamics are explored conditional on demand shocks, such as shifts in the mar-
ginal e¢ ciency of investment, government spending shocks and news shocks about future
TFP. The model generates co-movement conditional on each of these disturbances and
business-cycle properties that are broadly consistent with aggregate data. It should be em-
phasized that while this paper proposes a model that can in principle generate business-cycle
‡uctuations driven by non-TFP shocks, it is not about the quantitative importance of such
shocks. This is left to future research.


2     The co-movement problem
For a given level of TFP, real-business-cycle theory fails to produce co-movement between
hours and consumption. Consider the following equilibrium labor market condition, derived
under standard assumptions about preferences and technology,

              [   N   + (1   ) ] ln Nt = (1   ) ln T F Pt   ln Ct + (1    ) ln Kt ;

where   N   > 0 is the inverse Frisch elasticity of labor supply, 0 <    < 1 is the capital share
in a Cobb-Douglas production function, and Nt , Ct and Kt are hours, consumption and
capital. Capital is predetermined.
    Without total factor productivity shocks, which shift the demand for labor, hours and
consumption must be negatively correlated. On the one hand, any shock inducing strong
substitution e¤ects leads to a reduction in consumption and leisure to increase investment.
On the other hand, any shock generating positive wealth e¤ects increases consumption
and leisure at the expense of investment. The real-business-cycle model predicts labor
and consumption can move together, if, and only if, labor productivity co-moves more than
proportionally to consumption. Joint expansion of total hours, consumption and investment
requires a su¢ ciently strong increase in aggregate total factor productivity. The assumption
of increasing returns at the aggregate level can solve the co-movement problem by having
TFP endogenously increase to a su¢ cient degree. This is not the route taken in this paper.
The production side of the economy described below displays constant returns to scale.



                                                4
3     The model
In this section we describe the main features of our model.
    Households. Each household is composed of a continuum of members of unit measure.
The household decides whether a given member participates in the labor market and, if so,
how many hours to work. Participating in the labor market entails a cost. There is perfect
risk sharing within the household. The household’s problem is to maximize
              "                                                                                             #
     X1
                   (CTe bCT 1 )1   (nT )           (CTu bCT 1 )1     (0)
          T t
  Et            eT                       + (1 eT )                        XT1                          (eT )
     T =t
                          1                               1

where Cte is the consumption of the employed; Ctu consumption of the unemployed; et the
fraction of household members participating in the labor market; 0 <                      < 1 the discount fac-
tor; and    > 1. The latter restriction implies that consumption and leisure are substitutes,
as predicted by theories of time allocation — see Becker (1965).
                                      0          00
    The function     ( ) satis…es         ( );        ( ) > 0. Restrictions on         ( ) discussed in section
5 ensure that, given     > 1: i) individual labor supply has a constant Frisch elasticity; ii)
utility is concave; and iii) consumption and leisure are normal goods. This utility function
is consistent with a balanced growth path — see Basu and Kimball (2000). Following Abel
(1990), household utility depends on lagged aggregate consumption, de…ned as

                                          Ct = et Cte + (1           et ) Ctu ;                            (1)

as in the “catching up with the Jonses”version of habit formation.
    The function     (et ) denotes a time-invariant cost of participation, which we keep distinct
from the disutility incurred from hours worked –see, for example, Cho and Cooley (1994).
It has the properties
                                    (e) > 0;          e   (e) > 0;     ee   (e) > 0;

where e denotes the steady-state participation rate. For a balanced growth path to exist,
the cost function is discounted by the level of labor augmenting technical progress Xt , where
ln(Xt )    ln(Xt 1 ) = ln ( ) and     > 0. Whether technology has a stochastic or deterministic
trend or is a stationary process is unimportant for the question of co-movement.
    Maximization occurs subject to the budget constraint

                                    Ct + qt 1 It = RtK Ut Kt + Wt Nt                                       (2)

                                                            5
and the capital accumulation equation

                                                          It
                          Kt+1 = It 1                              + [1                     (Ut )] Kt :                      (3)
                                                         It    1

Labor market participants supply nt hours of work at the competitive wage Wt . The total
numbers of hours worked is Nt = et nt . The household supplies capital services to …rms at
the competitive rental rate RtK . Capital services depend on the available stock of capital Kt
and on the degree of utilization Ut . Consumption goods can be transformed into investment
goods at the price qt 1 , which is an exogenously given stochastic process.
   Investment adjustment costs depend on the function                                      ( ) which satis…es

                                             0                           00
                                 (1) =           (1) = 0 and                  (1)               0:

Finally, the capital depreciation depends on the degree of capacity utilization according to
the function
                                                 0                            00
                                U = ;                 U > 0 and                        U > 0:

   Risk sharing. The …rst-order conditions with respect to consumption of the employed
and unemployed are
                                   (Cte              bCt 1 )       (nt ) =              t                                    (4)

                                   (Ctu              bCt 1 )       (0) =               t;                                    (5)

where   t   is the Lagrange multiplier on the budget constraint. Together they imply the
risk-sharing condition
                                                                                   1
                                   Cte           bCt     1          (nt )
                                                              =                        :                                     (6)
                                   Ctu           bCt     1           (0)
Employed household members enjoy greater consumption as compensation for disutility of
work e¤ort.
   Labor supply. The …rst-order condition with respect to participation provides

            1
                (Ctu )1   (0)    (Cte )1               (nt ) =     t   [Wt nt                Cte + Ctu ]   Xt1   e   (et )   (7)
        1

which, rearranging, becomes

                                                                                       e   (et )
                                      (Cte            Ctu ) = Wt nt                         1        :                       (8)
                                  1                                           Xt                 t



                                                              6
The …rst-order condition with respect to hours gives

                                                (Cte        bCt 1 )          0
                                                                                 (nt )
                                                                                             = (nt ) Wt :                                          (9)
                                                                1

    Supply of capital services. The capital Euler equation is

                                          t+1     K                               t+1                                      1
                           Et                    Rt+1 Ut+1 +                                 [1         (Ut+1 )]   =                              (10)
                                           t                                         t

where        t   the the multiplier associated to the capital accumulation equation. Investment
dynamics obey
                                                                                                    "                                     #
                                                                                                                       2
         t                       It                It        0      It                                         It+1        0       It+1
             =     t   1                                                                 + Et            t+1                                  :   (11)
        qt                      It    1           It    1         It     1                                      It                  It

Finally, capacity utilization is determined by

                                                                    K                    0
                                                                 t Rt    =           t       (Ut ) :                                              (12)

    Firms. Output is produced by perfectly competitive …rms with the Cobb Douglas
production function
                                                  Yt = At (Ut Kt ) (Xt Nt )1                               :                                      (13)

where At is a stationary TFP shock, which is described in section 6.2. Firms’demand for
labor and capital services is then
                                                                                      Yt
                                                                 RtK =                                                                            (14)
                                                                                     Ut Kt
and
                                                                                                 Yt
                                                            Wt = (1                          )      :                                             (15)
                                                                                                 Nt
This completes the description of the model.


4     Non-separability, participation and co-movement
4.1      Extensive margin only
To provide intuition for the co-movement result, consider a special case of the model with no
investment adjustment costs, no habit formation, no capacity utilization and no intensive
margin. Assume that there is a …xed cost of participating so that                                                              e   (e) ! 0. These


                                                                                 7
assumptions admit analytical results. Details of the log-linearized model are described in
the appendix.
      Investment-speci…c technology shocks. Following Beaudry and Portier (2007), the
model’s intratemporal conditions are exploited to derive parametric restrictions required
for co-movement between consumption, hours and investment. They are as follows. The
participation decision requires
                                                           (      1)
                                       (Cte     Ctu ) =                   Wt n               (16)

where employed members of the household work a …xed number of hours n. The …rst-order
conditions for consumption allocation imply
                                                                      1
                                              Cte          (n)
                                                  =                                          (17)
                                              Ctu          (0)
which states that consumption of the employed and unemployed move proportionally. Ag-
gregate consumption and the real wage are de…ned as in (1) and (15), while the aggregate
resource constraint is
                                              Ct + qt 1 It = Yt :

      Log-linearizing these intratemporal conditions and rearranging using steady-state re-
strictions yields the constant-consumption aggregate labor supply condition
                                                       (1         !)
                                    C^t = W
                                          ^t +
                                                                1
                                                                         ^t
                                                                         N                   (18)
                                                   1 + (e           1) !
where Nt = net and ! = C u =C e is the steady-state ratio of unemployed-to-employed con-
sumption. When ! = 1, equivalently7                 = 1, preferences are separable in consumption
and leisure. The consumption of employed and unemployed are then equal and the model
implies a perfectly elastic labor supply, as in Hansen (1985) and Rogerson (1988). With
0 < ! < 1, employed members of the household consume more than the unemployed. This
induces a positive relationship between aggregate consumption and total hours supplied to
the market, for a given real wage.
      Since capital is predetermined in the current period, (15) implies a negative relation
between the real wage and the number of hours worked. In log-linear terms, and ignoring
terms in the capital stock,
                                                ^t =
                                                W              ^t :
                                                               N
  7
      The relationaship between   and ! is shown formally in the appendix.

                                                       8
Substituting this expression into (18) yields the relation

                                                      C^t = m! N
                                                               ^t                         (19)

between total hours and aggregate consumption, where

                                                        (1       !)
                                      m! =                     1
                                                                             :
                                                    1 + (e         1) !

The constant m! comprises two terms. The …rst is positive, indicating that an increase
in hours worked increases aggregate consumption because the fraction of employed rises,
and the employed consume more in equilibrium. This is a composition e¤ect arising from
consumption heterogeneity to which discussion will return. The second term is negative,
re‡ecting that decreasing returns to the labor input imply increases in hours decrease the
real wage, with concomitant declines in aggregate consumption. Su¢ ciently low values of !
guarantee positive co-movement between consumption and total hours worked.
      Concerning the relation between investment and hours worked, combining the resource
constraint, the production function and (19) yields

                                 I                                      C
                                     I^t           q^t =   1                 ^t
                                                                          m! N            (20)
                                 Y                                      Y

where I, C and Y are the steady-state values of investment, consumption and output. The
coe¢ cient on employment is positive and increasing in !.8 Exogenous variation in the
relative price of investment, q^t , strengthens co-movement between hours and investment in
the sense that falls in the relative price of investment are associated with rising investment
and hours. The following proposition summarizes the result.

Proposition 1 For a given e 2 (0; 1) and 2 (0; 1), there exists an ! such that for 0 <
! < ! the economy displays positive co-movement between aggregate hours, consumption
and investment.

Remark 2 Perfectly elastic labor supply does not imply co-movement. Consumption het-
erogeneity from the non-separability of leisure and consumption is central to the result.
  8
      Note that for ! ! 0,

                             C        1        !                     C
                                           1
                                                                 !     (1   ) < (1   ):
                             Y   1 + (e            1) !              Y




                                                             9
   News shocks. Discussed later in detail, news shocks are modeled as signals about future
total factor productivity. Conditions (19) and (20) also govern co-movement in this case.
However, the nature of co-movement is fundamentally di¤erent: wealth e¤ects dominate
substitution e¤ects so that consumption, investment and hours fall on receipt of positive
news about the state of future technology. Positive wealth e¤ects lead to a fall in employment
and therefore aggregate consumption, even though individual consumption of the employed
and unemployed rise. Market participants need not work and invest today to capture the
bene…ts of higher TFP tomorrow. As such, the news shock produces only an increase in
permanent income. Investment adjustment costs induce substitution e¤ects which increase
employment and investment in the current period, generating the “right”co-movement.
   Spending shocks. In the sequel we also consider the e¤ect of a spending shock, arising,
for example, from government activities. Consider an exogenous component of aggregate
demand Gt that is for simplicity zero in steady state. The resource constraint requires

                                    ^ t = Y^t     I ^     C ^
                                    G               It      Ct :
                                                  Y       Y

Assuming lump-sum taxation and a balanced budget, the introduction of a disturbance to
the resource constraint only a¤ects relation (20). It becomes

                          I                              C
                              I^t   q^t =     1               ^t
                                                           m! N    ^ t:
                                                                   G
                          Y                              Y

For ! < ! consumption and hours are positively related but investment might increase
or not, depending on model parameters, since increases in government spending crowd out
investment — making co-movement less likely.

4.2    Some Generalizations
Two extensions permit analytical results: the inclusion of capacity utilization and habit
formation. Both additions assist generating co-movement.
   Capacity utilization. Capacity utilization increases the ability of the model to generate
co-movement by mitigating the e¤ects of diminishing returns to labor input. Log-linearizing
(12) and (14) and combining the two expressions gives

                                                  1
                                      U^t =               ^t
                                                          N
                                                  +1

                                                  10
                00          0
where                U U=       U > 0. The wage then can be expressed as

                                        ^t =          1                     ^t ;
                                        W                             1     N
                                                      +1
which, substituted into (18), yields C^t = m! N
                                              ^t where
                                           (1       !)                     1
                            m! =                1
                                                                  1                   :
                                       1 + (e         1) !                 +1
It is evident that m! > m! . The relation between investment and hours becomes
                                  I                                       C
                                        I^t     q^t = (1          )            ^t :
                                                                            m! N
                                  Y                                       Y
In this case, provided (1          ) > C=Y , co-movement between total hours and investment is
guaranteed for every value of            .
       These expressions nest the results for the model without variable capacity utilization.
Speci…cally, when       ! 1, so that depreciation costs become in…nitely elastic with respect
to utilization rates. Note also that as              ! 0, depreciation costs become completely inelastic
and co-movement is guaranteed for every ! < 1. Variations in utilization rates are used to
fully o¤-set negative co-movement induced by diminishing marginal returns.
       Habit formation. Consider now the simple model where only habit formation is added.
Using the …rst-order condition for employment, individual consumption of employed and
unemployed, and the de…nition of aggregate consumption, provides

                                                     C^t = m  ^t
                                                           ~ !N

where
                                            (1 !)
                                   m
                                   ~! =                   (1 b) :
                                        1 + (e 1 1) !
       As in the case of capacity utilization, habit formation per se does not generate positive
co-movement. Coupled with non-separable preferences and the extensive margin it facilitates
co-movement by making some part of current consumption predetermined. This weakens
the e¤ect of variations in the real wage on aggregate consumption. Similarly, the relation
between investment and hours becomes9
                                   I                                  C
                                         I^t    q^t =    1              m  ^t :
                                                                        ~! N
                                   Y                                  Y
The discussion above can be summarized by the following proposition.
   9                                                                                         C
    Again, a su¢ cient restriction for positive comovement between hours and investment is   Y
                                                                                                 <1   . In
a plausible calibration values of ! > 0:5 imply positive comovemnt even if YC > 1   .

                                                             11
Proposition 3 Consider the model with habit formation and capacity utilization:
1) for ! = 1, m! < 0 for independently of and b;
2) for ! < 1, @!
              @
                  > 0 and @!
                           @b
                              > 0,
where ! is such that for 0 < ! < ! the economy displays positive co-movement between
aggregate hours, consumption and investment.

       To give an idea of the role of ! in a model with both capacity utilization and habit
formation, suppose        = 0:3, e = 0:7,       = 0:15 and b = 0:5. Then positive co-movement
obtains for values of ! as high as 0:96. This suggests that co-movement can be obtained for
reasonable values of !. This is discussed further in the calibration section.

4.3       Intensive margin
This section delineates the joint implications of non-separable preferences and the intensive
margin for co-movement. Thus far it has been assumed that variations in total hours are
driven only by changes in employment. However, in U.S. data, the intensive margin plays
a non-negligible role in explaining movement in hours worked. Such variation can generate
undesirable predictions in models with non-separable preferences. These predictions are not
a feature of our model.
       A consequence of introducing the choice of how many hours to work is that workers’
utility is a¤ected by both movement in hours and consumption. Non-separable preferences
in consumption and leisure have been proposed before in business-cycle models. King and
Rebelo (1999) and Hall (2008) demonstrate non-separable preferences increase co-movement
of consumption with output and hours, when the main driving force of the business cycle
are total factor productivity shocks.10 More closely related to this paper, non-separable
preferences have been proposed to explain business cycles in absence of productivity shocks.
Bennett and Farmer (2000) show that non-separable preferences can generate indeterminate
equilibria and thus expectations-driven business cycles, a form of animal spirits. But the
chosen preference speci…cation violates concavity — see Hintermaier (2003). Linnemann
(2006) considers government spending shocks and shows that non-separable preferences can
generate co-movement between government expenditures and consumption. But, as shown
in Bilbiie (2008), this implies that consumption is an inferior good. That paper shows
  10
     King and Rebelo (1999) discuss an extension of the Rogerson (1988) model to non-separable preferences.
They consider the extensive margin only. Hall (2008) includes non-separable preferences in a model with
frictional unemployment and real wage rigidities.

                                                    12
for a general class of non-separable preferences, which satisfy concavity and normality of
both consumption and leisure, co-movement between consumption and hours cannot be
obtained in a representative agent model. The appendix demonstrates that the class of
preferences considered in this paper satis…es both assumptions. The result is summarized
by the following proposition, employing the de…nitions, se                    C e e=C, the share of employed
consumption in aggregate consumption, and the marginal cost of participation as a fraction
of the aggregate wage bill discussed in detail in the sequel.

Proposition 4 Let N be the Frisch elasticity of the supply of hours worked. Assume
                                                           1
!se b 1 e > 0 and let N = 11 ! f1 eb 1 [1 + (e 1 1) !]g . For N > N
   1) the utility function is concave;
   2) consumption and leisure are normal goods.

       Because of the restrictions imposed by concavity and normality, the intensive margin has
important implications for co-movement. While analytical results are not available, some
implications can be inferred from …rst-order conditions. Consider the full model speci…ed
in section 2. The employed supply labor according to

                                                 ^t +           1^
                                          Nn
                                           ^t   =W                   t:                                   (21)

Combining (21) with the log-linearized expression for (4) gives a constant-consumption
individual labor supply
                                                            h                                         i
                                                        1
                  N    N   n    ^ t + se
                           ^t = W             eb   1
                                                                se C^te + be       1
                                                                                       C^t   1   ^t       (22)

As shown in proposition 4, normality of preferences implies a negative relation between
individual hours and individual consumption absent technology shocks.11 Introducing the
intensive margin necessarily weakens co-movement. However, the non-separability of pref-
erences implies a smaller e¤ect on consumption from a change in hours worked than in the
standard case of separable preferences where            N   = 0.
       This property of non-separable preferences reveals the extensive margin as crucial in
obtaining co-movement. Aggregate consumption satis…es

                              C^t = se C^te + (1   se ) C^tu + (1         !)se e^t :
  11
    The …nal two terms in brackets are irrelevant to comovement because one is predetermined and the
other exogenous. Also note that the term se eb 1 is assumed to be positive to ensure marginal utility of
consumption is positive in steady state.

                                                   13
It depends on the weighted sum of the individual consumption of the employed and un-
employed, and also the employment rate. Changes in participation generate a composition
e¤ect on aggregate consumption. The magnitude of this e¤ect depends on !, the consump-
tion share of the unemployed. In the case of equal consumption of employed and unemployed,
! = 1, there is no employment e¤ect on aggregate consumption. In the case where most
‡uctuations in total hours are determined by the intensive margin, e^t                     0, as in standard
real-business-cycle theory, there is no composition e¤ect, and aggregate consumption would
mimic individual consumption. In this case the assumed normality of preferences would
induce negative co-movement between consumption and hours.
     Labor force participation is determined by

                                         ^t + 1      1       (1       !)     ^t:
                                  ee
                                   ^t   =W                        1
                                                                                                       (23)
                                                         1 + (e         1) !

where        e   determines the Frisch elasticity of participation and it is related to the marginal
cost of participating in the labor market and the aggregate wage bill as a fraction of total
consumption,           = W N =C. The ratio    e= N   a¤ects the relative importance of extensive and
intensive margins. The lower the ratio, the stronger the co-movement between consumption
and hours.



5       Calibration
The model is calibrated to U.S. data. The time period is one quarter. The discount factor,
the capital share, and the depreciation rate of capital are determined as                   = 0:99,   = 0:3
and      = 0:025. Following Jaimovich and Rebelo (2008), the elasticity of capacity utilization
is     = 0:15. These parameters are fairly common in the real-business-cycle literature.
     The labor supply dynamics of the model are a¤ected by the steady-state fraction of
household members participating in the labor market, e; the marginal cost of participat-
ing,     e   (e); the consumption of non-participating households as a fraction of participating
households, !; and the inverse of the Frisch elasticities of hours,                N,   and employment,   e.

We set e = 0:68, roughly in line with the labor market participation rate in the U.S., and
 N     = 1 consistent with Kimball and Shapiro (2008) and broadly in line with the macro



                                                     14
literature.12   13
                     The remaining parameters are less standard, requiring further discussion.
       Consumption share of non-participants. We choose a baseline speci…cation in
which ! = 0:8, implying that members of a household that do not participate in the labor
market consume 20 percent less than employed members. The number is motivated as
follows. We use Consumer Expenditure Survey data on U.S. household expenditures for
1980-2003 to study consumption patterns across households with di¤erent levels of labor
supply.14 Looking at data for married couples with a minimum of 260 hours worked per
year the sample is divided into two groups: households that work less than 2600 hours in
a year (which corresponds to the 25th percentile) and households working more than this.
Households that work more than the threshold are found to consume 19.2 percent more
than those below the threshold.15 These numbers likely understate the consumption gap
between employed and unemployed as our calculations assume households working below
the threshold still work a nontrivial number of hours (in contrast to model assumptions).16
Of course, the documented drop in consumption might capture the existence of borrowing
constraints that are not included in our model. Additional evidence is provided by Aguiar
and Hurst (2005) which, using the Continuing Survey of Food Intake of Individuals (CSFII),
demonstrate that food consumption falls by roughly 19 percent when individuals transition
from employment to unemployment.
       The calibration of ! is below what is suggested in Hall (2009), which assumes consump-
tion of the unemployed to be 15 percent below consumption of employed. Hall’s value is
primarily based on evidence found in Browning and Crossley (2001), which studies declines
in total consumption during periods of unemployment using Canadian data. It considers
  12
     In particular, the calibrated steady-state corresponds to the average U.S. participation rate computed
as the ratio between total civilian employment from household data and the civilian non-institutional pop-
ulation between age 16 age 64. The years considered are 1948Q1-2008Q1.
  13
     Pistaferri (2003), often cited in the macro literature, estimates a Frish elasticity of 0:7, but focuses only
on males.
  14
     We thank Gianluca Violante for suggesting the data set and providing the data. The data used here
are from Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2008). A detailed description of the dataset can be found
in Krueger and Perri (2006).
  15
     In detail, we regress consumption on the hours dummy, controlling for age, eductation, race, region,
unrban/rural and year. We …nd a strongly signi…cant coe¢ cient. For consumption, we use the variable
consumption nondurable plus. This includes nondurable consumption and imputed services from durable
goods such as housing. Details on how this variable is constructed can be found in Krueger and Perri (2006).
  16
     The …rst group of households (working more than 2600 hours) works on average twice as many hours
than the second group. Still, the average number of hours worked in the second group is 2000, roughly
corresponding to the case in which a member of the couple has a full time job and the other is at home.


                                                       15
only unemployed agents; not non-participants. In Hall’s calibration, e is set equal to 0:95,
consistent with steady-state unemployment. Coupled with ! = 0:85 it is roughly the same as
our calibration which sets ! = 0:8 and e = 0:68: For example, the contribution of changes
in employment to changes in aggregate consumption is roughly the same under the two
alternative calibrations.
   Perfect insurance. Agents are assumed to have perfect insurance. This assumption
greatly simpli…es the analysis but implies that the observed relation between consumption
and hours worked comes from non-separable preferences and not from imperfect insurance.
There is much evidence that temporary income shocks are well insured, while permanent
shocks are only partially insured — see Attanasio and Davis (1996), Blundell, Pistaferri, and
Preston (2008) and Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2008). As discussed by the latter,
uninsurable income shocks tend to induce negative correlation between consumption and
hours because income e¤ects reduce labor supply — this holds under our preference spec-
i…cation with    > 1. Furthermore, in their consumption data, taken from the Consumer
Expenditure Survey, there is a positive correlation between hours and consumption in the
cross section after controlling for income dispersion arising from partially insurable perma-
nent income shocks. Hence, non-separability can explain the positive correlation between
hours worked and consumption also when permanent di¤erences in income are present. And
the mechanisms delineated in this paper would still be operative even if consumption dif-
ferentials are in part a result of incomplete markets. A similar argument can be made with
respect to di¤erences in wealth.
   Marginal cost of participating in the labor market. We calibrate the value for
the marginal disutility of working, de…ned as

                                       1   e   (e) e     1   e(e) e
                                   =                 =              :
                                                C            WN
Recall the parameter    denotes total wage compensation as a fraction of total consumption.
It is set equal to 0:9, roughly in line with empirical evidence — see, for example, Basu and
Kimball (2000). The marginal disutility of working is calibrated to     = 0:57, which implies
that the value of not working for any household member is about 43 percent of the ‡ow




                                                  16
value of employment. To see this, recall in steady state optimality implies
          "      1              1
                                           #
             Cu      (0)    Ce        (n)      1                          1
                                                 + Ce Cu = W n                                                    e   (e)
                1              1
                                                                                           = W n (1           )
                                                                                           = 0:43W n:

The left hand side of this expression represents the value in consumption units of shifting a
household member from employment to unemployment. It gives the value of leisure. To put
this number in perspective, a value of                  closer to 0:05 would correspond to the calibration of
Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008). Our calibration is closer to Hall (2006) and Shimer (2005),
which in our notation implicitly propose values for                              of 0:57 and 0:6.
      As a further consistency check, our benchmark calibration implies a cross-elasticity of
consumption of the employed with respect to the wage of 0:45, which is obtained from
combining (21) and (22), to give
                                                                         1
                            (         1)                   se        b       e    (        1)        1^
                     C^te =                        ^t
                                                   W                                                      t   +
                                              se                    se                          se
                                          1
                                   be
                               +                    ^ t + C^t   1    :
                                     se
The cross-elasticity of consumption of the employed, is above what is suggested in Hall
(2009), which assumes a cross-elasticity of 0:3. The cross-elasticity is pinned down by the
steady state of the model.
      Given the chosen values for ! and , the inverse intertemporal elasticity of substitution
is inferred from the steady-state restriction
                                                                                       1
                                                         1 (1    ) (1 !)
                                           = 1                                             :                                  (24)
                                                           1 + (e 1 1) !
This implies         = 1:56. The value is broadly consistent with the empirical literature on
intertemporal substitution in consumption, and in the mid-range between the values of 1 and
3 often used in the macroeconomic literature.17 To gauge robustness, consider calibrating
  = 2, as commonly done in macroeconomic studies. From (24) this implies                                                    = 0:3.
This calibration delivers a slightly higher co-movement between aggregate consumption and
total hours than our baseline. The stronger co-movement results from a larger employment
 17
      See Hall (2009) for a discussion on this literature.

                                                                17
response (due to the lower marginal cost of participating) at the expense of the hours
response. However, we constrain the relative response of the intensive and extensive margins
to be broadly consistent with US data.
      Frisch elasticity of employment (extensive margin). In the benchmark calibration,
we assume that the ratio of the inverse Frisch elasticity of the supply of hours is one fourth
the inverse Frisch elasticity of employment,               e= N   = 1=4. This choice approximates the
observed relative volatility of employment to total hours.18 To calibrate this parameter we
use measures of hours per worker, employment and total hours that come from payroll data
from the establishment survey, covering the non-farm private business sector.19 The payroll
data does not permit decomposing employment variations into changes in unemployment
and labor force participation — the former margin not considered here given the absence
of involuntary unemployment. The relative standard deviation of employment and total
hours is 0:84, in line with what is obtained from simulating the model under the benchmark
calibration (see section 6 and, in particular, Table II).
      The model predicts individual hours and employment to be perfectly correlated, imply-
ing a relative standard deviation between individual hours and employment of about 20%.
However, in the data, individual hours display a weaker correlation with total hours than
employment. While the correlation of total hours with employment is 0:97, the correlation
between individual hours and total hours is 0:68. Moreover, the correlation between indi-
vidual hours and employment is 0:48. As a result the relative volatility of individual hours
to employment implied by the model is lower than in the data. This weak correlation is
absent in the model because only one particular class of disturbance is adopted which have
the property of inducing perfect correlation between individual hours and employment. Per-
mitting exogenous ‡uctuations in the marginal cost of participation would induce a negative
correlation between individual hours and employment, reconciling the model with the data.
      The relative volatility of total hours and output implied by the calibrated model is
consistent with observed data. The measure of total hours that we consider is the adjusted
measure of total hours per capita Francis and Ramey (2008).
      Implied composition e¤ects on aggregate consumption. The key determinant
of comovement in the model is the composition e¤ect on aggregate consumption generated
 18
      Similar calibration is used in Dotsey and King (2006). See also Table II in Section 6.4.
 19
      The data range from 1948Q1-2008Q1.

                                                      18
by variations in employment. Given the calibration for the consumption share of non-
participants, the participation rate and the relative importance of the extensive margin, we
can provide a back-of-the-envelope quantitative evaluation of the magnitude of the com-
position e¤ect. The volatility of consumption expressed as the relative standard deviation
with respect to output for post-war data is roughly 50%. The relative standard devia-
tion of total hours to output is 90%.20 The relative volatility of employment to output is
0:9      0:84 = 76%. The composition e¤ect is then

                                                   e         (1 !)e      e
                                  (1    !)se           =                     = 0:11
                                                   y       e + (1 e) !   y

which corresponds to roughly one …fth of consumption volatility. This implies a non-
negligible role of composition e¤ects.
                                                                                                     00
       Real frictions. We set a low level of investment adjustment costs, with                            = 0:5.
Investment adjustment costs only play a role for co-movement in the case of news shocks,
                                                                                                               00
as will be discussed below. This particular value is chosen as it is the greatest value of
such that hours increase after a stationary productivity shock. Larger values imply stronger
co-movement but hours fall in response to technology shocks. The sensitivity of our results
to changes in this parameter is discussed in the next section. For habit formation, we choose
b = 0:5, slightly above microeconomic evidence but lower than macro-estimates.21 It satis…es
                                                   1
the steady-state restriction !se             b         e > 0, which ensures consumption of the unemployed
is higher than their habit component, bC.22 The properties of exogenous disturbances are
discussed as they arise.
       The benchmark calibration is summarized in Table I.

                                  Table I. Benchmark Calibration.
                                               00
        !              N   1        e             (1) e  b
        0:8   0:99 1       0:43        1=4       0:15 0:5         0:68 0:5     0:3    0:025   1:0053 1:56
  20
     See Table II below.
  21
     (Ravina 2005) estimates an external habit coe¢ cient of 0:29 and an internal habit coe¢ cient of 0:5.
  22
     As in other log-linearized models including habit formation, it is assumed that shocks are ‘small’enough
such that this does not occur too often in simulations.




                                                             19
6     Macroeconomic co-movement
This section describes the response of the economy to alternative demand shocks that have
been considered in the literature. In principle, all models can generate positive co-movement
without relying on total factor productivity changes. Consistently with the empirical litera-
ture on various kinds of demand shocks, the existence and strength of co-movement depends
on parameter values. The following is not intended to adduce evidence on the relative impor-
tance of any speci…c shock in business-cycle dynamics. This would require estimating and
investigating a more complex model of the economy. However, results do suggest that non-
separable preferences and heterogeneity are potential resolutions to co-movement problems
arising in neoclassical theory.

6.1    Investment-speci…c technology shocks
Shocks to investment demand have received considerable attention in the business-cycle
literature. They are here emphasized on three grounds. First, as motivated by Greenwood,
Hercowitz, and Hu¤man (1988), investment-speci…c technology shocks can be interpreted as
shifts in the marginal e¢ ciency of investment; or, alternatively, “news”about future returns
to investment, which Keynes (1936) considered a major determinant of business cycles.
However, in standard real-business-cycle models, investment-speci…c shocks coupled with
endogenous capacity utilization, induce substitution of resources towards new investment
goods, and toward higher usage of existing capital, increasing investment at the expense of
consumption. Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Hu¤man (1988) resolve this di¢ culty by assuming
preferences which eliminate the wealth e¤ect on labor supply. The approach of this paper
does not take a stand on whether wealth e¤ects are large or small. Instead, it proposes
preferences which are calibrated to observable characteristics of data.
    Second, Eusepi and Preston (2008) show that a real-business-cycle model augmented
with adaptive learning produces expectation-driven business cycles, induced by shifts in
beliefs about future returns to capital. Changes in expectations, endogenous to neutral
technology shocks, produce ‡uctuations in the demand for investment which have similar
substitution e¤ects as in the case of exogenous investment-speci…c technology shocks.
    Third, evidence supports investment-speci…c technology shocks being a major source of
business-cycle variation. Both the empirical vector autoregression and structural DSGE

                                             20
model literatures attest to this — see Fisher (2006), Justiniano and Primiceri (2008) and
Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2008). Investment-speci…c shocks have been inter-
preted as reduced-form measures of e¢ ciency in …nancial markets and as …nance premium
shocks in models of the …nancial accelerator. Despite these research e¤orts, it has proven
di¢ cult to obtain positive co-movement between consumption, hours and investment con-
ditional on this type of shock, even in models that include a variety of nominal and real
…ctions.
       Figure 1 shows the impulse response of consumption, output, investment and total hours
to an investment-speci…c technology shock. The solid line shows the model response under
our benchmark calibration which assumes !, the consumption share of non-participants, to
be equal to 0:8. The dotted line describes the real-business-cycle model where ! = 1. We
assume the investment-speci…c technology shock, q^t , to be …rst-order autoregression with
autocorrelation coe¢ cient equal to 0:85.23 The qualitative response of the economy under
the benchmark calibration is not a¤ected by the choice of this parameter.
       Under the real-business-cycle calibration, consumption drops on impact and remains
below steady state for approximately ten quarters. In contrast, the non-separable preferences
model produces positive co-movement between investment, hours and consumption. Labor
productivity increases slightly (because of the higher utilization of existing capital) but
by less than aggregate consumption. In fact, the consumption response is twice as large on
impact and nearly three times as large at the peak, after …ve quarters. As shown in Figure 2,
this is not true for individual consumption of the employed and unemployed. Consumption
of non-participants decreases slightly in accordance with strong substitution e¤ects, while
consumption of employed workers increases, but by less than the increase in productivity.24
These relative magnitudes are observed because normality of consumption and leisure makes
it impossible to have individual consumption and hours co-move unless TFP increases more
than proportionally. Figure 2 also shows both employment and hours increase and that the
extensive margin accounts for a large part of total hours variation.
       As a …nal note, neither habit formation nor investment adjustment costs are required
  23
     To put this number into perspective, in estimated models values range from 0:72 in Justiniano and
Primiceri (2008) to 0:87 in Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2008). In calibrated models, Greenwood,
Hercowitz, and Hu¤man (1988) use I = 0:84 and Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (2000) use I = 0:89
in terms of quarterly frequency. In contrast, Jaimovich and Rebelo (2008) assume a unit root.
  24
     The small rise in employed consumption is a consequence of investment adjustment costs.


                                                   21
                                                                            Consumption                                                                        Output

                                                 0.4
                                                                                                                                      1.5




                        % dev. from SS




                                                                                                                  % dev. from SS
                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                          1
                                                          0

                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                         -0.2


                                         -0.4                                                                                             0
                                                              0            5                10         15                                     0       5                   10    15
                                                                                Quarters                                                                      Quarters

                                                                               Investment                                                                 Total hours

                                                          7
                                                                                                                                      1.5
                                                          6
                                         % dev. from SS




                                                                                                                  % dev. from SS
                                                          5
                                                                                                                                          1
                                                          4
                                                          3
                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                          2

                                                          1
                                                                                                                                          0
                                                          0
                                                              0            5                10         15                                     0       5                   10    15
                                                                                Quarters                                                                      Quarters



Figure 1: Impulse response to an investment-speci…c shock. The solid line represents
our benchmark economy with ! = 0:8. The dotted line indicates the model’s response
assuming ! = 1.


                                                              Consumption of employed and unemployed                                                  Labor productivity
                                                 0.3                                                                                 0.15


                                                 0.2
                       % dev. from SS




                                                                                                                 % dev. from SS




                                                                                                                                          0.1

                                                 0.1

                                                                                                                                     0.05
                                                          0


                                         -0.1                                                                                               0
                                                              0            5                  10       15                                         0       5                10    15
                                                                                Quarters                                                                       Quarters

                                                                           Individual hours                                                                   Employment
                                                                                                                                          1.4
                                         0.25                                                                                             1.2
                                                 0.2
               % dev. from SS




                                                                                                                         % dev. from SS




                                                                                                                                            1
                                         0.15                                                                                             0.8
                                                 0.1                                                                                      0.6
                                         0.05                                                                                             0.4

                                                          0                                                                               0.2

                                    -0.05                                                                                                   0
                                                              0            5                  10       15                                         0       5                10    15
                                                                                Quarters                                                                       Quarters



Figure 2: Impulse response to an investment-speci…c shock. The Figure refers to the
benchmark model with ! = 0:8. The solid line indicates the response of employed and the
dotted line represents the consumption response of non-participants.


                                                                                                            22
for co-movement, although habit formation plays a role in magnifying the consumption
response.

6.2          News shocks
In a series of papers, Beaudry and Portier (2004, 2006, 2007) have sparked renewed interest
in the notion of news-driven business cycles. We de…ne a “news shock”as new information
about future TFP productivity modelled according to

                                          A^t =     ^
                                                  a At 1     +    t p   + t;

where A^t is a stationary TFP process, and               t       and    t   are i.i.d. disturbances.25 The shock
t    a¤ects TFP p periods later. The shock                   t   does not a¤ect current TFP but provides
information about its future evolution.
         The role of news shocks in the business cycle is still controversial. Schmitt-Grohe and
Uribe (2008) …nd that news shocks play a key role in business-cycle ‡uctuations in an
estimated real-business-cycle model. Evidence on news shocks using structural vector au-
toregressions is mixed. Sims (2009) proposes an identi…cation which results in news shocks
leading to a decrease in hours and investment, and a small increase in consumption. Beaudry
and Lucke (2009), using a di¤erent identi…cation scheme and a di¤erent set of variables, show
that an identi…ed news shock leads to a sharp increase in hours and stock prices, as suggested
in Beaudry and Portier (2006).
         In a real-business-cycle model this news shock would increase consumption but reduce
hours and investment because of the positive wealth e¤ect. In contrast, our benchmark
model without investment adjustment costs would produce co-movement, but of the wrong
kind: it would imply a drop in consumption as well! This is because the wealth e¤ect would
induce lower participation and thus lower aggregate consumption, while individual consump-
tion of the employed and unemployed increase. To generate a positive response in hours
and investment, agents need an incentive to invest today, to capture bene…ts of higher TFP
tomorrow. Following Jaimovich and Rebelo (2008), adjustment costs to investment provide
a reduced-form representation of the economic mechanisms that would induce investment
in the current period. With high enough adjustment costs, so that the substitution e¤ect
dominates the wealth e¤ect, hours and investment rise in response to a news shock.
    25
         See, for example, Christiano, Ilut, Motto, and Rostagno (2007) and Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2008).

                                                        23
       Worth underscoring is that news shocks about productivity can be thought of as a special
case of a TFP shock which is more persistent than a random walk. As shown in Campbell
(1994) for the standard RBC model, the long-term e¤ect of the shock dominates the initial
e¤ect so that income e¤ects drive consumption and hours in opposite direction. Hence,
TPF shocks need to satisfy restrictions on their persistence to deliver comovement. Such
restrictions depend on the speci…cs of the model; in particular its ability to generate strong
substitution e¤ects via adjustment costs to investment, endogenous capacity utilization and
aggregate labor supply elasticity.
       A more appealing approach to modeling news shocks about technology is o¤ered in
Comin, Gertler, and Santacreu (2009).26 Agents receive news about future production pos-
sibilities, but to adopt them, …rms must start investing when the news arrives. Endogenous
technology adoption produces strong substitution e¤ects, generating an increase in hours
and investment. A similar mechanism is present in Li and Mehkari (2009), which has
endogenous …rm entry and entry costs that depend positively on the number of existing
…rms.27
       The mechanisms operating in Comin, Gertler, and Santacreu (2009) reveal a more fun-
damental issue in the literature on news shocks. Because of strong substitution e¤ects
arising from technology adoption, the co-movement problem is inverted in their model: con-
sumption falls on impact (or increases weakly if the model is augmented with endogenous
entry) and hours and investment rise in response to a positive news shock.28 As mentioned
above, this property is common to Eusepi and Preston (2008) which seeks to endogenize
how news about future TFP a¤ects current resource use. Beliefs about future returns to
capital are revised endogenously to TFP shocks, leading to dynamics that are qualitatively
like investment-speci…c technology shocks. The model proposed here helps reconcile the high
substitution e¤ects required to generate an economic expansion after a news shock with the
observed co-movement between consumption, hours and investment. It does so without the
need to assume a su¢ ciently high degree of aggregate increasing returns to scale to allow
  26
     They also get desired movement in asset prices, which the current model fails to get. For a discussion
see Jaimovich and Rebelo (2008).
  27
     Firms have an incentive to enter the market before the productivity shock is realized to limit the cost of
entry. At the same time, endogenous entry, coupled with very inelastic capacity utilization cost, produces
an immediate increase in TFP, allowing investment hours and consumption to co-move.
  28
     Consumption falls after a TFP shock because of strong substitution e¤ects.



                                                      24
                                                          Consumption                                                      Output

                                         1.2                                                                 3
                                                  1
                                                                                                           2.5




                % dev. from SS




                                                                                          % dev. from SS
                                         0.8
                                                                                                             2
                                         0.6
                                                                                                           1.5
                                         0.4
                                                                                                             1
                                         0.2

                                                  0                                                        0.5

                                 -0.2                                                                        0
                                                      0   5                10   15                               0   5                 10   15
                                                               Quarters                                                   Quarters

                                                              Investment                                                 Total hours


                                                  8                                                          2
                                 % dev. from SS




                                                                                          % dev. from SS
                                                  6                                                        1.5


                                                  4                                                          1

                                                                                                           0.5
                                                  2

                                                                                                             0
                                                  0
                                                      0   5                10   15                               0   5                 10   15
                                                               Quarters                                                   Quarters



Figure 3: Impulse response to a news shock. The solid line represents our benchmark
economy with ! = 0:8. The dotted line indicates the model’s response assuming ! = 1.


consumption to move in the right direction.
   Figures 3 and 4 illustrate the response of the economy to the news of a positive produc-
tivity shock in the fourth quarter (p = 3), where the horizon is chosen for comparison with
the estimate of Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2008). The impulse response corresponds to the
benchmark calibration. Additionally, we set the autocorrelation coe¢ cient                                                                       a   to 0:9; as in
Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2008) and Christiano, Ilut, Motto, and Rostagno (2007). In the
real-business-cycle model, consumption drops below its steady-state value after the initial
increase, because of substitution e¤ects. In the non-separable preferences model, aggregate
consumption increases gradually before the shock is realized, as employment responds posi-
tively to the news shock. The magnitude of the response and the existence of co-movement
of course depends on chosen parameters. Under our benchmark calibration, positive co-
movement is obtained for values of the investment adjustment costs parameter as low as 0:3
— for lower values hours and investment drop as substitution e¤ects are too weak.
   Note that the longer is the horizon over which news is relevant, the weaker will be co-
movement because substitution e¤ects induced by investment adjustment costs diminish.



                                                                                     25
                                         Consumption of employed and unemployed                                    Labor productivity
                                                                                                         1.2
                                     1
                                                                                                          1
                                   0.8




                 % dev. from SS




                                                                                        % dev. from SS
                                                                                                         0.8
                                   0.6
                                                                                                         0.6
                                   0.4

                                   0.2                                                                   0.4

                                     0                                                                   0.2

                                  -0.2                                                                    0
                                         0            5              10           15                           0    5                10   15
                                                          Quarters                                                       Quarters

                                                      Individual hours                                                  Employment


                                   0.5                                                                   1.5

                                   0.4
                 % dev. from SS




                                                                                        % dev. from SS
                                   0.3                                                                    1

                                   0.2
                                                                                                         0.5
                                   0.1

                                     0
                                                                                                          0
                                  -0.1
                                         0            5              10           15                           0    5                10   15
                                                          Quarters                                                       Quarters



Figure 4: Impulse response to a news shock. The Figure refers to the benchmark
model with ! = 0:8. The solid line indicates the response of employed and the dotted line
represents the consumption response of non-participants.


Similarly, the more persistent are technology shocks the weaker will be co-movement, again
because substitution e¤ects are more likely to be dominated by income e¤ects. Aggregate
consumption on impact rises less than labor productivity, as the initial response of employ-
ment is weak, but in subsequent periods it becomes stronger. Finally, the extensive margin
is the main determinant of the response in total hours worked.
   The news shock co-movement problem has recently received much attention. Beaudry
and Portier (2007) discuss conditions to obtain expectations-driven business cycles in neo-
classical models. They show that production complementarities can induce positive co-
movement. Den Haan and Kaltenbrunner (2007) obtain expectations-driven business cycles
in a search model with an ine¢ cient steady-state level of investment. Chen and Song (2007)
discuss a model where capital is allocated ine¢ ciently among …rms and show the possibility
of co-movement in response to news shocks. Guo (2009) suggests a model with …nancial
frictions coupled with additional real frictions such as habit formation and investment ad-
justment costs. Finally, Christiano, Ilut, Motto, and Rostagno (2007) show that monetary
policy can lead to a positive response to news shocks, coupled with a stock market boom.


                                                                                   26
       The approach detailed here is closely related to Jaimovich and Rebelo’s (2008) which
modi…es preferences proposed by Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Hu¤man (1988), and, in con-
junction with variable capacity utilization and investment adjustment costs, generates co-
movement. Our model advances that analysis by permitting wealth e¤ects on labor supply.
Furthermore, it demonstrates that departures from the representative agent construct may
prove fruitful in reconciling certain aspects of theory with data.29

6.3       Government spending shocks
Baxter and King (1993) investigate the implications of variation in unproductive govern-
ment expenditures for macroeconomic dynamics in a standard real-business-cycle model.
Both permanent and transitory changes in government spending lead to a fall in aggregate
consumption and a rise in hours work. Depending on model parameters, investment may
rise or fall.
       These predictions have been the focus of much empirical research. Galí, López-Salido,
and Vallés (2007) provides a useful survey of the literature. For our purposes it su¢ ces to
note that there is now an extensive literature on the consumption response to government
expenditure shocks. And evidence on the sign of this relationship fails to speak with unani-
mous voice. Examples on either side of this debate are Blanchard and Perotti (2002), which
suggests positive co-movement based on an identi…ed vector autoregression; and Ramey
and Shapiro (1998) and Ramey (2008) which suggest negative co-movement based on the
so-called narrative approach.30 Our intention is not to take a strong stand on any particular
piece of evidence. Rather, it is to show that the posited framework is in principle consistent
with either correlation, while simultaneously being consistent with positive co-movement in
response to investment-speci…c technology shocks and news shocks.
       To this end, consider a shock to the resource constraint. The shock can be interpreted as
an unproductive government spending shock, where resources are pulled out of the economy.
Assume the shock is a …rst-order autoregression with autocorrelation coe¢ cient                g   = 0:99,
consistent with Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2008) and Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti
  29
    See also Chang and Kim (2007).
  30
    Concern about the validty of both identi…cation strategies has been raised by Leeper, Walker, and Yang
(2008) which argues invertibility problems arise because agents have foresight about many changes in the
…scal environment that the econometrician is not privy to.



                                                   27
                                                          Consumption                                                   Output
                                            0.3                                                         1.6

                                            0.2
                                                                                                        1.4
                                            0.1




                  % dev. from SS




                                                                                       % dev. from SS
                                             0
                                                                                                        1.2
                                       -0.1

                                       -0.2
                                                                                                         1
                                       -0.3

                                       -0.4                                                             0.8
                                                  0   5   10      15    20   25                               0   5   10      15    20   25
                                                           Quarters                                                    Quarters

                                                           Investment                                                 Total hours
                                             2                                                          1.8


                                                                                                        1.6
                                            1.5
                           % dev. from SS




                                                                                       % dev. from SS
                                                                                                        1.4
                                             1
                                                                                                        1.2

                                            0.5
                                                                                                         1


                                             0                                                          0.8
                                                  0   5   10      15    20   25                               0   5   10      15    20   25
                                                           Quarters                                                    Quarters



Figure 5: Impulse response to a government spending shock. The solid line represents
our benchmark economy with ! = 0:8. The dotted line indicates the model’s response
assuming ! = 1.


(2008). Figure 5 shows the benchmark model predicts a small increase in consumption and in
investment, while output and hours increase sharply. This shows that the calibrated model
can generate a joint positive response in both consumption and investment, as suggested
by some vector autoregression evidence. With separable preferences the crowding out of
consumption is clear. Figure 6 evidences the role of the extensive margin.
   The main di¤erence between government spending shocks and investment-speci…c tech-
nology shocks is that high substitution e¤ects are coupled with a negative wealth e¤ect, as
the resources available for investment and consumption shrink. The presence of habit forma-
tion is important to obtaining a positive response of consumption to government spending
disturbances given the calibration of remaining parameters. For values of the habit para-
meter, b, less than 0:24; consumption displays a small drop, delivering a response consistent
with evidence found in Ramey (2008). Regardless, this parameterization would deliver im-
pulse responses to investment-speci…c technology shocks and news shocks that are similar
to Figures 1 and 2 and Figures 3 and 4 respectively. Lastly, Figure 6 shows that labor
productivity (the wage) displays a small drop. The model can produce a positive response


                                                                                  28
                                                       Consumption of employed and unemployed                                                     Labor productivity
                                                0.05                                                                      -0.06

                                                                                                                          -0.07
                                                   0




                      % dev. from SS




                                                                                                     % dev. from SS
                                                                                                                          -0.08

                                           -0.05                                                                          -0.09

                                                                                                                               -0.1
                                                -0.1
                                                                                                                          -0.11

                                           -0.15                                                                          -0.12
                                                       0      5       10      15       20       25                                    0   5          10      15        20   25
                                                                       Quarters                                                                       Quarters

                                                                    Individual hours                                                                Employment
                                                0.25                                                                            1.5

                                                0.24                                                                           1.45

                                                                                                                                1.4
                               % dev. from SS




                                                                                                              % dev. from SS
                                                0.23
                                                                                                                               1.35
                                                0.22
                                                                                                                                1.3
                                                0.21
                                                                                                                               1.25
                                                 0.2                                                                            1.2

                                                0.19                                                                           1.15
                                                       0      5       10      15       20       25                                    0   5          10      15        20   25
                                                                       Quarters                                                                       Quarters



Figure 6: Impulse response to a government spending shock. The Figure refers to
the benchmark model with ! = 0:8. The solid line indicates the response of employed and
the dotted line represents the consumption response of non-participants.


of the real wage with the addition of a countercyclical mark-up, or a mild degree of increas-
ing returns. The minimum required level of increasing returns would not be su¢ cient to
generate a positive response in consumption for low values of habit.31
      Several recent papers have proposed alternative mechanisms to explain positive co-
movement in response to unproductive government expenditures shocks. Galí, López-Salido,
and Vallés (2007) demonstrate that a model with rule of thumb consumers induces positive
co-movement after a government spending shock. However, in their model, the assumption of
rule of thumb consumers requires the existence of nominal rigidities to provide co-movement.
A model with non-separable preferences and costly labor market participation is not equiv-
alent to assuming rule of thumb consumers. Monacelli and Perotti (2008) use a variant of
Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Hu¤man (1988) preferences proposed by Jaimovich and Rebelo
(2008) in conjunction with nominal rigidities to similar e¤ect. However, for consumption to
 31
      The model generates an increase in the real wage with with the following production function
                                                                                                0:08                                          1
                                                                      Yt = At (Kt Nt )                        Kt (Xt Nt )                              :




                                                                                                 29
move signi…cantly in response to government shocks requires a parameterization that almost
eliminates the wealth e¤ect on labor supply, seemingly inconsistent with evidence in Kimball
and Shapiro (2008). As emphasized in earlier discussion, the model presented in this paper
obviates the need to take a direct stand on the importance of wealth e¤ects on labor supply.
Finally, Ravn, Schmitt-Grohe, and Uribe (2006) explore the role of good-speci…c habit for-
mation in a real-business-cycle model with monopolistic competition. These so-called deep
habits deliver a positive correlation between government spending shocks and consumption.
       Closely related to the question of co-movement is the debate about the magnitude of
the …scal multiplier on consumption and output.32 The above papers all predict positive
impact e¤ects on consumption and also output. However, the magnitude of the output
multiplier is small in the case of Ravn, Schmitt-Grohe, and Uribe (2006) and the model
proposed by Monacelli and Perotti (2008) generates large e¤ects only when wealth e¤ects
on labor supply are small. This paper generates sizeable …scal multipliers. The impact
multiplier of the non-separable preferences model is 1.2; in contrast the separable preference
real-business-cycle model has multiplier slightly below one consistent with Baxter and King
(1993). Heterogeneity may be quite important for assessing the transmission and e¤ects of
policy disturbances.

6.4       Business-Cycle Statistics
As a …nal exercise, Table II shows business-cycle statistics generated by each individual
shock along with corresponding moments for U.S. data.33 All shocks have unit standard
deviation since only relative measures of …t are presented — their scale do not matter. All
  32
      Interest in the size of the …scal multiplier has heightened given the current recession. In models incor-
porating nominal rigidites, Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2009) and Eggertsson (2009) give explicit
consideration to the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates and demonstrate that when this constraint
is binding …scal multipliers will be larger than values in normal times, which are approximately unity. The
results presented in this paper suggest its not obvious, even under competitive markets and normal times,
that the multiplier be near or below unity.
   33
      We use US quarterly data from 1948Q1 to 2007Q4. Output is real GDP, consumption is consumption of
nondurable goods and services and investment is …xed business investment and consumption durable goods.
All series are in real percapita terms using GDP de‡ator and the Francis and Ramey (2008) measure of
population. For total hours we use the measure in Francis and Ramey, with the exception of the statistics
involving individual hours and employment for which we use index measures from the total nonfarm business
sector. Consequently, we compute the relative volatility and correlation of indiviudual hours and employment
with respect to a di¤erent measure of total hours: total hours worked in nonfarm business sector. Finally,
as a measure of capacity utilization we use the available series for the manufacturing and service sector.



                                                      30
shocks produce positive co-movement among consumption, investment and total hours.34
Statistics are comparable to what would be obtained using TFP shocks only as in the stan-
dard real-business-cycle model (virtually indistinguishable from the last column in the table
and therefore not reported). For the most part, investment-speci…c technology shocks bear
closest resemblance to data moments. Not surprisingly, the model has di¢ culty capturing
properties of labor productivity over the business cycle as current labor productivity can
only be increased through increases in capital utilization.




7      Conclusion
The paper shows that a model with non-separable preferences and labor market partici-
pation can generate positive co-movement between consumption, investment and hours in
response to demand shocks. The result is due to two distinct mechanisms. First, individual
consumption is a¤ected by the number of hours worked as predicted by theories of home pro-
duction. Second, variation in participation a¤ects aggregate consumption. The interaction
of latter with the consumption heterogeneity induced by the former engenders composi-
tional changes in aggregate consumption that delivers co-movement. The results suggest
heterogeneity might be central to explaining some observed characteristics of macroeco-
nomic dynamics.




  34
    Interestingly, the model successfully produces co-movement in the amount of hours worked in the
consumption and investment sector, as opposed to the standard real-business-cycle model which implies
a strong negative comovement. This issue is taken up in further detail by Benhabib, Rogerson, and Wright
(1991) and DiCecio (2009).


                                                  31
             Table II. Business-cycle properties
                                  Model by Shock
         Data Investment-speci…c Government Spending News


                  Panel A: Relative standard deviation
C= Y     0.52         0.20                     0.12      0.35
I= Y     2.82         3.32                     1.00      2.84
N= Y     0.91         0.95                     1.07      0.71
P r= Y   0.50         0.05                     0.07      0.34
P r= N   0.55         0.05                     0.07      0.48
U= Y     2.30         1.13                     0.85      0.80
e= N     0.84         0.83                     0.85      0.76
n= N     0.27         0.17                     0.15      0.24


                             Panel B: Correlation
 C;Y     0.73         0.95                     0.95      0.98
 I;Y     0.78         1.00                     0.92      0.99
 N;Y     0.87         1.00                     1.00      0.98
 P r;Y   0.42         0.90                    -0.96      0.91
 P r;N   -0.08        0.89                    -0.97      0.81
 U;Y     0.90         0.97                     1.00      0.93
  n;e    0.48         1.00                     1.00      0.95


                 Note: P r denotes productivity




                                 32
8     Appendix
8.1       Model Steady state
Steady state. Consider the model solution in steady state, expressed in terms of stationary
variables. For any non-stationary variable Zt the steady-state value of Zt =Xt is denoted Z.
Deviations from the balanced growth path are denoted Z^t = ln Zt =Z . Similar notation
applies to stationary variables which need not be normalized. The real interest rate is
de…ned as
                                                                               1
                                       Y   U Rk                                        1+
                                         =      =                                                  ;
                                       K
applying the normalization U = 1. In addition we assume G = 0. From the capital
accumulation equations we have
                                                    I                 1
                                                      =1                           :
                                                    K
Next, de…ne
                                                                                               1
                                                WN                                     C
                                           =       = (1                        )
                                                 C                                     Y
where we use
                                                        C   Y              I
                                                          =                  :
                                                        K   K              K
From the labor supply …rst-order condition we get

                                   Ce               b    1
                                                             C    0
                                                                      (n)
                                                                               = (n) W
                                                             1

so that
                    0
                        (n) n                       W en     C                                          (    1)
                              =(               1)                                      1C
                                                                                               =                  1
                                                                                                                      ;
                         (n)                         C e C e  b                                        se   eb
where
                                                                        e
                                   se = C e e=C =                             :
                                                                  e + (1 e) !
From the …rst-order condition for participation we have

                                                                                           1
                                               Ce       Cu = W n                               e   (e) :
                                       1

De…ne ! = cu =ce . Dividing for steady-state consumption and re-arranging we get

                                   1       e   (e) e
                                                     +                    (1       !) se = :                              (25)
                                               c                      1

                                                                 33
                  1   e (e)e
The parameter          c
                               measures the marginal cost of participation in terms of consumption
units (as a fraction of total consumption). We can express it as a fraction                                         of wage earnings

                                           1       e   (e) e   WN
                                                             =    =                      :
                                                       C       C
Substituting in (25) we obtain

                                                   (1        !) se = (1             ) :                                                 (26)
                                               1
This particular expression leads to (24). Finally, the steady-state amount of hours worked
can be determined by (0),
                                                                                                     1
                               Ce     b    1
                                            C   se b                        1
                                                                             e               (n)
                                              =                              1e
                                                                                =                        ;
                               Cu     b    1C   !se b                                        (0)
                                                                                                         1
where the left hand side is restricted to be positive, or !se                                   b            e > 0. Summing up, the
model implies 15 equations in 15 unknowns, given the parameters. We …x e, ! and n which
determine , (n) and (0) consistent with the steady state.

8.2    Non-separable utility and the normality of consumption and
       leisure
Here we assume a stationary environment (                                  = 0) for expositional simplicity. Positive
growth involves a straightforward adjustment which results in the expression reported in
the main text. Consider an individual with preferences

                                                       (ct       bCt 1 )1           (1        lt )
                                  U (ct ; lt ) =                                                                                        (27)
                                                                     1
                                                                                                                      0           00
where nt = 1 lt and lt denotes time not spend in market activities and where                                              (n) ;        (n) >
0. The budget constraint is
                                                   ct + lt Wt = Mt                                                                      (28)

where Mt denotes non-labor income. Next, de…ne
                                                                  00
                                                                       (n) n
                                                             =         0(n)
which de…nes the curvature of ( ) at the steady state. The following Lemma states the …rst
restriction on utility that guarantees concavity.

                                                                 34
Lemma 5 Assume             satis…es the restriction

                                                     (          1)2
                                                >                                              1
                                                                                                   ;
                                                                      se            eb

then the utility function (27) is concave.

Proof. Let us consider (27) in terms of consumption and leisure. Then we have

                                                 (c           bC)1              0
                                  Ul =                                              (1        l) > 0
                                                          1
where Ux denoted the marginal utility with respect to the argument x, and where, as above,
 0
     ( ) denotes the derivative of ( ) with respect to hours worked. Similarly we get

                                                (c        bC)1             00
                                      Ull =                                     (1           l) < 0:
                                                      1
It is straightforward to show that Uc > 0 and Ucc < 0. Further, concavity requires

                                                Ucc Ull           (Ucl )2                 0:

Substituting for the partial derivatives gives

                                                                      2                                   2
                                (n)       00
                                               (n) (c         bC)                    (c           bC)           0
                                                                                                                    (n)2
                            1
which, simplifying, yields
                                                                                    00                     0
                                      2        (n)    0                                   (n) n                (n) n
                      (c    bC)                           (n)                            0 (n)
                                                                                                                     :
                                               n                           1                                    (n)
Evaluating this condition at the model’s steady state provides
                                  0
                                      (n) n  Wn                                          (             1)
                                            = e (                      1) =                                ;               (29)
                                       (n)    c                                              se         eb
where for simplicity we assume no growth. Hence, concavity requires
                             "                         #
                                                     2
                                               (  1)
                                          se 1           0:
                                   se eb


      The next Lemma states the restrictions required for both consumption and leisure to be
normal goods.

                                                                 35
Lemma 6 Consumption and leisure are normal goods if and only if
                                                   (            1)
                                               >                    :
                                                       se        eb
Violation of the above condition implies that consumption is an inferior good.

Proof. Consider the …rst-order conditions of the static utility maximization in (27) and
(28). Total di¤erentiation of the individual …rst-order conditions and budget constraint
gives
                                           @c                 @l
                       (W Ucc    Ucl )        + (W UCl Ull )                               = 0
                                          @M                 @M
                                                     @c       @l
                                                        +W                                 = 1
                                                    @M       @M
where W is kept constant and M denotes non-wage income. We have
                                                                                      1
                            @c                          Ucl          W Ucc
                                      =    1       W
                           @M                           Ull          W Ucl
                                          2                                         ! 13
                                                          U                   Ucc
                                                       Ul Ucll
                                      = 4 1                                               5:
                                                                              Uc
                                                       Uc UUll                Ucl
                                                                              Uc
                                                            l


Substituting for the chosen utility and using the steady-state restrictions described above
provides                    "                                                                  #
                                                                                           1       1
                        @c                                           (          1)
                           = 1+
                       @M       se             eb                        se      eb
which states that consumption is an inferior good if and only if
                                                            (            1)
                                               <                             < 0:
                                 se       eb                    se        eb
Next, the condition to have both consumption an leisure normal good is
                                      Ucl =Ul       Ucc =Uc
                                                            < 0:
                                      Ull Ul        Ucl =Uc
Substituting for our chosen functional forms we get
                                    n                       1
                                                            ( 1)
                                                                              <0
                                  c bC                 +     se eb

if and only if
                                                   (            1)
                                               >                    :
                                                       se        eb


                                                       36
8.3      The log-linearized model I: individual labor supply and nor-
         mality
Re-expressing (9) in terms of stationary variables and log-linearizing gives

                     (         1) h                                                                 i
                                 1
                                    se C^te              b       1
                                                                     e ^t            C^t   1            +       ^t = ^t + W
                                                                                                                n         ^ t:                       (30)
                    se       eb

Combining with

                         1                                                                          (           1)                         1^
                             1e
                                         se C^te    be       1
                                                                     ^t        C^t    1    +                           n
                                                                                                                       ^t =                     t;   (31)
               se        b

obtained by log-linearization of (4) in stationary terms we get the Frisch individual labor
supply
                                                                  ^t +                    1^
                                                        Nn
                                                         ^t      =W                            t:                                                    (32)

where the inverse of the Frisch elasticity is de…ned as

                                                                 (         1)2
                                                N   =                                                       1
                                                                                     se        eb

As shown in Lemma 1, concavity of the utility function requires                                                               N        > 0. Notice here
the term    appears as we assume positive growth. We can also express the condition for
normality of consumption and leisure in terms of                                      N.       The implied restrictions on the labor
supply are summarized in proposition 4.

8.4      The log-linearized model II
Households. Substituting in (32) for the steady state value of                                                           and for the de…nition of
se we obtain
                                                ^t + 1                    1 (1    ) (1 !) ^
                                         Nn
                                          ^t   =W                                           t:                                                       (33)
                                                                            1 + (e 1 1) !
For the marginal utility of the unemployed we obtain

                                    1           h                                                               i
                                                                                                                             1^
                                           1e
                                                    !se C^tu          be        1
                                                                                      ^t            C^t     1        =            t:                 (34)
                         !se         b

   Employment is determined by (7). Re-expressing in terms of stationary variables and
log-linearizing we get

                                                                                                        1       ee            1        ee ^
                             C^te        ! C^tu se =             ^t + n
                                                                 W    ^t                       e                     e^t +                      t    (35)
                         1                                                                                  C                          C

                                                                          37
where
                                                                                ee e
                                                                    e   =              :
                                                                                 e

Using the assumption that the marginal cost of participating in terms of the consumption
good is a fraction of labor earnings,

                                                                    1     ee
                                                                                =
                                                                          C
we get
                                           C^te       ! C^tu se =               ^t + n
                                                                                W    ^t               e    e^t + ^ t :                  (36)
                                      1
Furthermore, Combining (31) and (34) with(36) we obtain the inverse Frisch elasticity of
participation         =       e   from


                                                  e
                                                            ^ t + (1
                                                      e^t = W
                                                                                  !) se
                                                                                        +                 ^t                            (37)
                                                                                (   1)
By substituting for the values of                          and se that are consistent with the steady state we get
(23).
   Log-linearization of equations (10), (11) and (12) in stationary terms yields


                                                                     ^ tK + ^ t
                                                               U^t = R                         ^;
                                                                                               t                                        (38)
                          h                                                                                                         i
         ^ = Et               1              (1            )    ^ t+1
                                                                R K
                                                                      + ^ t+1 +                           (1       ) ^t+1     ^ t+1 ;   (39)
          t

and
          ^t         ^        q^t =        2 00
                                                      ^ t + I^t     I^t     1   +          1        2 00
                                                                                                           Et ^ t+1 + I^t+1       I^t   (40)
                      t

               00
where    =          U = 0.
   The capital accumulation equation (3) and the budget/resource constraint are

                         ^ t+1 =          I ^                                           ^t
                         K                  It        (1         )^ t + (1             )K                      1
                                                                                                                    1+      U^t
                                          K
and
                                                  I                           C ^
                                                        I^t       q^t +              ^ t = Y^t :
                                                                                Ct + G
                                                  Y                           Y
Finally, total hours are
                                                                  ^t = e^t + n
                                                                  N          ^t:



                                                                          38
Firms. Log-linearization of the …rm’s …rst-order conditions and production function gives

                                          ^ t = Y^t
                                          W            ^t ;
                                                       N

where
                        Y^t = A^t       ^ t + U^t + K
                                                    ^ t + (1        ^t :
                                                                   )N

and


                                    ^ tK = y^t
                                    R            U^t   ^ t + ^t:
                                                       K




                                                 39
References
Abel, A. B. (1990): “Asset Prices under Habit Formation and Catching up with the
     Jonses,”American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 90, 38–42.

Aguiar, M., and E. Hurst (2005): “Consumption versus Expenditure,” Journal of Po-
     litical Economy, 113(5), 919–948.

Attanasio, O., and S. J. Davis (1996): “Relative Wage Movements and the Distribution
     of Consumption,”Journal of Political Economy, 104(6), 1227–62.

Barro, R. J., and R. G. King (1984): “Time-separable Preferences and Intertemporal-
     Substitution Models of Business Cycles,”The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 99(4),
     817–39.

Basu, S., and M. Kimball (2000): “Long Run Labor Supply and the Elasticity of In-
     tertemporal Substitution for Consumption,”mimeo, University of Michigan.

Baxter, M., and U. J. Jermann (1999): “Household Production and the Excess Sensitiv-
     ity of Consumption to Current Income,”American Economic Review, 89(4), 902–920.

Baxter, M., and R. King (1993): “Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium,” American
     Economic Review, 30, 73–86.

Beaudry, P., and B. Lucke (2009): “Letting Di¤erent Views About Business Cycles
     Compete,”NBER Working Paper 14950.

Beaudry, P., and F. Portier (2004): “Exploring Pigou’s Theory of Cycles,”Journal of
     Monetary Economics, 51(6), 1183–1216.

        (2006): “Stock Prices, News, and Economic Fluctuations,” American Economic
     Review, 96(4), 1293–1307.

        (2007): “When can changes in expectations cause business cycle ‡uctuations in
     neo-classical settings?,”Journal of Economic Theory, 135(1), 458–477.

Becker, G. S. (1965): “A Theory of the Allocation of Time,” The Economic Journal,
     75(299), 493–517.




                                          40
Benhabib, J., R. Rogerson, and R. Wright (1991): “Homework in Macroeconomics:
     Household Production and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Journal of Political Economy,
     99(61), 1166–1187.

Bennett, R. L., and R. E. A. Farmer (2000): “Indeterminacy with Non-separable
     Utility,”Journal of Economic Theory, 93(1), 118–143.

Bilbiie, F. (2008): “Nonseparable preferences, …scal policy puzzles and inferior goods,”
     Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, forthcoming.

Blundell, R., L. Pistaferri, and I. Preston (2008): “Consumption Inequality and
     Partial Insurance,”American Economic Review, 98(5), 1887–1921.

Browning, M., and T. F. Crossley (2001): “Unemployment insurance bene…t levels
     and consumption changes,”Journal of Public Economics, 80(1), 1–23.

Campbell, J. Y. (1994): “Inspecting the mechanism: An analytical approach to the
     stochastic growth model,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 33(3), 463–506.

Chang, Y., and S.-B. Kim (2007): “Heterogeneity and Aggregation: Implications for
     Labor-Market Fluctuations,”American Economic Review, 97(5), 1939–1956.

Chen, K., and Z. Song (2007): “Financial Friction, Capital Reallocation and Expectation-
     Driven Business Cycles,”MPRA Paper 3889, University Library of Munich, Germany.

Cho, J.-O., and T. F. Cooley (1994): “Employment and hours over the business cycle,”
     Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 18(2), 411 –432.

Christiano, L., C. Ilut, R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2007): “Monetary Policy and
     Stock Market Boom-Bust Cycles,”mimeo, Northwestern University.

Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2009): “When is the Government
     Spending Multiplier Large,”unpublished, Northwestern University.

Comin, D., M. Gertler, and A. M. Santacreu (2009): “Changes in Growth Potential
     and Endogenous Technology Di¤usion as Sources of Output and Asset Price Fluctu-
     ations,”mimeo, New York University.

Den Haan, W., and G. Kaltenbrunner (2007): “Anticipated Growth and Business
     Cycles in Matching Models,” CEPR Discussion Papers 6063, C.E.P.R. Discussion
     Papers.

                                           41
DiCecio, R. (2009): “Sticky Wages and Sectoral Labor Comovement,” Journal of Eco-
     nomic Dynamics and Control, 33, 538–553.

Dotsey, M., and R. G. King (2006): “Pricing, Production, and Persistence,”Journal of
     the European Economic Association, 4(5), 893–928.

Eggertsson, G. (2009): “Can a Tax Cut Deepen the Recession?,” unpublished, Federal
     Reserve Bank of New York.

Eusepi, S., and B. Preston (2008): “Expectations, Learning and Business Cycle Fluctu-
     ations,”NBER Working Papers 14181, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Fisher, J. D. M. (2006): “The Dynamic E¤ects of Neutral and Investment-Speci…c Tech-
     nology Shocks,”Journal of Political Economy, 114(3), 413–451.

Francis, N., and V. Ramey (2008): “Measures of Per Capita Hours and their Implications
     for the Technology-Hours Debate,”unpublished, University of California, San Diego.

Galí, J., J. D. López-Salido, and J. Vallés (2007): “Understanding the E¤ects of Gov-
     ernment Spending on Consumption,”Journal of the European Economic Association,
     5(1), 227–270.

Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and G. W. Huffman (1988): “Investment, Capacity
     Utilization and the Real Business Cycle,”American Economic Review, 78(3), 402–417.

Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and P. Krusell (2000): “The role of investment-
     speci…c technological change in the business cycle,”European Economic Review, 44(1),
     91–115.

Guo, S. (2009): “News shocks, expectations driven business cycles and …nancial market
     frictions,”mimeo, Concordia University.

Hagedorn, M., and I. Manovskii (2008): “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unem-
     ployment and Vacancies Revisited,”American Economic Review, 98(4), 1692–1706.

Hall, R. (2006): “Work-Consumption Preferences and Employment Volatility,” mimeo,
     Stanford University.

        (2008): “Sources and Mechanisms of Cyclical Fluctuations in the Labor Market,”
     mimeo, Stanford University.


                                          42
        (2009): “Reconciling Cyclical Movements in the Marginal Value of Time and the
     Marginal Product of Labor,”mimeo, Stanford University.

Hansen, G. (1985): “Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle,” Journal of Monetary
     Economics, 16, 309–337.

Heathcote, J., K. Storesletten, and G. L. Violante (2008): “The Macroeconomic
     Implications of Rising Wage Inequality in the United States,”mimeo, New York Uni-
     versity.

Hintermaier, T. (2003): “On the minimum degree of returns to scale in sunspot models
     of the business cycle,”Journal of Economic Theory, 110(2), 400–409.

Jaimovich, N., and S. Rebelo (2008): “Can News About the Future Drive the Business
     Cycle?,”American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Justiniano, A., and G. E. Primiceri (2008): “The Time-Varying Volatility of Macro-
     economic Fluctuations,”American Economic Review, 98(3), 604–41.

Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2008): “Investment Shocks
     and Business Cycles,”CEPR Discussion Papers 6739, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.

Keynes, J. M. (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. Macmil-
     lan Cambridge University Press.

Kimball, M. S., and M. D. Shapiro (2008): “Labor Supply: Are the Income and
     Substitution E¤ects Both Large or Both Small,”NBER Working Paper 14208.

King, R. G., and S. T. Rebelo (1999): “Resuscitating real business cycles,”in Handbook
     of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, vol. 1 of Handbook of
     Macroeconomics, chap. 14, pp. 927–1007. Elsevier.

Krueger, D., and F. Perri (2006): “Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption
     Inequality? Evidence and Theory,”Review of Economic Studies, 73(1), 163–193.

Kydland, F. E., and E. C. Prescott (1982): “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctua-
     tions,”Econometrica, 50(6), 1345–1370.

Leeper, E., T. B. Walker, and S. S. Yang (2008): “Fiscal Foresight: Analytics and
     Econometrics,”unpublished, Indiana University.


                                          43
Li, N., and M. S. Mehkari (2009): “Expectation Drive Firm Dynamics and Business
     Cycles,”unpublished, Ohio State University.

Linnemann, L. (2006): “The E¤ect of Government Spending on Private Consumption: A
     Puzzle?,”Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 38(7), 1715–1735.

Monacelli, T., and R. Perotti (2008): “Fiscal Policy, Wealth E¤ects, and Markups,”
     unpublished, Universita Bocconi.

Ramey, V. (2008): “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s All in the Timing,”
     unpublished, University of California, San Diego.

Ravina, E. (2005): “Habit Persistence and Keeping Up with the Joneses:Evidence from
     Micro Data,”NYU Working Paper FIN-05-046, NYU.

Ravn, M., S. Schmitt-Grohe, and M. Uribe (2006): “Deep Habits,” Review of Eco-
     nomic Studies, 73, 195–218.

Rogerson, R. (1988): “Indivisible labor, lotteries and equilibrium,”Journal of Monetary
     Economics, 21(1), 3–16.

Schmitt-Grohe, S., and M. Uribe (2008): “What’s News in Business Cycles,” NBER
     Working Papers 14215, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Shimer, R. (2005): “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,”
     American Economic Review, 95(1), 25–49.

        (2009): “Convergence in Macroeconomics: The Labor Wedge,”American Economic
     Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1), 280–97.

Sims, E. R. (2009): “Expectations Driven Business Cycles: An Empirical Evaluation,”
     mimeo, University of Michigan.

Trabandt, M., and H. Uhlig (2006): “How Far Are We From the Slippery Slope? The
     La¤er Curve Revisited,”CEPR Discussion Papers 5657, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.




                                           44
