NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY VS. FISCAL POLICY EFFECTS:
A REVIEW OF ThE DEBATE

Bennett T. McCallum

Working Paper No. 1556

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1985

This paper was prepared for "The Monetary vs. Fiscal Policy Debate:
Lessons from Two Decades," a conference sponsored by the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis (October 12—13, 19814). The author is
indebted to Carl Christ, Stanley Fischer, Robert King, Thomas
Mayer, Lawrence Meyer, and Allan Meltzer for helpful comments and
to the National Science Foundation (SES 814—08691) for financial
assistance. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Economic Fluctuations and project in Government
Budget. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper l1556
February 1985

Monetary vs. Fiscal Policy Effects:
A Review of the Debate
ABSTRACT

This

paper

reviews

econometric issues,

empirical findings,

and

theoretical results bearing upon the "monetary vs. fiscal policy" debate that

began with the 1963 Friedrnan—Meiselman study.
conclusions are not very dramatic.

The main substantive

The clearest is that an open-market

increase in the money stock has a stimulative effect on aggregate demand, a
conclusion that. in turn implies that a money-financed increase In government

expenditures (or reduction in taxes) is more stimulative than it would be if
bond financed.

This conclusion is based on empirical results obtained from

St. Louis—type estimates and large scale economebic models and is supported by

theoretical

analysis involving both Ricardian and non—Ricardian assumptions.

In the case of pure fiscal policy actions -—

or bond—financed expenditure increases --

i.e.,

bond-financed tax cuts

theory suggests that the latter

should be at least as stimulative as the former and probably to a positive
extent; evidence is mixed but not obviously inconsistent with

this

prediction.

With respect to the textbook issue concerning the relative effects of
pure monetary and fiscal actions, the evidence seems to support the notion
that a sequence of $k open-market purchases, one each period, will be much
more stimulative than a single but unreversed $k/period bond—financed increase
in expenditures. The importance of this last issue is debatable.

Bennett T. McCallum
G.S.I.A.
Carnegie—Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
(L12) 578_23L7

I.

Introduction

The "monetary vs. fiscal policy" debate has not attracted much attention

in recent years, and in some ways that is not to be regretted.

It may

therefore be useful to begin this discussion with a quote from Phillip Cagan
(1978, pp. 85—6):

Jo one who was not in touch with the economics profession in
the 1940s and 1950s can quite imagine the state of thinking then
in the profession at large on monetary theory and policy. The
quantity of money was not considered important, indeed was hardly
worth mentioning, for questions of aggregate demand, unemployment,
and even inflation . . . . Textbooks in basic economics and even
in money and banking mentioned the quantity theory of money, if at
all, only to hold it up to ridicule. Those textbooks produced an
entire cohort of professional economists who became the teachers
of hordes of economics students.
There were, of ourse, many
exceptions, most notably at the University of Chicago . . . . But
if you travelled among the profession at large, mention of the
quantity of money elicited puzzled glances of disbelief or sly
smiles of condescension.

s a former member of the horde of students that Cagan refers to, I would

modify his statement only by suggesting that the period in question lasted
longer than he indicates. For readers who find this claim hard to believe, I
would suggest perusal of the contents of the Anerican Economic Association's

Readings in Business Cycles, published in 1965 (Gordon and Kein, 1965).
Another interesting record is provided by the chapter on inflation in Ackley
(1961), the standard graduate macro text of the 1960's. Ackley begins with a
brief description of the "Classical school" theory whereby inflation depends

2

primarily upon growth of the quantity
ideas.

of money, but quickly moves on to other

1

There are few economists who

Today, of course, matters are different.

would label themselves "monetarists", but most publishing

macroecoflOmiStS hold

views that would have been two standard deviations away from the mean -the monetarist direction --

in

1965.

in

As one piece of evidence in support of

that claim, I would point to the specifications

(i.e., list of variables) of

vector autoregression (VAR) models currently being used for forecasting and/or
analysis.

In particular, the VAR systems of Sims (1980)(1982), Litterrnan

(1982), Gordon and King (1982), Webb (198), and B. M. Friedman (1Y8) all
include monetary aggregates but no fiscal variables.
Both sides in the debate can of course claim victory; the monetary policy

supporters for the reasons implicit in the foregoing comparison, and the
fiscal policy supporters by citing theory and

evidence which indicates that

fiscal actions are not without effect on aggregate demand. But the shift has
certainly been in favor of the former.

The purpose of this paper is to review developments bearing on this
debate over the last twenty years. To describe all of the significant items
in the literature would require a paper of' inordinate length and one that
would be extremely dull for the participants at this conference, most of whom

are intimately familiar with much of the material. Fortunately, it turns out

1Another interesting sign of the times is provided by Michael Parkin's
which centers on a
first notable publication (Lipsey and Parkin, 1970),
inflation
process.
The model's two
"prototype model" of the wage and price
the
price
level;
its exogenous
endogenous variables are the money wage and
and a
variables are import prices, output/manhour, the unemployment rate,
Unless
I
am
mistaken,
there
is no
measure of trade union aggressiveness.
mention of' "money" in the entire paper. This example will be appreciated most

by those of us who know and admire Parkin's later work as a monetary
economist.

3

to

be unnecessary for me to provide an extensive treatment of the main threads

of the argument, for a careful review was published fairly recently by eyer
and Rasche (1980).

I will be able, then, to pass quickly through the well-

known items and arguments and focus my attention on items that (i) have been

neglected, (ii) are fairly recent, or (iii) are somewhat original.
organization of the paper is very simple:

The

Section II is concerned with

empirical studies and econometric points of' interpretation while Section III

discusses some of the main theoretical issues.
provides some tentative conclusions and judgments.

In addition, Section IV

II. Empirical Results and Econometric Issues
11.1

Single-Equation Results

In discussing the empirical analysis and related issues, it will be

convenient to organize the discussion around the results that have been
featured in a long series of articles prepared by the research department of

the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.2

Brief mention should be made,

however, of the earlier paper by Friedman and Meiselman (1963), which is not
discussed by Meyer and Rasche.

The central ingredient of the Friedman-Meiselman study was a comparison

of simple correlations (based on annual U.S. data for 1897-1958 and
subperiods) of consumption with money stock magnitudes, on the one hand, and
consumption with "autonomous" fiscal variables,3 on the other hand. Friedman
and Meiselman found that movements in consumption were more highly correlated
with monetary than with fiscal variations.

Their own summary statement goes

as follows:

Except for the early
The results are strikingly one—sided.
more closely related
.
years of the Great Depression, money .
to consumption than is autonomous expenditures . . . . This is so
is
both for nominal values . . . and for "real" values . . .
true both for absolute values and for year-to-year or quarter-toquarter changes. Such correlation as there is between autonomous
expenditures and consumption is in the main a disguised reflection
of' the common effect of money on both . .

. is

. It

2The original paper was Andersen and Jordan (1968), soon followed by
Andersen and Carison (1970)(1972). Other notable items in the series include
Carison (1978), Hafer (1982), and Batten and Thornton (1983).

3Friedman and Meiselman used M2 as their monetary variable and defined

autonomous expenditures as "net private domestic investment plus the
government deficit on income and product account plus the net foreign balance"
They also calculated partial correlations and devoted some
(1963, p. 18L).
attention to quarterly data.

One implication of the results is that the critical variable
for monetary policy is the stock of money, not interest rates or
investment expenditures (1963, p. 166).

Given the climate described by Cagan, the central role of the consumotio

function in Keynesian analysis, and some questionable methodology, the
Friedman-Meiseirnan study was welcomed by the profession about like an
unexpected slap in the face.

Strongly critical studies were published by

Hester (19614), Pndo and Modigliani (1965), and DePrano and Mayer (1965).
Strongly worded replies and rejoinders followed promptly and at great length.

It is clear that the Friedman-Meiselman approach was in fact open to
several methodological objections.

Its critics emphasized the questionable

nature of the measure used for autonomous expenditures as well as the
delineation of sample subperiods.

Especially troublesome was the focus on

contemporaneous relationships in single regression equations including only

one or two explanatory variables.

Most researchers in macroeconomics

believed, I would guess, that investigation of the issues under discussion

could be adequately carried out only in the context of a fully-specified,
simultaneous-equation econometric model.

The judgment of Blinder and Solow,

expressed a few years later, was that "all

of' this was essentially

pointless. The issue is simply not to be settled by comparing goodness of' fit

of one—equation models that are far too primitive to represent any theory
adequately" (19714, p. 65).

Thus the Friedman—Meiselman results were in the process of being shrugged
off when the first of the St. Louis studies -—
(1968) -—

appeared.

that

of Andersen and Jordan

As is very well known, that study featured a least—

squares regression fit to quarterly U.S. data for 1952.1-1968.2 in which the

dependent variable was the change in nominal GMP while the explanatory
variables were current and lagged values of changes in the money stock (1 or

6

base),

full-employment expenditures, and full-employment tax receipts.

The

striking finding was that the sum of coefficients on the monetary variable was

highly significant while the sum of coefficients on both fiscal variables was
insignificantly different from

zero.

11.2 Econometric Objections

Again sharply critical objections were raised.

The main lines of

argument were brought together by Blinder and Solow (1974) and are nicely
My strategy here will be to focus on

reviewed by Meyer and Rasche (180).

three points emphasized by Blinder—Solow (see below) and on the evidence
concerning reliability of' "reduced form" procedures that was subsequently
described by Modigliani and Ando (1976).

It will be convenient, though, to

begin by quickly mentioning the observation of Benjamin Friedman (1977) that
when data for the period 1970.1—1976.2 is added to the Andersen-Carlson (1970)

sample, the sum of the fiscal variable coefficients becomes significantly
positive.

It was quickly shown by Carison (1978), however, that this

conclusion does not obtain when the variables are entered in rate-of-chang.e

form, rather than as first differences.

In effect, Carlson's suggested

specification amount to

+

(1)

where

mt, and

$(L)Am

+

i(L)Ag

+

ut,

are logarithms of nominal GNP, a money stock measure, and

a fiscal variable (respectively).

Also Ut

15 a

stochastic disturbance while

8(L) and L) denote finite polynomials in the lag operator defined by

An interesting predecessor of the Andersen-Jordan study, which probably
influenced the latter, is Brunner and Balbach (1959).

7

x

Lnlx

,

t—n

+

so

im1 +

that

8(L)Am stands for a distributed lag such as

... + Bkmk.

Carison's specification not only has the

desirable feature of relating relative rather than absolute changes, but also
leads to residuals that are more consistent with the standard assumption that

ut is a white-noise disturbance.5 Consequently, (1) seems preferable to the
specification used previously, and this judgment leads to the conclusion that

the inclusion of data for years since 1969 does not reverse the original
finding that the sum of the
from zero.

coefficients is insignificantly different

In what follows I will accordingly presume that (1) is the

relevant specification.

Let us now consider, then, the criticisms of Blinder and Solow (19714).
Those writers summarize their position very concisely, as follows:

In summary, the Andersen-Jordan study errs for at least three
reasons, any one of which is sufficient to render their results
meaningless.
First, by omitting all exogenous variables other
than fiscal or monetary policy, they seriously misspecify the
reduced-form equation for real [sic] output
.
. . Second, they
.

use an incorrect measure of fiscal policy, which biases the
coefficient toward zero.
Finally, and most damaging to their
position, they treat fiscal and monetary policies as exogenous
when it is intuitively obvious that the authorities are in some
sense reacting to movements in the macroeconomy (19714, pp. 70-71).

These three difficulties correspond to those discussed by Meyer and Rasche

on pp. 56-63 and to those listed by Batten and Thornton (1983, n. 2). We will
take them in turn, starting with the omission of exogenous variables. In this

case the contention is that the true specification is not (1) but

5Carlson (1978) indicates that the relative change specification passes,

and the absolute change specification fails, tests for the
disturbance heteroschedasticity.

absence of

8

(2)

+

Ayt

B(L)Amt

(L)g + (L)zt

+

+

Ut

where Zt is an additional variable6 that has an important influence on ye,.

are in fact exogenous, a

For the moment, let us suppose that mt and

supposition that will be considered below, in connection with the third
difficulty. Now Blinder and Solow refer to Zt as an exogenous variable. But
the conditions for true statistical exogeneity are extremely stringent -— Zt
must be generated by a process that is independent of current and past values

(and thus Ut). But it is hard to imagine any important macroeconomic

variable that is truly exogenous in that sense; even population growth and
technical change probably respond (with lags) to fluctuations in GNP.7 The
point is better expressed, then, as suggesting that (2) is applicable but with
as

interpreted

''
(3)

and

that

is affected

by

only with a lag. Suppose that relation is

a2rn1 +

a1Ay1

a0 +

where

endogenous variable

an

a3ig

+

is a stochastic disturbance term.

Then by substitution and

rearrangement we have

+

(L)aJ

+

[B(L)

+

a2LS(L)]mt

60r variables. My discussion proceeds as if only one such variable were
omitted solely for convenience of exposition.

7The impact of variables that follow smooth exponential trends is, of
course, picked up by the constant term. This was noted (for linear trends) by
Andersen and Jordan (1968).

9

+ [y(L)

+

a3L6(L)]g

+

a1ô(L)y

+
i

[Ut

+

which is not in the form of (2) because of' the appearance of a1(L)yi.
That can be remedied, however, by moving the

La1(L)]1:

side and multiplying through by [1 -

+

B'(L)Am

+

term to the left-hand-

i'(L)g + u.

Here we have a relation of the form of (2), but (of course) with disturbances
and parameters that are quite different:

[1 -

[1 -

y

u = [

1

[S(L) +

La16(L)]1

La1(L)]1
-

La1(L)]

a2L(L)J

+ a3L(L)]

[y(L)

[Ut +

What we have in (5), is not a reduced—form equation but a final-form equation

for

(still assuming that

and

are truly exogenous).8

Thus we see that the coefficients in (5), which will be estimated by the

St. Louis procedure, are not the reduced-form coefficients in (1).
estimated values will, under the assumption that (L)
(3)

is

a

and ig on

"stable"

relationship,

by way of Azt.

reflect

0

indirect

The

in (2) and that
influences

of

But the importance of that observation

8That the disturbance in (5) is a complicated function of current and
lagged values of the disturbance in (1) does not necessarily imply that the
former is serially correlated, for the properties of the latter are unknown.

10

is quite unclear; the coefficients in a reduced-form equation like (1) also

reflect influences that are "indirect".

The first problem mentioned by

Blinder and Solow hardly justifies, then, terming

the St. Louis estimates

be
"meaningless". It merely implies that. in interpreting the estimates it may

necessary to keep in mind that they reflect "indirect" effects.9

The foregoing argument presumes,
relationship (3) is "stable" --

i.e.,

it should be added, that the

unchanging over the sample period. Such

relationships may in fact change significantly over real-time sample periods,
for reasons explained by Lucas (1976) or for other reasons. But precisely the

same must be said for (1); these two relationships are on the same footing in
that respect.

If' there is reason to believe that (1) is stable over a period,

there is no particular reason to expect (3) to be shifting.

Let us turn next to the second of the Blinder-Solow (197U) points, that
the St. Louis measures of fiscal policy may be "incorrect". What is meant by

that is that the St Louis variable does not correspond to the "weighted
standardized surplus" shown by Blinder and Solow (1974, pp. 23, 33—34) to be

the measure that would appear in a reduced-form expression within the
particular model that they use for illustrative purposes.

But this is a

conclusive criticism only to one who has some attachment to the particular
model in question,1° and then only if he believes that the effect of using

alternative measures would be large.
specific measure, which Blinder and Solow

While Corrigan (1970) found that a
consider reasonably attractive, led

to estimates indicating a significant fiscal effect, it is my impression that

9This point was made by Andersen-Jordan (1968), Darby (1976), and probably
It will arise again in the discussion of the Modigliani-AndO (1976)

others.
results.

101t is a Keynesian multiplier model.

11

the

variable—measurement problem

is

not of overwhelming

importance

empirically. Or, to put it differently, if there is a fiscal policy measure
which carries a strongly significant sum of coefficients in an equation of the

St. Louis form, its existence has not been well publicised.1 In any event,
analysis of the policy-variable measurement issue is undermined by the third
problem discussed by Blinder and Solow, to which we now turn.

The issue in this case results from the endogeneity of policy actions, a

topic that was investigated in detail by Goldfeld and Blinder (1972).
Goldfeld—Blinder

paper

correctly emphasizes

the

distinction

The

between

exogerieity, in the sense of coming from outside the private sector of the
economy, and exogeneity in the statistical sense.

And they note that it is

almost inconceivable that either the monetary or fiscal variables in the St.

Louis studies could be exogenous in the latter sense, for that would imply

that the authorities' actions are not systematically influenced to any
significant extent by current or past macroeconomic conditions.

If in fact

the authorities' actions are so influenced, then (1) may not be a proper
reduced-form equation even if no variables are omitted.

disturbance term Ut

will

In particular, the

be correlated with regressor variables if policy

actions respond to current-quarter conditions or if policy responds with a lag

but the disturbance in (1) is autocorrelated. Under such circumstances, least

squares estimates of

B(L) and y(L)

will of course

be biased and

inconsistent.

11Meyer and Rasehe (1980, p. 59) conclude their discussion of this
measurement issue as follows:
"However, the modifications . . . have not
generally resulted in dramatic changes in sample reduced-form equations."

12

This point is clearly correct in principle and could easily be of
importance empirically.12

The nunthers reported in Goldfeld and Blinder's

Table 8 suggest, however, that the downward

bias should be about the same for

monetary variable coefficients as for fiscal variable coefficients, except in

the event that the fiscal authorities are extremely prompt and accurate in
It seems unlikely that this would be the case

their stabilization efforts.
for the U.S. economy.

Nevertheless, the point is important enough to warrant continued
discussion. Given that the policy authorities do respond to current or recent
macroeconomic conditions, the best way to proceed in estimating equations like

(1) or (5) is to append policy—rule or reaction—function specifications for
the authorities and carry out simultaneous equation estimation, as recommended

by Goldfeld and Blinder.

But it is not necessari to formulate explicitly

equations descriptive of policy behavior;

consistent estimates of (5) can be

obtained by estimating that equation in

variable (IV)

isolation but using instrumental

rather than ordinary least squares

(OLS)

estimators.

Comparisons of' IV and OLS results should indicate whether severe biases are in

fact induced by the reactive behavior of the policy authorities.

The results of an extremely brief and tentative exploration of that type

are reported in Table 1.

The first pair of numerical columns gives

coefficient and standard error values for an OLS regression of the form of
(5), using quarterly data on nominal GNP,

the Ml money supply, and nominal

federal purchases of goods and services for 195'4-1980. Despite the absence of
polynomial constraints and the use of a different expenditure variable, the

12Potential empirical importance is suggested by Modigliani and Ando
(1916,

pp.

40—J41).

13

Table 1

OLS vs. IV Estimates of St. Louis Equations
Sample Period: 19514.1 - 1980.14
IV Estimates

OLS Estimates
Coef.

(SE)

Coef.

*

(SE)

.007

(.002)

.009

(.003)

.651

(.119)

.167

(.387)

m1

.226

(.128)

.615

(.320)

Am2

.308

(.1148)

.191

(.251)

m3

.148

(.182)

.1401

(.3141)

—.2140

(.155)

—.297

Ag

.099

(.031)

—.190

(.221)

t—1

.026

(.032)

.058

(.079)

.005

(.032)

.0119

(.055)

-.050

(.032)

—.025

(.0148)

—.038

(.031)

—.033

(.01411)

Constant
Amt

mt14

t—3

A—

R2
DW

SE

.531

.053

1.90
.0080

1.91
.0113

*Instruments are fitted values from OLS regressions of

.,Mit4,
variable in each case is

and

on

ri, rt2, and a constant. Dependent

1L

results are much like those that have been featured in the St. Louis
studies.

In particular, the Am variables are strongly significant as a

group with coefficients summing to 1.09 while the fiscal variables enter less
strongly and their coefficients sum to only o.o.13

In the second pair of numerical columns are IV estimates for the same

period, with the instruments for
regressions

of

those

and Ag created by first-stage

variables

their

on

lagged

values

plus r1 and r2, with rt the 90—day
treasury bill rate.

Indentification is provided by the assumption that

r1 and rt_2 affect policy instrument settings in period t.

As there is no

strong sign of serially correlated disturbances, these estimates should be
consistent for the parameters of (5) even in the presence of current-period

responses of Am and

to values of Ay or other endogenous variables.

As is readily apparent, there are two major differences in these estimates as
compared to OLS. First, the coefficients attached to current-period values of
and

are much smaller, with the latter turning negative. Second, the

standard errors are much larger indicating a substantial reduction in the
reported accuracy of the coefficient estimators.

In part the latter is

induced by lower overall explanatory power, but in part it is due to the

increased collinearity that arises when

and

are replaced by

constructed variables that are primarily linear combinations of lagged
m and Ag values.
It therefore appears from this experiment that the effects stressed by

Goldfeld and Blinder may indeed be of quantitative importance. Yet even in

3Whether the magnitudes of these sums are important will be discussed in
Section IV.

15

these estimates it remains the case that the coefficients on
sum

to

to

sum

approximately 1.0 while those on

approximately

zero. (The numbers are 1.08 and -0.14, respectively.)14

Once it is recognized -— as seems necessary --

that

policy instruments

are set in response to current or recent conditions, then the motivation for

using high-unemployment

values of fiscal

variables

is

lessened

or

eliminated. Furthermore, it even becomes unclear why a distinction is drawn
between "discretionary't changes in expenditures or taxes and automatic changes

brought about as a result of the built-in stabilizers.

It would be

appropriate to distinguish empirically between automatic and non-automatic
instrument changes if there were theoretical reasons to believe that these

would have different effects on nominal GNP, but the econometric reasons
appearently motivating Andersen and Jordan (1968) do not seem applicable.12
Consequently, it would appear that there remains room for an empirical study

that emphasizes the endogenous—policy effects emphasized by Goldfeld and
Blinder, and that also considers the impact on aggregate demand of tax changes

brought about by the built-in stabilizers of the U.S. tax system.

A major

reason why such a study is still lacking is the difficulty in modelling policy
behavior together with the absence of genuine exogenous variables.

lUSimilar conclusions obtain when once and twice lagged values of the

unemployment rate for adult males are also used in the first-stage
regressions, though in this case the results are closer to thos obtained by
OLS.

12For a recent review of the theory of automatic stabilizers, see
Christiano (1984).

16

11.3 The Modigliani-ndO Study

Let us now turn to the rather interesting experiment conducted by
Modigliani and Ando (1976), who hypothesize that (even ignoring endogenouspolicy issues) estimates of policy multipliers obtained by means of the St.

Louis approach are extremely unreliable.

In support of that hypothesis,

Modigliani and Ando report that the St. Louis equation, when estimated using
artificial data generated by simulations of the MPS model, provides very poor

estimates of that model's known multipliers —-

estimates that are on the low

side for fiscal multipliers and on the high side for monetary multipliers.
While this finding does not literally imply that the St. Louis estimates of

the economy's multipliers are incorrect, it has been regarded by several
reviewers15 as tending to discredit the St. Louis procedure and thus its
results.

Reflection suggests, however,

that this conclusion may not be

warranted. The reason for doubt involves the point made above, that there are

virtually no macroeconomic variables that can appropriately be treated as
exogenous. If that point is correct, then the Modigliani—Ando experiment will

be misleading in the following way. Under the hypothesis at hand, that there

are no exogenous variables, the MPS model (which treats a large number of

variables as exogenous) incorrectly omits a large number of behavioral
relationships analogous to (3) above. Therefore the "true" multiplier values

for the ME'S model reported by Modigliani and Ando correspond to

the

(L) and y(L) values in equation (2). But estimates of' the MPS multipliers

obtained by the St. Louis approach correspond to the '(L) and ''(L)

15These include Meyer and Rasche (1980, p. 62), Purvis (1978, pp. 108-9),
and McCallurn (1978, p. 322).

1 1

coefficients in (5), with aj values in (3) being whatever is implied by the

historical values of the variables treated (incorrectly) as exogenous, the
historical values of the policy instruments, and the simulated values of the
model's endogenous variables.

In other words, the comparison reported is

between actual MPS values of the coefficients in (2) and estimated values of
the coefficients in (5). Since these coefficients are truly different, under

the hypothesis that there are no exogenous variables in reality,

the

discrepancy between estimated and true values does not, indicate unreliability

of the estimation procedure.16 This argument, it should be said, seems to
amount to an elaboration of the comment provided by Darby (1976).

11.14 Evidence From Large Models

One useful feature of the Meyer—Rasche survey is its compact tabulation
of policy multipliers for real GNP implied by seven prominent macroeconometric
models.

While there is considerable disagreement among the other models

concerning the magnitudes of fiscal and monetary multipliers, the St. Louis
results do depart significantly from the average of the others' values.

The

government spending multiplier after four quarters, for example, is 0.5 for

the St. Louis model as compared with a mean of 2.17 for the BEA, Brookings,
Michigan, DRI, MPS, and Wharton models. In the case of' the monetary variable,

the comparison is not straightforward since the St. Louis multipliers pertain
to an Ml variable while the others pertain to unborrowed reserves. But the

l6Variants of this argument would appear to apply to the other Modigliani—
Ando results.

other-model average after four quarters is 3.0, so the St. Louis value of 144

is much greater in elasticity terms, the ratio of' Ml to unborrowed reserves
being about 10.

These multipliers are for real GNP, it will be noted, so their magnitudes

depend upon the models'
relationships.

precise specifications of dynamic Phillips

Since it is well—known that there exist major disagreements

over the proper specification of' this

relationship, it is in principle not

What one might hope for is some

surprising that the multipliers diverge.

agreement concerning nominal GNP multipliers.

That, in any event, is the

topic under discussion in this paper -— the relative impact of' monetary and
fiscal actions on aggregate demand.

But the foregoing statement applies only in principle.

In fact, the

predicted price level responses from any of the models in question is so slow
that four-quarter multipliers are essentially the same for nominal as for real

GNP. Thus we see that there is a considerable discrepancy between St. Louis
and other-model responses to a monetary policy action, through less than in
the case of a fiscal policy action.

Niehans (1978) and McJelis (1980) have suggested that the implications

of'

non-St. Louis econometric models are actually much more "monetarist" than most

observers have recognized.

Their argument starts with the idea that the

proper comparison of fiscal vs. monetary policy effects requires that an
unreversed $1 billion/year increase in government spending should be compared
with a continuing seqaence of' $1 billion increases, one per year, in the high-

powered money stock. nd when this comparison is made, it is found that "for
every model except BEA and Wharton III .

.

. the

peak of' the money multipliers

must be many times as high as the peak of the hypothetical fiscal multipliers,

a typical ratio being perhaps 15:1

.

. . . The proposition that the quantity

19

of money matters much more than the way it is created is evidently common to
both" monetarist and non-monetarist models (Niehans, 1978, P. 253).

At first glance, this argument seems flawed.

Ihat is the point of
But then one

comparing effects of changes in stock and flow variables?

realizes that it is entirely apropriate to compare an unreversed $1 billion

change in expenditures financed by bond sales with a similar expenditure
change financed by money issues, the bond or money issues going on period
after period with total tax receipts unchanged.

And clearly the second of

these sequences is equivalent to the first plus a continuing sequence of open-

market bond purchases.

Thus the bond-financed expenditure increase and the

sequence of open-market purchases are the two constituent parts of a moneyfinanced expediture increase.

If the second constituent is much larger than

the first, as Niehans and McNelis claim it to be, then their comparison would
be both sensible and justified.

Continuing to reflect reminds one, however, that

the simulation

experiments actually carried out in the large-scale models are ones that hold

constant tax rates, not tax receipts.

Thus putative bond—financed

expenditures and bond-financed money stock expansions are in fact tax-financed

to a considerable extent.

This would tend, since the models are not

Ricardian, to depress multiplier values.

It is not obvious to me that this

tends to bias the results in favor of either type of policy action, but it
would be preferable to compare the effects of the following two experiments:

(i) an unreversed expansion of government expenditures financed by bond
sales, with unchanged tax-receipt and money stock-paths

20

(ii)an unreversed expansion of' government

expenditures financed by (high

powered) money issue, with unchanged

tax-receipt and bond-Stock

paths.

I would not be surprised if the outcome

of such an experiment were to support

in turn supports that of St. Louis to a
the Niehans—McreliS position -— which
considerable extent --

but

as far as I can tell it has not yet been conducted.

11.5 Simsts VAR Evidence

Before concluding this section, mention should be made of the argument

recently advanced by Sims (1980)(1983)

to the effect that the impact of

monetary policy actions on GNP is extremely small. This argument stems from
vector autoregression (VAR) results,

obtained by Sims, which show that money

stock innovations17 have very little explanatory power for U.S. postwar output

when an interest rate is included among the VAR system's variables.

These

results have been interpreted as indicating that monetary policy actions have

which would be, given
been an unimportant source of movements in real GNP -the apparent slowness of price level responses,
type results for nominal GNP as well.

inconsistent with St. Louis—

In a brief analytical note, however, I

have shown that this conclusion is not implied by the empirical results in
question (McCallum, 1983). The point is that money stock innovations do not
necessarily reflect irregular components of monetary policy. Indeed, when the
Fed uses an interest rate as its operating

of the postwar period ——

it

instrument -— as it has during most

is likely that its irregular actions will be

17A variable's innovation is its one-period ahead prediction error when
the prediction is the orthogonal projection of the variable on all past values
of the variables included in the system under consideration.

21

better represented by a VAR system's interest rate innovations than by its

money stock

innovations.18

And in fact interest rate innovations do

contribute importantly to output movements in Sims's results. Thus it cannot

be concluded that the actions of the monetary authority are unimportant for
the explanation of output and nominal GNP movements.19

l8 do not mean to claim that interest rate innovations actually reflect
They do in the formal model in McCalluxn (1983) but
only policy surprises.
would not if the Fed's operating procedure were slightly different than that
The main point of the demonstration is that it is unreasonable to
assumed.
use money stock innovations as representative of monetary policy surprises.
19This argument does not imply that interest rates are in general better
"indicators" than money stock growth rates of monetary policy impulses; the
relations mentioned in the text hold only for innovations.

22

III .Theoretical Issues

Let us begin the theoretical discussion by reviewing the effects of
monetary and fiscal actions on aggregate demand in a Ricardian economy, i.e.,

one in which agents take account of the government budget restraint (GBR) in

making saving/consumption decisions for an effectively

infinite planning

horizon.20 Under such conditions, the asset value of government bonds held by

the public is offset by the present value of extra future taxes necessitated
by the existence of these bonds, so the latter do not constitute wealth to the

private sector as a whole. Thus a one-period tax reduction financed by bond
sales has no effect on aggregate demand, for the implied increase in future

taxes just offsets the effect on wealth of the reduction of current taxes.

This Ricardian equivalence result, well-known from the work of Barro
(19714)(19814), provides the basis for a comparative analysis of monetary and
fiscal policy effects.

The case of a tax reduction financed by money creation is quite
different, for the asset value of the additional money is not offset by extra
implied future taxes, of which there are none.21 The added nominal wealth may

be negated in real terms by inflation, but the latter comes about as the
result of an upward shift in aggregate demand, which is precisely the effect

whose presence is being claimed. Thus the fact that inflation may for some

purposes be viewed as imposing a "tax" does not alter the validity of the

of course, is the assumption that taxes are lump sum in
That finite—lived
i.e., have no major substitution effects.

20pl needed,
nature,

individuals may have effectively infinite planning horizons was shown by Barro
(19714).

21See Patinkin (1965, p. 289). The reason money is willingly held despite

the absence of of interest payments is, of course, that it provides
transaction—facilitating services to its holders.

statement beginning this paragraph; a money-financed tax cut increase nominal
wealth and aggregate demand.

Consequently, since a money-financed tax cut (of, say,

financed tax increase (of

$x)

$x)

and a bond-

are together equivalent to an open market

purchase, we see that an open market purchase unambiguously increases
aggregate demand (in a Ricardian economy).22 And this result clearly implies
that an increase in government spending must have a larger stimulative effect

on aggregate demand if it is money financed than if it is bond financed, for

the difference in the two actions is precisely an open-market purchase (or

sequence of purchases if we are discussing an unreversed increase in
government purchases23).

It remains to be considered whether a bond (or tax) financed increase in
government purchases will have a non—zero effect on aggregate demand. Effects
of both temporary and permanent changes in government spending in a Ricardian
world have been analyzed, in a non-mathematical but careful fashion, by Barro
(198)4, pp. 309-312 and 316-320).

In the case of a temporary increase, there

is an increase in output and in the real rate of interest.

The latter

translates, in the absence of inflation, into a rise in the nominal rate. For
portfolio balance with a constant money stock, nominal income must then rise,

if the income elasticity of real money demand is less than unity.

To see

this, let us write the money demand function as

22An open-market purchase leaves fewer bonds outstanding and so requires
smaller interest payments in the future by the government. Under Ricardian

assumptions it does not matter whether tins reduction in payments is
accompanied by lower taxes or by bond growth.

23That maintained deficits are possible under bond finance, as well as
under money finance, is demonstrated in McCallum (19824a).

m_pa0+cz1y-2r

(6)

where m, p, and y are in logarithmic terms, r is the interest rate, and all
parameters are positive. This equation may be rearranged to read

y + p

(7)

'<

1

nominal income.

m -

+ (1-1)y

+

the increases in both y and r tend to increase y+p, the log of

En the case of a permanent increase in government spending,

Barro's analysis leads to no change in r but again to an increase in y so
again (7) indicates a rise in y+p.21 Thus we see that an increase in (real)
government spending tends to induce an increase in aggregate demand.

In summary, a Ricardian analysis suggests that (i) open market purchases

are expansionary so (ii) money-financed spending

increases or tax cuts are

more expansionary than ones that are bond financed.

Indeed, (iii) bond-

financed tax cuts have no effect on aggregate demand, but (iv) bond-financed
spending increases are expansionary.

•24This type of result can be shown to hold in the Sidrauski-type version
1s in Barro
of the Ricardian model used by McCallum (1984a) as follows.
(19814), let the consumer obtain utility from government-provided services and

express this by writing the within-period utility function for the
<
1.
The budget
representative household as u(c+g,m) with 0 <

constraint is not changed so the houseFiold's optimality conditions remain (3)—
Consider alternative steady states
(10) in McCallum (19814a, pp. 128—129).
(1Combining (14) and (5) then yields u2(c+cLg,m)
with zero inflation.
increase
in
g
has
no
effect
on
the
)u1(c+ctg,m). In this particular model an
steady-state value of k -- see p. 129 -- so c+g is unaffected and an incrase
[u1 +
c+g. From the equation above we have dm/dz
in g lowers z
From
the
the
latter
plus
the
conditions
u11 < 0,
— u22}.
fall
with
we
find
that
dm/dz
>
0.
So
real
money
balances
u22 < 0, and u12 > 0

But with a constant money
a reduction in z coming from an increase in g.
level
and thus in aggregate
stock, that implies an increase in the price
demand.

25

Now it is of course not the case that Ricardian assumptions are literally

satisfied by the U.S. economy.

But the Ricardian model may nevertheless

provide a useful first approximation to the workings of the economy, a
fruitful starting-point for thinking about the effects of policy actions.

In

particular, it would seem more appropriate to regard bonds as contributing to

private wealth not at all, than to regard them as doing so fully.

If each

dollar of bonds functions macroeconomically as k dollars of net private wealth
--

which is the way Patinkin (1965, P. 289) puts it -- then the value of k is

(I would conjecture) much closer to 0.0 than to 1.0.25

The relevance of this observation is, of course, that most of the
theoretical literature on monetary vs. fiscal policy effects has presumed --

usually
1.0).

without discussion --

that

bonds constitute wealth fully (i.e., that k

Indeed, this literature abounds with paradoxical results that obtain

in large part because of wealth effects due to ongoing expansion or

25This condition does not require that individuals' planning horizons
I would also conjective that analysis
extend beyond their own lifetimes.
using the recently-developed approach of Blanchard (198L) would support my
main conclusions.

Another source of paradox in this

contraction of government debt.26
literature -—

the exposition of which emphasizes the role of the GBR27 -- has

been the practice of focusing on "long run" effects, with the latter somewhat

misleadingly defined so

as

to

require a balanced budget.

The

inappropriateness of this terminology is emphasized by occasional statements

concerning the comparative "long run" effects of money- and bond-financed
deficit spending.28

In any event, there is one contention that appears in this literature
with which I want to take issue, namely, the notion that open-market purchases
are contractionary or, as Blinder and Solow (1976, p. 500) put it., "the long-

run effect of government spending is greater when deficits are bond-financed

than when they are money-financed."29 The basis of this contention is, as
explained in MeCalluin (1981, p. 136), that in models of the type now under

discussion either the contention is true or the economy is dynamically

26ome of the prominent items are included in volumes edited by Gordon
Also influential were Christ (1968), Brunner and
(19714) and Stein (1976).
of
and
a
series
Meltzer
papers by Blinder and Solow
(1972),
(1973)(1974)(1976). A recent review, which shares the criticised presumption
of the items reviewed, is Mayer (19814).

is worth noting that analysis that ignores the GBR is not thereby
discredited, as long as it does not pretend that time paths of money, bonds,
An analysis that
spending, and taxes can all be specified arbitrarily.
specifies paths for only three of these variables arbitrarily and ignores the
fourth, may be perfectly logical as long as it does not require an infeasible
path for the fourth variable -— for example, a path along which the bond stock
grows exponentially at a rate that exceeds the growth rate of output by more
than the rate of time preference (McCalluin, 198'4a). Failing to keep track of
the fourth variable may lead to errors if the model is non-Ricardian because
But if it is Ricardian and the
of induced shifts in behavioral relations.
fourth variable is bonds or tax receipts then such shifts will not occur.

28see, e.g., Blinder and Solow (1976,p. 506).
29Their contention is accepted by Mayer (19814).

27

unstable when deficits are bond-financed (i.e., when paths of spending, the
money stock, and income tax rates are determined exogenously so that the stock

of bonds must adjust to satisfy the GBR).

authors in question obtain the result.

Then by assuming stability, the

But, as is argued in detail in

McCallum (1981, pp. 136-137), the appropriate conclusion is rather that the
economy is unstable3° under these conditions -— and open-market purchases are

expansionary even according to the models and concepts in question.31 That
conclusion is in no way refuted by-the observed stability of the U.S. economy

because neither the money stock nor taxes are in fact managed in the way
assumed by the setup in which the analysis is conducted.

30Th McCallum (1981), it is suggested that the dynamic instability in
question can be avoided if the rate of output growth exceeds the after-tax
But with an income tax, a maximizing analysis in a
real rate of return.
Ricardian model of the type used in McCallum (19824a) indicates that the
steady-state, after-tax real rate of return will equal the rate of growth plus
So the condition mentioned as an escape from
the rate of time preference.
instability in my earlier paper cannot hold in the vicinity of the steady
I was thus wrong to quarrel, in my 1981 paper, with the first of the
state.
two "messages" suggested by Blinder and Solow (1976).

31This conclusion seems to agree with that of Christ (1979, p. 533).

IV. Conclusions

The substantive conclusions of the foregoing investigation/review are
fairly easy to discern and are not very dramatic.

The clearest is that an

open-market increase in the money stock has a stimulative effect on aggregate

demand, a conclusion that in turn implies that a money-financed increase in
expenditures (or reduction in taxes) is more stimulative than it would be if
bond—financed.

This conclusion is supported by empirical results obtained

both from St. Louis-style estimates and from large scale econometric models.

Furthermore, the conclusion is also supported by theoretical analysis
involving both Ricardian and non-Ricardian assumptions.

In the case of pure fiscal policy actions --

or bond—financed expenditure increases —-

i.e.,

bond-financed tax cuts

the situation is not so clear. But

theory suggests that the latter should be at least as stimulative as the
former and most probably stimulative to a positive extent. The evidence on
these points is mixed but is not obviously inconsistent with the theoretical
predictions.

With respect to the textbook issue concerning the relative (per dollar)
effect of pure monetary and fiscal actions, the evidence seems --

disorderly way ——

to

in

a rather

support the notion that a sequence of $x open-market

purchases, one each period, will be considerably more stimulative than a
single but unreversed $X/period bond-financed increase in expenditures.
It might be added, however, that it is unclear that any great importance
attaches to this last issue, at least from a policy perspective, provided that

each type of policy has non-negligible effects. If the object of the debate

is to determine whether monetary or fiscal variables would serve better as

instruments to be manipulated for stabilization purposes, then attention
should be focussed on the relative accuracy of the effects rather than the

29

per—dollar magnitudes.

Adjustments in the instrument settings do not

themselves involve costs, in terms of destroyed resources, as is implicitly
suggested by the view that it is relative magnitudes that matter.32

Nor is it entirely clear why, from a policy standpoint,33 so much
attention has been devoted to whether the sum of fiscal policy coefficients is

zero when individual coefficients are significantly non-zero. Only a minor
quibble3 keeps me from sharing Fischer's (1976) view that "if fiscal policy
had significant short—term effects . .

. but

no long-run effects it would be

an ideal stabilization tool."

More generally, the essential issues concerning stabilization policy that

continue to divide macroeconomists are ones concerned with, first, the
desirability of activist policy and, second, whether activist policy (if

desirable) should be executed according to well—specified rules or in a
period-by—period discretionary manner.'6 As various writers have noted,37

similar point was mentioned by Meltzer (1969, p. 31), but only with
respect to monetary instruments. Robert King has suggested to me that there

may be resource costs associated with adjustments of tax schedules or
government expenditures, which would tend to make money the better instrument.

33The question of whether the cumulative effect of such actions is
stimulative, contractionary, or neither may be of theoretical interest since
it bears on the appropriateness of competing theories. It is not the case,
however, that a value of unity for the sum of the monetary policy coefficients
For a recent discussion
is necessary for "long run" monetary neturality.
relating to that point, see McCallum (19814b).

quibble is that zero effects after the first period, rather than
zero "long-run" effects, would appear to be preferable.

35me efficacy of various possible instruments and institutional
arrangements is also of importance.

36The advantage of rule-like behavior of monetary policy has been
articulated by Earro and Gordon (1983).
37Among

these

are Sargent (1976), Modigliani (1977), and McCallum (1978).

neither of these issues is strongly dependent upon

the outcome of the

relative—magnitudes question.

That does not imply, however, that the monetary vs. fiscal policy debate
has been unenlightening.

On the contrary, the various ins and outs of the

discussion have served valuably to enhance knowledge and awareness of' the

central importance of monetary actions as determinants of nominal income.

That contribution is easy to belittle or overlook, given
acceptance of that importance.

today's wide

But the formation of' today's views --

i.e.,

the dramatic change away from the situation described by Cagan -- amounted to

a major overhaul in the practice of' macro and monetary economics, and this
change was aided substantially by the monetary vs. fiscal policy debate.

References

Ackley, Gardner, Macroeconomic Theory (New York: Macmillan, 1961).

Andersen, Leonall C., and Jerry L. Jordan, "Monetary and Fiscal Actions:

Test

A

of Their Relative Importance in Economic Stabilization," Federal

Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 50 (November 1968), 11.211.

Andersen, Leonall C., and Keith M. Carison, "A Monetarist Model for Economtc
Stabilization," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 52 (April 1970),
7—25.

Ando, Albert, and Franco Modogliani, "The Relative Stability of Monetary
Velocity and the Investment Multiplier,"

American Economic Review 50

(September 1965), 693—728.

Barro, Robert J., "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?"

Journal of Political

Economy 82 (November/December 19714), 1095—1117.

Barro, Robert J., Macroeconomics, (Mew York: John Wiley & Sons, 19814).

Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon, "A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy
in a Natural Rate Mooel," Journal of Political Economy 91 (August 1983),
589—6 10.

Batten, Dallas S., and Daniel L. Thornton, "Polynomial Distributed Lags and
the St. Louis Equation,"
(April 1983), 13—25.

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 65

Blanchard, Olivier J., "Debt, Deficits, and Finite Horizons,"

NBER Working

Paper No. 1389, June 1984.

Blinder, Alan S., and Robert M. Solow, "Does Fiscal Policy Matter?" Journal
of Public Economics 2 (January/February 1973), 349-337.

Blinder, Alan S., and Robert K. Solow, "Analytical Foundations of Ftscal
Policy,"

The Economics of Public Finance, (Washington:

Brookings

Institution, 1974).

Blinder, Alan S., and Robert M. Solow, "Does Fiscal Policy Still Matter? A
Reply," Journal of Monetary Economics 2 (tJovember 1976), 501—510.

Brunner, Karl, and Anatol B. Balbach,"An Evaluation of Two Types of Monetary
Theories,"

Proceedings of the 314th Annual Conference of' the Western

Economic Association, 1959.

Brunner, Karl, and Allan H. Meltzer, "Money, Debt, and Economic Activity,"
Journal of Political Economy 80 (December 1972), 951—977.

Cagan, Phillip, "Monetarism in Historical Perspective," in The Structure of
Monetarism, T. Mayer, ed., (New York: W. W. Norton and Co, 1978).

Carlson, Keith M., "Does the St. Louis Equation Now Believe in Fiscal
Policy?" Federal Bank of St. louis Review 60 (February 1978), 13—19.

Christ, Carl F., "A Simple Macroeconomic Model with a Government Budget
Restraint," Journal of Political Economy 76

(January/February

1968), 53-

67.

Christ,

Carl F., "On Fiscal and Monetary Policies and the Government Budget

Restraint," American Economic Review 69

(September

1979), 526—538.

Christiano, Lawrence J., "A Reexamination of the Theory of Aitomatic
Stabilizers," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 20
(Spring ig84), 1L7_2O6.

Corrigan, E. Gerald, "The Measurement and Importance of Fiscal Policy
Changes," Federal Reserve Bank of New 'fork Monthly Review 52 (June 1970),
133—145/

Darby, Michael, "Comments," in Monetarism, J. L. Stein, ed. (Amsterdam:
North-Holland 1976).

De Prano, Michael, and Thomas Mayer, "Tests of the Relative Importance of

Autonomous Expenditures and Money,"

American Economic Review 55

(September 1965), 729—752.

Fischer, Stanley, "Comments," in Monetarisrn, J. L. Stein, ed. (Amsterdam:
North-Holland 1976).

Friedman, Benjamin M., "Even the St. Louis Model Now Believes in Fiscal
Policy," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 9 (May 1977), 365-367.

Friedman, Benjamin H., "Money, Credit,

and Interest Rates in the Business

Cycle," NBER Working Paper No. 1L82, October 1984.

Friedman, Milton, and David Meiselman, "The Relative Stability of' Monetary
Velocity and the Investment Multiplier in the United States, 1897—1958,"

in Stabilization Polici (Englewood Cliffs:

Prentic Hall, 1963)

Goldfeld, Stephen M., and Alan S. Blinder, "Some Implications of Endogenous

Stabilization Policy," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (No. 3,
-

1972), 585-6O.

Gordon,

Robert J., ed., Milton Friedman's Monetary

Framework (Chicago:

University of Chicago Press, 19714).

Gordon, Robert J., and Stephen King, "The Output Costs of Disinflation in

Traditional and Vector Autoregression Models," Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity (No. 1, 1982), 205_2142.

Gordon, Robert A., and Lawrence Klein, eds., Readings in Business Cycles
(Homewood, IL.: Richard D. Irwin, 1965).

Hafer, R. W., "The Role of Fiscal Policy in the St. Louis Equation," Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 59 (January 1982), 17-22.

Hester, Donald D., "Keynes and the Quantity Theory:

A Comment on the

Friedman-Meiselman CMC Paper," Review of Economics and Statistics 46
(November 1964), 364—377.

Lipsey, Richard G., and J. M. Parkin, "Incomes Policy:

A Reappraisal,

Economica 37 (May 1970), 115—138.

Litterman,

Robert, tspecifying Vector Autoregressions for Macroeconomic

Forecasting," Working Paper No. 208, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
1982.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., "Econometric Policy Evaluation:

A Critique,"

Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series in Public Poly, vol. 1, K. Brunner
and A. H. Meltzer,eds. (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1976).

Mayer, Thomas, "The Government Budget Constraint and Standard Macrotheory,"
Journal of Monetary Economics 13 (May 1984), 371—379.

McCallurn, Bennett T., "Monetarist Principles and the Money Stock Growth Rule,"
American Economic Review 71 (May 1981), 1314—138.

McCallum, Bennett T., "A Reconsideration of Sims's Evidence Concerning
Monetarism," Economics Letters 13 (1983), 167—171.

McCalluni, Bennett T., "Are Bond-Financed Deficits Inflationary?

Analysis,"

A

Ricardian

Journal of Political Economy 92 (February 19814), 123-135. (a)

McCallurn, Bennett T., "On Low-Frequency Estimates of Long-Run Relationships in
Macroeconomics," Journal of Monetary Economics 114

(July

1981), 3_ill. (b)

McCallum, Bennett T., "Book Review," Journal of Monetary Economics 14 (April
1978), 321—324.

Mcelis, Paul D., "Irrespressible Monetarist Conclusions from a Jon—Monetarist
Model," Journal of Monetary Economics 6 (January 1980), 21-127.

Meltzer, Allan H., "Money, Intermediation, and Growth," Journal of Economic
Literature 7 (March 1969), 27—56.

Meyer, Lawrence H., and Robert H. Rasche, "Empirical Evidence on the Effects

of Stabilization Policy," in Stabilization Policies:

Lessons from the

'70s and Implications for the '80s, Center for the Study of American
Business, April 1980.

Modigliani, Franco, "The Monetarist Controversy Or, Should We Forsake
Stablization Policies?" American Economic Review 67

(March

1977), 1-19.

Modigliani, Franco,and Albert Ando, "Impacts of Fiscal Actions on Aggregate

Income and the Monetarist Controversy:

Theory and Evidence," in

Monetarism, J. L. Stein, ed. (Amsterdam: Jorth—Holland, 1976).

Meihans, Jurg, The Theory of Money (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1978).

Harper and

Patinkin, Don, Money, Interest, and Prices, 2nd ed. (New York:
Row, 1965).

Purvis, Douglas D., "Monetarism: A Review," Canadian Journal of'

Economics

13

(February 1980), 96—122.

Sargent, Thomas J.,

"P. Classical Macroeconometric Model for the United

States," Journal of Political Economy 814 (April 1976), 207-238.

Sims, Christopher A., "Comparison of Interwar arnd Postwar Business Cycles:
Monetarism Reconsidered," American Economic Review 70 (May 1980), 250-257.

Sims, Christopher A., "Policy Analysis with Econometric Models," Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity (No. 1, 1982), 107-152.

Stein, Jerome L., ed., Monetarisrn (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1976).

Webb, Roy H., "Vector Autoregressions as a Tool for Forecast Evalution,"
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review 70 (January/February
1984), 3-11.

