                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE CHANGING LANDSCAPE OF BLOCKBUSTER PUNITIVE DAMAGES AWARDS

                                         Alison F. Del Rossi
                                          W. Kip Viscusi

                                        Working Paper 15571
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15571


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2009




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Alison F. Del Rossi and W. Kip Viscusi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Changing Landscape of Blockbuster Punitive Damages Awards
Alison F. Del Rossi and W. Kip Viscusi
NBER Working Paper No. 15571
December 2009
JEL No. K10,K40

                                           ABSTRACT

This article investigates the determinants of the blockbuster punitive damages awards of at least $100
million. As of the end of 2008, there had been 100 such awards with an average value of $3.0 billion.
The U.S. Supreme Court decision in State Farm v. Campbell suggested a single digit upper bound
on the punitive damages/compensatory damages ratio, which reduced the annual number of blockbuster
awards, the total annual value of blockbuster awards, and the punitive damages/compensatory damages
ratio. Applying the 1:1 ratio from Exxon Shipping Co. et al. v. Baker et al. broadly would eliminate
most of the blockbuster awards.


Alison F. Del Rossi
Department of Economics
St. Lawrence University
Canton, New York 13617
adelrossi@stlawu.edu

W. Kip Viscusi
Vanderbilt Law School
131 21st Avenue South
Nashville, TN 37203-1181
and NBER
kip.viscusi@vanderbilt.edu
1. Introduction

           By their very nature, punitive damages awards tend to be large. Punitive damages

awards usually arise in cases where juries perceive the conduct to be particularly

egregious, and the compensatory damages associated with such cases are often great as

well. If the purpose of the award is to punish defendants for severe harms or to provide

incentives to deter the conduct that led to these harms, then one would expect these

awards to be reasonably substantial in absolute terms but not necessarily large relative to

the value of compensatory damages. From the standpoint of economic efficiency, the

appropriate relation between punitive damages and compensatory damages will depend

on the probability of detecting and punishing the behavior to provide the appropriate

economic incentives as well as perhaps on factors other than deterrence, such as

punishment.1

           Although punitive damages could serve a constructive role in some

circumstances, there have been signals that the process for setting punitive damages may

have gone awry. Whereas punitive awards for $1 million or more formerly garnered

news attention, awards at even higher levels than that have become quite common. The

extreme outliers involve much greater stakes than $1 million. Hersch and Viscusi (2004)

and Viscusi (2004) developed tabulations of what they called the “blockbuster punitive

damages awards,” which were those punitive awards of at least $100 million.

Notwithstanding this quite high cutoff, they identified 64 blockbuster awards as of 2004.

In this article, we update and analyze the blockbuster punitive damages award tally

through 2008, which now includes 100 blockbuster awards.



1
    Polinsky and Shavell (1998) summarize the economic theory of punitive damages.

                                                    1
         The emergence of blockbuster awards has been coupled with a series of studies

that have questioned the ability of jurors to set punitive damages levels such as these in a

meaningful way. Although jurors often are able to form reasonable judgments regarding

the reprehensibility of behavior, they have difficulty in mapping these concerns into a

level of punitive damages in a consistent manner.2 Jurors also are subject to a variety of

behavioral anomalies, such as hindsight bias, which may lead to a judgment after the fact

that the behavior is more blameworthy than it actually is.3 Anchoring effects also may be

influential to the extent that irrelevant anchors provided by plaintiffs’ attorneys serve as a

form of guidance to jurors in search of a damages number.4 Unfortunately, jury

instructions do not provide the type of meaningful guidance needed to overcome these

shortcomings.

         Extremely large punitive awards may have substantial economic consequences.

A sufficiently large award may threaten the solvency of the firm. Short of such

catastrophic effects on the viability of the firm, very high damages awards deter

innovation and the introduction of novel products that may be subject to the risk of large

awards, as novel technologies appear to be harder hit than older, but possibly riskier,

technologies.5 Costs to consumers also are increased by high damages amounts, to the

extent that companies’ expectations of liability costs raise product prices.6 Because of



2
  Sunstein et al. (2002) provide a series of results based on controlled jury experiments that explore a wide
variety of limitations in how juries set punitive damages.
3
  Ibid.
4
  Ibid.
5
  See Viscusi and Moore (1993) for an empirical analysis of the effect of liability costs on innovations, such
as patents and new product introductions. Some firms have also reduced their production of vaccines in
response to liability costs. See Manning (1994) for discussion of the effects of tort liability on the
production of childhood vaccines.
6
  Rubin et al. (1997) provide a thorough analysis of the law and economics of the effect of punitive
damages on prices.

                                                      2
their unpredictability, punitive awards may have little constructive effect in promoting

efficient behaviors, such as appropriate levels of product safety.7

        Controversies over the appropriateness of punitive damages awards combined

with the size of the awards and the economic repercussions from very large awards have

prompted several U.S. Supreme Court reviews of cases involving punitive damages. The

decisions in the early 1990s generally supported the awards, but subsequent decisions

focused on whether there should be limits on the ratio of punitive damages to

compensatory damages.8 In the 1991 decision in Pacific Mutual Life Insurance Company

v. Haslip, the Court concluded that a ratio of punitive damages to compensatory damages

of four to one was not improper.9 The 1993 decision in TXO Prod. Corp. v. Alliance Res.

Corp. affirmed a punitive damages judgment in which the ratio of punitive damages to

compensatory damages was over 526.10 In 1996 in BMW of N. Am., Inc. v. Gore, the

Court remarked that the “most commonly cited indicium of an unreasonable or excessive

punitive damages award is its ratio to the actual harm inflicted on the plaintiff.”11

Subsequently, the 2003 U.S. Supreme Court Decision in State Farm v. Campbell issued

more precise guidance for the reasonableness of punitive damages awards based on this

ratio, which the court believed should not exceed a single-digit ratio: “Our jurisprudence

and the principles it has now established demonstrate, however, that in practice few

7
  Viscusi (1998a,b) examines the weak incentive effects of punitive damages empirically.
8
  In addition to its rulings on the ratio of punitive to compensatory damages, in 2007 the U.S. Supreme
Court decided that a jury can consider harm to non-parties when deciding how reprehensible the conduct of
the defendant, but it cannot consider such harm in determining the level of punitive damages. See Philip
Morris USA v. Williams, 127 S. Ct. 1057 (2007). This decision has resulted in the reversal and a new trial
to determine punitive damages in Bullock v. Philip Morris, Inc. (Cal Ct. App., No. B164398, 1/30/08), a
case analyzed in this paper.
9
  Pac. Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Haslip, 499 U.S. 1 (1991).
10
   TXO Prod. Corp. v. Alliance Res. Corp., 509 U.S. 443 (1993).
11
   BMW of N. Am., Inc. v. Gore, 517 U.S. 559 (1996). Eisenberg and Wells (1999) found no effect of the
BMW decision on the ratio of punitive damages to compensatory damages based on a sample of published
opinions.

                                                    3
awards exceeding a single-digit ratio between punitive and compensatory damages, to a

significant degree, will satisfy due process.”12 In 2008 the U.S. Supreme Court supported

a punitive damages/compensatory damages maximum ratio of 1.0 in Exxon Shipping Co.

v. Baker, which it viewed as an appropriate upper bound ratio for maritime oil spill

cases.13 In her opinion that dissented in part, Justice Ginsburg hypothesized that the 1:1

ratio of punitive damages to compensatory damages might have broader applicability in

future cases: “On next opportunity, will the Court rule, definitively, that 1:1 is the ceiling

due process requires in all of the States, and for all federal claims?”14

        Our focus on the implications of the recent U.S. Supreme Court decisions is

twofold. First, we analyze the trends in the blockbuster awards throughout the era in

which blockbuster awards have occurred to identify the determinants of these awards as

well as whether there has been any decline in these very large awards in the wake of the

State Farm case. Second, we explore the implications of Justice Ginsburg’s conjecture

by also undertaking an analysis of how a lower ratio of 1:1 based on the Exxon Shipping

Co. v. Baker decision would affect blockbuster awards if this ratio were applied more

generally.

        Whereas the main focus of the previous studies of blockbuster awards was

primarily on the overall distribution of awards, this article examines their economic

underpinnings. How responsive is the magnitude of the blockbuster awards to the level

of compensatory damages? Are particular industries subject to larger punitive awards

even after taking into account the level of compensatory damages? Have the number of


12
   State Farm Mut. Auto Ins. Co. v. Campbell, 538 U.S. 425 (2003).
13
   Exxon Shipping Company, et al., Petitioners v. Grant Baker et al. No. 07-219, Supreme Court of the
United States (2008 U.S. LEXIS 5263).
14
   Ibid.

                                                    4
blockbuster awards been on the rise or have they become less frequent? Has the total

amount of the blockbuster awards exhibited a rising or falling trend over time? If there

has been a trend, is it related to the State Farm decision, which one would have expected

to lead to a dampening of blockbuster awards? The overall result is that such awards have

been on the rise, but after the State Farm decision there has been a statistically significant

drop in the number of blockbuster punitive damages awards, their amount, and the ratio

of punitive damages to compensatory damages.



2. An Inventory of Blockbuster Punitive Damages Awards

       The set of blockbuster cases with punitive damages awards of $100 million or

more (in nominal dollars) was found through a wide-ranging search of a number of

sources including, but not limited to, the following: LEXIS combined jury verdicts and

settlements, Lexis-Nexis and Westlaw databases, Lawyers Weekly USA, and

VerdictSearch’s annual “Top 100 Jury Verdicts” for 2006, 2007, and 2008. Basic case

information, such as the year of the award, amounts of punitive and compensatory

awards, and type of industry involved was drawn mainly from news articles and

published court opinions. We identified 100 blockbuster punitive damages awards for

the time period January, 1985 through December, 2008. We have not identified any

blockbuster awards before 1985. Table 1 lists the blockbuster awards by year. Appendix

Table A1 sorts these awards by the size of the award.




                                              5
        Figure 1 illustrates the distribution of the blockbuster punitive damages awards

for the sample, where all awards have been converted to 2008 dollars.15 Due to the

enormous range of the award amounts, the figure plots the frequency of the natural log of

punitive damages awards on the horizontal axis. For reference, the scale at the top of the

graph indicates the corresponding levels of punitive damages. Even using a logarithmic

scale, the distribution of punitive damages is greatly skewed right, or positively skewed.

Almost 20 percent of the awards have real values less than or equal to $150 million, and

the vast majority (73 percent) of the awards fall under the $500 million mark. Nearly 85

percent of the awards are less than or equal to $1 billion, but there are 6 cases (6 percent

of the sample) that exceed $5 billion in 2008 dollars.

        Table 2 summarizes the distribution of the punitive damages awards by type of

defendant. In almost all instances, the defendant in punitive damages cases is a corporate

entity rather than an individual or a government agency. One-fourth of the awards in the

sample are against firms in the energy or chemical industry. The 1995 punitive damages

award against Exxon Corporation, which has since become the Exxon Mobil

Corporation, of $5.0 billion for damages related to the Exxon Valdez oil spill is perhaps

the best known of these awards. However, this is by no means the only such award in the

multi-billion dollar range for firms in the energy and chemical industry. There was also

an $11.8 billion punitive damages award in 2003 for Exxon’s alleged accounting

violations in Exxon Mobil Corporation v. Alabama Department of Conservation and

Natural Resources, a $3.4 billion punitive damages award in 1997 in In re New Orleans



15
  The inflation adjustment factors are based on the Consumer Price Index, All Urban Consumers (CPI-U).
Authors’ calculations from data downloaded from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
<http://www.bls.gov/cpi/#tables>.

                                                  6
Tank Car Leakage Fire Litigation, and a $3 billion award in 1985 in Pennzoil v. Texaco.

These cases involve a mix of financial harms or serious environmental harms.

        Firms in the finance, investment, and insurance industry account for close to one-

fourth of all blockbuster punitive damages awards. The 1996 State Farm case is perhaps

the best known of these 23 blockbuster award cases. The largest punitive award in this

group is a $2.1 billion bench award against members of the Uzan family of Turkey in

2003 for fraud in loan transactions with Motorola Credit Corporation; this award was

later reduced to $1 billion, an amount upheld by a federal appeals court.16 The mean

punitive damages amount for these cases is $546.3 million, approximately one-third of

the level for the energy and chemical industry punitive damages mean. Also, the mean

ratio of punitive to compensatory damages is about two-thirds of the ratio for the energy

and chemical industry, but the average ratio is still in the double digits, above the State

Farm single digit guidelines.

        The third largest industry group of firms in terms of the number of blockbuster

punitive damages awards consists of those firms in the pharmaceutical or health care

industry, which account for 16 blockbuster cases.17 The magnitude of these awards is

about the same as for the finance, investment, and insurance industry category. The

prominence of the pharmaceutical and health care industry is not surprising, as litigation

involving medical malpractice, medical devices, and prescription drugs has long been

noted as being a major contributor to perceptions of the existence of a tort liability

crisis.18 Whether there is or has been a so-called “crisis” is beyond the scope of this


16
   Motorola Credit Corp. v. Uzan, 2007 U.S. App. LEXIS 26867.
17
   This category also includes professional medical practitioners or medical practices.
18
   See Manning (1994) for further discussion of this industry. More generally, Kakalik and Pace (1986)
and Hensler et al. (1987) review the areas of tort liability that have generated the largest costs.

                                                    7
article, except to the extent that the analysis here indicates that there is evidence of an

imbalance between the punitive damages and compensatory damages amounts for the

blockbuster cases affecting this industry. Within the set of firms with punitive damages

at the blockbuster level, pharmaceutical and health care firms are well represented but are

by no means outliers in terms of the magnitude of the awards.

        By far the greatest outlier category is the cigarette industry. The five blockbuster

awards average $44.5 billion, and even after excluding the $145 billion award in the

Engle Florida class action in 2000, the mean punitive damages value is $10.2 billion.

The smallest of the cigarette blockbuster punitive damages awards is $150 million in the

2002 case, Schwarz v. Philip Morris, Inc., in the state of Oregon. This award is

nevertheless strikingly large given that it is an individual smoker case. The imbalance

between the punitive damages and compensatory damages in this case is reflected in the

case’s ratio of punitive damages to compensatory damages, which is 882.4. The second

smallest blockbuster cigarette award is the $3 billion award in the 2001 individual

smoker case, Boeken v. Philip Morris, Inc. The ratio of punitive damages to

compensatory damages in this California case was 541.5, or two orders of magnitude

beyond the single digit guidance in the State Farm case. The largest punitive damages

award in an individual smoker case was the $28 billion award in 2002 in Bullock v. Philip

Morris, Inc. This case, which involved the same plaintiff’s attorney, Michael Piuze, as in

the Boeken individual smoker cigarette case, had a ratio of punitive damages to

compensatory damages of approximately 43,000, which is the highest ratio for any

blockbuster punitive damages award.19 A very large cigarette punitive damages award


19
 We have excluded Garamendi v. Altus Finance, S.A. from this comparison; since compensatory damages
were zero in this case, the ratio is infinite.

                                                 8
was in the 2003 Illinois “lights” cigarette class action, Price v. Philip Morris, Inc., in

which the judge in this Madison County, Illinois bench trial awarded $3.1 billion in

punitive damages, with a ratio of punitive damages to compensatory damages of 0.4.20

The final blockbuster cigarette award was the $145 billion award in Engle v. Philip

Morris, Inc. That case’s punitive damages/compensatory damages ratio of 11,417.3

overstates the actual ratio that would be observed if it were possible to calculate the full

value of compensatory damages for the entire class and not just the compensatory

damages for the class representatives, which was the focus of the jury award. Of all the

blockbuster cigarette awards, only the punitive damages/compensatory damages ratio in

the Price case would be under the single-digit State Farm threshold, and all other

punitive awards for the cigarette industry are at the triple-digit level or beyond. The

cigarette industry has experienced particularly extreme blockbuster awards in terms of

their levels, but the industry has not had as many awards of this type as have some

broader industry groups in Table 2.

         Our data set includes seven unusual cases involving punitive damages against the

perpetrators of violent crimes. The largest punitive award in this category was in Swan v.

20
   This very high award in a bench trial is one of two bench trials and one of twelve punitive awards in the
sample in excess of $1 billion (in nominal dollars). The role of a Madison County judgment in terms of its
outlier status is not too surprising given Madison County’s reputation as “The Lawsuit Capital of the
World” and “Class Action Paradise,” as noted by Amalia Deligiannis, “Madison County: A Corporation’s
Worst Nightmare,” 14 Corp. Legal Times 52 (2004). Other designations of Madison County as the number
one “Judicial Hellhole” and a “jackpot jurisdiction” have been provided by the American Tort Reform
Association, Bringing Justice to Judicial Hellholes 2003, at 3 (2003). The Illinois Supreme Court
overturned Judge Byron’s verdict and in August, 2007 turned down a request by plaintiffs to reopen the
case. Illinois also has been a prominent state for class actions. In 1995-1996, based on reported judicial
decisions, Illinois ranked first in terms of the number of consumer cases, third in torts, and second in
securities. The 1996-1997 Illinois class action rankings were first in consumer cases, second in torts, and
fifth in securities. Illinois ranked in the top five states in terms of the frequency of class actions per
population for all these groupings. See Hensler et al. (2000). With respect to medical malpractice cases,
Vidmar (2005) found that an analysis of Madison County and St. Clair County produced “no evidence to
support the perception that medical malpractice jury awards in these counties are frequent or that jury
verdicts for plaintiffs are outrageous.” Medical malpractice cases do not figure prominently in punitive
damages awards, in general, but six of the blockbuster cases in Table 1 are medical malpractice cases.

                                                     9
Einhorn in 1999. The parents of the victim were awarded $155 million in compensatory

damages and $752 million in punitive damages in a civil trial. The second largest verdict

was handed down in 2004 in Brown v. Dorsey. That case involved a conspiracy by

sheriff’s department employees culminating in the murder of the sheriff-elect. The civil

trial in 2004 led to a judgment of $326.1 million in compensatory damages and $450

million in punitive damages against the former sheriff and two co-conspirators. Two

2008 blockbuster awards, Estate of Mack v. Mack and Estate of LoCascio v. LoCascio,

involved children of murder victims seeking damages from family members who were

convicted of murdering their mothers. The punitive damages awarded in Mack equaled

$405 million (with compensatory damages of $185 million), and in LoCascio the punitive

damages award was $100 million (with compensatory damages of $25.1 million).

Another $100 million punitive damages award was given to a murder victim’s family in

the 2006 “American Beauty” case, de Villers v. Rossum.21 The remaining two violent

crime cases were a 2007 sexual battery civil case, Martin v. Swain and a 2008 wrongful-

death claim against the Cuban government and its leaders, the Estate of del Pino v. The

Republic of Cuba. In the Martin case the verdict was $155 million in compensatory

damages and $100 million in punitive damages against a father for many years of sexual

abuse of his daughter. In the del Pino case, the award of $252.5 million, $250 in punitive

damages alone, was given to the children of a man who was allegedly tortured and killed

by hanging by the Cuban government. The ratios of punitive damages to compensatory

damages in these cases are generally small relative to the other blockbuster cases, ranging

from 1.4 in Brown v. Dorsey to 16.7 in de Villers v. Rossum. An exception is the case

21
  Rossum, the murderer, attempted to make de Villers’ death appear to be a suicide by placing a wedding
photo, her opened diary indicating their marriage was failing, and rose petals near her husband’s body. See
Natalie White, “$106 Million in ‘American Beauty’ Murder,” Lawyers Weekly USA, April 24, 2006.

                                                    10
against the Cuban government, which has a ratio of 100. Excluding the latter award,

which is unusual in that the defendant is a foreign government, the mean ratio for the

other six violent crime punitive damages awards is 6.5 and the median ratio is 4.4.

        These violent crime cases are clearly different from other blockbuster punitive

damages awards and the group shares a number of characteristics. All but Martin v.

Swain concerned a highly visible, publicity-generating murder, and in all, liability is

already established in the civil trial, as each defendant had already been convicted and

was serving lengthy terms. Also, these cases are the only ones in the data set in which

both litigants are individuals rather than corporate or government parties.22 In the murder

cases, family members of the victims claim a key purpose of the civil suit, and for

seeking punitive damages in particular, is to make sure that the murderer can never profit

from the murder. In fact, the plaintiff’s attorney in the Einhorn case claimed that Einhorn

had been approached to write a book about the case, enabling him to profit from the

murder.23 The plaintiffs in de Villers v. Rossum brought in testimony from a professor of

marketing about Rossum’s potential earnings through selling her story to various national

media or selling movie or book rights. The Brown family’s attorney said in an interview,

“‘Let’s be honest: nobody has this type of money…But as I discussed with the jury, and I

think they understood, this prevents any of the defendants from ever profiting from any

sort of media deal…’” 24 Other reasons for the verdicts, noted by attorneys and family

members, are to reflect the egregious nature of the crime and to ‘send a message,’ with

the avowed intent of deterring future crimes. One juror in the case against the Cuban

22
   The exception in this group is the del Pino award which involved a national government as a defendant
and which did not have a criminal trial proceeding.
23
   Alan Fisk, “Pressing on for a fugitive’s debt: Ira Einhorn owes $907 million. But how much is
collectible?” National Law Journal, Volume 23, Number 51, August 13, 2001.
24
   “Top Ten Jury Verdicts of 2004,” Lawyers Weekly USA, October 24, 2005.

                                                   11
government noted that they wanted to send a “political statement.”25 None of these

plaintiffs has received any compensation to date.

        Several states have reputations for having courts in which plaintiffs seeking large

awards have more favorable prospects. Consistent with this view, Table 3 shows that the

distribution of the awards does differ substantially across states, as blockbuster awards

tend to be concentrated geographically. Exactly half the states (25 states) have had any

blockbuster punitive damages awards. California and Texas are the leading states in

terms of the total number of blockbuster cases, with 21 in California and 20 in Texas.

California has the highest total value blockbuster punitive damages award, $49.7 billion,

over four times greater than the total value of the punitive damages for Texas and nearly

3 times greater than the state with the second highest total value, Alabama.

        It is interesting to compare the California and Texas experiences with that of New

York. These three states have the largest populations, and California and New York both

have been the site of prominent cigarette cases. However, New York has had only two

blockbuster punitive damages awards. The average per capita value of the total

blockbuster punitive damages awards in the state from 1985–2008 is $136 in New York,

as compared to $1,429 in California, more than 10 times higher. This and other per

capita damages amounts in Table 3 pertain to the average across the 24 years in the

sample of the total blockbuster award amounts in 2008 dollars, divided by the state’s

population in the year of the awards. The per capita value of the total damages in Texas

is $629, as most of these awards tend to be at or just above the $100 million lower bound

to be in the sample, which is still 4.6 times greater than for New York State. The


25
  “Jury in Florida awards nearly $253 million to children of Castro foe who died in Cuban jail,” Associated
Press, April 5, 2008.

                                                    12
empirical analysis below will examine whether Texas and California are outliers

controlling for other case characteristics, such as the industry involved.

         Table 4 describes other key characteristics of the 100 blockbuster cases, including

the Engle case. Some of the breakdowns are of interest even though they did not prove to

be statistically significant in the regression analysis reported below. In terms of the types

of damages sought, 10 percent were for environmental harm, 40 percent were personal

injury and fatality cases, and 50 percent were cases involving monetary damages for

pecuniary harms. Six percent of the cases involved individual litigants in which private

individuals were both plaintiffs and defendants; these correspond to the violent crime

cases discussed above, excluding the del Pino award. The most common pattern

involved individuals paired against corporate or business entities, as 53 percent of the

cases involved an individual plaintiff and a business or corporate defendant.26 The

remainder of the cases involved plaintiffs and defendants who were both business or

government entities.



3. Temporal Trends of Blockbuster Punitive Damages

         Blockbuster punitive damages are a comparatively new phenomenon. The first

punitive damages award that we have identified as breaking the $100 million barrier was

in 1985.27 The two blockbuster awards in 1985 were in the California case, Micro/Vest v.

ComputerLand, and a $3 billion award in the highly publicized case of Pennzoil v.

Texaco. As the awards roster in Table 1 indicates, no awards earned blockbuster status in

26
   This group also includes the del Pino award which involved individuals against a national government
and its leaders. In the interest of simplicity, the label on this variable in the regressions below is “Individual
and Business Litigants.”
27
   While there may have been an earlier blockbuster award, this is the first award identified in the searches
for this paper or in Hersch and Viscusi (2004) or Viscusi (2004).

                                                       13
1986, 1987, 1990, or 1992, so in the early blockbuster awards era the number of punitive

awards meeting that criterion were not great. However, after 1992 every year through

2008 has had at least one award at the blockbuster level.

       While the 2003 U.S. Supreme Court State Farm decision is relatively recent, 31

percent of the sample of blockbuster cases came in 2004 or thereafter, providing a basis

for assessing whether there has been a shift in the punitive damages landscape after this

decision, holding fixed other case characteristics. The exploration below will not only

compare the performance of the blockbuster cases before and after the State Farm

decision, but will also assess whether the emergence of blockbuster cases has been

affected by the State Farm decision, as one might expect.

       Figure 2 illustrates the temporal trend in the number of blockbuster awards by

year. The number of blockbuster awards in any given year tends to be small, reaching a

peak of 12 in 1999, with 8 occurring in 2003, but never more than 7 in any other year.

Because of the small numbers, one should be cautious in generalizing with respect to the

overall trend in the absence of a formal statistical analysis that distinguishes which

effects are statistically significant and which are not. For example, there are few awards

in 1997 and 1998 before the spike in awards in 1999, and there are few awards in two of

the years after 1999. The 1999 spike in awards did not start a new upward trend, but the

tripling in the number of blockbuster awards in 1999 from the levels in the previous two

years may not be entirely random either.

       What may have accounted for a jump in punitive damages awards in 1999? One

hypothesis is that the Master Settlement Agreement in the cigarette litigation at the end of

1998 may have led juries to think in terms of billions rather than millions in setting



                                             14
damages awards. The lawsuits filed by the states seeking to recoup damages relating to

the states’ share of the Medicaid costs of smoking were settled for over $200 billion,

including $206 billion to 46 states, $36.8 billion to four states that settled individually, as

well as other costs.28 If jurors use the value of this highly publicized settlement as an

anchor in setting punitive damages awards,29 then one would expect both the frequency

and the level of blockbuster awards to rise after this settlement.

         There are two special cases that will be distinguished in the subsequent statistical

analysis because their ratios of punitive damages to compensatory damages are

misleading or undefined. First, Engle v. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. is a Florida tobacco

class action case in which the compensatory damages amount of $12.7 million pertains to

the class representatives, while the punitive damages amount of $145 billion is for the

entire class. Thus, while the punitive damages value is pertinent, the ratio of punitive

damages to compensatory damages will be misleading and overstated. The Engle case

also involved the largest punitive damages value in the sample, and including it in some

of the analyses may distort the average performance of the sample in terms of measures

such as the mean damages value. Second, there are some statistical problems raised in

the subsequent analyses by Garamendi v. Altus Finance, S.A., which had zero

compensatory damages and $700 million in punitive damages. As a result, the ratio of

punitive damages to compensatory damages for this case is infinite. At different

junctures below, we will present results with and without these cases in the sample, as is

appropriate.



28
  See Viscusi (2002) for a breakdown of these costs.
29
  See Sunstein et al. (2002) for discussion of experimental results demonstrating anchoring effects on
punitive damages.

                                                    15
        Table 5 summarizes the general characteristics of the blockbuster awards and

their pattern before and after the pivotal State Farm case. Panel A provides the

characteristics of the full sample, while Panels B and C, respectively, summarize the

comparable statistics before and after the 2003 State Farm decision. As noted earlier, to

ensure comparability, we converted all award values reported in tables and used in the

regressions to 2008 dollars using the Consumer Price Index. The mean punitive damages

amount across all cases excluding the Engle case is $1.2 billion, and is $3.0 billion

including that case. The median blockbuster award value is considerably less, reflecting

the highly skewed nature of the distribution of blockbuster awards. The punitive

damages amounts ranged from $100 million to $33.5 billion excluding the Engle case,

with a high of $181.3 billion including Engle, which is the largest punitive damages

award in the sample. Compensatory damages averaged $368.8 million excluding the

Engle case. If we exclude both Engle v. R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. and Garamendi v.

Altus Finance, S.A. in analyzing the ratio of punitive damages to compensatory damages,

the median ratio is 7.2, which is within the single digit ratio limit articulated in the State

Farm decision. However, the mean ratio is 502.4, while the maximum ratio is over

43,000, so there clearly is very wide variation in the relationship between punitive

damages and compensatory damages.

        Comparison of the statistics in Panels B and C of Table 5 indicates a possible

effect of the State Farm decision on blockbuster awards. The mean punitive

damages/compensatory damages award ratio exhibits significant declines in Panel C as




                                              16
compared to Panel B.30 The median value of this ratio also drops significantly for cases

decided after the State Farm decision, and the median ratio is below the single-digit limit

for cases decided since 2003 but above that limit for earlier awards.31 These overall

effects are suggestive of a State Farm effect but do not take into account other influences

on the trend of punitive damages awards over this time period, which may also have led

to lowering of award amounts and ratios in the absence of the case.

         The general patterns shown in Table 5 are also borne out if the Bullock case is

excluded. Unlike the Engle case and Garamendi v. Altus, the Bullock case has a

meaningful positively valued compensatory damages award so that a valid ratio can be

computed. However, the Bullock case has an extremely high ratio of punitive damages to

compensatory damages that influences the average values for the sample. As the

statistics in Appendix Table A2 indicate, excluding the Bullock case has negligible effect

on the median statistics, but lowers the mean punitive damages value to $826.8 million

overall and to $1.0 billion before the State Farm decision. The mean ratio of punitive

damages to compensatory damages is 63.4 overall and 85.4 in the period before the State

Farm decision without the Bullock award, compared to 502.4 and 717.7, respectively,

with the award. Both the mean ratio and the median ratio exhibit significant declines

after the State Farm decision even if the Bullock case is excluded.32

         To explore the determinants of the number of blockbuster cases over time, Table

6 presents the negative binomial regression results for the number of blockbuster punitive


30
   The test statistic using the Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test for equality of means for the ratio is z=3.51,
which has a p-value of 0.0004. The decline in the mean punitive damages amount is not statistically
significant at the usual levels.
31
   The Pearson chi-squared test of the equality of the medians yields a chi-squared test statistic equal to
6.92 (p-value=0.009) and equal to 5.81 (p-value=0.016) with a continuity correction.
32
   The Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test statistic is z=3.44 (p-value=0.001). The Pearson chi-squared test
statistic equals 6.60 (p-value=0.010) and equals 5.52 (p-value=0.019) with a continuity correction.

                                                     17
damages awards by year, from 1985–2008. The dependent variable, the number of

awards in each year, is a discrete variable that involves a small number of counts, which

sometimes take on a zero value. Consequently, we use a negative binomial regression

model, rather than using ordinary least squares, to estimate the effects of time-related

variables on the number of blockbuster awards in any year. 33 The coefficients, reported

in Table 6, provide the estimated effect on the log of the expected number of cases in any

year due to a one unit change in the variable. Consequently, the exponential of the

coefficient (minus 1) provides the percentage change in the number of cases for a one

unit change in the variable.34

         To control for the time trend in the volume of cases, the regressions in Table 6

also include the number of civil court cases filed by year.35 An alternative measure of the

possible set of cases that might generate blockbuster awards would be the number of

punitive damages awards generally, but these are not feasible to construct on an annual

basis for the sample period. 36



33
   One cannot reject the hypothesis that the parameter α that serves as a measure of overdispersion in the
negative binomial model equals zero. In all regressions, likelihood ratio tests (null hypothesis that alpha
equals zero) yield chi-squared statistics virtually equal to zero. The Poisson model is a special case of the
negative binomial model when alpha equals zero, and the negative binomial results in Table 6 are not
distinguishable from Poisson estimates of the same equations.
34
   As an example, in the first equation of Table 6, the coefficient on the time trend variable is 0.140 and
exp(0.140)=1.150. Thus, each additional year increases the expected number of cases by 15 percent.
35
   These data are from the Court Statistics Project, State Court Caseload Statistics, 1985-2006. (National
Center for State Courts 1985-2006.) Because data for 2007 and 2008 were unavailable, the number of civil
filings was set equal to zero for those two years and an indicator for missing state filings is included in the
regressions. Regressions excluding 2007 and 2008 yielded virtually identical results.
36
   Using data from the Civil Justice Survey of State Courts (CJSSC), it is possible to calculate the number
of punitive damages awards by year for three years, but these data are samples of cases from large counties
and not a census of cases from these counties. The counties represented vary a bit over time, and in any
given year the sampling procedure imposes caps on the number of case types to be included so that the
comprehensive tallies in the National Center for State Courts data are a more meaningful index of civil case
trends. Only one “blockbuster” case is included in the CJSSC data. Keeping these limitations in mind the
total number of cases with nonzero values for punitive damages and compensatory damages was 184 in
1992, 180 in 1996, and 153 in 2001. The probability of a punitive damages award given a compensatory
damages award is 0.056 in 1992, 0.040 in 1996, and 0.043 in 2001. Authors’ calculations.

                                                      18
        The number of state civil suit filings is never statistically significant. However,

the time trend counter variable has a significant positive effect, indicating that the number

of blockbuster awards increased over the 1985–2008 period. Each year that elapses

increases the number of punitive damages awards by about 14 to 15 percent. However,

there is a muting of such effects in the post-State Farm period from 2004–2008. We use

two different formulations to examine the effect of the State Farm decision on the annual

number of blockbuster awards. The result using an indicator variable for years after the

State Farm decision implies that the number of blockbuster cases is 52 percent less in

post-State Farm years, controlling for a general upward time trend (based on equation 1

regression coefficient). An alternative specification in equation 2, interacting the time

trend with the After State Farm indicator, shows a statistically significant reduction in the

upward temporal trend to an 11 percent increase per year post-State Farm. The inclusion

in equations 3 and 4 of an indicator variable for 1999, the year following the Master

Settlement Agreement, reflects the spike in the number of cases (2.5 times the number of

cases in other years), but it has little effect on general time trends. Similarly, in results

not reported here we found that an indicator variable for 1999-2008 (all years since the

Master Settlement Agreement) is not statistically significant and does not eliminate the

State Farm effect.

        Whether blockbuster awards are exhibiting any discernible trend depends not only

on the number of awards in any year but also on their magnitude. However, because of

the enormous size of the outlier blockbuster award in the Engle case, the trend in the total

value of punitive damages over time may be dominated by this extreme outlier. To better

reflect the trend in the award amounts by year, Figure 3A presents the total blockbuster



                                              19
award amounts by year for all cases, and Figure 3B excludes the Engle case. In each

instance blockbuster awards are on the rise, and as before, 1999 appears to be a year in

which the awards increased compared to previous years. The results in Figure 3B are

more informative in that they make clear that the total value of blockbuster awards has

been on the decline since 2002. That year exhibited a spike due to the $28 billion award

in the Bullock individual smoker case. It is conceivable that the jurors confused millions

for billions when setting the award level, and the trial judge reduced the punitive

damages amount to $28 million.37 Irrespective of the seemingly random factors that lead

to such jury awards, there appears to be a consistent downward trend in the total scale of

blockbuster damages in recent years. To the extent that one defines crises in the courts in

terms of trends in damages rather than simply absolute levels, then the fact that

blockbuster damages are not on the rise but are perhaps becoming less prominent is an

encouraging signal.

           To attempt to place a magnitude on the trends of Figures 3A and 3B, we fit

regressions of the total value of punitive damage awards per year. Because of the skewed

nature of the distribution of damages, the dependent variable is the natural log of

blockbuster punitive damages in any given year. In some years, the total blockbuster

awards amount is zero. We address this by adding 1 to the value of both compensatory

damages and punitive damages in each year so that the regression results reported in

Table 7 will be with respect to variables that have finite values. We report Tobit

estimates of the equation rather than ordinary least squares, and the coefficient estimate

and marginal effects are both reported, although there is very little difference between the

two. The log total blockbuster award regression results in Table 7 include two
37
     See p. 1450 of Viscusi (2004).

                                              20
specifications each using the entire sample and the sample excluding the Engle award.

The marginal effect of ln(compensatory damages) is not significantly different from 1.0

in each instance. That is, one cannot reject the hypothesis that there is a unitary elasticity

of blockbuster awards with respect to the value of compensatory awards, controlling for

the other variables in the equation. However, because this equation deals only with

annual totals, the role of specific case characteristics is not taken into account.

         The first of the other included variables is the time trend variable, which has a

positive effect that is statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Thus, while

compensatory damages have a proportional influence on punitive damages, there is an

additional upward drift in the total award amounts of 16 percent per year without the

Engle award and about 23 percent per year including the Engle award even after

controlling for inflation.

         We explored two different formulations for how the State Farm case might have

affected total blockbuster punitive damages. The first specification interacts the indicator

variable for the post-State Farm era with the time trend variable, and the second

specification interacts the State Farm indicator variable with ln(total compensatory

damages), as the decision’s focus on punitive damages/compensatory damages ratios

should have affected the relationship between punitive damages and compensatory

damages. Each of these formulations leads to a statistically significant negative effect for

both the full sample of cases as well as the sample excluding the Engle case.38 The time

trend interaction with State Farm has a negative effect that eliminates about three-fourths

of the upward temporal trend in the real value of total damages: total blockbuster awards


38
  Inclusion of both of the State Farm interaction variables in the same equation did not lead to statistically
significant effects.

                                                      21
increase at a rate of 5 percent per year post-State Farm (3 percent excluding the Engle

award). Alternatively, if one formulates the effect of State Farm in terms of how total

compensatory damages are linked to total punitive damages, the effect is to dramatically

reduce the elasticity from about 1.0 to the range of 0.5-0.6. The latter elasticities are

different from unitary elasticity at a significance level of 5 percent or better. From either

perspective, the State Farm decision dampened the total value of blockbuster punitive

damages as well as reducing the number of blockbuster punitive damages awards in any

year.

        In contrast to the number of blockbuster awards per year, there is little evidence

that the annual magnitude of the awards has been affected by the Master Settlement

Agreement. In results that are not reported, neither an indicator variable for 1999 nor an

indicator for the post- Master Settlement Agreement years is statistically significant when

controlling for a general time trend and the level of total compensatory damages.



4. Determinants of Awards in Individual Cases

        In addition to analyzing the determinants in the annual trends in the number and

level of blockbuster awards, it is instructive to analyze the individual awards themselves.

Doing so expands the range of questions that can be examined, such as whether particular

industries have been especially hard hit by blockbuster awards.

        The particular hypotheses being explored are conditional in nature. Given that

there was a blockbuster punitive damages award in a particular case, did the

characteristics of the case influence the magnitude of the award? This is a quite different

issue than determining whether a particular case type is likely to lead to a blockbuster



                                              22
punitive damages award. Answering that question would require a quite different sample

of cases, including those without blockbuster punitive damages awards, to determine

whether some cases are more likely to generate a blockbuster punitive damages award

and, if so, how large an award this will be.39

         The first dependent variable in the regression analysis in this section is the value

of ln(punitive damages) for each particular case. In contrast, the regressions above

focused on the natural log of total damages for all cases in each year. Because the

relationship between punitive damages and compensatory damages is a central concern,

we exclude from the sample the Garamendi v. Altus Finance, S.A. case in which there

were no compensatory damages; thus, the sample consists of 99 observations. We

include the Engle case in the regression but add a separate interaction of Engle with the

compensatory damages variable in recognition of the narrower scope of the

compensatory damages amount as compared to the class-wide punitive damages amount.

Below we present sensitivity tests, excluding the Engle case. 40

         Table 8 reports four sets of OLS regression results. Each equation includes the

ln(compensatory damages) and the interaction of this variable with the Engle case for that

observation. Equations 2 and 4 include the non-overlapping indicator variables for the

violent crime cases and the following five major industry groups: automobiles; cigarettes;

energy and chemicals; finance, investment, and insurance; and pharmaceuticals and


39
   Two previous studies, Hersch and Viscusi (2004) and Viscusi (2004), explored these relationships using
earlier samples of blockbuster cases. These authors found no significant relation between punitive damages
and compensatory damages for the sample. However, there is a significant relationship between the log of
punitive damages and the log of compensatory damages, as well as a tobacco case dummy variable. See
Eisenberg and Wells (2006). All three of these articles relate more generally to the issue of predictability
of punitive damages. For another perspective on the predictability of punitive damages and what is meant
by predictability, see Polinsky (1997).
40
   In addition, we examine regressions that exclude all cigarette cases, exclude bench awards, and include
the Garamendi v. Altus Finance, S.A. award.

                                                    23
health care. The omitted category is “other industries.” An indicator for cases involving

an individual plaintiff against a business or corporate defendant is included. There are

also indicator variables for the two most prominent states in the tally of blockbuster

punitive damages—California and Texas. In addition, the five cases involving a bench

trial are distinguished. Equations 3 and 4 include a post-State Farm interaction with the

value of ln(compensatory damages) to test whether on an individual case basis the State

Farm decision reduced the extent to which compensatory damages are transmitted into

punitive damages awards. For these results and all other OLS regressions, robust

standard errors are reported in parentheses and bootstrapped standard errors are in

brackets.41 The significance levels for the coefficients are quite similar for each, so for

concreteness our discussion will focus on the robust standard errors.

        Controlling for industry and other case characteristics, the overall elasticity of

punitive damages with respect to compensatory damages is between 0.21 and 0.26. This

level is far less responsive than the unitary elasticity implied by the aggregate annual data

regression results. The State Farm interaction with ln(compensatory damages) is

negative and statistically significant, and exhibits a small change in magnitude when case

characteristics are included. In equation 3, without detailed control variables, the null

hypothesis that the sum of the State Farm interaction term and the ln(compensatory

damages) coefficients, 0.04, equals zero cannot be rejected. Equation 4 results suggest

that the elasticity has declined from 0.26 prior to the Supreme Court decision to 0.13 after

the ruling (and the latter estimated elasticity is significantly different from zero at the 5

percent level).


41
  The bootstrapped standard errors for each regression in Tables 8 through 11 are based on 1,000
replications.

                                                   24
         We performed several other regressions reported in Table 9 to test the robustness

of the effects of this U.S. Supreme Court decision. Two alternative specifications

provide similar evidence of a negative effect of the State Farm decision on blockbuster

awards. Including a time trend and interaction of the trend with a post-State Farm

indicator variable yields no significant time trend prior to the ruling, and a 4-5 percent

decrease in the size of the punitive awards for each year after the State Farm decision.

An indicator variable for the post-State Farm years is negative and statistically significant

and shows a 49 percent decline in punitive award levels after State Farm compared to

cases heard before the 2003 decision. Finally, in results not reported, because the State

Farm decision was a state court case, we added an indicator for cases heard in state

courts and an interaction of state cases with the post-State Farm indicator variable.

Although the coefficient of the indicator for state cases is consistently negative, it and the

interaction variable are never statistically significant.

         Industry characteristics, rather than the level of compensatory damages alone,

appear to account for much of the variation in punitive damages in the results in Tables 8

and 9.42 Moreover, the pattern of industry or product type effects is consistent with the

general perceptions of which industries have been hardest hit by very large punitive

damages awards. By far the greatest effect is for the cigarette industry, for which the

punitive award is over 14 times the value of the omitted other industries category.43 Next



42
   Although the results are similar in Table 9, for concreteness we focus on the implications of the results in
Table 8 (equation 4, specifically) when calculating the magnitude of these effects.
43
   Because the dependent variable is a natural log and the industry variables are indicator variables, the
factor by which punitive damages awards are increased (compared to the excluded category) is equal to the
exponential of the coefficient. For cigarettes cases above, exp( 2.669) = 14.426, so punitive awards are
over 14 times greater than those of other industries, holding all else fixed. Alternatively, the percent
difference attributed to an indicator variable is found by subtracting one from the exponential of the
coefficient of the indicator variable and multiplying by 100. For example, the percent difference in

                                                      25
in prominence are the energy and chemical industry grouping and the finance,

investment, and insurance industry, which experience blockbuster awards over 130

percent greater than the other industries category. The pharmaceutical and health care

cases also have a positive blockbuster premium of over 100 percent. The violent crime

cases have a similar premium.

         The one included case type category that does not have a statistically significant

premium relative to the other industries category is the automobile industry. This lack of

a differential effect is not surprising as the automobile cases tend to be more routine.

These cases involve lower transactions costs than other cases and have generally not been

associated with the various tort liability crises.44 While products liability generally has

received substantial attention among tort reformers, within the class of products,

automobiles have a less prominent role than, for example, pharmaceutical products and

medical devices.

         Cases involving an apparent mismatch of an individual against a corporate entity

generate larger blockbuster damages than those involving more equally matched parties

of the same general class. The indicator variable for cases involving an individual

against a business entity has a positive effect, ranging from 61 to 66 percent in the fourth

columns of Tables 8 and 9, respectively.

         The other included variables in Tables 8 and 9 are not statistically significant, but

their lack of significance is of some interest as well. Although California and Texas are

distinguished by the greatest number of blockbuster awards, controlling for compensatory


punitive damages for cases involving the finance, investment and insurance industry compared to the
excluded category of other industries, is [exp(0.834) − 1] x 100 = 130 percent.
44
   Kakalik and Pace (1986) and Hensler et al. (1987) review the role of different lines of litigation, such as
automobile cases.

                                                      26
damages, industry type, and other factors, there is no statistically significant difference in

the performance of these states.45 Similarly, the coefficient for bench trials is not

statistically significant, but there are only five bench trials in the sample, which may limit

our ability to estimate this effect precisely. Finally, in results that are not reported,

adding indicators for 1999 only or for 1999-2008 does not change the results described

above, and these indicators are never statistically significant. The Master Settlement

Agreement appears to have had no discernable effect on blockbuster punitive damages

awards.

        Table 10 reports results from several empirical tests checking the robustness of

our results across different samples. The first equation excludes the Engle case from the

sample, but doing so does not alter the statistical significance of any of the coefficients.

Excluding all cigarette cases likewise yields results that are very similar to the full sample

results. With the five bench trials excluded from the sample, punitive damages are more

responsive to compensatory damages: the comparable elasticities are 0.30 for pre-State

Farm and 0.15 for post-State Farm cases. Also, the level of punitive damages awarded in

cigarette cases is of much higher magnitude in the jury trial only sample: the coefficient

of 3.245 means that punitive damages in cigarette cases, holding fixed compensatory

damages, are 26 times higher than other industry punitive damages (compared to a factor

of 14 for the sample that includes bench awards). The coefficient on the indicator for

individual and business litigants is slightly larger than the full sample results and is now

significant at the 5 percent level in equation 3. Juries award punitive damages that are 68

percent higher to individual plaintiffs in cases in which they are matched against business


45
   An indicator for Alabama cases, the second highest in total punitive damage awards, also was never
statistically significant.

                                                   27
defendants, compared to 61 percent higher in the full sample (equation 4, Table 8),

perhaps reflecting greater consideration by juries of the relative deepness of the

defendant’s pockets compared to the individual plaintiff’s.

         In order to include Garamendi v. Altus Finance, S.A., the case with compensatory

damages equal to 0, we added $1 to the compensatory damages and punitive damages for

each case before logging each variable. There were few changes in the magnitude or

statistical significance of coefficient estimates, but there is a reduction in the coefficient

on ln(compensatory damages). With the Altus Finance award included, the elasticity of

punitive damages with respect to compensatory damages decreases to 0.19 pre-State

Farm and drops to 0.03 for cases decided after the State Farm decision.

         A central focus of the U.S. Supreme Court decisions in the State Farm and Exxon

Shipping Co. cases has been on the ratio of punitive damages/compensatory damages.

The regression results in Table 11 examine the determinants of the natural log of this

ratio.46 Due to the outlier status of the ratio of Bullock v. Philip Morris, Inc., we present

equations with and without that case, and in equations 1 and 2 we also include an

indicator for the Engle award due to its unique limitation of compensatory damages

values to the class representatives, as discussed previously. Equation 3 excludes both the

Engle and Bullock awards. In contrast to the level of punitive damage regressions, there is

some weak evidence that bench awards have lower ratios than jury awards, although the

coefficients are not quite statistically significant, with p-values equal to 0.13 using robust


46
  Regressions using the level of the ratio rather than the natural log of the ratio yielded no statistically
significant results if the Bullock case is included. Without the Bullock case or without Bullock and Engle
several coefficients are statistically significant. The cigarette industry and the finance, investment,
insurance industry have higher ratios (at the 5 percent level of significance). Violent crime cases and cases
involving individual versus business litigants have higher ratios (at the 10 percent level of significance). In
addition, ratios are lower for cases in the post-State Farm era (at the 10 percent level of significance) using
these subsamples.

                                                      28
standard errors. There is some evidence that cases involving some groups of defendants

have higher ratios, specifically cases against the cigarette industry, the finance,

investment and insurance industry, and perpetrators of violent crimes. However, the

cigarette industry coefficient estimate is not statistically significant if the Bullock

cigarette case is excluded. In general, fewer of the industry indicator variables are

statistically significant. The results seem to suggest that in blockbuster punitive damages

cases juries (and judges) are more likely to penalize certain industries by changing the

absolute magnitude of the punitive damages rather than the ratio of punitive to

compensatory damages. The results in Table 11 indicate that cases involving individuals

against a business opponent have a ratio that is 5.7 to 6 times higher than cases involving

only business or government litigants. Consistent with the results from the level of

punitive damages regressions, the State Farm decision has resulted in a decrease of 75

percent in the ratio of punitive damages to compensatory damages.



5. An Examination and Simulation of the Effect of U.S. Supreme Court Ratio Limits

        The final Table 12 presents a closer examination of the two recent Supreme Court

decisions regarding the ratio of punitive to compensatory damages. The Engle case is

excluded from this analysis once again. Under the 2003 State Farm decision, the Court

indicated that few ratios above a single-digit limit would pass due process. As can be

seen in Panel A of Table 12, 45 cases or 45 percent of the blockbuster punitive awards’

ratios exceed the single-digit limit, where these cases account for 74 percent of the total

punitive damages award amounts, $84.3 billion. If the awards were capped at nine times

the compensatory damages, the total punitive damages awards of those 45 cases would



                                              29
have been $9.6 billion, or about 11 percent of the actual award amounts. This constraint

would have resulted in $39.9 billion in total punitive damages being levied, compared to

the $114.5 billion actual total of punitive damages, so that only 35 percent of the actual

total awards would remain. Under the State Farm single-digit ratio limit, 66 cases can

still be defined as “blockbuster” cases in the sense that their nominal punitive damages

awards are greater than or equal to $100 million with the cap imposed, including 12 cases

whose actual punitive damages awards are over the single-digit ratio limit.

       In the 2008 Exxon Shipping Co. decision, a valid ratio, at least for maritime cases,

was limited to 1:1. A more general restriction of the ratio to less than or equal to 1:1

would reduce the awards in 84 cases (or 85 percent of the 99 cases). Limiting punitive

damages awards to be no greater than the compensatory awards would reduce the total

awards of those cases from $99.9 billion to $6.1 billion, and would decrease the overall

blockbuster punitive amount to $20.7 billion, which is 18 percent of the actual total

awards. Under the Exxon Shipping Co. ratio limit, 35 cases or 35 percent of the 99

awards can still be defined as “blockbuster” cases with the cap imposed; this number

includes 20 cases whose actual punitive damages are over the 1:1 limit and 15 cases with

actual ratios less than 1. Adoption of a unitary ratio for punitive damages to

compensatory damages as an upper bound would have far more sweeping effects on

blockbuster awards than a single-digit ratio.



6. Conclusion

       Just over two decades ago, blockbuster awards were unprecedented. However,

the upsurge in the number and scale of blockbuster awards may be tapering off from its



                                             30
peak level. A diverse series of statistical analyses indicates that the upward trend in

blockbuster awards may have been dampened by the U.S. Supreme Court’s State Farm

decision. That 2003 decision provides guidelines to limit the ratio of punitive damages to

compensatory damages, suggesting that a single-digit upper limit should be the usual

norm. From 2004 onward, the total number of blockbuster awards per year and the

growth in the total value of the blockbuster awards in any given year tapered off.

Controlling for the total value of compensatory damages in each year, the upward time

trend in these values has been significantly reduced. Also, the magnitude of the

relationship between aggregate punitive damages and compensatory damages in recent

blockbuster cases is almost half that of years prior to the State Farm decision, which is

consistent with the State Farm decision’s focus on bringing punitive damages to be more

in line with the value of compensatory damages.

       We find more evidence that the State Farm case has affected punitive damages

awards through examination of the level of the individual awards given that a blockbuster

award has been made, as the elasticity of punitive awards to compensatory awards has

been reduced by more than half. A similar negative effect of the State Farm decision is

found by examining case-specific ratios of punitive damages to compensatory damages.

       Capping punitive damages using either of the Supreme Court’s recent ratio limits

in the State Farm decision and the Exxon Shipping Co. decision would have a large

dampening effect on the total amount of blockbuster punitive damages awards and would

eliminate many of the cases from the category of blockbuster cases. If strictly applied,

limiting the ratio of punitive damages to compensatory damages to 1:1 would eliminate

about two-thirds of the cases from the $100 million blockbuster category.



                                             31
        Analysis of the pattern of blockbuster awards yields a variety of insights into the

performance of the civil justice system more generally. Punitive damages are responsive

to the level of compensatory damages overall, but after controlling for factors such as

industry effects, this relationship is greatly reduced. Instead, the levels of punitive

damages are often driven not by the level of compensatory damages but by the particular

industry involved, as certain types of products and services seem to fare particularly

badly.47 Controlling for the level of compensatory damages, the industries that are

particularly hard hit are: the cigarette industry; the energy and chemical industry; the

finance, investment and insurance industry; and the pharmaceutical and health care

industry. These well known litigation targets tended to fare less well than the automobile

industry or miscellaneous other industry groups. This difference is consistent with

differential effects of the civil justice system for different segments of the economy.

Despite some reduction in the growth of blockbuster punitive awards and in the elasticity

of punitive damages with respect to compensatory damages, case-specific characteristics,

such as the identity of the litigants, result in punitive damages awards that vary greatly

across cases. Many awards remain extremely high by any standard.




47
   Empirical tests not reported here also explored whether the nature of the harm—personal injury,
environmental harm, or financial harm—accounted for such a relationship, but these variables were not
statistically significant.

                                                   32
References

Eisenberg, Theodore, and Martin T. Wells. 1999. “The Predictability of Punitive
       Damages Awards in Published Opinions, the Impact of BMW v. Gore on Punitive
       Damages Awards, and Forecasting When Punitive Damages Awards Will Be
       Reduced,” 7 Supreme Court Economic Review 59-85.

Eisenberg, Theodore, and Martin T. Wells. 2006. “The Significant Association between
       Punitive Damages and Compensatory Damages in Blockbuster Cases: A
       Methodological Primer,” 3(1) Journal of Empirical Legal Studies 175-196.

Hensler, Deborah R., Mary E. Vaiana, James S. Kakalik, and Mark Peterson. 1987.
       “Trends in Tort Litigation: The Story Behind the Statistics,” in RAND Institute
       for Civil Justice, R-3583-ICJ. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.

Hensler, Deborah R., Nicholas M. Pace, Bonita Dombey-Moore, Beth Giddens, Jennifer
       Gross, and Erik K. Moller. 2000. Class Action Dilemmas: Pursuing Public Goals
       for Private Gain. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.

Hersch, Joni, and W. Kip Viscusi. 2004. “Punitive Damages: How Judges and Juries
       Perform,” 33(1) Journal of Legal Studies 1-36.

Kakalik, James S., and Nicholas M. Pace. 1986. “Costs and Compensation Paid in Tort
       Litigation,” in RAND Institute for Civil Justice, R-3391ICJ. Santa Monica, CA:
       RAND Corporation.

Manning, Richard. 1994. “Changing Rules in Tort Law and the Market for Childhood
      Vaccines,” 37(1) Journal of Law and Economics 247-275.

Polinsky, A. Mitchell. 1997. “Are Punitive Damages Really Insignificant, Predictable,
       and Rational?” 26 Journal of Legal Studies 663-77.

Polinsky, A. Mitchell, and Steven Shavell. 1998. “Punitive Damages: An Economic
       Analysis,” 111 Harvard Law Review 869-962.

Rubin, Paul H. et al. 1997. “BMW v. Gore: Mitigating the Punitive Economics of
       Punitive Damages,” 5 Supreme Court Economic Review 197-216.

Sunstein, Cass, Reid Hastie, John Payne, David Schkade, and W. Kip Viscusi. 2002.
       Punitive Damages: How Juries Decide. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Vidmar, Neil. 2005. “Medical Malpractice and the Tort System in Illinois: A Report to
      the Illinois State Bar Association,” Duke Law School.

Viscusi, W. Kip. 1998a. “The Social Costs of Punitive Damages Against Corporations in
       Environmental and Safety Torts,” 87 Georgetown Law Journal 285-345.

                                           33
Viscusi, W. Kip. 1998b. “Why There Is No Defense of Punitive Damages,” 87
       Georgetown Law Review 247-275.

Viscusi, W. Kip. 2002. Smoke-Filled Rooms: A Postmortem on the Tobacco Deal.
       Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Viscusi, W. Kip. 2004. “The Blockbuster Punitive Damages Awards,” 53(3) Emory Law
       Journal 1405-1455.

Viscusi, W. Kip, and Michael J. Moore. 1993. “Product Liability, Research and
       Development, and Innovation,” 101(1) Journal of Political Economy 161-184.




                                         34
       Appendix Table A1. Blockbuster Punitive Damages Awards of at Least $100 million by Size of Punitive Damages Award
                                                                                                                        Ratio of
                                                                                          Punitive       Compensatory Punitive
                                                                                          Damages        Damages        Damages to
                                                             Year of                      Award          Award          Compensatory
Case Name                                                    Decision State               ($ millions) ($ millions)     Damages
Hedrick v. Sentry Insurance Co.                                   1993 Texas                     100.0              2.2          46.1
Forti v. General Dynamics Corp.                                   1996 California                100.0              7.4          13.5
Hardy v. General Motors Corp.                                     1996 Alabama                   100.0            50.0             2.0
Aaron v. Abex Corp.                                               1998 Texas                     100.0            15.6             6.4
Aultman v. Duncan Manufacturing                                   1999 Alabama                   100.0            14.5             6.9
City of West Allis v. Wisconsin Electric                          1999 Wisconsin                 100.0              4.5          22.2
Dorman v. Bridgestone/Firestone Inc.                              2000 Missouri                  100.0              5.0          20.0
Timely Adventures v. Coastal Mart Inc                             2000 Texas                     100.0              2.1          47.6
Anadarko Petroleum Corp. v. T-Bar X Ltd. Co.                      2003  Texas                    100.0            40.0             2.5
de Villers v. Rossum                                              2006 California                100.0              6.0          16.7
Martin v. Swain                                                   2007 Florida                   100.0            10.0           10.0
Wheeling Pittsburgh v. Massey Energy Co.                          2007 West Virginia             100.0           119.9             0.8
Estate of LoCascio v. LoCascio                                    2008 Florida                   100.0            25.1             4.0
Navarro v. Austin                                                 2006 Florida                   100.1           116.7             0.9
Moseley v. General Motors                                         1993 Georgia                   101.0              4.2          23.8
TVT Records v. Island Def Jam Music Group                         2003 New York                  107.0            25.0             4.3
Howell v. Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation                   1994 Texas                     108.9            14.7             7.4
Poliner v. Texas Health Systems                                   2004 Texas                     110.0           256.2             0.4
Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co. v. KCS Resources                       1996 Texas                     114.1            29.0             3.9
Savaglio v. Wal-Mart Stores                                       2005 California                115.0            57.0             2.0
Goodrich v. Aetna U.S. Healthcare of California                   1999 California                116.0              4.5          25.8
Robinson v. Ford Motor Co.                                        1998 Mississippi               120.0            24.9             4.8


                                                                 35
Alcorn v. National Railroad Passenger Corp.                         1999   Missouri         120.0    40.4     3.0
Carroll v. Interstate Brands                                        2000   California       121.0    11.0    11.0
Proctor v. Davis and Upjohn Co.                                     1991   Illinois         124.6     3.2    39.5
Micro/Vest v. ComputerLand                                          1985   California       125.0   400.0     0.3
Martin v. ServiceMaster Co.                                         1999   Georgia          135.0     1.3   107.1
Martin v. Children’s Advanced Medical Institutes                    2000   Texas            137.0   131.6     1.0
Adidas America Inc. v. Payless Shoesource Inc.                      2008   Oregon           137.0   167.6     0.8
50-Off Stores Inc. v. Banque Paribas (Suisse)                       1997   Texas            138.0    12.9    10.7
Campbell v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Co.                        1996   Utah             145.0     2.6    55.8
In re Technical Equities Federal Securities Litigation              1988   California       147.0     7.0    21.0
Coyne v. Celotex                                                    1989   Maryland         150.0     2.0    75.0
Broussard v. Meineke Discount Muffler Shops                         1996   North Carolina   150.0   197.0     0.8
The Robert J. Bellott Insurance Agency Inc. v. State Farm Mutual    1999   Alaska           150.0     2.7    55.6
Schwarz v. Philip Morris                                            2002   Oregon           150.0     0.2   882.4
Casas v. Paradez                                                    2006   Texas            150.0    10.0    15.0
Cal X-tra v. Phoenix Holdings II LLC                                2007   Arizona          150.0   210.0     0.7
Claghorn v. Edsaco                                                  2002   California       165.0     5.7    28.9
Smith v. Delta TV                                                   1995   Mississippi      167.2     0.5   334.4
Dominguez Energy v. Shell Oil                                       1993   California       173.0    46.9     3.7
City of Modesto v. Dow                                              2006   California       175.0     3.2    54.7
State of Alabama v. AstraZeneca LP                                  2008   Alabama          175.0    40.0     4.4
Perrine v. E.I. DuPont De Nemours and Co.                           2007   West Virginia    196.2    55.5     3.5
Bartlett v. Mitchell Energy Corp.                                   1996   Texas            200.0     4.1    49.4
MMAR. v. Dow Jones                                                  1997   Texas            200.0    22.7     8.8
City of Hope v. Genentech                                           2002   California       200.0   300.1     0.7
Steele Software Corp.v. First Union Nat. Bank                       2002   Maryland         200.0    76.0     2.6
Whittington v. U.S. Steel                                           2003   Illinois         200.0    50.0     4.0


                                                                   36
Cook v. Rockwell International Corp.                         2006 Colorado         200.2   353.7     0.6
Houchens v. Rockwell International Corp                      1996 Kentucky         210.0     7.7    27.3
Ernst v. Merck                                               2005 Texas            229.0    24.5     9.3
ICO Global Communications (Operations) Limited v. Boeing          California       236.1   370.6     0.6
   Satellite Systems International Inc.                      2008
Buell-Wilson v. Ford Motor Co.                               2004 California       246.0   123.0     2.0
Rubicon Petroleum Inc. v. Amoco                              1993 Texas            250.0   125.0     2.0
Jimenez v. Chrysler Corp.                                    1997 South Carolina   250.0    12.5    20.0
Burns v. Prudential Securities                               2003 Ohio             250.0    12.3    20.3
Estate of del Pino v. The Republic of Cuba                   2008 Florida          250.0     2.5   100.0
Hyatt v. Franchise Tax Board of the State of California      2008 Nevada           250.0   138.1     1.8
Six Flags Over Georgia v. Time Warner                        1998 Georgia          257.0   197.0     1.3
Estate of Tawney v. Columbia Natural Resources               2007 West Virginia    270.0   134.0     2.0
Romo v. Ford Motor Co.                                       1999 California       290.0     5.3    54.7
Perez v. William Recht Co.                                   1995 Florida          300.0   200.0     1.5
Fuqua v. Horizon/CMS Healthcare Corp.                        2001 Texas            310.0     2.7   114.4
Maryland Deposit Insurance Fund v. Seidel                    1988 Maryland         322.0    65.0     5.0
Gulsby Engineering v. Gulf Liquids New River Project         2006 Texas            325.0   375.0     0.9
Pioneer Commercial Funding v. American Financial Mortgage    2000 Pennsylvania     337.5    14.5    23.3
Man Aktiengesellschaft v. Freightliner LLC                   2006 Oregon           350.0   965.5     0.4
Banco Espirito Santo International LTD v. BDO Seidman LLP    2007 Florida          352.0   170.0     2.1
COC Services Ltd. v. CompUSA                                 2001 Texas            364.5    90.0     4.1
Amoco v. Lloyd’s of London                                   1993 California       386.4    36.0    10.7
O’Keefe v. Loewen Group                                      1995 Mississippi      400.0   100.0     4.0
Cassoutt v. Cessna Aircraft                                  2001 Florida          400.0    80.0     5.0
IGEN International Inc. v. Roche Diagnostics GmbH            2002 Maryland         400.0   105.0     3.8
Medtronic Sofamor Danek Inc. v. Michelson                    2004 Tennessee        400.0   160.0     2.5



                                                            37
Estate of Mack v. Mack                                           2008   Nevada             405.0     185.0        2.2
Brown v. Dorsey                                                  2004   Georgia            450.0     326.1        1.4
Carlisle v. Whirlpool Financial National Bank                    1999   Alabama            580.0       1.0      591.8
Avery v. State Farm                                              1999   Illinois           600.0     130.0        4.6
Featherston v. Gressler                                          2005   Texas              600.0       6.0      100.0
Garamendi v. Altus Finance, S.A.                                 2005   California         700.0       0.0         --
Swan v. Einhorn                                                  1999   Pennsylvania       752.0     155.0        4.9
Lockheed Litigation Cases                                        1998   California         760.0      25.4       29.9
Coleman Parent Holdings v. Morgan Stanley                        2005   Florida            850.0     604.3        1.4
Coffey v. Wyeth                                                  2004   Texas              900.0     113.4        7.9
Beckman Coulter Inc. v. Flextronics                              2003   California         931.0       2.9      321.0
Cowart v. Johnson Kart Manufacturing                             1999   Wisconsin        1,000.0      24.0       41.7
Grefer v. Alpha Technical Services                               2001   Louisiana        1,000.0      56.1       17.8
Whittaker v. Southwestern Life Insurance Co.                     2004   Alabama          1,600.0      20.0       80.0
Hayes v. Courtney Pharmacy, Inc.                                 2002   Missouri         2,000.0     225.0        8.9
Motorola Credit Corporation v. Uzan                              2003   New York         2,130.0   2,130.0        1.0
Pennzoil v. Texaco                                               1985   Texas            3,000.0   7,530.0        0.4
Boeken v. Philip Morris                                          2001   California       3,000.0       5.5      541.5
Price v. Philip Morris, Inc.                                     2003   Illinois         3,100.0   7,100.0        0.4
In re New Orleans Tank Car Leakage Fire Litigation               1997   Louisiana        3,365.0       2.0    1,682.5
Anderson v. General Motors                                       1999   California       4,775.0     107.6       44.4
In re The Exxon Valdez                                           1995   Alaska           5,000.0     287.0       17.4
Exxon Mobil Corporation v. Alabama Department of Conservation                                                   185.5
    and Natural Resources                                        2003 Alabama           11,800.0     63.6
Bullock v. Philip Morris                                         2002 California        28,000.0      0.7    43,076.9
Engle v. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco                                   2000 Florida          145,000.0     12.7    11,417.3
       a
         Bench awards



                                                                38
Appendix Table A2. Statistics on Damages, Excluding the Bullock Awarda

                                                               Ratio of
                                                               Punitive to
                                   Punitive     Compensatory Compensatory
       Statistics                  Damages      Damages        Damagesb
                           Panel A. Full Sample (N=98)
       Mean                          826.83        372.60          63.43
       Standard Deviation          1,833.36      1,736.80         209.21
       Minimum                       100.00          0.00           0.31
       Maximum                     13,807.28 15,067.00          1,682.50
       Median                        255.11         43.40           6.90
                         Panel B. Before State Farm (N=67)
       Mean                        1,041.71        462.74          85.44
       Standard Deviation          2,175.28      2,093.99         248.41
       Minimum                       117.01          0.20           0.31
       Maximum                     13,807.28 15,067.00          1,682.50
       Median                        267.53         30.45          11.00
                     Panel C. After State Farm Decision (N=31)
       Mean                          362.43        177.76          14.30
       Standard Deviation            363.09        222.30          28.82
       Minimum                       100.00          0.00           0.36
       Maximum                     1,823.61      1,031.11         100.00
       Median                        250.00        129.19           2.04
      a
        Damages are calculated as millions of 2008 dollars. All columns exclude the
      Engle award.
      b
        The ratio statistics in Panels A and C are calculated without Garamendi v. Altus
      Finance, S.A., which has zero compensatory damages.




                                          39
    Figure 1. Distribution of Blockbuster Punitive Damage Awards
                            Punitive Damages, Millions of 2008 Dollars
    15   10       100 500           1,000         5,000 10,000 50,000         150,000
Frequency
    5
    0




              4       5      6        7         8      9         10      11     12
                                      ln(Punitive Damages)




                                             40
Figure 2. Number of Blockbuster Awards by Year




                      41
Figure 3A. Total Blockbuster Punitive Damages, Including Engle Case




                             42
Figure 3B. Total Blockbuster Punitive Damages, Excluding Engle Case




                           43
   Table 1. Blockbuster Punitive Damages Awards of at Least $100 Million by Year of Decision

                                                                                                                    Ratio of
                                                                                      Punitive       Compensatory   Punitive
                                                                                      Damages        Damages        Damages to
                                                          Year of                     Award          Award          Compensatory
Case Name                                                 Decision   State            ($ millions)   ($ millions)   Damages
Micro/Vest v. ComputerLand                                1985       California          125.0            400.0             0.3
Pennzoil v. Texaco                                        1985       Texas             3,000.0          7,530.0             0.4
In re Technical Equities Federal Securities Litigation    1988       California          147.0               7.0          21.0
Maryland Deposit Insurance Fund v. Seidel                 1988       Maryland            322.0             65.0             5.0
Coyne v. Celotex                                          1989       Maryland            150.0               2.0          75.0
Proctor v. Davis and Upjohn Co.                           1991       Illinois            124.6               3.2          39.5
Hedrick v. Sentry Insurance Co.                           1993       Texas               100.0               2.2          46.1
Moseley v. General Motors                                 1993       Georgia             101.0               4.2          23.8
Dominguez Energy v. Shell Oil                             1993       California          173.0             46.9             3.7
Rubicon Petroleum Inc. v. Amoco                           1993       Texas               250.0            125.0             2.0
Amoco v. Lloyd’s of London                                1993       California          386.4             36.0           10.7
Howell v. Blockbuster Entertainment Corporationa          1994       Texas               108.9             14.7             7.4
Smith v. Delta TVa                                        1995       Mississippi         167.2               0.5         334.4
Perez v. William Recht Co.                                1995       Florida             300.0            200.0             1.5
O’Keefe v. Loewen Group                                   1995       Mississippi         400.0            100.0             4.0
In re The Exxon Valdez                                    1995       Alaska            5,000.0            287.0           17.4
Forti v. General Dynamics Corp.                           1996       California          100.0               7.4          13.5
Hardy v. General Motors Corp.                             1996       Alabama             100.0             50.0             2.0
Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co. v. KCS Resources               1996       Texas               114.1             29.0             3.9
Campbell v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Co.              1996       Utah                145.0               2.6          55.8
Broussard v. Meineke Discount Muffler Shops               1996       North Carolina      150.0            197.0             0.8
Bartlett v. Mitchell Energy Corp.                         1996       Texas               200.0               4.1          49.4
Houchens v. Rockwell International Corp                   1996       Kentucky            210.0               7.7          27.3



                                                              44
50-Off Stores Inc. v. Banque Paribas (Suisse)               1997    Texas               138.0     12.9       10.7
MMAR. v. Dow Jones                                          1997    Texas               200.0     22.7        8.8
Jimenez v. Chrysler Corp.                                   1997    South Carolina      250.0     12.5       20.0
In re New Orleans Tank Car Leakage Fire Litigation          1997    Louisiana         3,365.0      2.0    1,682.5
Aaron v. Abex Corp.                                         1998    Texas               100.0     15.6        6.4
Robinson v. Ford Motor Co.                                  1998    Mississippi         120.0     24.9        4.8
Six Flags Over Georgia v. Time Warner                       1998    Georgia             257.0    197.0        1.3
Lockheed Litigation Cases                                   1998    California          760.0     25.4       29.9
Aultman v. Duncan Manufacturing                             1999    Alabama             100.0     14.5        6.9
City of West Allis v. Wisconsin Electric                    1999    Wisconsin           100.0      4.5       22.2
Goodrich v. Aetna U.S. Healthcare of California             1999    California          116.0      4.5       25.8
Alcorn v. National Railroad Passenger Corp.                 1999    Missouri            120.0     40.4        3.0
Martin v. ServiceMaster Co.                                 1999    Georgia             135.0      1.3      107.1
The Robert J. Bellott Insurance Agency Inc. v. State Farm   1999    Alaska              150.0      2.7       55.6
    Mutual
Romo v. Ford Motor Co.                                      1999    California          290.0      5.3       54.7
Carlisle v. Whirlpool Financial National Bank               1999    Alabama             580.0      1.0      591.8
Avery v. State Farma                                        1999    Illinois            600.0    130.0        4.6
Swan v. Einhorn                                             1999    Pennsylvania        752.0    155.0        4.9
Cowart v. Johnson Kart Manufacturing                        1999    Wisconsin         1,000.0     24.0       41.7
Anderson v. General Motors                                  1999    California        4,775.0    107.6       44.4
Dorman v. Bridgestone/Firestone Inc.                        2000    Missouri            100.0      5.0       20.0
Timely Adventures v. Coastal Mart Inc                       2000    Texas               100.0      2.1       47.6
Carroll v. Interstate Brands                                2000    California          121.0     11.0       11.0
Martin v. Children’s Advanced Medical Institutes            2000    Texas               137.0    131.6        1.0
Pioneer Commercial Funding v. American Financial Mortgage   2000    Pennsylvania        337.5     14.5       23.3
Engle v. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco                              2000    Florida          145,000.0    12.7   11,417.3
Fuqua v. Horizon/CMS Healthcare Corp.                       2001    Texas               310.0      2.7      114.4
COC Services Ltd. v. CompUSA                                2001    Texas               364.5     90.0        4.1
Cassoutt v. Cessna Aircraft                                 2001    Florida             400.0     80.0        5.0
Grefer v. Alpha Technical Services                          2001    Louisiana         1,000.0     56.1       17.8


                                                               45
Boeken v. Philip Morris                             2001    California    3,000.0       5.5      541.5
Schwarz v. Philip Morris                            2002    Oregon          150.0       0.2      882.4
Claghorn v. Edsaco                                  2002    California      165.0       5.7       28.9
City of Hope v. Genentech                           2002    California      200.0     300.1        0.7
Steele Software Corp.v. First Union Nat. Bank       2002    Maryland        200.0      76.0        2.6
IGEN International Inc. v. Roche Diagnostics GmbH   2002    Maryland        400.0     105.0        3.8
Hayes v. Courtney Pharmacy, Inc.                    2002    Missouri      2,000.0     225.0        8.9
Bullock v. Philip Morris                            2002    California   28,000.0       0.7   43,076.9
Anadarko Petroleum Corp. v. T-Bar X Ltd. Co.        2003    Texas           100.0      40.0        2.5
TVT Records v. Island Def Jam Music Group           2003    New York        107.0      25.0        4.3
Whittington v. U.S. Steel                           2003    Illinois        200.0      50.0        4.0
Burns v. Prudential Securities                      2003    Ohio            250.0      12.3       20.3
Beckman Coulter Inc. v. Flextronics                 2003    California      931.0       2.9      321.0
Motorola Credit Corporation v. Uzana                2003    New York      2,130.0   2,130.0        1.0
Price v. Philip Morris, Inc.a                       2003    Illinois      3,100.0   7,100.0        0.4
Exxon Mobil Corporation v. Alabama Department of    2003    Alabama      11,800.0      63.6      185.5
   Conservation and Natural Resources
Poliner v. Texas Health Systems                     2004    Texas           110.0    256.2        0.4
Buell-Wilson v. Ford Motor Co.                      2004    California      246.0    123.0        2.0
Medtronic Sofamor Danek Inc. v. Michelson           2004    Tennessee       400.0    160.0        2.5
Brown v. Dorsey                                     2004    Georgia         450.0    326.1        1.4
Coffey v. Wyeth                                     2004    Texas           900.0    113.4         7.9
Whittaker v. Southwestern Life Insurance Co.        2004    Alabama       1,600.0     20.0       80.0
Savaglio v. Wal-Mart Stores                         2005    California      115.0     57.0        2.0
Ernst v. Merck                                      2005    Texas           229.0     24.5         9.3
Featherston v. Gressler                             2005    Texas           600.0      6.0      100.0
Garamendi v. Altus Finance, S.A.                    2005    California      700.0      0.0        --
Coleman Parent Holdings v. Morgan Stanley           2005    Florida         850.0    604.3        1.4
de Villers v. Rossum                                2006    California      100.0      6.0       16.7
Navarro v. Austin                                   2006    Florida         100.1    116.7        0.9
Casas v. Paradez                                    2006    Texas           150.0     10.0       15.0


                                                       46
City of Modesto v. Dow                                      2006    California      175.0     3.2    54.7
Cook v. Rockwell International Corp.                        2006    Colorado        200.2   353.7     0.6
Gulsby Engineering v. Gulf Liquids New River Project        2006    Texas           325.0   375.0     0.9
Man Aktiengesellschaft v. Freightliner LLC                  2006    Oregon          350.0   965.5     0.4
Martin v. Swain                                             2007    Florida         100.0    10.0    10.0
Wheeling Pittsburgh v. Massey Energy Co.                    2007    West Virginia   100.0   119.9     0.8
Cal X-tra v. Phoenix Holdings II LLC                        2007    Arizona         150.0   210.0     0.7
Perrine v. E.I. DuPont De Nemours and Co.                   2007    West Virginia   196.2    55.5     3.5
Estate of Tawney v. Columbia Natural Resources              2007    West Virginia   270.0   134.0     2.0
Banco Espirito Santo International LTD v. BDO Seidman LLP   2007    Florida         352.0   170.0     2.1
Estate of LoCascio v. LoCascio                              2008    Florida         100.0    25.1     4.0
Adidas America Inc. v. Payless Shoesource Inc.              2008    Oregon          137.0   167.6     0.8
State of Alabama v. AstraZeneca LP                          2008    Alabama         175.0    40.0     4.4
ICO Global Communications (Operations) Limited v. Boeing    2008    California      236.1   370.6     0.6
Satellite Systems International Inc.
Estate of del Pino v. The Republic of Cuba                  2008    Florida         250.0     2.5   100.0
Hyatt v. Franchise Tax Board of the State of California     2008    Nevada          250.0   138.1     1.8
Estate of Mack v. Mack                                      2008    Nevada          405.0   185.0     2.2
   a
       Bench awards.




                                                               47
                           Table 2. Damages and Ratio by Industry Typea

                                                                                          Mean Ratio of
                                                                           Mean            Punitive to
                                            Number      Mean Punitive   Compensatory      Compensatory
Industry Involved                          of Awards     Damages          Damages           Damages
Automobile Industry                            9           900.71          160.89             19.12
Cigarette Industryb                             5       10,240.92        2,078.87         11,125.31
Energy, Chemical Industry                      25        1,531.59          701.61             90.09
Finance, Investment, Insurance Industryc       23          546.33          222.45             59.20
Pharmaceuticals, Health Care Industry          16          503.69          109.29             40.98
Violent Crime                                   7          350.05          114.49             19.87
Other Industry                                 15          273.63          103.00             13.82
a
  Damages are calculated as millions of 2008 dollars.
b
  For the cigarette industry, all columns exclude the Engle award.
c
  For the finance, investment, insurance industry, the mean ratio excludes Garamendi v. Altus
Finance, S.A., which has zero compensatory damages.




                                                   48
       Table 3. Blockbuster Punitive Damages Awards by Statea


                       Number          Total Punitive      Punitive
                      of Awards          Damages          Damages
State                                   (millions $)    per Capita ($)b
Alabama                    6               16,822            3,749
Alaska                     2                 7,257         11,997
Arizona                    1                   156              25
California                21               49,731            1,439
Colorado                   1                   214              45
Florida                   8                  2,773             163
Georgia                    4                 1,177             145
Illinois                  4                  4,834             386
Kentucky                   1                   288              74
Louisiana                  2                 5,730           1,293
Maryland                   4                 1,565             313
Mississippi                3                   960             351
Missouri                   3                 2,674             472
Nevada                     2                   655             252
New York                  2                  2,618             136
North Carolina             1                   206              27
Ohio                       1                   293              26
Oregon                     3                   690             188
Pennsylvania               2                 1,394             115
South Carolina             1                   335              87
Tennessee                  1                   456              77
Texas                     20               11,505              629
Utah                       1                   199              96
West Virginia              3                   588             325
Wisconsin                 2                  1,422             267
Total                     99              114,539              ---
  a
    Damages are calculated as millions of 2008 dollars. Figures for Florida (and
  the totals) exclude the Engle award.
  b
    Population underlying per capita calculations is by state and by year of
  decision.




                                  49
      Table 4. Description of Blockbuster Punitive Damages Awards Cases

                                                  Mean or          Standard
Variable                                          Percent          Deviation
Damagesa
Punitive Damages                                  2,958.3            18,397.3
Compensatory Damages                                365.3             1,719.9
Ratio of Punitive/Compensatory Damagesb             612.6             4,464.6
Ln(Punitive Damages)                                  6.0                 1.3
Ln(Compensatory Damages)                              3.7                 2.0
State
California                                           21%
Texas                                                20%
Industry Involved
Automobile Industry                                   9%
Cigarette Industry                                    5%
Energy, Chemical Industry                            25%
Financial, Investment, Insurance Industry            23%
Pharmaceuticals, Health Care Industry                16%
Violent Crime                                         7%
Other Industry                                       15%
Type of Damages Sought
Personal Injury or Fatality                          40%
Environmental/Property                               10%
Other Monetary Damage                                50%
Pairs of Litigants
Individual and Business Litigants                    53%
Two Business or Government Litigants                 41%
Two Individual Litigants                              6%
Other Case Information
Bench Trial                                           5%
After State Farm                                     31%
a
  Damages are calculated as millions of 2008 dollars. All calculations include the
Engle award (N=100).
b
  The statistics for the ratio of punitive/compensatory damages exclude the
Garamendi v. Altus Finance, S.A. award, which has zero compensatory damages.




                                      50
                     Table 5. Statistics on Damagesa

                                                           Ratio of
                                                          Punitive to
                               Punitive     Compensatory Compensatory
Statistic                      Damages        Damages     Damagesb
                      Panel A. Full Sample (N=99)
Mean                          1,156.96         368.84      502.35
Standard Deviation            3,757.20       1,728.32     4350.00
Minimum                         100.00           0.00        0.31
Maximum                      33,509.73      15,067.00    43076.93
Median                          257.76          40.00        7.15
              Panel B. Before State Farm Decision (N=68)
Mean                          1,519.18         455.95      717.66
Standard Deviation            4,490.41       2,079.06     5219.31
Minimum                         117.01           0.20        0.31
Maximum                      33,509.73      15,067.00    43076.93
Median                          267.91          29.85       12.26
               Panel C. After State Farm Decision (N=31)
Mean                            362.43         177.76       14.30
Standard Deviation              363.09         222.30       28.82
Minimum                         100.00           0.00        0.36
Maximum                       1,823.61       1,031.11      100.00
Median                          250.00         129.19        2.04
a
  Damages are calculated as millions of 2008 dollars. All columns exclude the
Engle award.
b
  The ratio statistics in Panels A and C are calculated without Garamendi v. Altus
Finance, S.A., which has zero compensatory damages.




                                    51
           Table 6. Negative Binomial Regressions of the Number of Blockbuster Punitive
                                    Damages Awards by Yeara

                                           (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)
Time                                      0.140            0.140           0.135           0.135
                                         (0.025)**        (0.025)**       (0.023)**       (0.023)**
After State Farm                         -0.734                           -0.652
                                         (0.165)**                        (0.135)**
Time x After State Farm                                   -0.035                          -0.031
                                                          (0.008)**                       (0.006)**
Millions of State Filings                 0.022            0.022         -0.025           -0.025
                                         (0.059)          (0.059)        (0.049)          (0.049)
Missing State Filings                     0.098            0.185         -0.681           -0.603
                                         (0.978)          (0.984)        (0.830)          (0.830)
Indicator for 1999                                                        0.940            0.939
                                                                         (0.160)**        (0.160)**
Constant                                 -0.788          -0.795           0.035            0.028
                                         (1.195)         (1.198)         (0.991)          (0.993)
Observations                             24              24              24               24
Pseudo R-squared                          0.222           0.223           0.276            0.276
       a
         Dependent variable is the number of blockbuster punitive damages awards in each year,
       1985-2008. Estimated using negative binomial regression. Robust standard errors are in
       parentheses.
       +Significant at the 10% level; *significant at the 5% level; and **significant at the 1%
       level, two-tailed tests.




                                                   52
       Table 7. Tobit Regressions of Total Blockbuster Punitive Damages Awards by Yeara

                                           (1)              (2)               (3)             (4)
                                       All Awards       All Awards        No Engle         No Engle
                                                                           Awardb           Awardb
Ln(Total Compensatory Damages)            0.974            0.984            0.984           0.991
                                         (0.156)**        (0.157)**        (0.133)**       (0.134)**
                                         [0.974]c         [0.983]          [0.984]         [0.991]
Time                                      0.226            0.218            0.161           0.155
                                         (0.0817)*        (0.0813)*        (0.0700)*       (0.0695)*
                                         [0.226]          [0.218]          [0.161]         [0.155]
Time x After State Farm                  -0.173                            -0.128
                                         (0.0542)**                        (0.0465)*
                                        [-0.173]                          [-0.128]
Ln(Total Compensatory Damages)                            -0.534                            -0.396
  x After State Farm                                      (0.172)**                         (0.147)*
                                                         [-0.534]                          [-0.396]
Constant                                 -0.341           -0.312            0.0412           0.0630
                                         (0.921)          (0.927)          (0.784)          (0.787)
Observations                             24              24                24              24
Pseudo R-squared                          0.314            0.311            0.349            0.347
 a
   Dependent variable is ln(total blockbuster punitive damages + 1) for 1985-2008. Estimated
 using Tobit regression. Standard errors in parentheses.
 b
   Equations 3 and 4 exclude the Engle award from the totals of punitive and compensatory
 damages (for the year 2000).
 c
   Estimated marginal effects (changes in the conditional expected value of the dependent
 variable) given in brackets.
 +Significant at the 10% level; *significant at the 5% level; and **significant at the 1% level,
 two-tailed tests.




                                                   53
           Table 8. Regressions of Individual Blockbuster Punitive Damages Awardsa
                                              (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)
Ln(Compensatory Damages)                    0.129        0.205        0.192        0.260
                                           (0.0765)+    (0.0706)**   (0.0785)*   (0.0761)**
                                           [0.0753]+    [0.0731]**   [0.0810]*   [0.0796]**
Ln(Compensatory Damages) x Engle            2.288        1.504        2.236        1.463
                                           (0.0519)**   (0.352)**    (0.0559)**  (0.358)**
                                           [1.110]*     [0.797]+     [1.091]*    [0.780]+
Ln(Compensatory Damages)                                             -0.152      -0.129
   x After State Farm                                                (0.0453)**  (0.0492)*
                                                                     [0.0463]**  [0.0503]*
Automobile Industry                                      0.283                     0.281
                                                        (0.381)                  (0.374)
                                                        [0.395]                  [0.397]
Cigarette Industry                                       2.696                     2.669
                                                        (0.966)**                (0.992)**
                                                        [1.179]*                 [1.228]*
Energy, Chemical Industry                                0.888                     0.840
                                                        (0.336)**                (0.307)**
                                                        [0.342]**                [0.320]**
Finance, Investment, Insurance Industry                  0.862                     0.834
                                                        (0.244)**                (0.251)**
                                                        [0.265]**                [0.264]**
Pharmaceuticals, Health Care Industry                    0.613                     0.700
                                                        (0.325)+                 (0.314)*
                                                        [0.334]+                 [0.320]*
Violent Crime                                            0.472                     0.645
                                                        (0.327)                  (0.305)*
                                                        [0.346]                  [0.322]*
Individual and Business Litigants                        0.486                     0.474
                                                        (0.265)+                 (0.252)+
                                                        [0.269]+                 [0.259]+
California                                               0.284                     0.227
                                                        (0.296)                  (0.290)
                                                        [0.305]                  [0.311]
Texas                                                   -0.318                   -0.353
                                                        (0.275)                  (0.261)
                                                        [0.285]                  [0.274]
Bench Trial                                              0.0443                  -0.188
                                                        (0.393)                  (0.388)
                                                        [0.481]                  [0.548]
Constant                                    5.423        4.201        5.396        4.201
                                           (0.319)**    (0.434)**    (0.312)**   (0.414)**
                                           [0.323]**    [0.456]**    [0.316]**   [0.438]**
Observations                              99            99           99          99
Adjusted R-squared                          0.248        0.396        0.297        0.428



                                            54
a
 Dependent variable is ln(punitive damages). Excluded industry category is other industry.
Excludes Garamendi v. Altus Finance, S.A. award. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses, and bootstrapped standard errors are in brackets.
+Significant at the 10% level; *significant at the 5% level; and **significant at the 1%
level, two-tailed tests.




                                             55
             Table 9. Regressions of Individual Blockbuster Punitive Damages Awards:
                       Alternative Specifications of Post-State Farm Effectsa

                                              (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)
Ln(Compensatory Damages)                    0.172        0.245         0.164        0.240
                                           (0.0710)*    (0.0697)**    (0.0733)*    (0.0707)**
                                           [0.0701]*    [0.0723]**    [0.0712]*    [0.0725]**
Ln(Compensatory Damages) x Engle            2.194        1.492         2.225        1.477
                                           (0.0743)**   (0.357)**     (0.0594)**   (0.354)**
                                           [1.059]*     [0.789]+      [1.062]*     [0.778]+
Time                                        0.0364       0.0196
                                           (0.0337)     (0.0340)
                                           [0.0355]     [0.0332]
Time x After State Farm                    -0.0460      -0.0359
                                           (0.0172)**   (0.0174)*
                                           [0.0177]**   [0.0171]*
After State Farm                                                      -0.677       -0.603
                                                                      (0.208)**    (0.232)*
                                                                      [0.208]**    [0.236]*
Automobile Industry                                      0.249                      0.246
                                                        (0.370)                    (0.366)
                                                        [0.366]                    [0.401]
Cigarette Industry                                       2.543                      2.621
                                                        (0.992)*                   (0.977)**
                                                        [1.188]*                   [1.156]*
Energy, Chemical Industry                                0.885                      0.862
                                                        (0.322)**                  (0.308)**
                                                        [0.305]**                  [0.312]**
Finance, Investment, Insurance Industry                  0.864                      0.839
                                                        (0.251)**                  (0.254)**
                                                        [0.252]**                  [0.259]**
Pharmaceuticals, Health Care Industry                    0.728                      0.750
                                                        (0.314)*                   (0.320)*
                                                        [0.313]*                   [0.320]*
Violent Crime                                            0.869                      0.832
                                                        (0.288)**                  (0.295)**
                                                        [0.310]**                  [0.321]**
Individual and Business Litigants                        0.513                      0.505
                                                        (0.248)*                   (0.254)+
                                                        [0.246]*                   [0.256]*
California                                               0.288                      0.267
                                                        (0.285)                    (0.290)
                                                        [0.311]                    [0.300]
Texas                                                   -0.313                     -0.331
                                                        (0.257)                    (0.267)
                                                        [0.267]                    [0.274]

                                               56
Bench Trial                                             -0.170                       -0.144
                                                        (0.371)                      (0.386)
                                                        [0.462]                      [0.521]
Constant                                  4.983          3.935         5.503          4.234
                                         (0.421)**      (0.575)**     (0.312)**      (0.414)**
                                         [0.459]**      [0.596]**     [0.299]**      [0.425]**
Observations                             99             99            99             99
Adjusted R-squared                        0.303          0.427         0.295          0.428
       a
        Dependent variable is ln(punitive damages). Excluded industry category is other
       industry. Equations exclude Garamendi v. Altus Finance, S.A. award. Robust standard
       errors are in parentheses, and bootstrapped standard errors are in brackets.
       + Significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                              57
         Table 10. Regressions of Individual Blockbuster Punitive Damages Awards:
                                     Different Samplesa

                                            (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)
                                          No Engle     No Cigarette   No Bench     With Altus
                                           Award         Awards        Awards       Finance
                                                                                    Award
Ln(Compensatory Damages)                   0.260         0.288         0.299        0.192
                                          (0.0757)**    (0.0734)**    (0.0826)**   (0.0698)**
                                          [0.0787]**    [0.0776]**    [0.0825]**   [0.0791]*
Ln(Compensatory Damages) x Engle                                       1.259        1.484
                                                                      (0.430)**    (0.355)**
                                                                      [0.759]+     [0.780]+
Ln(Compensatory Damages)                  -0.129        -0.141        -0.139       -0.159
  x After State Farm                      (0.0490)*     (0.0479)**    (0.0505)**   (0.0541)**
                                          [0.0488]**    [0.0504]**    [0.0497]**   [0.0590]**
Automobile Industry                        0.281         0.326         0.287        0.316
                                          (0.372)       (0.380)       (0.374)      (0.394)
                                          [0.389]       [0.394]       [0.388]      [0.410]
Cigarette Industry                         2.669                       3.245        2.561
                                          (0.987)**                   (1.195)**    (0.981)*
                                          [1.255]*                    [1.529]*     [1.219]*
Energy, Chemical Industry                  0.840         0.849         0.845        0.839
                                          (0.305)**     (0.301)**     (0.322)*     (0.306)**
                                          [0.302]**     [0.290]**     [0.328]*     [0.312]**
Finance, Investment, Insurance Industry    0.834         0.786         0.804        0.821
                                          (0.250)**     (0.246)**     (0.278)**    (0.261)**
                                          [0.272]**     [0.255]**     [0.283]**    [0.272]**
Pharmaceuticals, Health Care Industry      0.700         0.741         0.718        0.733
                                          (0.312)*      (0.308)*      (0.328)*     (0.311)*
                                          [0.318]*      [0.316]*      [0.325]*     [0.320]*
Violent Crime                              0.645         0.651         0.698        0.599
                                          (0.304)*      (0.284)*      (0.295)*     (0.343)+
                                          [0.322]*      [0.307]*      [0.326]*     [0.362]+
Individual and Business Litigants          0.474         0.448         0.518        0.319
                                          (0.251)+      (0.250)+      (0.256)*     (0.246)
                                          [0.256]+      [0.257]+      [0.253]*     [0.267]
California                                 0.227         0.0123        0.198        0.225
                                          (0.289)       (0.266)       (0.292)      (0.299)
                                          [0.297]       [0.280]       [0.303]      [0.323]
Texas                                     -0.353        -0.417        -0.350       -0.396
                                          (0.260)       (0.254)       (0.275)      (0.266)
                                          [0.263]       [0.259]       [0.270]      [0.272]
Bench Trial                               -0.188         0.137                     -0.0832
                                          (0.386)       (0.253)                    (0.373)
                                          [0.547]       [0.293]                    [0.522]

                                              58
Constant                                    4.201          4.165           4.036          4.594
                                           (0.412)**      (0.411)**       (0.440)**      (0.387)**
                                           [0.432]**      [0.428]**       [0.437]**      [0.437]**
Observations                               98             94              94            100
Adjusted R-squared                          0.270          0.206           0.421          0.399
    a
     Dependent variable is ln(punitive damages). Excluded industry category is other
    industry. Equations 1, 2 and 3 exclude the Garamendi v. Altus Finance, S.A. award.
    Equation 4 adds $1 to the punitive and compensatory damages before logging each
    variable, and includes the Garamendi v. Altus Finance, S.A. award. Robust standard
    errors are in parentheses, and bootstrapped standard errors are in brackets.
     +Significant at the 10% level; *significant at the 5% level; and **significant at the 1%
    level, two-tailed tests.




                                                59
   Table 11. Regressions of the Ln(Ratio of Punitive to Compensatory Damages)a

                                              (1)            (2)          (3)
                                          With Bullock   No Bullock   No Bullock or
                                            Award          Award      Engle Award
Engle Case                                  3.544          4.921
                                           (1.593)*       (1.547)**
                                           [2.266]        [2.844]+
After State Farm                           -1.405         -1.403       -1.403
                                           (0.380)**      (0.381)**    (0.379)**
                                           [0.385]**      [0.368]**    [0.380]**
Automobile Industry                        -0.149         -0.106       -0.106
                                           (0.464)        (0.456)      (0.453)
                                           [0.478]        [0.483]      [0.483]
Cigarette Industry                          3.323          1.934        1.934
                                           (1.655)*       (1.578)      (1.570)
                                           [2.088]        [1.958]      [1.957]
Energy, Chemical Industry                   0.788          0.798        0.798
                                           (0.527)        (0.521)      (0.518)
                                           [0.523]        [0.535]      [0.516]
Finance, Investment, Insurance Industry     1.531          1.478        1.478
                                           (0.502)**      (0.484)**    (0.481)**
                                           [0.495]**      [0.494]**    [0.516]**
Pharmaceuticals, Health Care Industry       0.855          0.882        0.882
                                           (0.617)        (0.607)      (0.603)
                                           [0.616]        [0.615]      [0.615]
Violent Crime                               2.118          2.087        2.087
                                           (0.535)**      (0.539)**    (0.536)**
                                           [0.550]**      [0.590]**    [0.565]**
Individual and Business Litigants           1.799          1.748        1.748
                                           (0.376)**      (0.366)**    (0.364)**
                                           [0.374]**      [0.365]**    [0.376]**
California                                  0.857          0.673        0.673
                                           (0.487)+       (0.463)      (0.461)
                                           [0.471]+       [0.465]      [0.472]
Texas                                      -0.0326        -0.0885      -0.0885
                                           (0.437)        (0.428)      (0.426)
                                           [0.441]        [0.426]      [0.423]
Bench Trial                                -1.989         -1.691       -1.691
                                           (1.303)        (1.113)      (1.107)
                                           [1.565]        [1.423]      [1.366]
Constant                                    0.677          0.740        0.740
                                           (0.410)        (0.406)+     (0.404)+
                                           [0.410]+       [0.415]+     [0.400]+
Observations                               99            98            97
Adjusted R-squared                          0.397          0.354        0.268

                                          60
a
 Dependent variable is ln(punitive damages/compensatory damages).
Excluded industry category is other industry. Excludes Garamendi v. Altus
Finance, S.A. in all equations, excludes Bullock v. Philip Morris, Inc. in
equation 2, and excludes the Bullock award and the Engle award in equation
3. Robust standard errors are in parentheses, and bootstrapped standard
errors are in brackets.
+Significant at the 10% level; *significant at the 5% level; and **significant
at the 1% level, two-tailed tests.




                               61
                    Table 12. Effects of U.S. Supreme Court Ratio Limitsa

                       Panel A. Punitive/Compensatory Damage Ratio < 10
                                                                       Awards with Ratio
                                      Actual Awards                      Limit Imposed
                         Cases with     Cases with                 Cases with
                         Ratio < 10      Ratio ≥ 10   All Cases    Ratio ≥ 10     All Cases
Mean                       560.45         1,872.78    1,156.96        213.49        402.74
Median                     251.28           267.53      257.76          57.67       156.56
Total Awards            30,264.04       84,275.28   114,539.30      9,607.13     39,871.16
Percent of Total            26.42            73.58      100             24.10       100
Number of Awards            54               45          99             45           99
Percent of Awards           54.55             45.45         100               45.45            100

                        Panel B. Punitive/Compensatory Damage Ratio ≤ 1
                                                                              Awards with Ratio
                                      Actual Awards                            Limit Imposed
                         Cases with    Cases with                         Cases with
                          Ratio ≤ 1     Ratio > 1    All Cases            Ratio > 1      All Cases
Mean                        974.50       1,189.55     1,156.96                72.76       209.38
Median                      236.10         267.91       257.76                26.05        40.00
Total Awards             14,617.46     99,921.85    114,539.30             6,111.54    20,729.00
Percent of Total               12.76        87.24       100                   29.48       100
Number of Cases                    15       84           99                   84           99
Percent of Cases               15.15        84.85       100                   84.85       100


    a
     Damages are calculated as millions of 2008 dollars. All columns exclude the Engle
    award. Garamendi v. Altus Finance, S.A., which has zero compensatory damages, is
    included in the statistics for all cases and for cases with a ratio exceeding the limit.




                                                 62
