NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BANKING SYSTEM CONTROL, CAPITAL ALLOCATION, AND ECONOMY PERFORMANCE
Randall Morck
M. Deniz Yavuz
Bernard Yeung
Working Paper 15575
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15575

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2009

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Randall Morck, M. Deniz Yavuz, and Bernard Yeung. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Banking System Control, Capital Allocation, and Economy Performance
Randall Morck, M. Deniz Yavuz, and Bernard Yeung
NBER Working Paper No. 15575
December 2009
JEL No. G0,G21,G28,G32,O15,O16
ABSTRACT
We observe less efficient capital allocation in countries whose banking systems are more thoroughly
controlled by tycoons or families. The magnitude of this effect is similar to that of state control over
banking. Unlike state control, tycoon or family control also correlates with slower economic and productivity
growth, greater financial instability, and worse income inequality. These findings are consistent with
theories that elite-capture of a country’s financial system can embed “crony capitalism”.

Randall Morck
Faculty of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, CANADA T6G 2R6
and NBER
randall.morck@ualberta.ca
M. Deniz Yavuz
Olin Business School
Washington University in St. Louis
Simon Hall
1 Olympian Way
St. Louis, MO 63130
deniz.yavuz@wustl.edu

Bernard Yeung
National University of Singapore
Business School
Singapore 117592
bizdean@nus.edu.sg

1.

Introduction

Economic growth correlates strongly with financial development (King & Levine 1993ab; DemirgucKunt & Levine 1996; Levine 1996; Levine & Zervos 1998; Rajan & Zingales 1998; Demirguc-Kunt &
Maksimovic 1998; Beck et al. 2000; Levine et al. 2000; Beck & Levine 2002). But financial development
is neither inevitable nor irreversible. Many countries never sustained dynamic financial systems; and
more surprisingly, many that once did ceased doing so (Rajan & Zingales 2003).
One explanation for financial underdevelopment is that growth can undermine the positions of the
already wealthy (Schumpeter 1912, 1951; Morck, Stangeland & Yeung 2000, Fogel et al. 2008). Thus,
Rajan & Zingales (2004) argue that early 20th century financial development enriched an initial cadre of
tycoons who, in many countries, then successfully oversaw financial development reversals that deprived
potential competitors and innovative upstarts of capital. This, they posit, locks in a status quo favoring the
initial tycoons and their heirs. Morck, Wolfenzon, & Yeung (2005) further argue that many countries
block financial development entirely to forestall competition that threatens entrenched economic elites.
Consistent with these theses, economies that entrust more of their economies to old-moneyed
business families grow slower and sustain lower living standards than otherwise similar countries,
suggesting that protecting these families imposes costs on the broader economy (Morck, Stangeland &
Yeung 2000). Such countries also have more corrupt government, less efficient judiciaries, and more
bureaucratic red tape (Fogel 2006) – all likely barriers to entrepreneurs. However, the most direct way to
limit competition from new entrepreneurs is probably to limit their access to capital by controlling the
country’s financial system (Rajan & Zingales 2004).
Such situations are described as elite capture. This arises if an elite – a minority such as the very
wealthy, political insiders, or an ethnic group – controls an economic, political, or other institution to
advance the minority’s interests, rather than general social welfare (Glaeser, Scheinkman & Shleifer
2003; Hellman, Jones & Kaufmann 2003; and others). Elite capture of a country’s financial system might
occur in various ways, but would be incomplete without control over banks, which Beck et al. (2008)
show to be an essential source of capital for small businesses across countries We measure the potential
elite capture of each country’s banking system by the fraction of its largest banks, listed and unlisted,
controlled by tycoons and business families. For brevity, we refer to this as family control.

1

Controlling for banking system size, stock market size, and other relevant factors we find that
more predominantly family-controlled banking systems allocate capital less efficiently, measured either
by Wurgler’s (2000) cross-industry correlation of capital spending growth with value-added or by nonperforming loans. The efficiency loss is comparable to what La Porta et al. (2002), Caprio et al. (2007)
and others find for state-controlled banking systems. However, family-controlled banking systems also
correlate with financial instability and slower per capita GDP and productivity growth; while statecontrolled banking systems do not. These findings are highly robust - including to reasonable sources of
endogeneity. Family control of banks also correlates with proxies for crony capitalism (Murphy et al.
1991, 1993; Shleifer & Vishny 1993; Shleifer & Vishny 1998b; Haber 2002; Krueger 2002; Rajan &
Zingales 2004; Daniels & Trebilcock 2008; Fisman & Miguel 2008; and others), such as high income
inequality and barriers to entry.
We conclude that, on average, entrusting the governance of large banks to tycoons or families
provides efficiency losses comparable to those of state-controlled banks, augmented by the inequality
consequences associated with crony capitalism. Of course, our results imply neither that tycoon and
family control are always inefficient nor that banking systems predominantly controlled by tycoons or
families always harm their countries. Our results do, however, indicate such cases to be atypical and
therefore especially deserving of study.

2.

The economics of bank control

The social purpose of the financial system is to allocate the economy’s savings to its highest value uses
(Tobin 1989; Wurgler 2000) – especially to innovative upstart firms (Schumpeter 1912). A healthy
banking system is therefore key to sustained prosperity (King & Levine 1993a). Consequently, bank
governance affects not only banks, but the whole economy. Indeed, policies that maximize the bank
owners’ wealth – such as excessive risk taking to exploit deposit insurance or probably bailouts – might
adversely affect the overall economy. Such externalities divorce efficient bank governance from
maximizing bank shareholder valuations (Saunders et al. 1990). Keeping this distinction in mind, we
focus on the implications of bank control for the overall economy, rather than for banks’ shareholders.

2

Our results build on large body of previous work exploring state-controlled banking and familycontrolled firms, and on a much smaller literature investigating family-controlled banks. We now review
the most relevant parts of these literatures.

2.1

State-controlled versus private sector banks

State-controlled banks can rise above market forces to allocate capital where it advances social goals,
rather than where it creates the greatest bank-level profit. Such considerations allow that state-controlled
banking systems might not only better promote social goals, such as income equality or equality of
opportunity, but also allocate an economy’s capital more efficiently than private-sector banks (Lewis,
1950).
However, like all state-owned enterprises, state-controlled banks are vulnerable to a range of
“government failure problems” (Shleifer & Vishny 1998a). Thus, Krueger (2002, p. 15) writes that statecontrolled banking often means “cronies can be favored through the granting of domestic credit when that
credit is allocated at rates significantly below market.” Even where such overt corruption is rare, populist
political entrepreneurs might still use state-controlled banks to buy political support with unsound lending
(Dornbusch & Edwards 1992; Dinc 2005).
Which arguments weigh more heavily in a typical country is thus an empirical question. At the
bank level, state control correlates with poor financial performance, and privatizations increase financial
performance (Megginson et al. 2004; Boubakri et al. 2005). This is consistent with both social goals
trumping profit and crony lending. However, at the economy level, greater state control of banking
correlates with lower per capita income levels, growth rates and worse financial sector instability (La
Porta et al. 2002), and with greater capital misallocation (Wurgler 2000, Taboada 2008).
The weight of the evidence is thus consistent with state-controlled banking having major costs in
terms of depressed living standards, capital misallocation, and systemic instability, and thus of policy
options favoring private bank ownership (La Porta et al. 2002). To explore these issues further, we
distinguish two flavors of private ownership – widely held banks versus family held banks, which are
described below.

2.2

Widely Held Banks
3

Career concerns are thought to force professional CEOs of widely held firms to maximize shareholder
value (Fama 1977), and market forces are thought to fine-tune such CEOs’ incentives towards this end
(Demsetz & Lehn 1985). Free of government pressure to advance political or social goals and free of
pressure to advance business family interests, widely held banks’ CEOs should allocate capital more
efficiently than state or family-controlled banks. Most importantly, widely held banks’ professional
managers, bent on maximizing shareholder value, should offer loans to established and upstart firms alike
at similar risk-adjusted rates.
On the other hand, diffuse ownership and professional management induce well-known
governance problems (Shleifer & Vishny 1997). Professional managers have interests other than
shareholder value (Jensen & Meckling 1976; Jensen 1986), can become entrenched (Stulz 1988). CEOs
at widely held firms are thought to shun risk – either to protect firm-specific human capital (Kane 1985)
or to enjoy “quiet lives” of high status and multimillion dollar compensation packages (John et al. 2008).
The empirical evidence indicates that widely held banks outperform both state and family banks (Caprio
et al., 2007) and carry lower risk (Laeven & Levine 2009). However, as we argued above bank level
performance and economy level performance may differ. Thus, whether or not a more widely held
banking system leads to more desirable economy-level outcomes remains an open issue.

2.3

Family Banks

Most large firms in most countries have controlling shareholders, and these are usually wealthy oldmoney business families (La Porta et al. 1999; Bebchuk et al. 2000; Khanna et al. 2000; Morck,
Stangeland & Yeung 2000; Khanna & Yafeh 2005). Such families wield equity control blocks in most
listed firms in East Asia (Claessens et al. 2000; Claessens et al. 2002), India (Khanna & Palepu 2000;
Bertrand et al. 2002), Latin America (Hogenboom 2004; Rogers et al. 2007; Adolfo 2008; Cueto 2008),
Turkey (Ararat & Ugur 2003; Orbay & Yurtoglu 2006), and most other developing economies. Family
control is also important in Canada (Morck, Percy, Tian, & Yeung 2005), continental Europe (Faccio &
Lang 2002), Israel (Lauterbach & Vaninsky 1999; Maman 1999), Japan (Nakamura 2002), and others.
Though not unknown, family control over large firms is more tenuous and far rarer in the United
Kingdom (Franks et al. 2005) and United States (Villalonga & Amit 2006, 2008), where most large firms

4

are independent and widely held. Many countries’ major banks are also controlled by such families
(Caprio et al. 2007).
The ubiquity of family control suggests underlying economic advantages. Firms, including banks,
with powerful shareholders are potentially immunized against utility-maximizing CEOs neglecting
shareholder value (Shleifer & Vishny 1986). Banks, even more than most other firms, rely on
relationships (Diamond 1984), and business families’ relationship networks are considered a key asset
(Khanna & Palepu 2005). Family control can be a feasible second best solution to information asymmetry
and agency problems (Shleifer & Vishny 1986), especially absent legal systems that reliably enforce
arm’s-length contracts and protect passive investors (Burkart et al. 2003) 1 . In endemically corrupt
economies, business families can acquire reputational capital (Khanna & Yafeh 2007) and the strength to
counter predatory governments effectively (Fisman & Khanna 2004).
But large shareholders, as well as CEOs, presumably maximize their utility, which can include
tangible and intangible private benefits of control, and thus need not align with public shareholder value
(Nenova 2003; Dyck & Zingales 2004). Indeed, entrenched large shareholders appear to be a more
commonplace governance problem than entrenched professional mangers in most countries (Djankov et
al. 2006).
Moreover, what is good for large established businesses need not be good for economies (Fogel et
al. 2008). Especially in banking, where externalities imposed on other firms separate bank level
performance from banks’ contribution to economy-level performance (Saunders et al. 1990), firm-level
advantages of family-control of banks may well have economy-level downsides. Almeida & Wolfenzon
(2005) argue that easier financial transactions between a family’s firms, though good for those firms, can
decrease overall welfare by inefficiently depriving other firms of capital. This plausibly imposes broader
economy-level costs. Economic growth primarily arises from creative upstarts with new products or
processes arising and destroying established businesses in what Schumpeter (1942, p. 84) calls a
“perennial gale of creative destruction” (King and Levine 1993ab; Aghion and Howitt 1997; Fogel et al.
2008). Old-money business families, whose patrimonies are their economy’s established large businesses

1

Empirical studies generally find that family (heir controlled) firms outperform in countries where these issues are
important (Khanna & Rivkin 2001; Khanna & Yafeh 2005a, 2007), but underperform in countries such as Canada
(Morck, Stangeland &Yeung 2000), Denmark (Bennedsen et al. 2007), and the US (Villalonga and Amit 2006).

5

and whose comparative advantage is no longer creativity, might want a windbreak from Schumpeter’s
gale (Morck, Wolfenzon & Yeung 2005) by limiting capital to entrants.
Rajan & Zingales (2004) argue that many countries first developed dynamic financial systems
and then systematically dismantled them to erect such a windbreak. They posit that, after building great
business empires, a first generation of tycoons, or their heirs, used political influence to cripple their
countries’ financial systems precisely to deny upstarts capital. A growing body of evidence links such
windbreaks to persistent underdevelopment (Acemoglu, Johnson & Robinson 2005; Morck, Wolfenzon &
Yeung 2005; Perotti & Volpin 2006; Stulz 2005).
A wide range of policies erect effective barriers to entry. Thickets of costly regulation (Djankov
et al. 2002), tax disincentives to entrants (Gentry & Hubbard 2000), subsidies or regulatory favors to
established businesses (Krueger 2002), trade barriers (Krueger 1974; Krueger 2004), and many other
windbreaks are effective. But innovative entrants’ most critical need is typically capital (Schumpeter
1912; Levine 1991, 1992; King & Levine 1993ab; Beck et al. 2000). Because stock markets are important
sources of capital for new firms in only a handful of countries, controlling major banks may thus provide
incumbents uniquely effective shelter from Schumpeter’s gale.
Not only does bank control let established business families deny potential entrants’ capital, it
also lets them shift losses to banks when contagion risks justify governments bailing out banks but not
other firms (Perotti & Vorage 2008; Perotti & Volpin 2006).2 La Porta et al. (2003) link business family
control of privatized Mexican banks to pervasive capital misallocation and risk shifting. Laeven & Levine
(2009) link family control of banking to higher bank risk taking, consistent with strong shareholders
forcing more aggressive gaming of deposit insurance and leverage regulations.
Politicians might acquiesce because of rent-seeking (Krueger 1974; Morck & Yeung 2004;
Perotti & Vorage 2008); or even actively assist because of business family ties (Krueger 2002; Faccio
2006; Faccio et al. 2006). This raises the possibility of “elite capture” of the banking system being an

2

These considerations do not escape astute politicians. For example, Singapore’s then Deputy Prime Minister Hsien
Loong in a speech at The Association of Banks in Singapore (ABS) on Jun 21st 2001 stated that, “with banking and
non-banking activities inter-meshed within a conglomerate, there will be a strong tendency to stretch any safety net
intended for the banking system also to cover non-bank operations in the group.” Reflecting this concern Singapore
mandates a “separation of financial and non-financial businesses within the banking groups, and to further improve
corporate governance through a clearer and more transparent ownership and control structure.” Other countries’
banking regulations reflect similar concerns. For example Canada mandates low voting caps on chartered banks,
effectively forcing them to be widely held.

6

important element of “crony capitalism” and all its attendant economic problems (Murphy et al. 1991,
1993; Shleifer & Vishny 1993; Shleifer & Vishny 1998b; Haber 2002; Krueger 2002; Rajan & Zingales
2004; Daniels & Trebilcock 2008; Fisman & Miguel 2008 and others). Haber et al. (2003) argue that elite
capture of Mexican banks in the early twentieth century stunted development for decades afterwards.
In contrast, family control could also have efficiency consequences for the overall economy if
families facilitate “big push” industrialization (Morck & Nakamura 2007) by using “tunneling” (Johnson
et al. 2000) to orchestrate the same cross-industry subsidies a disinterested central planner would impose
(Rosenstein-Rodan 1943; Murphy et al. 1989). In addition, family-controlled banks might mitigate
financial crises if they continued advancing credit, even if only to other firms controlled by the same
families.
Thus, the existing literature on bank control and bank level performance can usefully be extended
by exploring potential links between bank control, economy performance, and indicators of elite capture
or crony capitalism.

3.

Sample, Data, and Variable Construction

To this end, we construct a set of economy level measures of banking system control and economy
performance. This section describes their construction, and that of various control variables we also
require.

3.1

Sample

We start with the 2001 global sample of 244 banks Caprio et al. (2007) use to study banks’ market
valuations and equity ownership structures. Although this covers 83 percent of the total banking assets in
44 large economies (Caprio et al., 2007), it omits unlisted banks – a potentially important subsample for
our study because these firms are especially likely to be family-controlled.
We therefore augment these data to include every country’s ten largest banks, listed or unlisted,
as ranked by 2001 assets in The Banker (2001).3 If The Banker lists fewer than ten large banks in a
country, we add all those not already included but covered by Bankscope. This yields 427 banks from 44

3

Including smaller banks would be desirable, but greatly magnifies data collection problems. Since we need to
gauge economy-level banking system control, focusing on large banks is defensible as a first pass.

7

countries. After merging our data with the Caprio et al. (2007) sample we have fewer than ten banks in
some countries and more than ten banks in others.
We then identify the controlling shareholder, if any, for each bank. Caprio et al. (2007) detail the
control structures of the 244 banks in that sample, so we need only fill in control data only for the
additional banks. Bankscope provides this information – in most cases for 2001, and more
comprehensively for 2002 and subsequently. This leaves us with a grand total of 324 listed and unlisted
banks whose controlling owner we can identify. A controlling owner is identified by 2001 for 79% of our
sample and by 2003 for 94% of the sample.

3.2

Defining and Classifying Banks’ Controlling Shareholders

We ascertain each bank’s ultimate owners, if any, as in Caprio et al. (2007) and La Porta et al. (2002).
That is, we first identify all shareholders with voting blocks of five percent or more. If these are state
organs or biological persons, we call them ultimate owners. However, most blockholders in most banks
are corporations. We identify these corporations’ owners, their owners’ owners, and so on until reaching
either discernable ultimate owners (state organs or biological persons) or diffusely held entities. We then
work through these chains, aggregating voting blocks of common ultimate owners by assuming members
of a family act in concert and state organs obey a single authority. At each link in these chains, we assign
control to the ultimate owner with the largest combined voting block of ten percent or more, combining
direct ownership with indirect ownership by dint of controlling other corporations owning shares in the
corporation in question. If no ten percent voting block exists, we say the corporation in question has no
controlling shareholder.
We define each bank’s controlling shareholder, if one exists, as the ultimate owner commanding
the largest voting block of ten percent of more. Since the transparency of ownership structures varies
across countries, this mechanical procedure is imperfect.4 We expect to underestimate the prevalence of
control blocks in countries with less stringent reporting requirements.
After determining the controlling shareholder we assign banks to one of three categories. We say
a bank is state-controlled if its controlling shareholder is a government entity, and family-controlled if its
4

Different countries have different blockholder reporting thresholds. In the US, all insider stakes and all owners of
5% or more must be disclosed. Comparable thresholds range from 2% to 25% across other countries (Schouten and
Siems, 2009).

8

controlling shareholder is a tycoon or family. All others, denoted widely held banks, lack a controlling
shareholder – because they are either widely held or controlled by ten percent plus blockholders that are
widely held corporations or cooperatives.
Finally, we construct three country-level bank governance indexes: fractions of the banking
system, weighted by total net credit, whose governance is entrusted to the state, to business tycoons or
families, or to professional managers. For brevity, we call these the state-controlled, family-controlled,
and widely held shares of countries’ banking systems. Table 1 displays these indexes.

[Table 1 about here]

Our bank categorization rules have shortcomings. For example, control by founders versus heirs
has different performance implications (Villalonga & Amit 2006), so our combining banks controlled by
self-made tycoons and old-moneyed families likely includes some for which the entrenchment effects
discussed above may not pertain. However, in most countries, control blocks do signal old-moneyed
family control (La Porta et al. 1999; Morck, Wolfenzon & Yeung 2005). An opposite problem arises for
Svenske Handelsbanken, a widely held Swedish bank that holds extensive control blocks in industrial
firms (Högfeldt 2005), which it might be tempted to treat specially. Another possible distinction would
separate widely held publicly traded banks from cooperative (customer or member owned) banks.
However, all save nine of our widely held banks are cooperative banks but not publicly traded, so we
cannot explore this distinction. All of these imperfections induce noise in our bank control measures, and
thus cut against our finding significant differences between them. We return to these and other
shortcomings of our measures in the robustness section below.

3.3

Financial System Efficiency Measures

We estimate efficiency of a country’s financial system in the following ways:

Capital allocation efficiency
Following Wurgler (2000), we associate more efficient capital allocation with a country’s capital
investment being more predominantly concentrated in industries with faster value-added growth. We

9

operationalize this by estimating a simple elasticity of gross fixed capital formation to value added
growth for each country using its industry-level data. That is, country’s Wurgler’s elasticity is the
coefficient ηc in the regression

[1]

ln

I ict
V
= α c + η c ln ict + ε ict
I ict −1
Vict −1

with i denoting industry, t time, I fixed capital investment, and V industry value added.
Comparable industry level investment and value-added data are available through 2003 from
United Nations' General Industrial Statistics (UNIDO) database,. We estimate each country’s capital
allocation efficiency twice. Our first Wurgler’s elasticity estimate uses data for 1993 through 2003 – the
ten years closest to our observation of the bank control. We would ideally base our capital allocation
efficiency measurements of data subsequent to 2001, the earliest date at which we can assemble a broad
international cross-section of bank control data; however, this leaves too short an estimation window. Our
second Wurgler’s elasticity uses all available UNIDO data (1963 through 2003). The longer window
raises the number of countries with enough data to estimate the coefficient η from 33 to 39 and permits
more precise estimates if capital allocation efficiency changes little through the window. If not, the first
version is preferable. Table 4 shows that the two measures are highly correlated.
Since value-added growth across all sectors, by definition, sums to GDP growth, this measure
gauges the strength of the link between capital spending in each industry and that industry’s contribution
to overall economic growth. Its weakness is that it fails to capture investments that respond to new growth
opportunities yet to affect values added.

Nonperforming Loans
We next use nonperforming loans, measured as a fraction of the value of total gross loans outstanding, to
gauge the banking system’s ability to pick winners, or at least avoid losers. These data are from the World
Development Indicators database (WDI), provided by the World Bank, and are averaged across 1993
through 2003 to yield one observation for each country to smooth out cyclical variations. In our

10

regressions, we logistically transform each dependent variable a bounded within the unit interval to â
ranging across the real line. That is, we transform a ∈ [0,1) into:

[2]

⎛ a ⎞
aˆ = ln⎜
⎟ ∈ ℜ,
⎝1− a ⎠

A more efficiently-run banking system should make fewer loans to ex ante unqualified borrowers,
and should therefore bear fewer nonperforming loans. State banks pressured by politicians into lending to
financially unqualified but politically favored borrowers often run up huge nonperforming loan problems.
Banks controlled by oligarchic families can get into very similar problems by lending to related parties
who, despite daunting pedigrees, are ill qualified managers (Krueger 2002).
However, this logic is imperfect. Because screening borrowers is costly, we should observe some
nonperforming loans. Too few might actually indicate inefficiently cautious lending. Also, different
financial reporting practices across countries could render nonperforming loans data noisy, or even induce
bias if, for example, family banking correlates with lower transparency. The last would work against
finding significant results.

Banking Crises
Our third banking efficiency measure, the number of banking crises the economy experiences, is also
directly tied to quality of banks’ governance and their financial health. Although many factors can trigger
banking crises (Allen & Gale 2007), financial history reveals extensive accumulated capital misallocation
a near universal theme (Kindleberger & Aliber 2005). We therefore expect fewer banking crises in
countries where bank loans are allocated more efficiently, all else equal.
Our first banking crises variable is the number of banking crises in each country covered in
Demirguc-Kunt et al. (2006) or Dell'Ariccia et al. (2008) after 1993. Dell'Ariccia et al. (2008) presume a
banking crises if one of the following happens: extensive depositor runs; an emergency measure (e.g.
bank holiday or nationalization); bank rescues costing 2% of GDP or more; or non-performing loans
rising to 10% or more of bank assets. These papers do not include the 2008 banking crisis, so we
construct an alternative measure banking crises + 2008 , which increases countries’ crises counts by one

11

where the IMF Global Financial Stability Report (April 2009) indicates that governments directly
intervened to rescue large financial institutions in 2008 or 2009. Unfortunately, data to replicate the
criteria used in previous papers are as yet unavailable, so we treat this variable with circumspection.

Economy Stability
A country’s banking system is a fundamental channel through which monetary variables affect its real
economy. Consequently, macroeconomic stability correlates with the health and governance of the
banking system. Banking systems that allocate capital less efficiently might be more vulnerable to
negative economic shocks, and curtail credit more sharply in response. This might magnify the effect of
economic shocks on the overall economy. We gauge macroeconomic volatility by growth volatility – the
standard deviation of log first differences in real per capita GDP for each country from the Penn World
Tables, averaged from 1993 through 2004.

3.4

Economy Performance Measures

A country’s economic performance is commonly measured by growth in per capita income, productivity,
or capital. These are important metrics, but economies can also be plausibly described as betterperforming if they provide more egalitarian incomes or opportunities. We therefore consider a
constellation of economic growth measures augmented by measures of equality indexes.

Economic Growth
Our first set of performance measures capture the pace of economic growth. As in Beck et al. (2000), we
use Penn World Tables data (1993-2004), which allow us to decompose income growth into productivity
growth and capital accumulation growth.
Income growth is the arithmetic mean of log differences in per capita GDP for each country. This
is obtained by regressing each country’s log real per capita GDP on a constant and a time trend, and
taking the time trend as its income growth rate.
TFP growth is the economy’s total factor productivity (TFP) growth rate: the growth rate in the
value of the outputs it can generate from inputs of a fixed value. To estimate this, we assume output in
each economy obeys the aggregate production function.

12

[3]

Yt = AK tα L1t−α ,

with Yt, Kt, and Lt designating its GDP, capital stock, and labor force, respectively at time t; and with the
capital share, α, assumed to be 30% for all countries (Beck et al. 2000). Using logarithms of first
differences in time, we estimate the rate of change in A for each country and interpret this as its TFP
growth rate.
Capital accumulation is the rate at which the economy’s aggregate stock of capital assets grows
through time. To estimate this, we assume its real capital stock at time t, denoted Kt, is its previous year’s
capital stock adjusted for depreciation at a rate δ and for new capital investment, It. That is,

[4]

K t = (1 − δ ) K t −1 + I t
We assume all capital to depreciate at seven percent per year, and assume 1964 capital stocks as

starting points (Beck et al. 2000). We then apply [4] recursively to generate subsequent years’ capital
stocks moving forward.

Economic Equality
Rapid economic growth whose benefits accrue to tiny elite might be less socially desirable than slower
growth whose fruits are more evenly distributed across the population. State or family-controlled banks
might distribute wealth more evenly than widely held banks if the bureaucrats or families place social
goals ahead of profits. Alternatively, either state or family-controlled banks might distribute wealth less
evenly if they favor firms controlled by cronies or relatives. Indeed, elite capture of a country’s banking
systems ought to concentrate wealth the hands of a well-connected elite, skewing its income distribution.
We therefore consider several measures of economic inequality.
We gauge income inequality by a country’s average Gini coefficient from 1993 through 2003.5
Another measure of inequality is the concentration of economic power in the hands of a small oligarchy,
5

This measures the deviation of the country’s income distribution from a uniform distribution, with a zero Gini
coefficient indicating a perfectly egalitarian income distribution, and larger coefficients indicating greater inequality
(Gini 1921).

13

as reflected in the fraction of the country’s top ten businesses or business groups controlled by old
moneyed families (Fogel 2006). “Old money” here is defined as second or subsequent generation wealth.
The top ten rankings are based on total employees, and are the largest domestically-controlled privatesector businesses or business groups, including listed and unlisted firms. In regressions, we normalize
both the income inequality and oligarchy variables using a logistic transformation, as in [2].
Broad access to options for improving one’s life is arguably at least as socially important as
equality of outcomes (Sen 1992). We are especially interested in equality of opportunity for small
entrepreneurs, for which we consider two sets of proxies.
The first set gauges access to information, such as personal computers per thousand population
averaged from 1993 through 2003. Khanna (2008) and others argue that an information technology
revolution in the 1990s fundamentally changed China, India, and other developing economies by letting
their small entrepreneurs access information and markets previously unavailable to them.
While the breadth of computer ownership is a defensible measure of this access; there are
alternatives. We thus use internet connections, telephone lines and car ownership per capita as robustness
checks. While we defend all these variables as proxies for equality of opportunity for small entrepreneurs,
we recognize that they also reflect the size and wealth of a country’s “middle class”, and thus can be
interpreted as measures of consumption equality, which is a valid alternative to income inequality
(Gordon & Dew-Becker 2007).
Our second set of equality of opportunity measures gauges overt entry barriers blocking new
businesses. These variables are the number of bureaucratic procedures a start-up must complete to
operate legally, as well as the time (in business days) and cost (all identifiable official costs) required to
do this. Cost is expressed as a fraction of per capita GDP, and all three variables are for 1999 and from
Djankov et al. (2002).
The owners of incumbent businesses are thought to erect entry barriers that protect them from
upstart rivals, and might control banks to constrict financing to rivals and potential rivals. If control over
the banking system complements other means of effecting economic entrenchment, we should see more
such hindrances where wealthy business elites control banking systems. However, we might also see
fewer such barriers if control of the banking system is sufficient to lock in the status quo, rendering other
entry barriers superfluous. Also, state control over banks may indicate general government activism, and

14

a heavier overall regulatory burden, so this variable might also correlate with the procedures, time and
cost of establishing a new company.

3.5

Control Variables

Our regressions use a collection of control variables to isolate the relationship of the banking system
control measures described in section 3.3 to the economy performance variables in section 3.4. This
section explains the purpose, construction, and sources of each control variable.
Initial general development, gauged by the logarithm of the country’s per capita GDP in 1992,
appears in all of our regressions. In our growth regressions, initial general development controls for the
possibility that countries already at high standards of living have less scope for very high growth rates
than do poorer countries in the process of “catching up” (Solow 1956; Mankiw et al. 1992). Because
Barro (1997) argues for a nonlinear relationship between economic growth and initial GDP, we also
control for the square of the logarithm of the country’s per capita GDP in 1992. More generally, initial
economic development is also associated with higher quality institutions (North 1989, La Porta et al.
1999), which could limit the scope for capital misallocation by providing more effective checks on bank
mis-governance.
Wurgler (2000) shows that financial development is an important determinant of capital
allocation efficiency. We control for a country's general financial development with measures of the sizes
of its equity and credit markets relative to its GDP, following King & Levine (1993), La Porta et al.
(1997), Rajan & Zingales (1998), and Wurgler (2000). Stock market size is the country’s total stock
market capitalization as a fraction of GDP, averaged across 1993 through 2003 to smooth out any cyclical
variations. Banking system size is the total bank credit outstanding as a fraction of GDP, likewise
averaged across 1993 through 2003. We control for stock market size because stock markets provide
alternatives to banks for firms seeking capital (Levine 2002). Consequently, a country with a large
efficient stock market might allocate capital efficiently regardless of what sort of banking system it has.
In growth regressions we supplement the above variables with additional controls for human
capital (Barro & Lee 1996; Barro 2001), trade openness (Krueger 1998), and a sub-Saharan African
dummy (Barro 1991), which are also shown to be important for economic growth. In our robustness tests,

15

we also control for inflation, government size, black market premium, average number of coups, average
number of assassinations, and ethnic diversity individually and all together, as in Beck et al. (2000).

3.6

Persistence Issues

During crises, banks may be nationalized and then quickly privatized, making bank control data from a
period without major crises preferable for our purposes. We therefore follow Caprio et al. (2007) and
Laeven & Levin (2009) in using bank control data from 2001. These are the earliest available data with
reasonably wide coverage after the 1997 Asian Crisis was resolved.
However, our dependent variables are generally estimated using data windows ending in 2003 or
2004 because UNIDO data, on which our investment efficiency measures are based, exist only through
2003, and the Penn World Tables end in 2004. This has two unfortunate consequences. First, we cannot
run lead and lag causality tests between bank control and economy performance. Second, our bank
control data do not precede the period in which we observe economy level performance. This timing
mismatch is important if the category of ultimate controlling shareholder changes frequently, but less so if
bank control is highly persistent.
To check this, we scan BankScope data from 2001 through 2007 for bank control changes.
Although banks’ controlling shareholders and the sizes of their equity blocks both change during this
period, the category of controlling shareholder rarely changes; family-controlled banks tend to remain
family-controlled, state-controlled banks tend to remain state-controlled, and widely held banks tend to
remain widely held. Indeed, we identify only 14 banks (4.3% of the total 324) switching category from
2001 to 2007. Two family-controlled banks become state-controlled and four become widely held. Four
state-controlled banks become widely held. Two widely held banks become family-controlled and two
becomes state-controlled. Laeven & Levine (2009) perform a similar exercise, checking private banks for
controlling shareholder changes from 2001 to 2005, and reach at the same conclusion: banks’ ownership
categories are very stable through time.
We are especially concerned about temporary bank nationalizations amid financial crises. For
example, Sweden nationalized many of its major banks in 1992, but promptly privatized them again, and
their controlling shareholders categories reverted to their pre-crisis values. One major financial crisis in
our sample period is the 1997 Asian crisis. Djankov et al. (2005) analyze the resolution of financial

16

distress after this crisis in the three most affected countries, Indonesia, South Korea and Thailand. In
these, only one Indonesian bank in our sample is nationalized. Our investigation of other East Asian,
Latin American, and East European countries’ banking systems also reveals no substantial changes in
country-level controlling shareholder categories.
Another obvious problem could be bank control changes during privatization episodes. We have
data on 283 bank privatizations from Megginson (2004), and work backwards from 2001 to explore how
these affect our data. For example, Italy’s Banco Nazionale del Lavoro is labeled widely held in our data,
but was state-controlled until November 1998. This exercise reveals 16 changes in bank control between
1993 and 2001 in our sample. We return to this issue below by directly controlling for privatizations in
recalculating our bank control measures.
These exercises suggest that country-level banking system control is likely to be highly persistent.
Although this validates our use of 2001 banking system control measures, it also prevents us from using
changes in banking system control for identification. We must therefore contend with endogeneity
problems, such as reverse causality or latent factors affecting both control over countries’ banking sectors
and their economies’ performance. We return to these issues below.

3.7

Descriptive Statistics

Table 3 summarizes the definitions and sources of all our main variables; and Table 2 presents simple
descriptive statistics for each.

[Tables 2 and 3 about here]

4.

Empirical Findings

We examine the correlations between our indices of bank control and various measures of economic
performance – including banking system efficiency, economic growth rates, and macroeconomic stability
– as well as factors correlated with crony capitalism.

[Table 4 about here]

17

4.1

Simple Correlations

Table 4 presents simple correlation coefficients of each main variable with all the others. Several patterns
emerge. First, the three bank control indexes sum to unity, so each should correlate negatively with the
other two – purely as an algebraic artifact. However, their relative magnitudes are informative
nonetheless. Family control is not significantly negatively correlated with state control, but widely held
banks are significantly (p < 0.01) rarer wherever either state or family control is more prevalent. Thus, the
primary difference across countries seems to be widely held banks on the one hand versus state or familycontrolled banks on the other.
Second, capital allocation efficiency correlates negatively and significantly with state-control of
the banking system (1963-2003), as in Wurgler (2000). However, efficient capital allocation is positively
significantly correlated with widely held banks and negatively and significantly, if measured between
1993 and 2003, correlated with family-controlled banks.
Third, more prevalent family-control over banks is associated with more non-performing loans,
more banking crises, slower economic growth, slower capital accumulation, and worse macroeconomic
volatility. In contrast, a more widely held banking system correlates with fewer non-performing loans,
fewer banking crises, faster capital accumulation, and less macroeconomic volatility. A more thoroughly
state-controlled banking system correlates only with more non-performing loans and slower capital
accumulation.

4.2

Main Regression Results

Figure 1 graphs capital allocation efficiency against the fractions of banks designated family-controlled,
state-controlled, and widely held. The figure shows clear general tendencies in the data, indicated by solid
lines; but surrounded by substantial scatter. This suggests other variables at work in the background. We
therefore turn to more formal multivariate tests to clarify the patterns in the data.

[Figure 1 about here]

18

Financial System Efficiency
Table 5 explores our first question: whether or not bank control correlates with capital allocation
efficiency. The first four columns show capital allocation efficiency, measured as in Wurgler (2000) and
across either 1993-2003 or 1963-2003, clearly correlated with control over banking systems. Countries
with more widely held banking systems allocate capital more efficiently. Countries that entrust their
banking systems to either families or the state exhibit less efficient capital allocation.

[Tables 5 about here]

The scatter evident in Figure 1 is considerably reduced by the control variables, for the regression
R2 statistics range from 33% to 61% – indicating that the variables in the regression now explain
substantial fractions, by the standards of cross-sectional regression analysis, of the variation in capital
allocation efficiency across countries.
The next two columns in Table 5 regress nonperforming loans on the bank control measures. A
more widely held banking system is significantly correlated with fewer non-performing loans; while more
predominantly state or family-controlled banking systems both correlate with more nonperforming loans.
Next we test the relationship between bank control and the number of banking crises the country
experienced after 1993. Banking crises are more common in countries whose banking systems are more
predominantly family-controlled (p=0.00). In contrast, widely held banks are negatively correlated with
the number of banking crises and state-controlled banks seem uncorrelated with the incidence of crises.
State-controlled banks could be enjoying the implicit guarantee of the state.
However, when we include the 2008 crisis, the coefficient on family control becomes less
significant (p = 0.09) and that on widely held banks loses significance. Obviously, family control over
banks does not explain 2008 crisis, which began in the United States, whose banking system is
predominantly widely held, and spread to other countries with largely widely held banking systems, such
as the United Kingdom. However, this does not belie the strong correlation of family control with
previous crises.
The final two columns of the table checks whether family control of banks correlates with the
stability of economic growth. The standard deviation of a country’s real per capita GDP growth rate is

19

positively associated with family control over banks (p = 0.01), indicating less stable economic growth
where family banks predominate.
These results are also economically significant. One standard deviation increase in the fraction of
family-controlled banks corresponds to 25% (1993-2003) and 15% (1963-2003) decrease in capital
allocation efficiency, 25% more nonperforming loans, and 27% larger standard deviation of growth. For
comparison, a one standard deviation increase in the fraction of banks controlled by the state corresponds
to 26% decrease in capital allocation efficiency (1963-2003) and 27% more nonperforming loans. These
results survive a wide range of robustness checks, detailed below.
In summary, Table 5 shows countries where family-controlled banks are more predominant to be
less efficient in allocating capital, to have banking systems with larger fractions of nonperforming loans,
and to have less stable economic growth. Although family bank control correlates strongly with more
financial crises prior to 2008, this correlation weakens if we extend the data to include the 2008 crisis.

Economic Growth
Since our banking system control measures correlate with capital allocation efficiency and banking
system efficiency, we expect them to correlate with economic growth as well. Table 6 therefore regresses
our economic growth measures – per capita income growth, TFP growth, and per capita capital
accumulation – on our country level bank control measures, revealing lower real per capita GDP growth
and TFP growth where banking systems are more family-controlled. The coefficient of family control in
explaining capital accumulation is negative, but insignificant. In contrast, capital accumulation correlates
negatively with state-controlled banks and positively with widely held banks.

[Table 6 about here]

These results are economically significant: a one standard deviation higher family control
corresponds to 53% lower real GDP per capita growth (the average growth rate in our sample is 1.92%).
They also survive a substantial battery of robustness checks, described below. In summary, Table 6 shows
slower economic growth in countries with more predominantly family-controlled banking systems.

20

4.3

Endogeneity and Identification

Tables 5 and 6 link family-controlled banking to, respectively, inefficient capital allocation and slow
unstable economic growth. However, since banking control is persistent and is, in any case, measured
contemporaneously to the outcome variables, the tables cannot resolve endogeneity. Family-controlled
banking might impede and destabilize growth; or slow unstable growth might favor family-controlled
banks; or a third latent factor might “cause” both.
We employ instrumental variables regressions to mitigate endogeneity concerns. Because bank
control is persistent, we employ deep historical instruments: the origin of each country’s legal system; the
fraction of its population adhering to each major religion, and its latitude.
Countries whose legal systems derive from the Common Law seem more able to sustain large
financial systems than are countries whose legal systems derive from the Napoleonic Code; with systems
derived from the German Civil Code and Scandinavian codifications occupying the middle ground (La
Porta et al. 1997, 1998; Levine et al. 2000). Legal systems have deep historical roots – the spread of the
Common Law, Napoleonic Code, and German Civil Code predates the widespread rise of dispersed
ownership; and the Scandinavian codifications, though more recent, reflect similarly deep-rooted legal
traditions. Non-Western countries generally either inherited their colonial legal systems or adopted a
Western legal system before developing large stock markets (La Porta et al. 2008). Legal origin is
therefore defensible as an instrument in that it is “predetermined” (Beck et al. 2000). Our four legal origin
indicators are one for each of a Common Law, Napoleonic Code, German Civil Code, or Scandinavian
legal origin, respectively; and zero otherwise.
Stulz & Williamson (2003) show that religion explains substantial cross-country variation in
creditor rights, and attribute this to different religions’ differing views on debt and interest. Although
whole countries abruptly switched religions in the distant past, current changes are relatively slow. The
religion variables are therefore also defensible as instrument candidates, in that they are mostly
“predetermined”.
Hall & Jones (1999) argue that latitude is correlated with Western influence, which they argue
leads to institutions amenable to economic development. Acemoglu et al. (2001) support the validity of
this instrument by showing it has no effect on economic performance, save via measures of institutional
development. While Western countries’ latitudes are clearly exogenous, where they established,

21

conquered, or defended colonies reflects their governments’ decisions. However, those decisions were
taken in the distant past, making latitude – defined as the distance of a country’s geographic center from
the equator in degrees – a plausible instrumental variable.

[Table 7 about here]

A valid instrument must be highly correlated with banking system control, and uncorrelated with
the residuals in the correctly specified second stage regressions. Table 7 Panel A1 shows widely held
banking systems to be markedly rare in French Civil Code countries, whose banking systems are on
average 41% family-controlled. Widely held banks constitute 70 percent of the typical Protestant
country’s banking system, but total only five percent in the typical Muslim country. Countries in the
highest quartile of absolute latitudes have the highest mean fraction of widely held banks (83%) and the
lowest mean fractions of family-controlled and government-controlled banks. These differences suggest
that our instruments’ likely relevance to bank control. Panel A2 shows likelihood ratios of the first stage
Tobit regressions using these variables as instruments for our bank control measures to have p values
sufficiently low to refute concerns about weak instruments.6
Valid instruments must also be uncorrelated with the true residuals of the correctly specified
second stage regressions. These are unobservable; however, assuming the observed residuals represent the
true residuals allows approximations of these tests. For example, using the residuals of the second stage
regression of capital allocation efficiency (estimated over the long window) on family and statecontrolled banking system fractions yields a Hansen’s J statistics of 2.29 (p = 0.69), consistent with
exogeneity. If the dependent variable is income growth, the Hansen’s J statistics is 4.12 (p = 0.39). In
every case, these tests fail to reject exogeneity of the instruments.
We therefore take the predicted values from the Tobit regressions in panel A2 as first stage
estimates of exogenous components of our banking system control measures. Panels B and C then rerun
the regressions in Tables 5 and 6, but using these estimated exogenous components of our banking control
measures, rather than the measures themselves.

6

In specifications with only one endogenous variable (independent banks), we can directly utilize Stock & Yogo
(2004) critical p-values for weak instruments. All our instruments pass this test.

22

The second stage coefficients of the bank control measures resemble those in Tables 5 and 6.
Family control again correlates significantly with less efficient capital allocation, more nonperforming
loans, slower economic growth, more volatile economic growth, and more banking crises. Widely held
banking systems correlate with more efficient capital allocation (using the longer estimation window,
though not using the shorter one), fewer nonperforming loans, faster economic growth, less volatile
economic growth, and fewer banking crises (though not if we include the 2008 crises). State control over
banks correlates only with more nonperforming loans and growth rate volatility.
Obviously, instrumental variables cannot completely preclude reverse causality or missing latent
variable effects. However we conclude that our findings are at least consistent with causation running
from bank control measures to economy level variables, as discussed above.

4.4

Robustness

Our main results (Tables 5 and 6) pass a wide battery of robustness checks, in that alternative approaches
to estimation generate qualitatively similar results, by which we mean the banking system control
measures attract the same patterns of signs and significance as in the tables. Where this is not so, we
describe how the robustness checks’ results differ from those shown in the tables. The relationships
between bank control measures and our banking crises count that includes 2008 is only marginally
significant in the tables, so we do not consider it in the robustness tests.
Our results are unlikely to be driven by outliers. We check this using an iterative reweighted least
squares algorithm that successively deemphasizes observations farther from the trend line until
converging. The algorithm does not converge for regressions explaining the number of bank crises, and so
cannot be applied to these. In all other cases, it converges. This exercise leads to a much stronger negative
correlation of family control with capital accumulation (p = 0.02); and also renders more state-controlled
banking significantly correlated with higher growth rate volatility. Widely held banking systems are
revealed dampening growth rate volatility and improving capital accumulation. In all other regressions,
controlling for outliers in this way yields qualitatively similar results.
Our economy performance variables end in 2003-2004. Our next set of robustness checks
ascertains that our findings are robust to extending this time window. Since the Penn World Tables and
UNIDO data are made available with a lag of several years, we cannot extend our TFP growth rates,

23

capital accumulation rates, or Wurgler’s elasticity to windows after our bank control data. However, using
estimation endpoints different from those used in the tables generates qualitatively similar results
throughout. Data for per capita GDP growth and volatility, and for nonperforming loans, are available
through 2007 in the WDI database. We therefore reconstruct these variables using windows from 1993 to
2007, a window extending our data up to six years after our bank control cross section. Outlier robust
regressions yield qualitatively similar results to those shown.
We measure banking system control as of 2001. Above, we showed that the banking control
measures are highly persistent between 2001 and 2007 (by checking for all changes in bank control) and
before 2001 (by using bank privatization data to work backwards from 2001). However, we can do more
with our privatization data from Megginson (2004), which indicates that 16 banks in our sample are
privatized: 6 become family-controlled and 10 become widely held. In the tables, we count these banks
using their 2001 (post-privatization) control categories. An alternative approach is to calculate a durationweighted measure of banking system control for 1993 through 2003. If a bank is state-controlled for the
five years from 1993 to 1998, and then sold to a family, which controls it through 2003, we say it is 50%
state-controlled and 50% family-controlled when tallying up our country-level bank control measures.
This exercise generates qualitatively similar results to those shown, save that widely held banking
systems are now positively correlated with growth, negatively correlated with growth rate volatility, and
insignificant in explaining the efficiency of capital allocation in the shorter window.
We follow La Porta et al. (1999) and Caprio et al. (2007) in presuming the largest equity voting
block of 10% or more to confer control. Increasing this to 20%, and recalculating our bank control
measures generates qualitatively similar results to those shown.
Another alternative construction of our bank control measures would use different weights. We
calculate country-level bank control measures weighting banks by total net credit. Credit issued is a
plausible gauge of the importance of a bank as a capital allocator; but others are possible. We therefore
reweight banks by total assets and reconstruct our bank control measures. This generates qualitatively
similar results to those shown, save that widely held banking systems now correlate negatively with
growth volatility and lose significance in explaining capital allocation efficiency in the shorter window.
We posit above that entrusting the governance of the banking system to wealthy business families
might impede efficient capital allocation because those families might divert capital to their own firms

24

and away from upstarts and competitors. These problems could arise even if the families that control the
banks do not control other firms, for Faccio (2006) and others reveal numerous connections between
wealthy families. However, they may well be more serious where the families that control banks also
control large nonfinancial corporations. The Orbis dataset identifies other companies owned by our
banking families. We augment this with an extensive online media search using family names and bank
names to verify matches in Orbis and identify other firms controlled by our banking families. This
admittedly crude approach probably underestimates the non-financial interests of these families, but
nonetheless confirms that 90% of the families that control banks in our data also control other firms. We
use this information to recalculate our bank control measures assuming banks controlled by families with
no other firms are equivalent to widely held banks. Under this definition, 100% of Mexican banks become
widely held – a call many students of the Mexican economy might find low. Rerunning our regressions
yields qualitatively similar results.
The statistical tests in all our regressions employ heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors.
Using standard OLS regression t-tests generates qualitatively similar results; except for the capital
allocation efficiency measure based on 1993 to 2003 data.
Our capital allocation efficiency measures, Wurgler’s (2000) elasticities, are estimated, not
observed. We therefore rerun regressions using these variables weighting observations by the inverses of
the standard errors of our elasticity estimates. These weighted least squares regressions generate
qualitatively similar results to those in the tables.
We can obtain data for only a few banks in some countries. If these have only a few banks, this is
not necessarily a problem; but if we are missing data for these countries, their banking control measures
may be estimated less precisely. We therefore repeat our tests after dropping the countries represented in
our data by fewer than three banks: Finland, Venezuela, and Zimbabwe. This exercise renders widely held
banking systems positively correlated with income growth and state-controlled banking negatively
correlated with capital accumulation; and leaves all our bank control measures insignificant in explaining
capital allocation efficiency in the shorter window, though the coefficient magnitudes are roughly
preserved.
Table 6 controls for initial banking system size, stock market size, per capita GDP, per capita
GDP squared, mean years of schooling, trade openness, and adds a Sub-Saharan Africa dummy. These

25

control variables are commonly used in the economic growth literature; but others are sometimes added.
We therefore repeat the income growth regressions of Table 6 including other controls used in Beck et al.
(2000) mean inflation rates, government as a fraction of GDP, the black market exchange rate premium,
the number of coups, the number of assassinations, and ethnic diversity, individually and all together.
Qualitatively similar results ensue; family control is always negatively significantly associated with
growth.
Table 5 shows that including the 2008 financial crisis in our crisis counts greatly weakens the
correlations of family control with instability and widely held banks with stability. Banking crises are rare
events, so further checking the broader generality of our findings requires extending our time period back
in time. We do this by counting all the crises covered in Demirguc-Kunt et al. (2006) plus Dell'Ariccia et
al. (2008), rather than just those dated after 1993. This extends our window back to 1980. We perform
this robustness check both with and without 2008 crises added to the total counts. Both generate
qualitatively similar results: family bank control is highly significant in explaining the number of banking
crises. For instance, when the 2008 crises is included, family bank control has a coefficient of 1.03 (p =
0.02). Many factors contribute to financial crises (Allen & Gale 2007); however, this evidence supports
bank control being numbered among them (Saunders et al. 1990; Laeven & Levine 2009), at least in some
time periods and some countries.

4.4

Efficiency versus Equality

Our findings above are consistent with family control over banks impairing financial system efficiency
and thereby both slowing and destabilizing economic growth. This aligns with arguments that economies
are subject to economic entrenchment, sometimes called crony capitalism, wherein incumbent business
leaders erect barriers to entry that lock in the advantageous (to them) status quo to the determinant of their
countries (Murphy et al. 1991, 1993; Shleifer & Vishny 1998b). Our findings also align with the thesis of
Rajan & Zingales (2004) and its supporting country case studies (Haber et al. 2003; La Porta et al. 2003),
that this entrenchment can be effected by elite capture of countries’ financial systems.
But other explanations of our findings must also be considered. For example, family-controlled
banks might simply be less competent capital allocators. Or, family-controlled banks might elevate social
goals, such as equality, above economic efficiency, consistent with the solidarity, or social capital

26

strengthening, advantages attributed to family businesses by e.g. Lester & Cannella (2006). However,
both of these seem implausible given that Caprio et al. (2007) find higher valuations for banks with
controlling shareholders.
We apply Ockham’s razor by testing for links between family-controlled banking systems and
economy characteristics correlated with crony capitalism. First, crony capitalism is associated with
extreme inequality. If family bank control abets crony capitalism, it should therefore correlate negatively
with measures of equality. Crony capitalism is also associated with high barriers to entry. Thus, if control
of the banking system alone is insufficient to achieve crony capitalism, family bank control should be
positively correlated with barriers to entry. Family bank incompetence, in contrast, has no clear prediction
regarding these variables; and the solidarity explanation would presumably imply greater income equality
and equality of opportunity.

[Table 8 about here]

The first two columns of Table 8, employing countries’ Gini coefficients, reveal significantly less
egalitarian income distributions in countries whose banking systems are more extensively controlled by
families. In contrast, state-controlled banking systems significantly correlate with more egalitarianism in
income distributions, as do widely held banking systems.
The next two columns gauge economic inequality by the economic importance of each country’s
greatest business families, as assessed by Fogel (2006). Family-controlled business empires are more
important in countries whose banking systems are more extensively controlled by families.
The remaining columns use various measures of equality of opportunity. Family control over
banks correlates negatively with PCs per thousand people, a measure of the breadth of access to new
economy employment and market opportunities. Alternative measures – car ownership, internet
connections, and telephone lines per capita – generate qualitatively similar results (not reported). Familycontrolled banks correlate with fewer, not more opportunities. Since these measures also likely correlate
with middle class purchasing power, they also reinforce our finding, based on Gini coefficients, that
family-controlled banking correlates with worse income inequality.

27

The last six columns relate banking system control to measures of barriers to entry directly due to
government bureaucratic procedures. All three measures – the number of procedures, time and cost
required to set up a new company legally – correlate positively with family-controlled banking and
negatively with widely held banking systems. In contrast, state control over banks is insignificant, except
for correlating with a higher cost of setting up a new firm.
These findings survive the battery of robustness checks enumerated in the previous section. All
the robustness checks used above generate qualitatively similar results to those shown in the table with
the following exceptions. If we restrict “family control” to mean control by tycoons or families who also
control other firms, family control remains significant except in regressions of the cost of starting a new
business and regressions controlling for privatizations of the number of procedures, the time required to
start a new business, and our oligarchy measure. However, if we use the instrumental variables in Table 7
to estimate the exogenous component this modified family banking control measure, it reasserts
significance throughout, save in regressions of the oligarchy measure.
Family control correlates positively with inequality, regardless of which dimension of inequality
we measure. Of course, correlations do not resolve causation; however correlations with third variables
relevant to one causal explanation and not others can further sharpen Ockham’s razor. We interpret these
findings as reinforcing the plausibility of family control over banking systems reflecting crony capitalism.

5.

Conclusions

Banks are vital intermediaries allocating capital in an economy; and in many economies, banks are the
only intermediaries available. Who controls the banks therefore matters. Controlling for capital market
development and initial GDP per capita, we find that national banking systems controlled more
predominantly by tycoons and families correlate with worse economy-level outcomes: less efficient
capital allocation, more nonperforming loans, more frequent bank crises, greater macro volatility, and
slower income and productivity growth rates. Of course, our results imply neither that all controlling
tycoons and families are entrenched nor that their control has these associations in all time periods and all
financial crises.
Recent work links crony capitalism, and the slow growth it entails, to elite capture of countries
financial systems (Morck, Stangeland & Yeung 2000, Rajan & Zingales 2003, Morck, Wolfenzon &

28

Yeung 2005, Acemoglu, Johnson & Robinson 2001, 2005). Rajan & Zingales 2003 posit a detailed
mechanism for this, whereby an initial cadre of entrepreneurs (or their heirs), made rich by their country’s
newly developed financial system, actively reverse that development to lock in their dominance by
starving entrants of capital. Since banks provide essential capital for new and small firms across countries
(Beck et al. 2008), control over the banking system is an obvious place to look for this effect. Consistent
with these arguments, we find family control over banks correlated with traditional signs of crony
capitalism, such as high inequality and barriers to entry.

29

Table 1
Control Structure of Banks across Countries
Family, state and widely held measure the fractions of banks (weighted by total credit) controlled by family groups,
governments and neither, respectively. Control is presumed to lie with the largest voting block of ten percent or
more. If no such block exists, we classify the bank as widely held. Banks is the number of banks in the country for
which we have ownership data. Code abbreviates the country’s name in the graphs. See Table 3 for variable
definitions and data sources.
Country
Code
Family
State
Widely held
# of Banks
Argentina
AR
0.40
0.51
0.10
5
Australia
AU
0.01
0.00
0.99
11
Austria
AT
0.00
0.00
1.00
6
Brazil
BR
0.59
0.27
0.13
12
Canada
CA
0.00
0.00
1.00
9
Chile
CL
0.71
0.29
0.00
5
Colombia
CO
0.41
0.18
0.41
4
Denmark
DK
0.01
0.00
0.99
9
Egypt
EG
0.02
0.98
0.00
9
Finland
FI
0.00
0.00
1.00
1
France
FR
0.00
0.00
1.00
8
Germany
DE
0.14
0.24
0.62
8
Greece
GR
0.36
0.56
0.08
10
Hong Kong
HK
0.27
0.08
0.65
7
India
IN
0.00
1.00
0.00
13
Indonesia
ID
0.04
0.91
0.05
12
Ireland
IE
0.00
0.00
1.00
7
Israel
IL
0.48
0.43
0.09
8
Italy
IT
0.11
0.00
0.89
9
Japan
JP
0.00
0.22
0.78
7
Jordan
JO
0.91
0.09
0.00
8
Kenya
KE
0.03
0.83
0.15
5
Korea
KR
0.03
0.38
0.59
9
Malaysia
MY
0.93
0.00
0.07
6
Mexico
MX
0.70
0.00
0.30
3
Netherlands
NL
0.00
0.22
0.78
3
Norway
NO
0.00
0.43
0.57
9
Pakistan
PK
0.04
0.96
0.00
4
Peru
PE
0.49
0.19
0.33
4
Philippines
PH
0.68
0.21
0.11
13
Portugal
PT
0.43
0.29
0.29
7
Singapore
SG
0.56
0.44
0.00
3
South Africa
ZA
0.64
0.01
0.34
5
Spain
ES
0.34
0.01
0.65
14
Sri Lanka
LK
0.00
0.59
0.41
6
Sweden
SE
0.30
0.00
0.70
4
Switzerland
CH
0.09
0.21
0.70
9
Taiwan
TW
0.17
0.74
0.09
14
Thailand
TH
0.54
0.46
0.00
7
Turkey
TR
0.48
0.32
0.21
11
United Kingdom
GB
0.21
0.00
0.79
6
United States
US
0.02
0.00
0.98
10
Venezuela
ZM
0.76
0.00
0.24
2
Zimbabwe
ZW
0.00
0.00
1.00
2

30

Table 2
Descriptive Statistics of Main Variables
Sample is the countries listed in Table 1; variables are defined in Table 3.
Mean

Median

Standard
Deviation

Maximum

Minimum

Panel A. Bank control indexes
1
Family
2
State
3
Widely held

0.27
0.27
0.46

0.16
0.21
0.38

0.29
0.31
0.38

0.93
1.00
1.00

0.00
0.00
0.00

Panel B. Financial system efficiency
4
Capital allocation efficiency, ’63-‘03
5
Capital allocation efficiency, ’93-‘03
6
Non-performing loans
7
Banking crises

0.54
0.43
8.12
0.23

0.55
0.47
5.88
0.00

0.28
0.42
7.42
0.48

1.12
1.32
27.43
2.00

-0.03
-1.02
0.45
0.00

0.02
0.02
-0.01
0.03

0.02
0.02
-0.01
0.02

0.02
0.01
0.01
0.02

0.07
0.07
0.01
0.08

-0.02
-0.01
-0.04
0.01

38.88
0.62
165.84
2.10
3.38
6.75

36.00
0.70
85.27
2.20
3.61
6.68

9.57
0.33
151.88
0.56
1.00
1.26

59.08
1.00
462.72
2.89
4.85
8.87

24.70
0.00
3.53
0.69
0.69
4.21

8.66
3.92
4.41
4.13
2.05

9.10
3.95
4.49
4.08
2.05

1.41
0.82
0.58
0.62
0.30

10.45
5.68
5.68
5.94
2.54

5.78
2.15
2.98
2.96
1.49

Panel C. Economic growth
8
Real GDP growth
9
TFP growth
10 Capital accumulation
11 Growth rate volatility
Panel D. Crony capitalism
12 Income inequality
13 Oligarchy
14 Computers
15 Number of Procedures
16 Time
17 Cost
Panel E. Main controls
18 Initial income
19 Stock market size
20 Banking system size
21 Trade openness
22 Human capital

31

Table 3
Variable Definitions and Sources
Panel A. Bank control
Family
Total 2001 credit-weighted fraction of listed and unlisted banks controlled by an individual or
family. Control is imputed to the largest blockholder whose voting control, direct and indirect,
sums to at least 10% for 2001 or the nearest year with data. Indirect control is inferred using the
“weakest link” method, as in La Porta et al. (1999). Sources: Caprio et al. (2007), BankScope.
State

Total credit-weighted fraction of banks controlled by state organs. Constructed analogously to
Family.

Widely held

Total credit-weighted fraction of banks with no controlling shareholder. Constructed analogously to
Family.

Panel B. Financial system efficiency
Capital
The efficiency of capital allocation is the estimated elasticity of manufacturing investment to value
allocation
added, estimated as in Wurgler (2000). Note: Two versions of this variable are used, one using all
efficiency
available data and the other using data for 1993 through 2003 only.
Nonperforming
loans

Ratio of nonperforming loans as a fraction of total gross loans, averaged over 1993 through 2003.
In regressions and correlations, this variable is log normalized by the formula: normalized [x] = ln
[x/(1-x)]. Source World Development Indicators (WDI).

Banking crises

The number of banking crises in each country covered in Demirguc-Kunt et al. (2006) plus
Dell'Ariccia et al. (2008) after 1993.

Banking crises
+2008

This variable adds 1 to “Banking crises” if governments directly intervened to large financial
institutions in 2008 and 2009 according to the IMF Global Financial Stability Report (April 2009).

Panel C. Economic Growth
Income
Real per capita GDP growth is the coefficient in an OLS regression of log real per capita GDP time
growth
trend and intercept as in Beck et al. (2000). Data are for 1993 through 2003, and are from Penn
World Tables.
TFP growth

Each country’s total factor productivity (TFP) growth is A in the production function Y = A Kα L1-α,
with Y, K, and L the country’s GDP, capital stock, and labor force, respectively; and with capital
share α = 0.03 as in Beck et al. (2000). Data are for 1993 through 2003, and are from Penn World
Tables.

Capital
accumulation

Average growth rate in capital stock from 1993 to 2003, assuming 1964 capital stocks are in steady
state and using aggregate real investment and 7% depreciation recursively to generate capital stock
estimates going forward, as in Beck et al. (2000). Data are from World Penn Tables.

Growth rate
volatility

Standard deviation of real GDP per capita growth, 1993-2003. Source: Calculated from World Penn
Tables data.

Panel D. Crony Capitalism
Income
Average Gini coefficients measure the deviation of income distribution from uniformity (Gini
inequality
1912), from 1993 through 2003, where data are available. Otherwise it is the average across
available data. Data are unavailable for most countries after 2001. In regressions and correlations,
this variable is log normalized by the formula: normalized [x] = ln [x/(1-x)]. Source: WDI.
Oligarchy

Fraction of the top ten largest (according to number of employees) non-financial private-sector
domestically-controlled freestanding businesses or business groups, including listed and unlisted
firms, controlled by business failies in 1996. In regressions and correlations, this variable is log
normalized by the formula: normalized [x] = ln [x/(1-x)]. Source: Fogel (2006).

PCs

Personal computers (PCs) per thousand people, averaged over 1993-2003. Personal computers are
defined as self-contained and designed for use by one person. Source: International

32

Telecommunication Union, World Telecommunication Development Report and database.
Downloaded from WDI.
Cars

Passenger cars per 1000 people, average over 1993-2003. Passenger cars refer to road motor
vehicles, other than two-wheelers, intended for the carriage of passengers and designed to seat no
more than nine people (including the driver). International Road Federation, World Road Statistics
and data files. Downloaded from WDI.

Telephone

Telephone lines per 1000 people, average over 1993-2003. Telephone mainlines are fixed telephone
lines connecting a subscriber to the telephone exchange equipment. Source: International
Telecommunication Union, World Telecommunication Development Report and database.
Downloaded from WDI.

Internet

Internet user per 100 people, average over 1993-2003. Internet users are people with access to the
worldwide network. International Telecommunication Union, World Telecommunication
Development Report and database. Downloaded from WDI.

Number of
Procedures

Log number of different procedures that a start-up has to comply with in order to obtain a legal
status, i.e. to start operating as a legal entity. Source Djankov et al. 2002.

Time

Log time it takes to obtain legal status to operate a firm, in business days. A week has five business
days and a month has twenty two. Source Djankov et al. 2002.

Cost

Log cost of obtaining legal status to operate a firm as a share of per capita GDP in 1999. It includes
all identifiable official expenses (fees, costs of procedures and forms, photocopies, fiscal stamps,
legal and notary charges, etc). The company is assumed to have a start-up capital of ten times per
capita GDP in 1999. Source Djankov et al. 2002.

Panel E. Controls
Initial income Logarithm of 1992 per capita GDP in US dollars at purchasing power parity. Source: Penn World
Tables.
Initial income
square

Square of logarithm of 1992 per capita GDP in US dollars at purchasing power parity. Source: Penn
World Tables.

Banking
system size

Log average credit outstanding to GDP averaged across 1993-2003. Source: World Development
Indicators, World Bank.

Stock market
size

Log of average stock market capitalization to GDP averaged across 1993-2003. Source: World
Development Indicators, World Bank.

Financial
development

Log sum of average stock market capitalization to GDP and average credit outstanding to GDP
averaged across 1993-2003. Source: World Development Indicators, World Bank.

Human capital

Log of average schooling years in total population aged 15 or over, 1990. Source: World
Development Indicators, World Bank.

Trade
openness

Log of trade/GDP: the sum of exports and imports of goods and services measured as a share of
gross domestic product, over GDP. Source: World Bank national accounts data, OECD National
Accounts data.

Africa Dummy

Equals to 1 if the country is located in sub-saharan Africa.

Inflation

Inflation rates are calculated using average annual CPI data from the International Financial
Statistics. Source Beck et al.(2000).

Size of the
government

Real general government consumption as the share of real GDP. Source: Beck et al.(2000).

Black market
premium

Source: Beck et al.(2000).

33

Average no. of
coups

Source: Beck et al.(2000).

Average no. of
assassinations

Source: Beck et al.(2000).

Ethnic
diversity

Source: Beck et al.(2000).

Panel F. Instrumental Variables
Predominant
Fraction of Catholics, Protestants, Muslims, Buddhists and “other religions” in a country, from the
religion
World Christian Encyclopedia (1995) as reported by Stulz & Williamson (2003).
Legal origin

These are dummy variables, from La Porta et al. (1998), indicating each country’s legal system as
having originated from British Common Law, the French Napoleonic Code, the German Civil
Code, or the Scandinavian system of legal codifications.

Latitude

Absolute value of average latitude of countries. Source: CIA Factbook.

34

Table 4
Main Variables: Simple Cross-sectional Correlation Coefficients
Variables are as defined in Table 3. Numbers in parentheses are probability levels for rejecting the null hypothesis of a zero correlation. Boldface indicates
significance at ten percent or better.
1
1.00

2

State

-0.20
(0.19)

1.00

3

Widely held

-0.60
(0.00)

-0.66
(0.00)

1.00

4

Capital allocation efficiency, ‘63-‘03

-0.21
(0.19)

-0.65
(0.00)

0.70
(0.00)

1.00

5

Capital allocation efficiency, ‘93-‘03

-0.30
(0.09)

-0.24
(0.18)

0.43
(0.01)

0.54
(0.00)

1.00

6

Non-performing loans

0.30
(0.05)

0.58
(0.00)

-0.70
(0.00)

-0.63
(0.00)

-0.37
(0.03)

1.00

7

Banking crises

0.35
(0.02)

0.01
(0.95)

-0.28
(0.07)

-0.26
(0.11)

0.02
(0.91)

0.32
(0.04)

1.00

8

Income growth

-0.25
(0.10)

0.03
(0.87)

0.17
(0.27)

0.16
(0.32)

0.13
(0.48)

-0.44
(0.00)

-0.30
(0.0)5

1.00

9

TFP growth

-0.20
(0.20)

0.13
(0.40)

0.04
(0.78)

0.05
(0.76)

0.05
(0.78)

-0.31
(0.04)

-0.30
(0.05)

0.97
(0.00)

1.00

10

Capital accumulation

-0.26
(0.09)

-0.40
(0.01)

0.52
(0.00)

0.43
(0.01)

0.31
(0.08)

-0.55
(0.00)

-0.07
(0.66)

0.33
(0.03)

0.09
(0.57)

1.00

11

Growth rate volatility

0.51
(0.00)

0.08
(0.60)

-0.45
(0.00)

-0.37
(0.02)

-0.31
(0.08)

0.48
(0.00)

0.36
(0.02)

-0.20
(0.20)

-0.14
(0.36)

-0.24
(0.12)

1.00

12

Initial income

-0.21
(0.19)

-0.59
(0.00)

0.63
(0.00)

0.66
(0.00)

0.51
(0.00)

-0.73
(0.00)

-0.23
(0.15)

0.18
(0.25)

0.06
(0.70)

0.49
(0.00)

-0.40
(0.01)

1

Family

2

3

4

35

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Table 5
Bank Control and Financial System Efficiency
The first 6 and final 2 columns show cross-country OLS regressions with robust standard errors. In the next two columns the coefficients are from negative binomial regressions
with robust standard errors. Next two columns are from Poisson regression because the negative binomial does not converge. Dependent variables are in columns and independent
variables are in rows. Variables are as defined in Table 3. P values are in parentheses.
Capital Allocation
Capital Allocation
Non-performing Loans
Banking Crises
Banking Crises
Growth Rate Volatility
Efficiency
Efficiency
+2008
1993-2003
1963-2003
Widely held
-0.836
-0.015
0.262
0.353
-1.312
-2.320
(0.19)
(0.12)
(0.08)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.01)
Family

-0.372
(0.04)

-0.284
(0.00)

1.287
(0.01)

3.152
(0.00)

1.239
(0.09)

0.028
(0.01)

State

-0.088
(0.67)

-0.462
(0.00)

1.349
(0.01)

1.085
(0.32)

0.197
(0.80)

-0.004
(0.74)

Banking system
size

0.067
(0.78)

0.119
(0.63)

0.003
(0.98)

-0.030
(0.71)

0.356
(0.26)

0.364
(0.20)

0.073
(0.92)

-0.496
(0.38)

-0.013
(0.98)

-0.189
(0.68)

0.002
(0.70)

-0.002
(0.71)

Stock market
size

0.086
(0.40)

0.045
(0.64)

0.053
(0.30)

0.083
(0.16)

-0.266
(0.24)

-0.274
(0.20)

-0.774
(0.09)

-0.454
(0.29)

-0.237
(0.48)

-0.117
(0.36)

0.001
(0.68)

0.005
(0.18)

Initial income

0.093
(0.04)

0.073
(0.16)

0.043
(0.15)

0.055
(0.05)

-0.398
(0.00)

-0.401
(0.00)

-0.105
(0.69)

0.160
(0.37)

0.138
(0.48)

0.199
(0.18)

-0.006
(0.09)

-0.004
(0.26)

Constant

-0.851
(0.30)

-0.999
(0.20)

0.155
(0.55)

-0.282
(0.21)

-0.715
(0.52)

0.622
(0.48)

0.490
(0.84)

1.811
(0.91)

-1.645
(0.77)

-1.067
(0.56)

0.057
(0.05)

0.059
(0.04)

0.35
33

0.33
33

0.61
39

0.59
39

0.65
43

0.65
43

0.21
43

0.16
43

0.03
43

0.02
43

0.37
43

0.25
43

R2
N

36

Table 6
Bank Control and Economic Growth
The table shows results of cross-country OLS regressions with robust standard errors. Dependent variables
are in columns and independent variables are in rows. Variables are as defined in Table 3. P values are in
parentheses.
Income Growth
Widely held
Family

TFP Growth

0.015
(0.16)

Capital Accumulation

0.010
(0.34)

0.016
(0.00)

-0.035
(0.01)

-0.030
(0.03)

-0.015
(0.19)

State

-0.003
(0.78)

0.002
(0.82)

-0.016
(0.05)

Human capital

0.012
(0.19)

0.015
(0.18)

0.011
(0.19)

0.014
(0.16)

0.004
(0.77)

0.004
(0.77)

Trade openness

0.003
(0.49)
0.006
(0.28)

0.003
(0.59)
0.008
(0.17)

0.005
(0.26)
0.004
(0.43)

0.005
(0.33)
0.006
(0.29)

-0.006
(0.02)
0.005
(0.27)

-0.006
(0.02)
0.005
(0.32)

0.005
(0.24)

0.002
(0.69)

0.005
(0.25)

0.001
(0.76)

0.001
(0.69)

0.001
(0.66)

-0.023
(0.07)

-0.024
(0.05)

-0.022
(0.08)

-0.023
(0.06)

-0.004
(0.53)

-0.004
(0.54)

-0.004
(0.09)

-0.001
(0.60)

-0.004
(0.10)

-0.001
(0.73)

-0.001
(0.57)

-0.001
(0.24)

R2

0.064
(0.12)
-0.280
(0.13)
0.41

0.011
(0.76)
-0.077
(0.62)
0.31

0.058
(0.13)
-0.252
(0.14)
0.39

0.004
(0.91)
-0.041
(0.77)
0.28

0.021
(0.57)
-0.094
(0.54)
0.45

0.023
(0.24)
-0.120
(0.17)
0.45

N

43

43

43

43

43

43

Banking system size
Stock market size
Africa dummy
Initial income square
Initial Income
Constant

37

Table 7
Instrumental Variable Regressions
Panel A1 summarizes the control structure of banks by a country’s legal origin, largest religion and capital
city latitude. Numbers reported are fractions of top ten banks classified as widely held, family, or statecontrolled. Religion dummies are one for the most commonly practiced in that country and zero for all
others. Latitude dummies represent membership in latitude absolute value quartiles, with one designating
lowest latitudes. Panel A2 reports LR statistics first stage Tobit regressions (censored at 0 and 1) predicting
bank control proportions, one LR for each set of control variables used. Panels B and C replicate Tables 5
and 6 respectively, but as second-stage regressions using the first-stage estimated bank control proportions.
Numbers in parentheses are p-levels. Variables are as defined in Table 3.
Panel A Instrumental Variables Verification
A1. Mean banking system control breakdowns in countries, by legal origin, religion, and latitude.
Widely held
Family
State
Legal origin
British Common Law
0.467
0.233
0.300
French Napoleonic Code
0.309
0.413
0.278
German Civil Code
0.629
0.072
0.299
Scandinavian
0.816
0.076
0.108
Principal
Catholic
0.525
0.336
0.139
religion
Muslim
0.053
0.405
0.542
Protestant
0.703
0.125
0.172
Others
0.310
0.238
0.452
Latitude
Lowest quartile
0.173
0.457
0.37
Second quartile
0.307
0.316
0.377
Third quartile
0.514
0.240
0.246
Highest quartile
0.832
0.068
0.1
A2. First stage regression LR Chi-Square statistics and p-levels (in parentheses)
Regressions with
Widely held
Family
State
Controls for economic growth determinants
41.73
54.82
33.19
(0.000008)
(0.000000)
(0.000124)
All other regressions
32.90
32.30
25.54
(0.000011)
(0.000036)
(0.000110)

Panel B Instrumental Variable Regressions (Table 5)

Widely held
Family
State

Capital
Allocation
Eff, (93-03)
0.593
(0.27)
-0.743
(0.05)
0.423
(0.53)

Capital
Non-performing Banking Crises
Allocation
Loans
Eff, (63-03)
0.587
-5.338
-6.589
(0.06)
(0.00)
(0.03)
-0.422
3.923
5.180
(0.08)
(0.00)
(0.05)
-0.705
3.688
6.386
(0.13)
(0.85)
(0.00)

Banking Crises
+ 2008

Growth Rate
Volatility

-3.047
(0.20)
2.849
(0.08)
3.638
(0.28)

-0.082
(0.01)
0.060
(0.01)
0.070
(0.09)

Panel C Instrumental Variable Regressions (Table 6)
Income Growth TFP Growth
Widely held
Family
State

0.105
(0.02)
-0.058
(0.03)
-0.018
(0.51)

0.077
(0.10)
-0.042
(0.11)
0.007
(0.77)

Capital
Accumulation
0.093
(0.00)
-0.052
(0.00)
-0.041
(0.25)

38

Table 8
Consistency with Crony Capitalism
The table shows cross-country OLS regressions with robust standard errors. Dependent variables are in columns and independent variables are in rows. Variables are as defined in Table
3. P values are in parentheses.
Equality of Outcomes
Income Inequality
(Gini coefficient)

Oligarchy
(top families’ holdings)

-0.266
(0.08)

Widely held

Equality of Opportunity
PCs per thousand
population

-1.59
(0.04)

Difficulty starting a new company legally
Number of procedures
Time
Cost

118
(0.00)

-0.785
(0.00)

-1.136
(0.02)

-1.39
(0.00)

Family

0.629
(0.00)

1.98
(0.02)

-189
(0.00)

1.028
(0.00)

1.440
(0.00)

1.277
(0.02)

State

-0.275
(0.10)

1.11
(0.21)

-11.5
(0.82)

0.415
(0.17)

0.674
(0.15)

1.571
(0.00)

Banking system size

-0.174
(0.10)

-0.303
(0.01)

0.520
(0.48)

0.573
(0.43)

-37.5
(0.17)

-12.1
(0.61)

0.242
(0.08)

0.154
(0.20)

0.130
(0.59)

0.020
(0.93)

0.506
(0.17)

0.548
(0.13)

Stock market size

0.103
(0.13)

0.229
(0.01)

-0.675
(0.16)

-0.653
(0.17)

63.0
(0.00)

39.9
(0.04)

-0.382
(0.00)

-0.302
(0.00)

-0.545
(0.00)

-0.446
(0.01)

-0.583
(0.02)

-0.621
(0.00)

Initial income

-0.130
(0.01)

-0.098
(0.07)

-0.445
(0.04)

-0.400
(0.02)

72.9
(0.00)

63.0
(0.00)

0.001
(0.98)

0.036
(0.58)

-0.102
(0.25)

-0.059
(0.55)

0.880
(0.00)

0.863
(0.00)

Constant

0.924
(0.01)

0.947
(0.03)

3.93
(0.21)

4.74
(0.05)

-493
(0.00)

-537
(0.00)

2.132
(0.00)

2.662
(0.00)

5.261
(0.00)

6.078
(0.00)

-1.570
(0.17)

-0.054
(0.96)

0.60

0.40

0.60

0.56

0.86

0.80

0.44

0.39

0.49

0.46

0.57

0.57

42

42

27

27

43

43

43

43

43

43

43

43

R2
N

39

Figure 1. Capital Allocation Efficiency and the Control of Banks
The vertical axis is the capital allocation efficiency (1963-2003), and the horizontal axes in panels
A, B, and C are, respectively, the fractions of family-controlled, state-controlled, and widely held
banks, as in Table 3. Observations are labeled with country codes, as defined in Table 1.
Panel A. Family-controlled banks

Panel B. State-controlled banks

Panel C. Widely held banks

40

References
Acemoglu Daron, Johnson, Simon and Robinson, James. 2001. The colonial origins of
comparative development: an empirical investigation. The American Economic
Review 91 5, 1369-1401.
Acemoglu Daron, Johnson, Simon and Robinson, James. 2005. Institutions as the
fundamental cause of long-run economic growth. In: Philippe Aghion & Stephen
Durlauf, Editors, Handbook of Economic Growth, North Holland.
Adolfo, Figueroa. 2008. Competition and Circulation of Economic Elites: Theory and
Application to the Case of Peru. p. 263.
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt. 1997. Endogenous Growth Theory. MIT Press.
Allen, Franklin and Gale, Douglas. 2007. Understanding Financial Crises, Oxford
University Press.
Almeida, Heitor and Daniel Wolfenzon. 2005. Should business groups be dismantled?
The equilibrium costs of efficient internal capital markets. Journal of Financial
Economics, forthcoming.
Almeida, Heitor V. and Wolfenzon, Daniel. 2006. A theory of pyramidal ownership and
family business groups. Journal of Finance 61 6, 2637-2680.
Anderson, Ronald and David Reeb. 2003. Founding-family ownership and firm
performance: evidence from the S&P 500. Journal of Finance 58(3) 1301-1329.
Anderson, Ronald C., Mansi, Sattar A. and Reeb, David M. 2003. Founding family
ownership and the agency cost of debt. Journal of Financial Economics 68, 263285.
Ararat, Melsa and Ugur, Mehmet. 2003. Corporate governance in Turkey: an overview
and some policy recommendations. Corporate Governance: An International
Review 3, 58-75.
Bankscope. Bureau Van Dijk Electronic Publishing, www.bankscope.com.
Barro, Robert J. 1997. Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Empirical
Study. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Barro, Robert J. and Lee, Jong W. 1996. International measures of schooling years and
schooling quality. American Economic Review 86 2, 218-223.
Barro, Robert, J. 1991. Economic growth in a cross section of countries. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 106 2, 407-443.
Barro, Robert, J. 2001. Human capital and growth. The American Economic Review 91,
12-17.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye, Kraakman, Reinier, Triantis, George G. & Morck, Randall K.
2000. Stock pyramids, cross-ownership, and dual class equity: the mechanisms
and agency costs of separating control from cash-flow rights. In: Randall Morck,
Editor, Concentrated Corporate Ownership. University of Chicago Press, NBER
Conference Report series. Chicago and London, 295-315.
Beck, Thorsten and Levine, Ross. 2002. Industry growth and capital allocation: does
having a market- or bank-based system matter? Journal of Financial Economics
64 2, 147-180.
Beck, Thorsten, Levine, Ross and Loayza, Norman. 2000. Finance and the sources of
growth. Journal of Financial Economics 58 1-2, 261–300.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, & Vojislav Maksimovic. 2008. Financing patterns
around the world: Are small firms different? Journal of Financial Economics.
89(3) 467
41

Bennedsen, Morten, Nielsen, Kasper Meisner, Pérez-González, Francisco and
Wolfenzon, Daniel. 2007. Inside the family firm: the role of families in
succession decisions and performance. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, 647691.
Bertrand, Marianne and Antoinette Schoar. 2006. The role of family in family firms.
Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(2) 73-96.
Bertrand, Marianne, Mehto, Paras and Mullainathan, Sendhil. 2002. Ferreting out
tunneling: an application to Indian business groups. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117 1, 121-148.
Boubakri, Narjess, Cosset, Jean-Claude, Fischer, Klaus, and Guedhami, Omrane. 2005.
Privatization and bank performance in developing countries. Journal of Banking
& Finance 29, 2015-2041.
Burkart, Mike, Panunzi, Fausto and Shleifer, Andrei. 2003. Family firms. Journal of
Finance 58 5, 2167-2201.
Caprio, Gerard, Laeven, Luc and Levine, Ross. 2007. Governance and bank valuation.
Journal of Financial Intermediation 16 4, 584-617.
Chandler, Alfred D. 1977. The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American
Business. Belknap Press, Cambridge, MA.
Claessens, Stijn, Djankov, Simeon and Lang, Larry H.P. 2000. The separation of
ownership and control in East Asian corporations. Journal of Financial
Economics 58 1-2, 81-112.
Claessens, Stijn, Djankov, Simeon, Fan, Joseph P.H. and Lang, Larry H.P. 2002.
Disentangling the incentive and entrenchment effects of large shareholdings.
Journal of Finance 57 6, 2741-2771.
Cueto, Diego C. 2008. Corporate governance and ownership structure in emerging
markets: evidence from Latin America. SSRN.
Daniels, Ronald R. and Trebilcock, Michael J. 2008. Rule of Law Reform and
Development: Charting the Fragile Path of Progress. Elgar.
Dell'Ariccia, Giovanni, Detragiache, Enrica and Rajan, Raghuram. 2008. The real effect
of banking crises. Journal of Financial Intermediation 17, 89-112.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Levine, Ross. 1996. Stock markets, corporate finance, and
economic growth: an overview. World Bank Economic Review 10, 223-239.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Maksimovic, Vojislav. 1998. Law, finance and firm growth.
Journal of Finance 53 6, 2107-2137.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, Detragiache, Enrica and Gupta, Poonam. 2006. Inside the crisis: an
empirical analysis of banking systems in distress. Journal of International Money
and Finance 25, 702-718.
Demsetz, Harold and Lehn, Kenneth. 1985. The Structure of Corporate Ownership:
Causes and Consequences. Journal of Political Economy 93 6 1155-77.
Diamond, Douglas W. 1984. Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring. Review
of Economic Studies 51, 393-414.
Dinc, I. Serdar. 2005.Politicians and banks: Political influences on government-owned
banks in emerging markets. Journal of Financial Economics 77 2, 453-479.Djankov,
Simeon, Jindra, Jan and Klapper, Leora F. 2005. Corporate valuation and the resolution
of bank insolvency in East Asia. Journal of Banking & Finance 29, 2095-2118.
Djankov, Simeon, La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio and Shleifer, Andrei.
2002. The regulation of entry. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1-37.
42

Djankov, Simeon, La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio and Shleifer, Andrei.
2006. The Law and Economics of Self-Dealing. Journal of Financial Economics
88 430-465.
Dornbusch, Rudiger and Edwards, Sebastian. 1992. The Macroeconomics of Populism in
Latin America. University of Chicago Press.
Dyck, Alexander and Luigi Zingales. 2004. Private Benefits of Control: An International
Comparison. Journal of Finance 59 2 537-600.
Faccio, Mara and Lang, Larry H.P. 2002. The ultimate ownership of Western European
corporations. Journal of Financial Economics 65 3, 365-395.
Faccio, Mara, Masulis, Ronald W. and McConnell, John J. 2006. Political connections
and corporate bailouts. Journal of Finance 61 6, 2597-2635.
Faccio, Mara. 2006. Politically connected firms. American Economic Review 96 1, 369386.
Fisman, Raymond and Edward Miguel. 2008. Economic Gangsters: Corruption,
Violence, and the Poverty of Nations. Princeton University Press.
Fisman, Raymond and Khanna, Tarun. 2004. Facilitating development: the role of
business groups. World Development 32 4, 609-628.
Fogel, Kathy, Morck, Randall and Yeung, Bernard. 2008. Big business stability and
economic growth: is what's good for General Motors good for America? Journal
of Financial Economics 89 1, 83-108.
Fogel, Kathy. 2006. Oligarchic family control, social economic outcomes, and the quality
of government. Journal of International Business Studies 37 5, 603-622
Franks, Julian, Mayer, Colin, Rossi, Stefano and Morck, Randall K. 2005. Spending less
time with the family: the decline of family ownership in the United Kingdom. In:
Randall Morck, Editor, A History of Corporate Governance around the World:
Family Business Groups to Professional Managers. University of Chicago Press,
National Bureau of Economic Research Conference Report. Chicago and London,
581-607.
Gentry, William and Hubbard, R. Glenn. 2000. Tax policy and entrepreneurial entry. The
American Economic Review 90, 283-287.
Gini, Corrado. 1921. Measurement of inequality and incomes. Economic Journal 31,
124-126.
Glaeser, Edward, Jose Scheinkman and Andrei Shleifer. 2003. The injustice of inequality.
Journal of Monetary Economics 50 199-222.
Gordon, Robert J. and Dew-Becker, Ian. 2007. Unresolved issues in the rise of American
inequality. Working paper. Brookings Panel on Economic Activity, Washington,
DC, September 7.
Haber, Stephen H., Maurer, Noel and Razo, Armando. 2003. The Politics of Property
Rights: Political Instability, Credible Commitments, and Economic Growth in
Mexico, 1876-1929. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, New York.
Haber, Stephen, ed. 2002. Crony Capitalism and Economic Growth in Latin America:
Theory and Evidence. Stanford: Hoover Institution.
Hall, Robert E. and Jones, Charles I. 1999. Why some countries produce so much more
output per worker than others? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 1, 83116.

43

Hellman, Joel, Geraint Jones and Daniel Kaufmann. 2003. Seize the state, seize the day:
state capture and influence in transition economies. Journal of Comparative
Economics 31 4, 751-773.
Hogenboom, Barbara. 2004. Economic concentration and conglomerates in Mexico.
Journal of Developing Societies 20, 207-225.
Högfeldt, Peter. 2005. The history and politics of corporate ownership in Sweden. In:
Randall Morck, Editor, A History of Corporate Governance around the World:
Family Business Groups to Professional Managers. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, 517-580.
John, K., Litov, L., Yeung, B., 2008. Corporate governance and managerial risk taking:
theory and evidence. Journal of Finance 63, 1679-1728.
Johnson, Simon, La Porta Rafael, Lopez-De-Silanes, Florencio, and Shleifer, Andrei.
2000. Tunneling. American Economic Review 90 2 22-27.
Khanna, Tarun & Rivkin, Jan. 2001. Estimating the performance effects of business
groups in emerging markets. Strategic Management Journal 22, 45-74.
Khanna, Tarun & Yafeh, Yishay. 2005. Business groups and risk sharing around the
world. Journal of Business 78 1, 301-340.
Khanna, Tarun & Yafeh, Yishay. 2007. Business groups in emerging markets: paragons
or parasites? Journal of Economic Literature 45 2, 331-372.
Khanna, Tarun and Palepu, Krishna. 2000. Is group affiliation profitable in emerging
markets? An analysis of diversified Indian business groups. Journal of Finance 55
2, 867-891.
Khanna, Tarun, Palepu, Krishna and Garten, Jeffrey E. 2000. Why focused strategies may
be wrong for emerging markets. In: World View: Global Strategies for the New
Economy. Harvard Business School Press, Harvard Business Review Book Series.
Boston, 21-36.
Khanna, Tarun. 2008. Billions of Entrepreneurs: How China and India Are Reshaping
Their Futures--and Yours. Harvard Business School Press.
Kindleberger, Charles & Robert Aliber.2005. Manias, Panics and Crashes. Wiley.
King, Robert G. & Levine, Ross. 1993a. Finance and growth: Schumpeter might be right.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 717-737.
King, Robert G. & Levine, Ross. 1993b. Finance, entrepreneurship, and growth: theory
and evidence. Journal of Monetary Economics 32, 513-542.
Krueger, Anne O. 1974. The political economy of the rent-seeking society. American
Economic Review 64, 13.
Krueger, Anne O. 1998. Why trade liberalisation is good for growth. The Economic
Journal 108, 1513-1522.
Krueger, Anne O. 2002. Why crony capitalism is bad for economic growth. In: S.H.
Haber, Editor, Crony Capitalism and Economic Growth in Latin America: Theory
and Evidence. Hoover Institution Press, Stanford, CA. 1-23.
Krueger, Anne, O. 2004. Wilful ignorance: the struggle to convince the free trade
skeptics. World Trade Review 3, 483-493.
La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio & Shleifer, Andrei. 1999. Corporate
ownership around the world. Journal of Finance 54 2, 471-517.
La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio & Shleifer, Andrei. 2002. Government
ownership of banks. Journal of Finance 57 1, 265-301.
44

La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio & Shleifer, Andrei. 2002. Investor
protection and corporate valuation. Journal of Finance 57 3, 1147-1170.
La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio & Shleifer, Andrei. 2006. What works in
securities laws? Journal of Finance 61 1, 1-32.
La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio & Shleifer, Andrei. 2008. The economic
consequences of legal origins. Journal of Economic Literature 46 2, 285-332.
La Porta, Rafael, López-de-Silanes, Florencio & Zamarripa, Guillermo. 2003. Related
lending. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 1, 231-268.
La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei, & Vishny, Robert W.
1997. Legal determinants of external finance. Journal of Finance 52 3, 11311150.
La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei, & Vishny, Robert W.
1998. Law and finance. The Journal of Political Economy 106 6, 1113-1155.
Laeven, Luc, Levine Ross. 2009. Bank governance, regulation and risk taking. Journal of
Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Lauterbach, Beni & Alexander Vaninsky. 1999. Ownership structure and firm
performance: evidence from Israel. Journal of Management and Governance 3:
189–201.
Lester, Richard H. & Cannella, Albert A. 2006. Interorganizational families: how family
firms use interlocking directorates to build community-level social capital.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 30 6, 755-775.
Levine, Ross & Zervos, Sara. 1998. Stock markets, banks, and economic growth.
American Economic Review 88, 537-558.
Levine, Ross, Loayza, Norman & Beck, Thorsten. 2000. Financial intermediation and
growth: causality and causes. Journal of Monetary Economics 46, 31-77.
Levine, Ross. 1991. Stock markets, growth, and tax policy. Journal of Finance 46 4,
1445-1465.
Levine, Ross. 1996. Stock markets: a spur to economic growth. Finance and
Development 33, 7-10.
Levine, Ross. 2002. Bank-based or market-based financial systems: which is better?
Journal of Financial Intermediation 11, 398-428.
Lewis, W. Arthur. 1950, Principles of Economic Planning. London: G. Allen & Unwin.
MacIntyre, Andrew, Pempel, T.J. & Ravenhill, John. 2008. Crisis as Catalyst: Asia's
Dynamic Political Economy. Cornell University Press.
Maman, Daniel. 1999. Research note: Interlocking ties within business groups in Israel--a
longitudinal analysis, 1974-1987. Organization Studies 20, 323-339.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, Romer, David & Weil, David N. 1992. A contribution to the
empirics of economic growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 407.
Megginson, William L. 2004. The economics of bank privatization. SSRN working
paper.
Megginson, William L., Nash, Robert C., Netter, Jeffrey M., & Poulsen, Annette B.
2004. The choice of private versus public capital markets: evidence from
privatizations. Journal of Finance 59 6, 2835-2870.
Morck, Randall & Nakamura, Masao. 2007. Business groups and the big push: Meiji
Japan's mass privatization and subsequent growth. Enterprise and Society 8 3,
543-601.
45

Morck, Randall & Yeung, Bernard. 2004. Family control and the rent-seeking society.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 28 4, 391-409.
Morck, Randall K., Percy, Michael, Tian, Gloria Y., & Yeung, Bernard. 2005. The rise
and fall of the widely held firm: a history of Corporate ownership in Canada. In:
Randall Morck, Editor, A History of Corporate Governance around the World:
Family Business Groups to Professional Managers. University of Chicago Press,
National Bureau of Economic Research Conference Report. Chicago and London,
65-140.
Morck, Randall K., Stangeland, David A. & Yeung, Bernard. 2000. Inherited wealth,
corporate control, and economic growth: the Canadian disease? In: Randall
Morck, Editor, Concentrated Corporate Ownership. University of Chicago Press,
NBER Conference Report series. Chicago and London, 319-369.
Morck, Randall, Wolfenzon, Daniel & Yeung, Bernard. 2005. Corporate governance,
economic entrenchment, and growth. Journal of Economic Literature 43 3, 655720.
Murphy, Kevin M., Shleifer, Andrei & Vishny, Robert W. 1991. The allocation of talent:
implications for growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 2, 503-530.
Murphy, Kevin M., Shleifer, Andrei & Vishny, Robert W. 1993. Why is rent-seeking so
costly to growth? American Economic Review 83 2, 409-414.
Murphy, Kevin, Andrei Shleifer, & Robert Vishny. 1989. Industrialization & the big
push. Journal of Political Economy 97 1003-1026.
Nakamura, Masao. 2002. Mixed ownership of industrial firms in Japan: debt financing,
banks and vertical keiretsu groups. Economic Systems 26, 16.
Nenova. Tatiana. 2003. The value of corporate voting rights and control: A cross-country
analysis. Journal of Financial Economics 68 3 325-351.
North, Douglass C. 1989. Institutions and economic growth: an historical introduction.
World Development 17(9) 1319-1332.
Orbay, Hakan & Yurtoglu, B. Burcin. 2006. The impact of corporate governance
structures on the corporate investment performance in Turkey. Corporate
Governance: An International Review, 349-363.
Perotti, Enrico & Paolo Volpin. 2006. Investor protection and entry. Tinbergen Institute
Discussion Paper No. 07-006/2.
Perotti, Enrico & Vorage, Marcel. 2008. Political allocation of finance. Working Paper.
Rajan, Raghuram G. & Zingales, Luigi. 1998. Financial dependence and growth.
American Economic Review 88 3, 559-586.
Rajan, Raghuram G. & Zingales, Luigi. 2003. The great reversals: the politics of financial
development in the twentieth century. Journal of Financial Economics 69 1, 5-50.
Rajan, Raghuram G. & Zingales, Luigi. 2004. Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists:
Unleashing the Power of Financial Markets To Create Wealth and Spread
Opportunity. Princeton University Press.
Rogers, Pablo, Dami, Anamélia T., Ribeiro, Kárem C., & Ferreira De Sousa, Almir.
2007. Corporate governance and ownership structure in Brazil: causes and
consequences. Journal of Corporate Ownership & Control 5 2, 36-54.
Rosenstein-Rodan, Paul. 1943. Problems of industrialization of Eastern & South- Eastern
Europe. Economic Journal 53(210/211) 202-211.
Saunders, Anthony, Elizabeth Strock and Nickolaos G. Travlos. 1990. Ownership
Structure, Deregulation, and Bank Risk Taking. Journal of Finance 45 2 643-654.
46

Schouten, Michael & Mathias Siems. 2009. The evolution of ownership disclosure rules
across countries. Columbia Law School working paper.
Schumpeter, Joseph Alois. 1912. Theorie der Wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung. Duncker &
Humblot, Leipzig.
Schumpeter, Joseph Alois. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. Harper &
Brothers, New York, London.
Schumpeter, Joseph Alois. 1951. Imperialism and Social Classes. A.M. Kelly, New
York.
Sen, Amartya. 1992. Inequality Reexamined. Harvard University Press.
Shleifer, Andrei & Vishny, Robert W. 1986. Large shareholders and corporate control.
Journal of Political Economy 94 3, 461-488.
Shleifer, Andrei & Vishny, Robert W. 1998a. The Grabbing Hand: Government
Pathologies and Their Cures. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Shleifer, Andrei & Vishny, Robert W. 1998b. The Grabbing Hand: Government
Pathologies and Their Cures. Harvard University Press, Cambridge and London.
Solow, Robert M. 1956. A contribution to the theory of economic growth. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 70, 65-94.
Stock, James H. & Yogo, Motohiro. 2004. Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV
Regression. Working paper.
Stulz, René M. 1988, Managerial control of voting rights: Financing policies and the
market for corporate control. Journal of Financial Economics 20 25-54
Stulz, René M. & Williamson, Rohan. 2003. Culture, openness and finance. Journal of
Financial Economics 70, 313-349.
Stulz, René M. 2005. The limits of financial globalization. Journal of Finance 60 4,
1595-1638.
Taboada, Alvaro G. 2008. Impact of changes in government ownership of banks on the allocation
of capital: International evidence. Working paper.
Tobin, James. 1989. On the efficiency of the financial system. In: C. Johnson, Editor, The

Market on Trial. Columbia University Press, New York, 125-138.
Villalonga, Belen & Amit, Raphael. 2006. How do family ownership, control, and
management affect firm value? Journal of Financial Economics 80 2, 385-417.
Villalonga, Belén & Amit, Raphael. 2008. How are U.S. family firms controlled? Review
of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Wurgler, Jeffrey. 2000. Financial markets and the allocation of capital. Journal of
Financial Economics 58 1-2 187-214.

47

