                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE GLOBAL AGGLOMERATION OF MULTINATIONAL FIRMS

                                             Laura Alfaro
                                             Maggie Chen

                                         Working Paper 15576
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15576


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2009




We are very grateful to the Editor Stephen Yeaple and two anonymous referees for their insightful
comments and suggestions. We thank Jim Anderson, Bruce Blonigen, James Harrigan, Keith Head,
Tarun Khanna, Jim Markusen, Keith Maskus, Mike Moore, Henry Overman, John Ries, Roberto Samaneigo,
Tony Yezer, and seminar and conference participants at Harvard Business School, University of Virginia
Darden School of Business, George Washington University, the AEA meeting, the ETSG meeting,
the EIIT meeting, and the LACEA Trade, Integration and Growth Meeting for helpful suggestions,
William Kerr for discussions on the agglomeration indices and kindly providing us the patent concordance
data, Bill Simpson for advice on computing the indices, John Elder, Elizabeth Meyer, Francisco Pino,
and Hillary White for research assistance, Dennis Jacques for help with the D&B dataset, and HBS
and GW for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Laura Alfaro and Maggie Chen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Global Agglomeration of Multinational Firms
Laura Alfaro and Maggie Chen
NBER Working Paper No. 15576
December 2009, Revised October 2014
JEL No. D2,F2,R1,R3

                                            ABSTRACT

The explosion of multinational activities in recent decades is rapidly transforming the global landscape
of industrial production. But are the emerging clusters of multinational production the rule or the
exception? What drives the offshore agglomeration of multinational firms in comparison to the
agglomeration of domestic firms? Using a unique worldwide plant-level dataset that reports detailed
location, ownership, and operation information for plants in over 100 countries, we construct a
spatially continuous index of agglomeration and analyze the different patterns underlying the global
economic geography of multinational and non-multinational firms. We present new stylized facts
that suggest the offshore clusters of multinationals are not a simple reflection of domestic industrial
clusters. Agglomeration economies including technology diffusion and capital-good market externality
play a more important role in the offshore agglomeration of multinationals than the agglomeration
of domestic firms. These findings remain robust when we explore the process of agglomeration.


Laura Alfaro
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 263
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lalfaro@hbs.edu

Maggie Chen
Dept. of Economics
George Washington University
2115 G ST, NW, #367
Washington, DC 20052
xchen@gwu.edu
1    Introduction
The explosion of multinational activities in recent decades is rapidly transforming the global
landscape of industrial production. But are the emerging clusters of multinational corporations
(MNCs) the rule or the exception? What drives the o¤shore agglomeration of MNCs in compari-
son to the agglomeration of domestic …rms? In this paper, we examine the patterns of the global
agglomeration of multinational production— both o¤shore and at headquarters— in comparison
to the agglomeration of domestic …rms.
    We quantify and characterize the global agglomeration of multinational and domestic …rms
to establish new insights into how …rms of di¤erent organizational forms might agglomerate
di¤erently. We use the term agglomeration broadly to explore the geographic concentration
of production activities.1 As highlighted in a growing literature led by Helpman, Melitz, and
Yeaple (2004) and Antras and Helpman (2004, 2008), the economic attributes and organizations
of multinationals are, by selection, di¤erent from those of domestic …rms. The greater revenue
and productivity, the vertically integrated production, and the higher knowledge- and capital-
intensities all suggest that the agglomeration motives of MNC o¤shore subsidiaries are likely to
be di¤erent from those of domestic …rms.
    We use WorldBase, a worldwide plant-level dataset that provides detailed location, owner-
ship, and activity information for over 43 million plants— including multinational and domestic,
o¤shore and headquarters establishments— in more than 100 countries. This dataset makes it
possible to compare the agglomeration of di¤erent types of establishment. We use the plant-level
physical location information to obtain latitude and longitude codes for each establishment and
compute the distance between each pair of establishments.
    To quantify the agglomeration patterns, we construct an index of agglomeration at both
the pairwise industry level and the plant level by extending an empirical methodology intro-
duced by Duranton and Overman (2005) (henceforth, "DO"). The index measures the extent
of geographic localization and the spatial scale at which it takes place. It …rst estimates the
actual density function of distance between MNC establishments and then compares that den-
sity function with the counterfactual. In our main analysis, we use the distance density function
of domestic establishments in the same industry as the counterfactual to control for the role of
location fundamentals that a¤ect both MNC and domestic plants. The index thus quanti…es the
extent to which MNC establishments are more or less likely to agglomerate than their domes-
tic counterparts. In contrast to traditional indices, which tend to de…ne agglomeration as the
amount of activity taking place in a particular geographic unit, the index constructed in this
paper is spatially continuous and thus unbiased with respect to the scale of geographic units and
the level of spatial aggregation.
    Our analysis presents a rich array of new stylized facts that shed light on the worldwide
   1
     We use the term "agglomeration" to refer to both within- and between-industry agglomeration (the latter
sometimes referred to as "coagglomeration"). Such broad usage of the term "agglomeration" is fairly common in
the literature.


                                                     1
agglomeration patterns of multinational and domestic …rms. We show that the o¤shore agglom-
eration patterns of MNCs are distinctively di¤erent from those of their headquarters and their
domestic counterparts. First, across di¤erent types of establishment, multinational headquarters
are, on average, the most agglomerative. For example, the average probability of agglomeration
at 50 kilometers (km) is 0.8 for MNC headquarters, 0.48 percent for MNC foreign subsidiaries,
and 0.43 percent for domestic plants. Second, the agglomeration of multinational foreign sub-
sidiaries exhibits a low correlation with the agglomeration of domestic plants, suggesting that the
o¤shore clusters of MNCs are not merely a projection of the domestic clusters. Third, multina-
tional foreign subsidiaries are signi…cantly more agglomerative than domestic plants in capital-,
skilled-labor-, and R&D-intensive industries. For example, in industries with above-median cap-
ital intensity, the probability of agglomeration at 50 km is, on average, 0.1 percentage point (or
equivalently 23 percent) higher for MNC foreign subsidiaries than for domestic plants.
   We then further explore the stylized facts and analyze how di¤erent agglomeration economies—
including input-output linkages, labor and capital-good market externalities, and technology
di¤usion— might account for the variations in the agglomeration patterns of MNC and domestic
establishments. Our empirical analysis shows that the relative importance of the agglomeration
forces varies sharply for MNC o¤shore subsidiaries, MNC headquarters, and domestic plants. The
potential bene…ts of technology di¤usion and capital-good market externality play a signi…cantly
stronger role in the agglomeration of MNCs’foreign subsidiaries than in the agglomeration of do-
mestic plants in the same industry. For example, a 10-percentage-point increase in industry-pair
technology linkage— measured by the share of patent citations between two industries— increases
the probability of agglomeration at 50 km by 0.16 percentage points (or 46 percent) more for
MNC foreign subsidiaries than for domestic plants. Compared to domestic plants and MNC for-
eign subsidiaries, MNC headquarters’agglomeration patterns are even more strongly in‡uenced
by technology di¤usion factors. Labor market externality and input-output linkages, in contrast,
play a greater role in accounting for the agglomeration patterns of domestic plants.
   These …ndings are largely consistent with the characteristics of multinational …rms. Relative
to their domestic counterparts in the same industry, MNC o¤shore subsidiaries are, on average,
more knowledge and capital intensive and have stronger motives than domestic plants to ag-
glomerate with each other when their industries exhibit potential for technology di¤usion and
capital-good market externality. Domestic plants, in contrast, tend to be more concerned about
labor-market externality and geographic proximity to input suppliers and customers. Moreover,
the increasing segmentation of activities within the boundaries of multinational …rms can ex-
plain why the agglomeration patterns of MNC foreign subsidiaries di¤er from those of MNC
headquarters. In particular, the input-sourcing focus of o¤shore production motivates MNC
foreign subsidiaries to take into account not only technology di¤usion but also capital-good
market externality in their location decisions, while a greater emphasis on knowledge-intensive
activities— such as R&D, management, and services— leads MNC headquarters to be more driven
by technology di¤usion bene…ts.


                                                2
       Our paper builds on an extensive empirical literature in regional and urban economics that
examines the importance of Marshallian agglomeration forces in domestic economic geography.
Economic historians and regional and urban economists have long recognized the agglomeration
of economic activity as one of the most salient features of economic development.2 However,
relatively few studies have investigated the growing spatial concentrations of multinational pro-
duction around the world and their patterns and driving forces in comparison to those of domestic
…rms. An overview of the existing literature is beyond the scope of our paper; we focus below
on the empirical studies most closely related to our analysis.3
       As noted earlier, a central issue in agglomeration studies is the measurement of agglomeration.
Ellison and Glaeser’s (1997) in‡uential paper introduces a "dartboard" approach to construct an
index of spatial concentration. The authors note that even in an industry with no tendency for
clustering, random locations may not generate regular location patterns due to the fact that the
number of plants is never arbitrarily large. Their index thus compares the observed distribution
of economic activity in an industry to a null hypothesis of random location and controls for the
e¤ect of industrial concentration, an issue that had been noted to a¤ect the accuracy of previous
indices. Using this index, Rosenthal and Strange (2001) evaluate the importance of agglomeration
forces in explaining the localization of U.S. industries and …nd that both labor-market pooling
and input-output linkages have a positive impact on U.S. agglomeration. Overman and Puga
(2009), also using Ellison and Glaeser’s (1997) index, examine the role of labor-market pooling
and input sharing in determining the spatial concentration of UK manufacturing establishments.
They …nd that sectors whose establishments experience more idiosyncratic employment volatility
and use localized intermediate inputs are more spatially concentrated.
       The study by DO advances the literature by developing a spatially continuous concentration
index that is independent of the level of geographic disaggregation (see Section 2.2 for a detailed
description). Applying this index, Ellison, Glaeser and Kerr (2010) (henceforth "EGK") employ
an innovative empirical approach that exploits the coagglomeration of U.S. industries to disen-
tangle the e¤ects of Marshallian agglomeration economies. Like Rosenthal and Strange (2001),
they …nd a particularly important role for input-output relationships.
       Exploring the role of agglomeration economies in MNCs’ location patterns also relates our
paper to a literature in international trade assessing MNCs’ agglomeration decisions. Several
studies (see, for example, Head, Ries, and Swenson, 1995; Head and Mayer, 2004a; Bobonis and
Shatz, 2007; Debaere, Lee and Paik, 2010) have examined the role of distance and production
   2
      See Ottaviano and Puga (1998), Duranton and Puga (2004), Head and Mayer (2004b), Ottaviano and Thisse
(2004), Rosenthal and Strange (2004), Puga (2010), and Redding (2010, 2011) for excellent reviews of these
literatures.
    3
      Another important strand of empirical literature concerns one of the key theoretical predictions of New Eco-
nomic Geography models: factor prices should vary systematically across locations with respect to market access.
See, for example, Redding and Venables (2004) and Hanson (2005) for related empirical evidence. Among the
latest contributors to this literature are Ahlfeldt et al. (2012), who introduce a structural estimation approach
incorporating both location fundamentals and agglomeration economies. The authors combine a quantitative
model of city structure with the natural experiment of Berlin’s division and reuni…cation and …nd that the model
accounts for the observed changes in factor prices and employment.


                                                        3
linkages in individual multinationals’ location decisions. The results of these studies, which
suggest that MNCs with vertical linkages tend to agglomerate within a host country/region, shed
light on the role of vertical production relationships in the economic geography of multinational
production.
    Our analysis, assessing the di¤erent patterns underlying the global agglomeration of multi-
national and non-multinational …rms, contributes to the literature in several ways. First, instead
of examining domestic agglomeration patterns in an individual country, we o¤er a perspective
on the structure of industrial agglomeration around the world. Second, we investigate how the
agglomeration of the most mobile and distinctive group of …rms— the multinationals— compare
to the agglomeration of domestic …rms. Third, we evaluate how agglomeration economies, partic-
ularly the value of external scale economies in knowledge and capital goods, a¤ect MNCs relative
to domestic …rms, given MNCs’ vertically-integrated organizational form and large investment
in technologies and capital goods. While existing studies have o¤ered evidence of agglomera-
tion economies in domestic economic geography, little is known about how their in‡uence on
the global economic geography of multinationals di¤ers from their in‡uence on the economic
geography of domestic …rms. Fourth, we examine micro agglomeration patterns by construct-
ing and exploring plant-level agglomeration indices. Speci…cally, we examine how a given plant’s
characteristics— such as size, age, foreign ownership, and the number of products— and its indus-
try’s characteristics— such as capital-, skilled-labor-, and R&D-intensity— might jointly explain
the extent of agglomeration centered around the plant.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and the method-
ology with which we quantify the agglomeration of multinational and domestic …rms and the
agglomeration economies driving them. Section 3 presents the stylized facts emerging from the
worldwide agglomeration patterns of multinational and domestic …rms. Section 4 reports the
empirical analysis that assesses the relative importance of agglomeration economies in the ag-
glomeration of MNCs and domestic …rms. The last section concludes.


2     Quantifying Agglomeration Patterns and Economies: Data
      and Methodology
In this section, we describe the data and the empirical methodology we use to quantify the
global agglomeration of multinational and domestic …rms and the economic factors that could
systematically account for the observed agglomeration patterns.

2.1   The WorldBase Database
Our empirical analysis uses a unique worldwide establishment dataset, WorldBase, that covers
more than 43 million public and private establishments in more than 100 countries and territories.
WorldBase is compiled by Dun & Bradstreet (D&B), a leading source of commercial credit and


                                                4
marketing information since 1845. D&B— presently operating in over a dozen countries either
directly or through a¢ liates, agents, and associated business partners— compiles data from a
wide range of sources including public registries, partner …rms, telephone directory records, and
websites.4 All information collected by D&B is veri…ed centrally via a variety of manual and
automated checks.5

Cross-country coverage and geocode information                       D&B’s WorldBase is, in our view, an
ideal data source for the research question proposed in this study. It o¤ers several advantages
over alternative data sources. First, its broad cross-country coverage enables us to examine
agglomeration on a global and continuous scale. Examining the global patterns of agglomera-
tion allows us to o¤er a systematic perspective that takes into account nations at various stages
of development. Viewing agglomeration on a continuous scale is important in light of the in-
creasing geographic agglomeration occurring across regional and country borders. Examples of
cross-border clusters include the metalworking and electrical-engineering cluster involving Ger-
many and German-speaking Switzerland; an electric-machinery cluster involving Switzerland
and Italy; a biotech cluster spreading across Germany, Switzerland, and France; an automobile
industry cluster that crosses the border of Germany and Slovakia; the Ontario-Canada-Michigan-
US (Windsor-Detroit) auto cluster; and the Texas-Northeastern-Mexico cluster. Our data shows
that more than 20 percent of MNC establishment pairs that are within 200 km of each other
are in two di¤erent countries. The percentage rises to 40 percent at 400 km. This is not sur-
prising given countries’growing participation in regional trading blocs and the rapid declines in
cross-border trade costs.
       Second, the database reports detailed information for multinational and domestic, o¤shore
and headquarters establishments. This makes it possible to compare agglomeration patterns
across di¤erent types of establishment and to investigate how the economic geography of pro-
duction varies with the organization form of the …rm.
       Third, the WorldBase database reports the physical address and postal code of each plant,
whereas most existing datasets report business registration addresses. The physical location
information enables us to obtain precise latitude and longitude information for each plant in the
data and compute the distance between each establishment pair. Existing studies have tended
to use distance between administrative units, such as state distances, as a proxy for distance
of establishments. In doing so, establishments proximate in actual distance but separated by
administrative boundaries (for example, San Diego and Phoenix) can be considered dispersed.
   4
     For more information, see: http://www.dnb.com/us/about/db_database/dnbinfoquality.html. The dataset
used in this paper was acquired from D&B with disclosure restrictions.
   5
     Early uses of D&B data include, for example, Lipsey’s (1978) comparisons of the D&B data with existing
sources with regard to the reliability of U.S. data. More recently, Harrison, Love, and McMillian (2004) use D&B’s
cross-country foreign ownership information. Other research that has used D&B data includes Rosenthal and
Strange’s (2003) analysis of micro-level agglomeration in the United States; Acemoglu, Johnson, and Mitton’s
(2009) cross-country study of concentration and vertical integration; and Alfaro and Charlton’s (2009) analysis of
vertical and horizontal activities of multinationals.



                                                        5
Conversely, establishments far apart but still in the same administrative unit (for example, San
Diego and San Francisco) can be counted as agglomeration.
       We obtain latitude and longitude codes for each establishment using a geocoding software
(GPS Visualizer). This software uses Yahoo’s and Google’s Geocoding API services, well known
as the industry standard for transportation data. It provides more accurate geocode information
than most alternative sources. The geocodes are obtained in batches and veri…ed for precision.
We apply the Haversine formula to the geocode data to compute the great-circle distance between
each pair of establishments.6

MNC and domestic establishment data                      Our empirical analysis is based on MNC o¤shore
subsidiaries, MNC headquarters, and domestic plants in 2005. WorldBase reports, for each
establishment in the dataset, detailed information on location, ownership, and activities. Four
categories of information are used in this paper: (i) industry information including the four-
digit SIC code of the primary industry in which each establishment operates; (ii) ownership
information including headquarters, domestic parent, global parent, status (for example, joint
venture and partnership), and position in the hierarchy (for example, branch, division, and
headquarters); (iii) detailed location information for both establishment and headquarters; and
(iv) operational information including sales, employment, and year started.
       An establishment is deemed an MNC foreign subsidiary if it satis…es two criteria: (i) it reports
to a global parent …rm, and (ii) the headquarters or the global parent …rm is located in a di¤erent
country. The parent is de…ned as an entity that has legal and …nancial responsibility for another
establishment.7 We drop establishments with zero or missing employment values and industries
with fewer than 10 observations.8
       Our …nal sample includes 32,427 MNC o¤shore manufacturing plants. Top industries include
Electronic Components and Accessories (367), Miscellaneous Plastics Products (308), Motor
Vehicles and Motor Vehicle Equipment (371), General Industrial Machinery and Equipment
(356), Laboratory Apparatus and Analytical, Optical, Measuring, and Controlling Instruments
(382), Drugs (283), Metalworking Machinery and Equipment (354), Construction, Mining, and
Materials Handling (353), and Special Industry Machinery except Metalworking (355). Top host
   6
      To account for other forms of trade barriers, such as border, language, and tari¤s, we also estimated a measure
of trade cost between each pair of plants based on conventional gravity-equation estimations. The trade cost
information was then used to construct the index of agglomeration following the empirical methodology described
in the next sub-section. Alternatively, we computed the agglomeration index based on distance by assuming
country borders to have an in…nite e¤ect on trade cost. This essentially excluded all establishment pairs located
in two di¤erent countries, regardless of their actual distance, and focused exclusively on establishments located in
the same country. See the HBS working paper version (#10-043) for more detail.
    7
      There are, of course, establishments that belong to the same multinational family. Although separately
examining the interaction of these establishments is beyond the focus of this paper, we expect the Marshallian
forces to have a similar e¤ect here. For example, subsidiaries with an input-output linkage should have incentives
to locate near one another independent of ownership. See Yeaple (2003) for theoretical work and Chen (2011)
for supportive empirical evidence in this area. One can use a methodology similar to the one outlined in the next
sub-section to study intra-…rm interaction (see Duranton and Overman, 2008).
    8
      Requiring positive employment helps to exclude establishments registered exclusively for tax purposes.



                                                         6
countries include China, the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, France, Poland, the
Czech Republic, and Mexico.
   To examine the coverage of our MNC establishment data, we compared U.S. owned sub-
sidiaries in the WorldBase database with the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis’(BEA) Direct
Investment Abroad Benchmark Survey, a legally mandated con…dential survey conducted every
…ve years that covers virtually the entire population of U.S. MNCs. The comparison revealed
similar accounts of establishments and activities between the two databases. We also compared
WorldBase with UNCTAD’s Multinational Corporation Database. These two databases di¤er in
that the former reports at the plant level and the latter at the …rm level. For the U.S. and other
major FDI source countries, the two databases report similar numbers of …rms, but WorldBase
contains more plants. See Alfaro and Charlton (2009) for detailed discussion of the WorldBase
data and comparisons with other data sources.

2.2   Quantifying Agglomeration Patterns
As noted in Head and Mayer (2004b), measurement of agglomeration is a central challenge in
the economic geography literature. There has been a continuous e¤ort to design an index that
accurately re‡ects the agglomeration of economic activities. One of the latest advances in this
literature is Duranton and Overman (2005) who construct an index to measure the signi…cance
of agglomeration in the U.K. DO’s index has been adapted by other studies such as EGK who
examine the U.S. industries’ coagglomeration patterns. We extend this index to assess and
compare the agglomeration of multinational and domestic …rms worldwide.
   The empirical procedure to construct the extended agglomeration index consists of three
steps. In the …rst step, we estimate a distance density function for each pair of industries (in-
cluding within- and between-industry pairs) based on the distance between MNC establishments.
In the second step, we obtain counterfactual density functions based on domestic manufactur-
ing plants in the same industry pair to control for location fundamental factors that a¤ect the
location decisions of both domestic and multinational plants. In the last step, we construct
the MNC agglomeration index to measure the extent to which multinational establishments in
an industry pair are more or less likely to agglomerate than the domestic counterfactuals at a
given threshold distance. We repeat the procedure for MNC foreign subsidiaries, MNC foreign
subsidiaries weighted by workers, and MNC headquarters.

Step 1: MNC distance density functions              We …rst estimate MNC’s distance density func-
tion for each pair of industries. Note that even when the locations of nearly all establishments
are known with a high degree of precision (as is the case with the data we use, as described
above), distance is only an approximation of the true transport cost between establishments.
One source of systematic error, for example, is that the travel time for any given distance might
di¤er between low- and high-density areas. Given the potential noise in the measurement of



                                                7
transport cost, we follow DO in adopting kernel smoothing when estimating the distance density
function.
   Let  denote the distance between MNC establishment  and . For each industry pair 
and e
    , we obtain a kernel density estimator at any level of distance (i.e.,   ( )):
                                                                                                  

                                                           
                                                                            !
                                                    X X 
                                                                      ¬    
                                               1                           
                                 (   )=                                                            (1)
                                               =1 =1            
                                                  


where                                                                  e
        and  are the numbers of MNC establishments in industries  and , respectively, 
                
is the bandwidth, and  is the kernel function. We use Gaussian kernels with the data re‡ected
around zero and the bandwidth set to minimize the mean integrated squared error. This step
generates an estimated distance probability density function for each of the 8 001 manufacturing
industry pairs in our data.
    In addition to estimating the distance density functions based on individual establishments,
we can also treat each worker as the unit of observation and measure the level of agglomeration
among workers. To proceed, we obtain a weighted kernel density estimator by weighing each
establishment by employment size, given by
                                                                                                      !
                                                                                            ¬    
                                            1              P
                                                              
                                                                P
                                                                  
                                                                                              
                  (   )=                                =1   =1                                 (2)
                                   P
                                      
                                        P
                                          
                                                                                          
                                     =1    =1 (  )


where  and  represent the numbers of employees in MNC establishments  and , respec-
tively.

Step 2: Domestic counterfactual density functions                     In the second step, we obtain coun-
terfactual distance density functions based on domestic plants in the same industry pair. By using
domestic plants in the same industries as the counterfactuals, the procedure controls for location
fundamental factors that a¤ect the location decisions of both MNC and domestic plants. It also
enables us to compare the agglomeration patterns of MNC and domestic plants and examine
how the agglomeration economies might a¤ect them di¤erently.
   Let  denote the distance between domestic establishments  and . For each industry pair
 and e
      , we obtain a kernel density estimator at any level of distance (i.e.,   ( )):
                                                                                                       

                                                          
                                                                            !
                                                    X X 
                                                                      ¬    
                                               1                           
                                  ( ) =                                                            (3)
                                               =1 =1            
                                                  


where                                                               e
        and  are the numbers of domestic plants in industries  and .
                
    Alternatively, we obtain a weighted kernel density estimator for domestic plants by weighing



                                                        8
each domestic establishment by employment size:
                                                                                                       !
                                                                                             ¬    
                                          1              P
                                                            
                                                              P
                                                                
                                                                                               
                   ( )=                               =1           =1                                       (4)
                                  P
                                     
                                       P
                                         
                                                                                           
                                   =1    =1 (  )


where  and  represent the numbers of employees in domestic establishments  and , re-
spectively.

Step 3: MNC agglomeration indices         Next we construct the MNC agglomeration indices
using domestic plants as the benchmark. For each industry pair  and e
                                                                     , we obtain

                                                     X             h                        i
                          
                                       
                                        
                                          ( )                           ( ) ¬  ( )                           (5)
                                                            =0

or employment-weighted
                                                    X          h                         i
                    
                                 
                                    
                                      ( )                           
                                                                     
                                                                         
                                                                           ( ) ¬  
                                                                                  
                                                                                     
                                                                                       ( )                             (6)
                                                           =0

               P    (
                                    P     (
   Note that     =0 
                      
                           ) and      =0 
                                             
                                                   ), the sum of distance density from                        = 0 to   = ,
capture the probability of MNC establishments in a given industry pair agglomerating with one
                                                  P                P
another within a threshold distance  . Similarly, =0   ( ) and =0    ( ), the sum of
                                                                                                     
distance density for domestic plants, capture the probability of domestic plants in the same
industry pair agglomerating with one another within the same threshold distance. The MNC
agglomeration indices  ( ) and   ( ) thus are essentially MNCs’
                                                                               
di¤erences from domestic establishments in the probabilities of agglomeration and measure the
extent to which MNC establishments are more or less likely to agglomerate than their domestic
counterfactuals. We compute the index at various distance thresholds, including 50, 100, 200,
400 and 800 kilometers (including thresholds previously considered by DO and EGK as well as
lower levels such as 50 and 100km).

   In addition to the pairwise-industry agglomeration index, we also follow the above procedure
and construct an agglomeration density measure for each MNC and domestic establishment
to measure the probability that a plant is proximate to other plants (from either the same or
other industries). The plant-level agglomeration measure enables us to explore the patterns of
agglomeration at the micro plant level and examine how plant characteristics— such as MNC
ownership— and industry attributes might jointly explain the di¤erent levels of agglomeration
observed across plants.
   Our methodology to calculate the MNC agglomeration indices, extended based on DO (2005),
addresses two key issues that arise with traditional measures of agglomeration, most of which
equalize agglomeration with activities located in the same administrative or geographic region
(measured by number of …rms or volume of production in the region). First, the traditional


                                                     9
measures often cannot separate the geographic concentration of the manufacturing industry
due to location attractiveness from agglomeration. Second, previous measures, by equating
agglomeration with activities in the same region, can omit agglomerating activities separated by
administrative or geographic borders, while overestimating the degree of agglomeration within
the same administrative or geographic units. The accuracy of these measures is thus dependent
on the scale of geographic units. Ellison and Glaeser (1997) develop an index that solves the …rst
problem. DO address the remaining issue of the dependence of existing measures on the level of
geographic disaggregation by developing a continuous-space concentration index.
       The MNC agglomeration indices thus exhibit three important properties essential to agglom-
eration measures. First, it is comparable across industries and establishments and captures cross-
industry or cross-establishment variation in the level of agglomeration. Second, its construction
is based on a counterfactual approach and controls for the e¤ect of location factors— such as
market size, natural resources, and policies— that apply to establishments in the same industry.
Third, by taking into account spatial continuity, the index is unbiased with respect to the scale
and aggregation of geographic units.
       However, this methodology also poses two constraints. First, the index requires detailed phys-
ical location information for each establishment. As described above, the WorldBase dataset,
supplemented by a geocoding software, satis…es this requirement. Second, the empirical pro-
cedure to construct the index can be extremely computationally intensive, especially for large
datasets. Constructing the index for di¤erent types of establishment further increases the com-
putational burden. Given that measuring the agglomeration of all domestic manufacturing plants
worldwide is infeasible with the size of the WorldBase dataset and the computational intensity
of the empirical procedure, we adopt a random sampling strategy as EGK. For each SIC 3-digit
industry with more than 1,000 observations, we obtain a random sample of 1,000 plants. For
industries with fewer than 1,000 observations, we include all domestic plants. This yields a …nal
sample of 127,897 domestically owned plants and 32,427 MNC o¤shore manufacturing plants.

2.3      Measuring Agglomeration Economies
We now turn to economic factors that could systematically account for the observed agglomer-
ation patterns of MNC and domestic plants. Four categories of agglomeration economies have
been stressed in the literature of economic geography, including: (i) vertical production linkages,
(ii) externality in labor markets, (iii) externality in capital-good markets, and (iv) technology
di¤usion.9 However, the advantage of geographic proximity and subsequently the importance
   9
     In addition to agglomeration economies, the location fundamentals of multinational production— such as
country market size, comparative advantage, and trade cost— also a¤ect the location decisions of multinational
…rms. In the paper, we use worldwide domestic establishment locations as the counterfactual to account for the
role of location fundamentals. In a robustness analysis, we also constructed an expected index of agglomeration,
re‡ecting the geographic distribution of MNC plants predicted exclusively by country- and region-level location
factors of multinational production, including, for example, market size, trade costs, comparative advantage,
infrastructure, corporate taxes (see the HBS working paper version (#10-043) for more detail).



                                                      10
of agglomeration economies can di¤er dramatically between multinational and domestic …rms
and between MNC foreign subsidiaries and headquarters. For instance, given their technol-
ogy intensity, MNCs can …nd technology di¤usion from other MNCs in closely linked industries
particularly attractive and thus have greater incentives to agglomerate with other MNCs that
share close technology linkages. We discuss below the role of each agglomeration economy in
multinational …rms’location choices and the proxies used to represent each force.

Vertical production linkages            Marshall (1890) argued that transportation costs induce plants
to locate close to inputs and customers and determine the optimal trading distance between
suppliers and buyers. This agglomeration incentive also applies to MNCs, given their large
volumes of sales and intermediate inputs.10 Compared to domestic …rms, multinationals are
often the leading corporations in each industry. Because they tend to be the largest customers of
upstream industries as well as the largest suppliers of downstream industries, the input-output
relationship between MNCs (for example, Dell and Intel; Ford and Delphi) can be particularly
strong.11 However, MNCs, on the other hand, engage in substantial intra-…rm trade, sourcing a
signi…cant share of their inputs within the boundary of the …rm. This distinctive organization
structure suggests that compared to domestic …rms, the location decisions of MNC establishments
could also be less driven by external input-output relationships.
       To determine the importance of customer and supplier relationships in multinationals’ v.s.
domestic plants’agglomeration decisions, we construct a variable,  , to measure the
extent of the input-output relationship between each pair of industries. We use the 2002 Bench-
mark Input-Output Data (speci…cally, the Detailed-Level Make, Use and Direct Requirement
Tables) published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, and de…ne  as the share of
industry ’s inputs that come directly from industry e
                                                      and vice versa. These shares are cal-
culated relative to all input-output ‡ows including those to non-manufacturing industries and
…nal consumers. Table A.1 reports the summary statistics of industry-level control variables.
As supplier ‡ows are not symmetrical, we take either the maximum or the mean of the input
and output relationships for each pair of industries, which, as shown in Table A.2, are highly
correlated. We used the mean values in our analysis, but obtained similar results when we used
the maximum measure.

Externality in labor markets                  Agglomeration can also yield bene…ts through external
scale economies in labor markets. Because …rms’proximity to one another shields workers from
the vicissitudes of …rm-speci…c shocks, workers in locations in which other …rms stand ready to
  10
     For FDI theoretical literature in this area, see, for example, Krugman (1991), Venables (1996), and Markusen
and Venables (2000).
  11
     Head, Ries, and Swenson (1995) note, for example, that the dependence of Japanese manufacturers on the
"just-in-time" inventory system exerts a particularly strong incentive for vertically linked Japanese …rms to ag-
glomerate abroad.




                                                       11
hire them are often willing to accept lower wages.12 Externalities can also occur as workers move
from one job to another, especially between …rms characterized by similar skill requirements.13
    To examine labor market pooling forces, we follow EGK in measuring each industry pair’s
similarity in occupational labor requirements. We use the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ (BLS)
2006 National Industry-Occupation Employment Matrix (NIOEM), which reports industry-level
employment across detailed occupations (such as Assemblers and Fabricators; Metal Workers
and Plastic Workers; Textile, Apparel, and Furnishings Workers; Business Operations Specialists;
Financial Specialists; Computer Support Specialists; and Electrical and Electronics Engineers).
We convert occupational employment counts into occupational percentages for each industry,
map the BLS industries to the SIC3 framework, and measure each industry pair’s labor similarity,
 , using the correlation in occupational percentages.

Externality in capital-good markets                   External scale economies can also arise in capital-
good markets. This force has particular relevance to multinational …rms given their large involve-
ment in capital-intensive activities. Geographically concentrated industries o¤er better support
to providers of capital goods (such as producers of specialized components and providers of ma-
chinery maintenance) and reduce their risk of investment (due, for example, to the existence
of resale markets).14 Local expansion of capital-intensive activities can consequently lead to
expansion of the supply of capital goods, thereby reducing the cost of capital goods.
    To evaluate the role of capital-good market externalities, we construct a new measure of
industries’ similarity in capital-good demand— in a spirit similar to the measure of industries’
similarity in labor demand— using capital ‡ow data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA). The capital ‡ow table (CFT), a supplement to the 1997 benchmark input-output (I-
O) accounts, shows detailed purchases of capital goods (such as motors and generators, textile
machinery, mining machinery and equipment, wood containers and pallets, computer storage
devices, and wireless communications equipment) by using industry. We compute— for each
using industry— the share of investment in each capital good and then measure each industry
pair’s similarity in capital-good investment, denoted by  , using the industry pair’s
correlation in investment shares.15

Technology di¤usion           A fourth motive relates to the di¤usion of technologies. Technology
   12
      This argument has been formally considered in Marshall (1890), Krugman (1991), and Helsley and Strange
(1990). Rotemberg and Saloner (2000), for a related motivation, argue that workers can bene…t because multiple
…rms o¤er protection against ex-post appropriation of investments in human capital.
   13
      The ‡ow of workers can also lead to technology di¤usion, another Marshallian force discussed below.
   14
      Agglomeration can also create costs, for example, by increasing labor and capital-good prices. Like bene…ts,
these costs can be greater for industries with similar labor and capital-good demand, in which case the estimated
parameters of the variables would represent the net e¤ect of similar factor demand structures on agglomeration
decisions.
   15
      Note that this measure captures a di¤erent dimension of industry-pair relatedness than vertical production
linkages. Unlike vertical production linkages, industry-pair correlations in capital-good demand re‡ect industry
pairs’similarity in capital-good demand and, thus, scope for externality in capital-good markets.



                                                       12
can di¤use from one …rm to another through movement of workers, interaction between those
who perform similar jobs, or direct interaction between …rms through technology sourcing. This
has been noted by Navaretti and Venables (2006), who predict that MNCs may bene…t from
setting up a¢ liates in proximity to other MNCs with advanced technology. The a¢ liates can
bene…t from technology spillovers, which can then be transferred to other parts of the company.
    To capture this agglomeration force, we construct a proxy of technology di¤usion frequently
considered in the knowledge spillover literature (see, for example, Ja¤e et al., 2000; EGK),
using patent citation ‡ow data taken from the NBER Patent Database. The data, compiled
by Hall et al. (2001), includes detailed records for all patents granted by the United States
Patent and Trademark O¢ ce (USPTO) from January 1975 to December 1999. Each patent
record provides information about the invention (such as technology classi…cation and citations
of prior art) and about the inventors submitting the application (such as name and city). We
construct the technology di¤usion variable, that is,  , by measuring the extent to
which technologies in industry  cite technologies in industry e
                                                               , and vice versa.16 In practice,
there is little directional di¤erence in  due to the extensive number of citations
within a single technology …eld. We obtain both maximum and mean for each set of pairwise
industries. We used the mean values in our analysis, but obtained similar results when using the
maximum measure.

    Constructing the proxies of agglomeration economies using the U.S. industry-level account
data is motivated by three considerations. First, compared to …rm-level input-output, factor
demand, or technological information (which is typically unavailable), industry-level production,
factor and technology linkages re‡ect standardized production technologies and are relatively
stable over time, limiting the potential for the measures to endogenously respond to MNC ag-
glomeration. Second, using the U.S. as the reference country while our analysis covers multi-
national activity around the world further mitigates the possibility of endogenous production,
factor, and technology linkage measures, even though the assumption that the U.S. production
structure carries over to other countries could potentially bias our empirical analysis against
…nding a signi…cant relationship. Third, the U.S. industry accounts are more disaggregated than
those of most other countries, enabling us to dissect linkages between disaggregated product
categories.
    Table A.2 presents the correlation matrix. As shown, the proxies of agglomeration economies
have very low correlations. For example, the correlation between industry-pair input-output link-
age and similarity in capital-good demand is about 0.19 and the correlation between production
linkage and technology di¤usion is 0.29. This suggests that industry pairs exhibit signi…cant vari-
ation in their relatedness in inputs, labor, capital goods, and technology. For example, industry
pairs with strong input-output linkages often have weak linkages in capital goods and technol-
  16
     The concordance between the USPTO classi…cation scheme and SIC3 industries is adopted in the construction
of the variable.



                                                     13
ogy. This provides us a key source of variation for disentangling the e¤ects of agglomeration
economies.



3    The Global Agglomeration of MNCs and Domestic Plants:
     Stylized Facts
In this section, we examine the global agglomeration patterns of MNC and domestic plants and
present emerging stylized facts.
    First, we show in Table 1 the descriptive statistics of MNC and domestic plants’ (cumula-
                                                                   P             P
tive) agglomeration densities at various threshold distances (i.e., =0   ( ), =0    ( ),
                                                                                     
P        ( ) and
                   P      ( ), the probability of MNC/domestic establishments agglomerat-
    =0             =0    
                       
ing at a threshold distance). We …nd that multinational headquarters exhibit, on average, the
highest probability of agglomeration among the di¤erent types of establishment. At 50 km, for
example, the average probability of agglomeration is 0.8 percent for MNC headquarters, 0.48
percent for MNC foreign subsidiaries, and 0.43 percent for domestic plants. At 100 km, the
average probability of agglomeration increases to 1.6 percent for MNC headquarters, 0.92 per-
cent for MNC foreign subsidiaries, and 0.85 percent for domestic plants. The di¤erences between
MNC headquarters and the other types of establishment are statistically signi…cant at all thresh-
old distances, while the di¤erences between MNC foreign subsidiaries and domestic plants are
statistically signi…cant at 50 and 100 km.

                                      [Table 1 about here]

    The above …nding is summarized as our …rst stylized fact below.

Stylized Fact 1: Across di¤ erent types of establishment, multinational headquarters are, on
average, the most agglomerative.

    Stylized fact 1 is broadly consistent with the knowledge capital theory of multinational …rms
(see Markusen, 2002), which predicts that MNC headquarters should concentrate in skilled-
labor-abundant countries and subsidiaries should be relatively dispersedly distributed across host
regions based on markets and comparative advantages. Our …nding also lends empirical support
to theoretical predictions in urban economics which suggest greater clustering of headquarters
relative to that of manufacturing plants (see, for example, Duranton and Puga, 2005).
    Among MNC foreign subsidiaries, industry pairs in which MNCs exhibit some of the highest
o¤shore agglomeration probabilities include, as reported in Table A.3, Footwear except Rubber
(314) and Boot and Shoe Cut Stock and Findings (313); Knitting Mills (225) and Footwear
except Rubber (314); Dolls, Toys, Games (394) and Sporting and Athletic and Footwear except



                                               14
Rubber (314); Miscellaneous Publishing (274) and Paperboard Mills (263); and Miscellaneous
Publishing (274) and Miscellaneous Transportation Equipment (379).
    In Table 2, we present descriptive statistics for within- and between-industry pairs, respec-
tively. We …nd that (i) Stylized fact 1 holds for both within- and between-industry pairs;17 and
(ii) establishments in the same industry are signi…cantly more agglomerative than establishments
from di¤erent industries. The latter observation is consistent with the expectation noted in EGK
that …rms from di¤erent industry pairs exhibit greater variation in their relatedness in produc-
tion, factor markets, and technology space, thereby displaying weaker average agglomeration
incentives.

                                            [Table 2 about here]

    Next, we examine in Table 3 the correlations of agglomeration density measures across di¤er-
ent types of plant. Comparing the probability of agglomeration between MNC foreign subsidiaries
and domestic plants, we …nd the correlation of the two to be 0.17 at 50 km (and only slightly
higher at more aggregate distance levels), suggesting that multinational and non-multinational
plants exhibit sharply di¤erent spatial patterns. In over 65 percent of the industry pairs, MNC
foreign subsidiaries are more likely to agglomerate than domestic plants. The agglomeration
patterns of MNC headquarters and foreign subsidiaries are correlated with a higher coe¢ cient
of 0.44 at 50 km, implying that while for some industry pairs the clusters of MNC subsidiaries
resemble those of headquarters, for other industry pairs the two types of establishment exhibit
distinctly di¤erent agglomeration patterns.
    These observations, summarized in stylized fact 2, indicate that the o¤shore clusters of MNCs
are not merely a projection of the domestic clusters. The driving forces of MNCs’ o¤shore
agglomeration are likely to vary from those of domestic plants and MNC headquarters, as we
explore in Section 4.18

                                            [Table 3 about here]


Stylized Fact 2: The agglomeration of multinational foreign subsidiaries exhibits a low corre-
lation with the agglomeration of domestic plants.
  17
     In the descriptive and the empirical analysis, we take into account both within- and between-industry agglom-
eration. As a robusntess, we also analyzed only between-industry agglomeration, also called "coagglomeration",
and obtained similar results. As noted by EGK, compared to …rms in the same industries, …rms from di¤erent
industry pairs often exhibit greater variation in their relatedness in production, factor markets, and technology
space, thereby displaying di¤erent agglomeration incentives. While location fundamentals and all agglomeration
economies tend to predict spatial concentration among …rms in the same industry, their predictions of which indus-
try pairs should agglomerate vary signi…cantly. Between-industry agglomeration patterns thus o¤er an important
source of variation for separating the e¤ects of di¤erent agglomeration economies.
  18
     Similarly, the correlations do not change signi…cantly when we drop within-industry pairs (which consist of
126 observations).




                                                       15
       Next we take a …rst glance at the di¤erences in multinational and domestic plants’agglomer-
ation patterns and examine how they relate to industry characteristics such as capital intensity,
skilled-labor intensity, and R&D intensity.19
       In Figure 1, we plot the distributions of pairwise industries’ agglomeration densities at 50
km for multinational foreign subsidiaries and domestic plants, respectively. We …nd that for
industries with greater than median levels of capital intensity, the distribution shifts rightward for
multinational foreign subsidiaries compared to domestic plants. The probability of agglomeration
in these relatively capital-intensive industries is, on average, 0.1 percentage point (or equivalently
23 percent of the mean value) higher for MNC foreign subsidiaries than for domestic plants.
This pattern is similarly observed for industries with greater than median levels of skilled-labor
intensity and R&D intensity: in skilled-labor- and R&D-intensive industries, the distribution of
multinational foreign subsidiaries’agglomeration densities dominates the distribution of domestic
plants, with the mean di¤erence around 0.1 percentage point.20
       Table 4 presents the Kolmogorov–Smirnov (K-S) …rst-order stochastic dominance test on
the distributions of MNC subsidiaries and domestic plants in capital-, skilled-labor- and R&D-
intensive industries. We …nd that the di¤erences of the distributions are statistically signi…cant
and, further, the one-sided test suggests that MNC subsidiaries are signi…cantly more agglomer-
ative than domestic plants in capital-, skilled-labor- and R&D-intensive industries.

                                             [Table 4 about here]

       We also plot the distribution of agglomeration densities at the plant level, for multinational
foreign subsidiaries and domestic plants, respectively. As discussed in Section 2.2, we also
compute— in addition to pairwise-industry agglomeration measures— a plant-level agglomera-
tion measure to capture the degree to which a plant is proximate to other plants. The plant-level
densities are demeaned by industry averages to ensure within-industry comparisons. Similar
to industry-level patterns, we show in Figure 2 that multinational foreign subsidiaries exhibit
greater agglomeration than their domestic peers in capital-, skilled-labor-, and R&D-intensive
industries.21
       In Table 5, we examine how plant characteristics— such as ownership structure, size, age and
the number of products— and industry characteristics— including capital, skilled-labor, and R&D
intensity— might jointly explain the extent of agglomeration centered around each plant. The
estimation results at 50 and 100 km are reported. To control for the role of location fundamentals,
a vector of region-industry dummies is also included in the analysis.
  19
     We use the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database to construct each industry’s capital and skilled-
labor intensities, which are de…ned as, respectively, the ratios of investment and of non-production workers’payroll
to value added. Each industry’s R&D intensity is measured using the median …rm’s ratio of R&D expenditure
relative to value added based on the COMPUTSTAT database.
  20
     The pattern, again, does not change when within-industry agglomeration indices are excluded.
  21
     This result is similarly con…rmed by the two-sided and the one-sided Kolmogorov–Smirnov (K-S) …rst-order
dominance tests.



                                                        16
                                                              capital intensity>median




                                 400   300
                        Kernel density
                            200  100
                                 0




                                                    0        .005                    .01             .015
                                                                Agglomeration density

                                                              Domestic              Multinational


                                                            skilled-labor intensity>median
                                  400  300
                        Kernel density
                            200   100
                                  0




                                                    0        .005                    .01             .015
                                                                Agglomeration density

                                                               Domestic             Multinational


                                                                 R&D intensity>median
                                        400   300
                               Kernel density
                                   200  100
                                        0




                                                        0     .005                    .01             .015
                                                                 Agglomeration density

                                                                Domestic             Multinational




Figure 1: The agglomeration-density distributions of multinational foreign subsidiaries and do-
mestic plants: Pairwise industry level




                                                                      17
                                                            capital intensity>median




                                 1000  800
                        Kernel density
                        400     600
                                 200
                                 0




                                             -.002   -.001              0               .001      .002
                                                         Agglomeration density (demeaned)

                                                            Domestic             Multinational


                                                          skilled-labor intensity>median
                                    1000
                                    800
                          Kernel density
                           400    600
                                    200
                                    0




                                             -.002   -.001              0               .001      .002
                                                         Agglomeration density (demeaned)

                                                             Domestic             Multinational


                                                              R&D intensity>median
                                    1000
                                    800
                           Kernel density
                            400     600
                                    200
                                    0




                                             -.002   -.001              0               .001      .002
                                                         Agglomeration density (demeaned)

                                                             Domestic             Multinational




Figure 2: The agglomeration-density distributions of multinational foreign subsidiaries and do-
mestic plants: Plant level




                                                                    18
                                                 [Table 5 about here]

         We …nd that the degree of agglomeration varies sharply across plants in the same region
and industry. First, multinational foreign subsidiaries are signi…cantly more agglomerative than
domestic plants in the same capital-, skilled-labor-, and R&D-intensive industries. This result
suggests that multinational foreign subsidiaries enjoy greater agglomeration bene…ts than their
domestic counterparts do when industrial activities are capital- and knowledge-intensive.22 Sec-
ond, plant size also matters. At both 50 and 100 km, we …nd that plants with a larger revenue
are signi…cantly more likely to attract agglomeration. This is similarly true for older plants.
On the other hand, the number of products produced by each plant does not appear to have a
signi…cant e¤ect on agglomeration.
         These …ndings, summarized as our stylized fact 3 below, suggest that in industries with high
capital, skilled-labor, and R&D requirements, MNCs— which tend to be more productive and
more capital- and knowledge-intensive than domestic plants in the same industry— are more likely
to provide as well as derive bene…ts of capital market externality and technology di¤usion— than
their domestic peers— and thus are more likely to cluster with each other o¤shore.

Stylized Fact 3: Multinational foreign subsidiaries are more agglomerative than domestic plants
in capital-, skilled-labor-, and R&D-intensive industries.



4         Assessing the Roles of Agglomeration Economies
Next we further explore the stylized facts and examine how di¤erent agglomeration economies—
including input-output linkages, labor and capital-good market externalities, and technology
di¤usion— might account for the variations in the agglomeration patterns of MNC and domestic
establishments.

4.1        MNC o¤shore agglomeration
We …rst consider MNCs’ o¤shore agglomeration. Speci…cally, we evaluate how agglomeration
economies a¤ect the agglomeration patterns of MNC foreign subsidiaries relative to their domestic
counterfactuals by estimating the following equation:
                               X      h                        i
 
              
               
                 ( )                       ( ) ¬  ( )
                                  =0

                           =   1 
                                           
                                                    +    2 
                                                                       
                                                                           +   3 
                                                                                       
                                                                                           +   4 
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                +  
                                                                                                                    (7)
    22
    We also considered including a separate dummy variable to represent MNCs’domestic subsidiaries and found
that the agglomeration patterns of MNC domestic subsidiaries is fairly similar to that of domestic plants in the
MNC headquarters country when controlling for plant characteristics. The result is available upon request.



                                                             19
where  ( ), capturing the di¤erences between MNC foreign subsidiaries and
                          
domestic plants in their probabilities of agglomeration, measures the extent to which MNC
establishments are more or less likely to agglomerate than their domestic counterfactuals, and
the coe¢ cients     1,   2,    3,   and   4   represent the di¤erences in the e¤ects of the covariates on
multinational foreign subsidiaries and domestic plants.
       Table 6 reports the regression results. We …nd that the proxy for technology di¤usion exerts
a stronger e¤ect on MNC foreign subsidiaries than on domestic plants in the same industry pairs.
For example, at 50 km a 10-percentage-point increase in the level of technology di¤usion— that
is, the share of patent citations between two industries— raises the agglomeration probability of
MNC foreign subsidiaries by 0.03 percentage points (or 7 percent) more than the agglomeration
probability of domestic plants. Industry pairs’correlations in capital-good demand, a proxy for
potential capital-good market externality, also exert a stronger e¤ect on the agglomeration of
MNC foreign subsidiaries at 400 km and above. Interestingly, the proxy for potential labor-
market externality, captured by industry-pair correlations in labor demand, has a greater e¤ect
on the agglomeration of domestic plants than on the agglomeration of MNC foreign subsidiaries.23

                                               [Table 6 about here]


       These results are consistent with the stylized facts documented in Section 3 and suggest that,
given the technology- and capital-intensive characteristics of multinational …rms, it is impor-
tant to take into account technology di¤usion and capital-good market externality in explaining
MNCs’o¤shore agglomeration.
       The lower panel of Table 6 reports the normalized beta coe¢ cients.24 Comparing the stan-
dardized coe¢ cients of agglomeration forces, we …nd that the e¤ect of technology di¤usion out-
weighs the e¤ect of capital-good market correlations. This implies that technology di¤usion
bene…ts are likely to be a more important factor than capital-good market externality in MNCs’
o¤shore agglomeration decisions, especially at the disaggregated distance levels. Comparing the
magnitudes of the normalized beta coe¢ cients across distance thresholds, we …nd that the im-
pact of technology di¤usion diminishes and the e¤ect of capital-good market externality rises
at more aggregate distance levels. The stronger e¤ect of technology di¤usion at lower distance
levels suggests that, compared to the other agglomeration economies, bene…ts from technology
di¤usion tend to be localized geographically.
       Thus far, we have examined MNC o¤shore agglomeration using the subsidiary as the unit
of observation. We now take into account the di¤erent employment sizes of multinational sub-
sidiaries, which essentially treats the worker as the unit of observation and measures the level
of agglomeration among MNC foreign subsidiary workers. This exercise, by di¤erentiating the
  23
     We also examined distance thresholds lower than 50 km, such as 20 km which is less than the distance between,
say, the JFK airport and Newark. The results were quantitatively similar to those at 50 km.
  24
     Standardized coe¢ cients enable us to compare the changes in the outcomes associated with the metric-free
changes in each covariate.


                                                        20
agglomeration incentives between individual establishments and workers, has implications for
policy making targeted at in‡uencing the geographic distribution of workers.
   The results are reported in Table 7. Similarly, proxies for technology di¤usion and capital-
good market externality exert a stronger e¤ect on MNC foreign subsidiaries than on domestic
plants in the same industry pairs. For example, at 50 km a 10-percentage-point increase in the
level of technology di¤usion— the share of patent citations between two industries— leads to a
0.16-percentage-point (or 46 percent) greater increase in the agglomeration probability of MNC
foreign subsidiaries than the agglomeration probability of domestic plants. Again, technology
di¤usion, an agglomeration force that involves close labor interaction and mobility, appears to
be the strongest agglomeration factor at all distance thresholds. The role of the input-output
relationship is now signi…cantly stronger for domestic plants than for MNC foreign subsidiaries at
disaggregated distance levels, but is not signi…cantly di¤erent at more aggregate distance levels
(such as 400 km and 800 km). The e¤ect of labor-market externality is not signi…cantly di¤erent
between MNC foreign subsidiaries and domestic plants in this case.
   The above …ndings are consistent with the characteristics of multinational …rms. Rela-
tive to their domestic counterparts, multinationals exhibit greater participation in capital- and
technology-intensive activities. As a result, in industries with strong potential for capital-good
market externality and technology di¤usion, MNCs are more likely to realize these agglomeration
economies when they agglomerate with other, productive and capital- and knowledge-intensive
MNCs. In contrast, domestic plants— with lower capital- and technology-intensity— place a
greater emphasis on proximity to local suppliers and customers and thus have greater incentives
to agglomerate with upstream and downstream industries.

                                      [Table 7 about here]

4.2   MNC headquarter agglomeration
We next examine the patterns of MNC headquarter agglomeration relative to the agglomera-
tion of domestic plants. Table 8 reports the estimation results. Technology di¤usion exerts a
signi…cantly stronger e¤ect on MNC headquarters than on domestic plants in the same indus-
try pairs. In contrast, potential labor market externality exerts, again, a stronger e¤ect on the
agglomeration of domestic plants.

                                      [Table 8 about here]

   Comparing the normalized beta coe¢ cients in Table 8 with those in Table 6, we …nd that (i)
technology di¤usion exerts a stronger e¤ect on MNCs’headquarter agglomeration than their ag-
glomeration overseas, and (ii) capital-good market externality exerts a stronger e¤ect on MNCs’
o¤shore agglomeration than on the agglomeration of MNC headquarters. These results sug-
gest that the agglomeration of MNC foreign subsidiaries, with their input-sourcing focuses, is
more in‡uenced by capital-good market externality, whereas the agglomeration of headquarters,

                                               21
with their specialization in providing services such as R&D and management, is more driven by
technology di¤usion bene…ts.
         .

4.3          The process of MNC agglomeration
To shed light on the formation of MNC clusters, in particular, the spatial interdependence
between incumbents and entrants, we now turn from the geographic patterns to the process of
multinational agglomeration. Doing so also helps us to address the di¤erent establishment dates
of plants. Our estimates thus far take into account not only new plants’entry decisions but also
incumbents’decisions to continue in their current locations. But the mix of old and new plants
could create the potential for reverse causality between MNC location patterns and measures of
agglomeration economies.25
         We therefore explore in this subsection the dynamics of location decisions. Speci…cally, we
distinguish new from incumbent plants and assess new MNC plants’propensity to agglomerate
with incumbents. Repeating the procedure described in Section 2.2, we construct an index of
agglomeration between MNC entrants in 2004-2005 and MNC incumbents established before
2004 and use domestic plants as the benchmark. For each industry pair  and e
                                                                            , the index
measures the extent to which new MNC subsidiaries in industry  are more likely to cluster with
incumbent MNCs in industry e  and vice versa relative to their domestic counterfactuals.26

                                           [Table 9 about here]

         Table 9 reports the estimates. The roles of agglomeration forces remain robust in explaining
the entry patterns of MNCs. Relative to domestic plants, multinational entrants display a
stronger propensity to cluster with incumbent multinationals when technology di¤usion bene…ts
are greater. Labor-market externality, again, has a stronger impact on the agglomeration of
domestic plants.



5            Conclusion
The emergence of multinational clusters is one of the most notable phenomena in the process of
globalization. In this paper, we examine the global patterns and forces of MNC agglomeration—
    25
     We also examined regional agglomeration patterns from which the United States is excluded to alleviate
concerns of endogenous agglomeration economy measures and found the results to be robust. If U.S. domestic
industry-pair relationships could be a¤ected by the agglomeration of MNCs in the U.S., then one would expect
that the former would not be a¤ected by the agglomeration of MNCs located in other regions like Europe. See
the HBS working paper version (#10-043) for more detail.
  26
     To address the possibility that the index of MNC agglomeration might re‡ect the clustering between MNC
and domestic plants, we also used an alternative benchmark, the agglomeration between new MNC subsidiaries
and incumbent domestic plants. We …nd that for each industry pair, new MNC foreign subsidiaries exhibit a
stronger tendency to agglomerate with incumbent MNC plants than with incumbent domestic plants. Moreover,
the estimated e¤ects of the agglomeration economies remain largely similar.


                                                    22
both o¤shore and at headquarters— relative to the patterns and forces of domestic-…rm agglom-
eration. Our analysis, using a worldwide plant-level dataset and a novel index of agglomeration,
yields a number of new insights into the industrial landscape of multinational production.
   First, the o¤shore clusters of MNCs are not simply a re‡ection of domestic industrial clusters.
Across di¤erent types of plant, multinational headquarters are, on average, the most agglomer-
ative, followed by multinational foreign subsidiaries and domestic plants. Further, the agglom-
eration densities of MNC foreign subsidiaries, MNC headquarters, and domestic plants exhibit
only limited correlations, suggesting that multinationals follow distinctively di¤erent agglomer-
ation patterns o¤shore than their domestic counterparts do. In particular, multinational foreign
subsidiaries are signi…cantly more agglomerative than domestic plants in capital-, skilled-labor-,
and R&D-intensive industries.
   Second, exploring the patterns of the multinational agglomeration, we …nd that multination-
als’location choices are signi…cantly in‡uenced by agglomeration economies including technology
di¤usion and capital-good market externality. The impact of technology di¤usion, in particular,
outweighs the e¤ect of all other agglomeration economies.
   Third, the importance of agglomeration economies varies sharply between MNCs’ o¤shore
agglomeration and the agglomeration of MNC headquarters and domestic plants. MNCs’o¤shore
plants are signi…cantly more in‡uenced than domestic plants by technology di¤usion and capital-
good market externality factors.
   One potential extension of our analysis that is worthy of particular attention is to explore
how patterns of MNC agglomeration vary across regions. For example, labor market externality
can o¤er a stronger incentive for agglomeration in countries with more rigid and less mobile labor
markets. Similarly, the varying quality of infrastructure across regions can a¤ect the value of
proximity for vertically linked industries. Firms are likely to have a stronger motive to cluster
with suppliers and customers when they are in a country with poorer infrastructure. Further
analysis of the role of regional characteristics in determining the clustering of MNCs could yield
additional insights.




                                               23
References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron, Johnson, Simon and Mitton, Todd (2009) Determinants of Vertical Inte-
    gration: Financial Development and Contracting Costs. Journal of Finance 63, 1251-1290.

 [2] Alfaro, Laura and Charlton, Andrew (2009) Intra-Industry Foreign Direct Investment.
    American Economic Review 99(5): 2096-2119.

 [3] Antràs, Pol and Helpman, Elhanan (2004) Global Sourcing. Journal of Political Economy
    112(3): 552-580.

 [4] Antràs, Pol and Helpman, Elhanan (2008) Contractual Frictions and Global Sourcing, in
    Elhanan Helpman, Dalia Marin, and Thierry Verdier (Eds.), The Organization of Firms in
    a Global Economy, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 9-54.

 [5] Ahlfeldt, Gabriel, Redding, Stephen J., Sturn, Daniel and Wolf, Nikolaus (2012) The Eco-
    nomics of Density: Evidence from the Berlin Wall. CEP Discussion Papers dp1154, Centre
    for Economic Performance, LSE.

 [6] Bobonis, Gustavo J. and Shatz, Howard J. (2007) Agglomeration, Adjustment, and State
    Policies in the Location of Foreign Direct Investment in the United States. Review of Eco-
    nomics and Statistics 89(1): 30-43.

 [7] Chen, Maggie (2011) Interdependence in Multinational Production Networks. Canadian
    Journal of Economics 44(3): 930-956.

 [8] Debaere Peter, Lee, Joonhyung, and Paik, Myungho (2010) Agglomeration, Backward and
    Forward linkages: Evidence from South Korean Investment in China Canadian Journal of
    Economics 43(2), 520-546.

 [9] Duranton, Gilles and Overman, Henry (2005) Testing for Localization Using MicroGeo-
    graphic Data. Review of Economic Studies 72(4): 1077-1106.

[10] Duranton, Gilles and Overman, Henry (2008) Exploring the Detailed Location Patterns of
    U.K. Manufacturing Industries Using Microgeographic Data. Journal of Regional Science
    48(1): 213-243.

[11] Duranton, Gilles and Puga, Diego (2004) Micro-foundations of urban agglomeration
    economies. In J. Vernon Henderson and Jacques-François Thisse (eds.) Handbook of Re-
    gional and Urban Economics, Vol. 4. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2063-2117.

[12] Duranton, Gilles and Puga, Diego (2005) From Sectoral to Functional Urban Specialisation.
    Journal of Urban Economics 57(2): 343-370.




                                             24
[13] Ellison, Glenn and Glaeser, Edward (1997) Geographic Concentration in U.S. Manufacturing
    Industries: A Dartboard Approach. Journal of Political Economy 105(5): 889-927.

[14] Ellison, Glenn, Glaeser, Edward and Kerr, William (2010) What Causes Industry Agglom-
    eration? Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns. American Economic Review 100(3):
    1195–1213.

[15] Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam B. Ja¤e, and Manuel Trajtenberg (2001) The NBER Patent Cita-
    tion Data File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools. National Bureau of Economic
    Research Working Paper 8498.

[16] Harrison, Ann E., Love, Inessa and McMillan, Margaret S. (2004) Global Capital Flows and
    Financing Constraints. Journal of Development Economics 75(1): 269-301.

[17] Hanson, Gordon (2005) Market potential, increasing returns and geographic concentration.
    Journal of International Economics 67(1): 1-24.

[18] Head, Keith and Mayer, Thierry. (2004a) Market Potential and the Location of Japanese
    Firms in the European Union. Review of Economics and Statistics 86(4): 959-972.

[19] Head, Keith and Mayer, Thierry (2004b) The Empirics of Agglomeration and Trade. In:
    Henderson, J.V., and Thisse, J.-F. (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics,
    volume 4. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 2609-2669.

[20] Head, Keith, Ries, John and Swenson, Deborah (1995) Agglomeration Bene…ts and Location
    Choice: Evidence from Japanese Manufacturing Investments in the United States. Journal
    of International Economics 38(3-4): 223-247.

[21] Helpman, Elhanan, Melitz, Marc, and Yeaple, Stephen (2004) Export versus FDI with
    Heterogeneous Firms. American Economic Review 94(1): 300-316.

[22] Helsley, Robert W. and Strange, William C. (1990) Matching and Agglomeration Economies
    in a System of Cities. Regional Science and Urban Economics 20(2): 189-212.

[23] Ja¤e, Adam, Trajtenberg, Manuel and Fogarty, Michael (2000) Knowledge Spillovers and
    Patent Citations: Evidence from a Survey of Inventors. American Economic Review Paper
    and Proceedings 90(2): 215-218.

[24] Krugman, Paul (1991) Increasing Returns and Economic Geography. Journal of Political
    Economy 99(3): 483-499.

[25] Lipsey, Robert E. (1978) The Creation of Microdata Sets for Enterprises and Establishments.
    Annales de l’INSEE 30(31): 395-422.

[26] Markusen, James and Venables, Anthony J. (2000) The Theory of Endowment, Intra-
    industry and Multi-national trade. Journal of International Economics 52(2): 209-234.

                                              25
[27] Markusen, James (2002) Multinational Firms and the Theory of International Trade. Cam-
    bridge: MIT Press.

[28] Marshall, Alfred (1890) Principles of Economics. London: MacMillan and Co.

[29] Navaretti, Giorgio Barba and Venables, Anthony J. (2006) Multinational Firms in the World
    Economy. Princeton University Press.

[30] Ottaviano, Gianmarco I. P. and Puga, Diego, (1998) Agglomeration in the Global Economy:
    A Survey of the "New Economic Geography." World Economy 21(6): 707-731.

[31] Ottaviano, Gianmarco and Thisse, Jacques-François (2004). Agglomeration and economic
    geography. In: Henderson, J. Vernon, and Thisse, Jacques-François. (Eds.), Handbook of
    Regional and Urban Economics, vol. 4. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2563-2608.

[32] Puga, Diego (2010) The Magnitude and Causes of Agglomeration Economies. Journal of
    Regional Science 50(1): 203-219.

[33] Redding, Stephen (2010) The Empirics of New Economic Geography. Journal of Regional
    Science 50(1): 297-311.

[34] Redding, Stephen (2011) Economic Geography: a Review of the Theoretical and Empirical
    Literature. The Palgrave Handbook of International Trade, Chapter 16.

[35] Redding, Stephen and Venables, Anthony (2004) Economic Geography and International
    Inequality. Journal of International Economics 62(1): 53-82.

[36] Rosenthal, Stuart and Strange, William (2001) The Determinants of Agglomeration. Journal
    of Urban Economics 50(2): 191–229.

[37] Rosenthal, Stuart and Strange, William (2003) Geography, Industrial Organization, and
    Agglomeration. Review of Economics and Statistics 85(2): 377-393.

[38] Rosenthal, Stuart and Strange, William (2004) Evidence on the nature and sources of ag-
    glomeration economies. In: Henderson, J. Vernon, Thisse, Jacques-François (Eds.), Hand-
    book of Regional and Urban Economics, vol. 4. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2119-2171.

[39] Rotemberg, Julio and Saloner, Garth (2000) Competition and Human Capital Accumula-
    tion: A Theory of Interregional Specialization and Trade. Regional Scienc

[40] Venables, Anthony (1996) Equilibrium Locations of Vertically Linked Industries. Interna-
    tional Economic Review 37(2): 341-359.

[41] Yeaple, Stephen (2003) The Complex Integration Strategies of Multinational Firms and
    Cross-Country Dependencies in the Structure of Foreign Direct Investment. Journal of In-
    ternational Economics 60(2): 293-314.


                                             26
        Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for MNC and Domestic Agglomeration Densities

                                            Obs.    Mean     Std. Dev.     Min.    Max.

                                  MNC foreign subsidiaries
               Threshold (T) = 50 km 8,001 0.005        0.001              0.001   0.013
               T = 100 km            8,001 0.009        0.002              0.002   0.025
               T = 200 km            8,001 0.019        0.005              0.005   0.051
               T = 400 km            8,001 0.041        0.010              0.011   0.112
               T = 800 km            8,001 0.097        0.024              0.025   0.254

                       MNC foreign subsidiaries (employment-weighted)
               Threshold (T) = 50 km 8,001 0.004        0.003    0.000             0.023
               T = 100 km             8,001 0.008       0.005    0.000             0.042
               T = 200 km             8,001 0.017       0.009    0.000             0.077
               T = 400 km             8,001 0.036       0.019    0.000             0.128
               T = 800 km             8,001 0.079       0.037    0.001             0.243

                                           Domestic plants
               Threshold (T) = 50 km       8,001 0.004          0.002      0.000   0.048
               T = 100 km                  8,001 0.008          0.003      0.001   0.091
               T = 200 km                  8,001 0.019          0.007      0.003   0.191
               T = 400 km                  8,001 0.045          0.015      0.010   0.379
               T = 800 km                  8,001 0.101          0.032      0.029   0.472

                           Domestic plants (employment-weighted)
               Threshold (T) = 50 km 8,001 0.003       0.002     0.000             0.046
               T = 100 km              8,001 0.007     0.003     0.001             0.089
               T = 200 km              8,001 0.015     0.007     0.003             0.178
               T = 400 km              8,001 0.037     0.015     0.007             0.331
               T = 800 km              8,001 0.087     0.031     0.021             0.458

                                         MNC headquarters
               Threshold (T) = 50 km      8,001 0.008           0.002      0.003   0.031
               T = 100 km                 8,001 0.016           0.004      0.005   0.059
               T = 200 km                 8,001 0.032           0.008      0.009   0.117
               T = 400 km                 8,001 0.069           0.018      0.020   0.251
               T = 800 km                 8,001 0.153           0.043      0.043   0.544

Notes: This table reports the summary statistics of agglomeration densities for MNC foreign subsidiaries,
domestic plants, and MNC headquarters at 50, 100, 200, 400 and 800 km. All industry pairs (SIC3) are
included.




                                                   27
                Table 2: Within- and Between-Industry Agglomeration Densities

                                              Within-Industry     Between-Industry
                                              Obs.    Mean        Obs.     Mean

                                  MNC foreign subsidiaries
                 Threshold (T) = 50 km 126       0.006     7,875             0.005
                 T = 100 km             126      0.011     7,875             0.009
                 T = 200 km             126      0.022     7,875             0.019
                 T = 400 km             126      0.048     7,875             0.041
                 T = 800 km             126      0.108     7,875             0.096

                       MNC foreign subsidiary (employment-weighted)
                 Threshold (T) = 50 km 126       0.006   7,875     0.004
                 T = 100 km              126     0.012   7,875     0.008
                 T = 200 km              126     0.024   7,875     0.015
                 T = 400 km              126     0.049   7,875     0.036
                 T = 800 km              126     0.104   7,875     0.079

                                      Domestic plants
                 Threshold (T) = 50 km 126       0.007            7,875      0.004
                 T = 100 km             126      0.014            7,875      0.008
                 T = 200 km             126      0.029            7,875      0.019
                 T = 400 km             126      0.065            7,875      0.045
                 T = 800 km             126      0.135            7,875      0.107

                           Domestic plants (employment-weighted)
                 Threshold (T) = 50 km 126       0.006    7,875              0.003
                 T = 100 km              126     0.013    7,875              0.007
                 T = 200 km              126     0.026    7,875              0.015
                 T = 400 km              126     0.057    7,875              0.036
                 T = 800 km              126     0.116    7,875              0.087

                                     MNC headquarters
                 Threshold (T) = 50 km 126     0.009              7,875      0.008
                 T = 100 km             126    0.018              7,875      0.015
                 T = 200 km             126    0.037              7,875      0.032
                 T = 400 km             126    0.078              7,875      0.069
                 T = 800 km             126    0.171              7,875      0.153

Notes: This table reports the summary statistics of agglomeration densities for within- and between-
industry pairs, respectively, for MNC foreign subsidiaries, domestic plants, and MNC headquarters at 50,
100, 200, 400 and 800 km.




                                                  28
              Table 3: Correlations of MNC and Domestic Agglomeration Densities

                               MNC foreign subsidiaries v.s. Domestic plants

                   50km    100km    200km    400km     800km      50km    100km   200km   400km   800km
                   (sub)    (sub)    (sub)    (sub)     (sub)     (dom)   (dom)   (dom)   (dom)   (dom)
 T=50km(sub)        1.00
 T=100km(sub)       0.99    1.00
 T=200km(sub)       0.99    0.99     1.00
 T=400km(sub)       0.96    0.97     0.99     1.00
 T=800km(sub)       0.89    0.92     0.95     0.98         1.00
 T=50km(dom)       0.17     0.17     0.16     0.15         0.12   1.00
 T=100km(dom)       0.18    0.18     0.17     0.16         0.13   0.99    1.00
 T=200km(dom)       0.20    0.19     0.19     0.18         0.15   0.99    0.99    1.00
 T=400km(dom)       0.24    0.24     0.24     0.23         0.21   0.96    0.97    0.98    1.00
 T=800km(dom)       0.31    0.31     0.31     0.31         0.29   0.79    0.81    0.85    0.92     1.00

                   MNC foreign subsidiaries v.s. Domestic plants (employment weighted)

                   50km    100km    200km    400km     800km      50km    100km   200km   400km   800km
                   (sub)    (sub)    (sub)    (sub)     (sub)     (dom)   (dom)   (dom)   (dom)   (dom)
 T=50km(sub)        1.00
 T=100km(sub)       0.99    1.00
 T=200km(sub)       0.99    0.99     1.00
 T=400km(sub)       0.99    0.99     0.99     1.00
 T=800km(sub)       0.95    0.95     0.96     0.98         1.00
 T=50km(dom)       0.33     0.33     0.33     0.33         0.32   1.00
 T=100km(dom)       0.33    0.33     0.33     0.33         0.32   0.99    1.00
 T=200km(dom)       0.33    0.33     0.33     0.33         0.32   0.99    0.99    1.00
 T=400km(dom)       0.33    0.33     0.33     0.34         0.33   0.96    0.97    0.98    1.00
 T=800km(dom)       0.31    0.31     0.32     0.32         0.33   0.81    0.82    0.86    0.93     1.00

                             MNC foreign subsidiaries v.s. MNC headquarters

                   50km    100km    200km    400km     800km      50km    100km   200km   400km   800km
                   (sub)    (sub)    (sub)    (sub)     (sub)     (hq)     (hq)    (hq)    (hq)    (hq)
 T=50km(sub)        1.00
 T=100km(sub)       0.99    1.00
 T=200km(sub)       0.99    0.99     1.00
 T=400km(sub)       0.96    0.97     0.99     1.00
 T=800km(sub)       0.90    0.92     0.95     0.98         1.00
 T=50km(hq)        0.44     0.46     0.48     0.52         0.56   1.00
 T=100km(hq)        0.43    0.45     0.48     0.52         0.57   0.99    1.00
 T=200km(hq)        0.41    0.43     0.46     0.52         0.58   0.99    0.99    1.00
 T=400km(hq)        0.37    0.39     0.44     0.51         0.59   0.96    0.97    0.99    1.00
 T=800km(hq)        0.35    0.38     0.43     0.51         0.59   0.92    0.94    0.97    0.99     1.00

Notes: This table reports the correlations between the agglomeration densities of MNC foreign subsidiaries
and domestic plants and between MNC foreign subsidiaries and MNC headquarters at 50, 100, 200, 400
and 800 km.




                                                      29
Table 4: Comparing the distance density distributions of MNC and domestic plants: First-order
stochastic dominance test


 Industry characteristics                Two-sided K-S test p-value                    One-sided K-S test p-value
                                       MNC foreign subsidiary = Domestic            MNC foreign subsidiary < Domestic
 Capital intensity>median                            0.00                                         0.00
 Skilled-labor intensity>median                      0.00                                         0.00
 R-D intensity>median                                0.00                                         0.00

Notes: This table reports the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test results that compare MNC and domestic plants’
distance density distributions at 50 km for relatively capital-, skilled-labor-, and R-D-intensive industries.
"Capital intensity" is the industry’s ratio of capital expenditure relative to value added; "skilled-labor
intensity" is the ratio of non-production workers’ payroll to value added. Both variables are computed
based on the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database. "R-D intensity" is the median …rm’s ratio
of R-D expenditures relative to value added in an industry, computed based on the COMPUTSTAT
database.




                                                     30
    Table 5: The Roles of Industry and Plant Characteristics in Plant-level Agglomeration

         Dependent Variable:           T= 50 km      T= 50 km       T= 100 km      T= 100 km
         Plant Agglom. Index
         MNC Dummy                     -0.001***        -0.001***   -0.003***       -0.003***
                                         (0.000)          (0.000)     (0.000)         (0.000)
         x IO Linkages                    0.002            0.003       0.006           0.006
                                         (0.002)          (0.002)     (0.004)         (0.004)
         x Capital Intensity            0.005***         0.005***    0.009***        0.009***
                                         (0.002)          (0.002)     (0.004)         (0.004)
         x Skilled-Labor Intensity      0.002***         0.002***    0.004***        0.004***
                                         (0.000)          (0.000)     (0.001)         (0.001)
         x RD Intensity                 0.0003*           0.0003*     0.001*          0.001*
                                         (0.000)          (0.000)     (0.000)         (0.000)
         Revenue                                         0.001***                   0.001***
                                                          (0.000)                     (0.000)
         Age                                            0.00004**                   0.0001**
                                                          (0.000)                     (0.000)
         Product Count                                     0.000                       0.000
                                                          (0.000)                     (0.000)
         State-Industry FE                Yes               Yes        Yes              Yes
         Obs.                           122,426          122,324     122,426         122,324
         R2                              0.997             0.997      0.997            0.997

Notes: This table estimates the roles of industry and plant characteristics in explaining the plant-level
agglomeration densities at 50, 100, 200, 400 and 800 km. Bootstrapped standard errors are reported in
parentheses, *** p0.01, ** p0.05, * p0.1. All regressions include region-industry …xed e¤ect. "MNC
dummy" is an indicator of MNC foreign subsidiaries. "Revenue", "age" and "product count" are a plant’s
logged revenue, age, and number of products, respectively. "Capital intensity" is the industry’s ratio
of capital expenditure relative to value added; "skilled-labor intensity" is the ratio of non-production
workers’ payroll to value added. Both variables are computed based on the NBER-CES Manufacturing
Industry Database. "R-D intensity" is the median …rm’s ratio of R-D expenditures relative to value added
in an industry, computed based on the COMPUTSTAT database.




                                                   31
Table 6: The Roles of Agglomeration Economies in the Agglomeration of MNC Foreign Sub-
sidiaries v.s. Domestic Plants

 Dependent Variable:             T= 50 km      T= 100 km       T= 200 km       T=400 km       T=800 km
 MNC Sub Agglom. Index

 IO Linkages                       -0.001          -0.001          -0.002         -0.005         -0.010
                                  (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.003)        (0.006)        (0.009)
 Capital Good                      -0.000          -0.000          0.000         0.001*        0.003**
                                  (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)          0.000        (0.001)
 Labor                           -0.0002**       -0.0004**       -0.001**       -0.002**       -0.003**
                                  (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.001)        (0.001)
 Technology                        0.003*          0.006*         0.013*         0.025*        0.042**
                                  (0.002)         (0.004)         (0.008)        (0.015)        (0.022)

 Obs.                               8,001          8,001           8,001          8,001          8,001
 R2                                  0.61           0.61            0.62           0.67           0.76


 IO Linkages                       -0.007         -0.007          -0.007          -0.007         -0.007
 Capital Good                      -0.004         -0.003          0.001            0.010         0.021
 Labor                             -0.026         -0.026          -0.027          -0.026         -0.019
 Technology                        0.022          0.021           0.021            0.019         0.016

Notes: This table estimates the role of agglomeration economies in explaining how MNC foreign sub-
sidiaries agglomerate relative to domestic counterfactuals in the same industry at 50, 100, 200, 400 and
800 km. Bootstrapped standard errors are reported in parentheses, *** p0.01, ** p0.05, * p0.1. All
regressions include industry …xed e¤ect. "IO Linkages" is the average of an industry pair’s shares of inputs
that come directly from each other, calculated using the U.S. Benchmark Input-Output Data. "Capital
Goods" is an industry pair’s correlation in their investments in capital goods, calculated based on the BEA
capital ‡ow table (CFT). "Labor" is an industry pair’s correlation in their use of occupations, calculated
using the BLS’s National Industry-Occupation Employment Matrix. "Technology" measures the extent
to which an industry pair’s patents cite each other, constructed using the USPTO data. Normalized beta
coe¢ cients are shown in the lower panel.




                                                    32
Table 7: The Roles of Agglomeration Economies in the Employment-Weighted Agglomeration
of MNC Foreign Subsidiaries v.s. Domestic Plants


 Dependent Variable:                       T= 50 km      T= 100 km      T= 200 km       T=400 km      T=800 km
 MNC Sub Weighted Agglom. Index

 IO Linkages                                 -0.002*        -0.005*         -0.01*         -0.017         -0.016
                                             (0.001)        (0.003)        (0.006)        (0.012)        (0.018)
 Capital Good                                 0.0002        0.0005          0.001*        0.003**       0.009***
                                             (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.001)        (0.003)
 Labor                                       -0.0000        -0.0001        -0.0002         -0.001        -0.0002
                                             (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.002)
 Technology                                 0.016***       0.029***       0.056***       0.107***       0.198***
                                             (0.004)        (0.007)        (0.014)        (0.026)        (0.046)

 Industry FE                                   Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes
 Obs.                                         8,001          8,001          8,001          8,001            8,001
 R2                                            0.37           0.37           0.37           0.40             0.48


 IO Linkages                                 -0.023         -0.023         -0.023         -0.019            -0.009
 Capital Good                                 0.020         0.020           0.023         0.031              0.047
 Labor                                       -0.001         -0.003         -0.006         -0.008            -0.001
 Technology                                   0.073         0.073           0.071         0.068              0.063

Notes: This table estimates the role of agglomeration economies in explaining how employment-weighted
MNC foreign subsidiaries agglomerate relative to domestic counterfactuals in the same industry at 50,
100, 200, 400 and 800 km. Bootstrapped standard errors are reported in parentheses, *** p0.01, **
p0.05, * p0.1. All regressions include industry …xed e¤ect. "IO Linkages" is the average of an industry
pair’s shares of inputs that come directly from each other, calculated using the U.S. Benchmark Input-
Output Data. "Capital Goods" is an industry pair’s correlation in their investments in capital goods,
calculated based on the BEA capital ‡ow table (CFT). "Labor" is an industry pair’s correlation in
their use of occupations, calculated using the BLS’s National Industry-Occupation Employment Matrix.
"Technology" measures the extent to which an industry pair’s patents cite each other, constructed using
the USPTO data. Normalized beta coe¢ cients are shown in the lower panel.




                                                   33
Table 8: The Roles of Agglomeration Economies in the Agglomeration of MNC Headquarters
v.s. Domestic Plants

 Dependent Variable:            T= 50 km      T= 100 km       T= 200 km      T=400 km       T=800 km
 MNC HQ Agglom. Index

 IO Linkages                       -0.002         -0.004         -0.007          -0.011        -0.008
                                  (0.001)        (0.003)        (0.005)         (0.010)       (0.014)
 Capital Good                     -0.0001        -0.0002        -0.0004         -0.0003         0.001
                                  (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.001)       (0.001)
 Labor                           -0.0003**      -0.001**       -0.001**       -0.003***      -0.004***
                                  (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.001)       (0.002)
 Technology                      0.004***       0.008***       0.016***        0.036***      0.082***
                                  (0.001)        (0.003)        (0.005)         (0.011)       (0.022)

 Industry FE                        Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
 Obs.                              8,001          8,001          8,001          8,001          8,001
 R2                                0.71            0.72          0.74           0.80           0.87


 IO Linkages                      -0.019         -0.018          -0.016         -0.011         -0.004
 Capital Good                     -0.011         -0.011          -0.008         -0.002          0.005
 Labor                            -0.034         -0.034          -0.034         -0.029         -0.023
 Technology                        0.032          0.031           0.031          0.031          0.034

Notes: This table estimates the role of agglomeration economies in explaining how MNC headquarters
agglomerate relative to domestic counterfactuals in the same industry at 50, 100, 200, 400 and 800 km.
Bootstrapped standard errors are reported in parentheses, *** p0.01, ** p0.05, * p0.1. All regressions
include industry …xed e¤ect. "IO Linkages" is the average of an industry pair’s shares of inputs that come
directly from each other, calculated using the U.S. Benchmark Input-Output Data. "Capital Goods" is an
industry pair’s correlation in their investments in capital goods, calculated based on the BEA capital ‡ow
table (CFT). "Labor" is an industry pair’s correlation in their use of occupations, calculated using the
BLS’s National Industry-Occupation Employment Matrix. "Technology" measures the extent to which an
industry pair’s patents cite each other, constructed using the USPTO data. Normalized beta coe¢ cients
are shown in the lower panel.




                                                   34
    Table 9: The Roles of Agglomeration Economies in the Process of MNC Agglomeration

 Dependent Variable:            T= 50 km      T= 100 km       T= 200 km       T=400 km      T=800 km
 MNC Sub Agglom. Index

 IO Linkages                       -0.002         -0.004          -0.007         -0.011        -0.008
                                  (0.001)        (0.003)         (0.005)        (0.010)       (0.014)
 Capital Good                     -0.0001        -0.0002         -0.0004        -0.0003        0.001
                                  (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.001)       (0.001)
 Labor                           -0.0003**      -0.001**        -0.001**      -0.003***      -0.004***
                                  (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.001)       (0.002)
 Technology                      0.004***       0.008***        0.016***       0.036***      0.082***
                                  (0.001)        (0.003)         (0.005)        (0.011)       (0.022)

 Industry FE                        Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
 Obs.                              8,001          8,001          8,001           8,001         8,001
 R2                                 0.71           0.72           0.74            0.80          0.87


 IO Linkages                       -0.019         -0.018         -0.016         -0.011         -0.004
 Capital Good                      -0.011         -0.011         -0.008         -0.002          0.005
 Labor                             -0.034         -0.034         -0.034         -0.029         -0.023
 Technology                        0.032          0.031          0.031           0.031         0.034

Notes: This table estimates the role of agglomeration economies in explaining how new MNC foreign
subsidiaries agglomerate with existing MNC foreign subsidiaries in comparison to their domestic coun-
terfactuals in the same industry at 50, 100, 200, 400 and 800 km. Bootstrapped standard errors are
reported in parentheses, *** p0.01, ** p0.05, * p0.1. All regressions include industry …xed e¤ect.
"IO Linkages" is the average of an industry pair’s shares of inputs that come directly from each other,
calculated using the U.S. Benchmark Input-Output Data. "Capital Goods" is an industry pair’s cor-
relation in their investments in capital goods, calculated based on the BEA capital ‡ow table (CFT).
"Labor" is an industry pair’s correlation in their use of occupations, calculated using the BLS’s National
Industry-Occupation Employment Matrix. "Technology" measures the extent to which an industry pair’s
patents cite each other, constructed using the USPTO data. Normalized beta coe¢ cients are shown in
the lower panel.




                                                   35
                 Table A.1: Descriptive Statistics for Agglomeration Economies

                                                    Mean      Std. Dev.    Min.     Max.
                 Input-Output (IO) Linkages         0.003       0.012      0.000    0.193
                 Capital Good                       0.476       0.209      0.004    1.000
                 Labor                              0.333       0.227      0.014    1.000
                 Technology                         0.007       0.012      0.000    0.179

Notes: This table reports the summary statistics of agglomertion economy measures. "IO Linkages" is
the average of an industry pair’s shares of inputs that come directly from each other, calculated using
the U.S. Benchmark Input-Output Data. "Capital Goods" is an industry pair’s correlation in their
investments in capital goods, calculated based on the BEA capital ‡ow table (CFT). "Labor" is an
industry pair’s correlation in their use of occupations, calculated using the BLS’s National Industry-
Occupation Employment Matrix. "Technology" measures the extent to which an industry pair’s patents
cite each other, constructed using the USPTO data.




                          Table A.2: Correlations of Agglomeration Economies

                        IO Linkages     IO Linkages         Capital Good    Labor     Technology    Technology
                                          (max.)                                                      (max.)
 IO Linkages                1.000
 IO Linkages (max.)         0.973           1.000
 Capital Good               0.191           0.189              1.000
 Labor                      0.232           0.225              0.567        1.000
 Technology                 0.291           0.284              0.230        0.331           1.000
 Technology (max.)          0.264           0.257              0.188        0.297           0.976     1.000

Notes: This table reports the correlations between agglomeration economy measures. "IO Linkages" is
the average of an industry pair’s shares of inputs that come directly from each other, calculated using
the U.S. Benchmark Input-Output Data. "Capital Goods" is an industry pair’s correlation in their
investments in capital goods, calculated based on the BEA capital ‡ow table (CFT). "Labor" is an
industry pair’s correlation in their use of occupations, calculated using the BLS’s National Industry-
Occupation Employment Matrix. "Technology" measures the extent to which an industry pair’s patents
cite each other, constructed using the USPTO data.




                                                    36
           Table A.3: Top Industry Pairs by the MNC Foreign-Subsidiary Agglomeration Index

                            MNC Foreign-Subsidiary Agglomeration Index
                                           T = 200 km
 274          Miscellaneous Publishing        379      Miscellaneous Transportation Equipment
 314          Footwear, Except Rubber         313      Boot And Shoe Cut Stock And Findings
 225               Knitting Mills             313      Boot And Shoe Cut Stock And Findings
 367   Electronic Components And Accessories 225                    Knitting Mills
 225               Knitting Mills             314              Footwear, Except Rubber
                                           T = 400 km
 274          Miscellaneous Publishing        379      Miscellaneous Transportation Equipment
 314          Footwear, Except Rubber         313      Boot And Shoe Cut Stock And Findings
 225               Knitting Mills             313      Boot And Shoe Cut Stock And Findings
 274          Miscellaneous Publishing        213     Chewing And Smoking Tobacco And Snu¤
 263              Paperboard Mills            213     Chewing And Smoking Tobacco And Snu¤

                  Employment-Weighted MNC Foreign-Subsidiary Agglomeration Index
                                           T = 200 km
 394       Dolls, Toys, Games And Sporting    314            Footwear, Except Rubber
 394       Dolls, Toys, Games And Sporting    313     Boot And Shoe Cut Stock And Findings
 225                 Knitting Mills           314            Footwear, Except Rubber
 314           Footwear, Except Rubber        313     Boot And Shoe Cut Stock And Findings
 225                 Knitting Mills           394 Dolls, Toys, Games And Sporting And Athletic
                                           T = 400 km
 394       Dolls, Toys, Games And Sporting    314            Footwear, Except Rubber
 394       Dolls, Toys, Games And Sporting    313     Boot And Shoe Cut Stock And Findings
 225                 Knitting Mills           314            Footwear, Except Rubber
 314           Footwear, Except Rubber        313     Boot And Shoe Cut Stock And Findings
 225                 Knitting Mills           313     Boot And Shoe Cut Stock And Findings

Notes: Authors’calculations.




                                            37
