NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PROFITING FROM REGULATION:
AN EVENT STUDY OF THE EU CARBON MARKET
James B. Bushnell
Howard Chong
Erin T. Mansur
Working Paper 15572
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15572

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2009

The authors are grateful for helpful discussion and comments from Antonio Bento, Denny Ellerman,
Arik Levinsohn, Matt Kotchen, and seminar participants at Environmental Defense Fund, Georgetown,
Harvard, Minnesota,UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UC Energy Institute, and Yale University. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by James B. Bushnell, Howard Chong, and Erin T. Mansur. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Profiting from Regulation: An Event Study of the EU Carbon Market
James B. Bushnell, Howard Chong, and Erin T. Mansur
NBER Working Paper No. 15572
December 2009
JEL No. G14,H22,H23,Q50,Q54
ABSTRACT
Tradable permit regulations have recently been implemented for climate change policy in many countries.
One of the first mandatory markets was the EU Emission Trading System, whose first phase ran from
2005-07. Unlike taxes, permits expose firms to volatility in regulatory costs, but are typically accompanied
by property rights in the form of grandfathered permits. In this paper, we examine the effect of this
type of environmental regulation on profits. In particular, changes in permit prices affect: (1) the direct
and indirect input costs, (2) output revenue, and (3) the carbon permit asset value. Depending on abatement
costs, output price sensitivity, and permit allocation, these effects may vary considerably across industries
and firms. We run an event study of the carbon price crash on April 25, 2006 by examining the daily
stock returns for 90 stocks from carbon intensive industries and approximately 600 stocks in the broad
EUROSTOXX index. In general, firms in industries that tended to be either carbon intensive, or electricity
intensive, but not involved in international trade, were hurt by the decline in permit prices. In industries
that were known to be net short of permits, the cleanest firms saw the largest declines in share value.
In industries known to be long in permits, firms granted the largest allocations were most harmed.

James B. Bushnell
Department of Economics
468H Heady Hall
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50011
and NBER
jimb@iastate.edu
Howard Chong
UC Energy Institute
2547 Channing Way
Berkeley, CA 94720
HGChong@berkeley.edu

Erin T. Mansur
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
erin.mansur@yale.edu

1

Introduction

There is a long-standing perception of a fundamental conflict between the interests of business and environmental regulators. In many cases regulators apply policies that increase
production costs, restrict production, or otherwise constrain the actions of firms. There
is a rich literature chronicling the impacts that regulations such as the clean air act have
had on industrial activity.1 With greenhouse gas regulation on the horizon in the US, and
already under way in the European Union, the question of the impacts of these regulations
on industry has taken center stage. As countries and regions around the world develop
policies for limiting greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, there is an understandably great interest in how these policies will impact the competitiveness, productivity, and profitability
of the industries to which they are applied.
Measuring the economic impacts of GHG regulations obviously has direct relevance to
setting the levels and timings of the regulations. Even contingent upon a specific goals
for GHG reductions, however, information about the overall magnitude and distribution
of economic impacts has importance for the policy-making process. This is most starkly
true in the case of cap-and-trade mechanisms, which create valuable new property rights
in the form of emissions credits. These credits constitute the “currency” of cap and
trade markets. They also provide an important tool to policy makers for distributing the
revenues collected by the carbon regulation. The process of allocating emissions credits,
while inevitably containing a strong element of political maneuvering, is usually grounded
in a desire to oﬀset some of the cost impacts of the introduction of carbon regulation.
Industries that claim to bear the brunt of the abatement costs usually stake the largest
claim to allocations of credits.
However, for most industrial enterprises, changes in direct abatement costs are only
one piece of a complicated profitability puzzle. The introduction of a price of CO2 into
an economy can have indirect impacts on firms that are not large CO2 emitters. In most
1

Gray (1987), Becker and Henderson (2002), Gray and Shadbegian (2003), List, et al. (2004).

2

industries, increases in CO2 costs will be reflected in output prices, and therefore revenues,
as well as in costs. A more complete picture of these net impacts is necessary in any attempt
to align allocations to the true economic impacts of CO2 regulation on firms.
Indeed, the impact of regulations on profitability is ambiguous, even when those regulations have a substantial impact of costs. There are several mechanisms, ranging from
restricting entry (e.g. Ryan, 2007) to raising rivals’ costs (e.g. Puller, 2005) through which
revenue increases can outstrip cost increases, enhancing profitability.2 With cap-and-trade
regulations, the free allocation of emissions credits adds an additional source of revenue.
In the case of GHG markets, these assets can total hundreds of billions of dollars.
Despite the politically motivated tendency to award emissions credits proportionally to
emissions, several papers have concluded that this likely amounts to overcompensation of
the aﬀected industries. These papers all use various simulation methodologies to forecast
potential impacts of carbon taxes or caps. Bovenberg and Goulder (2001) and Goulder,
et. al (2009) utilize general equilibrium models to assess the likely impacts of a carbon tax
and various cap-and trade policies on a wide set of industries. Burtraw and Palmer (2008)
simulate the US electricity sector under potential cap-and-trade scenarios. Smale et al.
(2006) simulate several industries under a carbon cap in Europe using an assumption of
Cournot competition. All these studies find that for many industries, compensation of less
than 20 percent of emissions would oﬀset the profitability impacts of regulation.
In this paper we study impacts on firms of the largest, in monetary terms, cap-andtrade market in the world the European Union’s Emissions Trading System (ETS) for CO2 .
This is by far the most significant eﬀort at regulating CO2 emissions in the world. As a
role model for carbon cap-and-trade, the ETS has been closely scrutinized both within
and outside the European Union. From the outset, the relative impact of the ETS on EU
industries has been a controversial topic, one that has strongly influenced policies for the
2

For example, Ryan (2007) demonstrates how the Clean Air Act significantly increased the sunk cost
of entry in the Portland cement industry. Puller (2006) demonstrates how firms can profit from increased
regulation by raising rival’s costs, leading them to promote the adoption of those regulations.

3

allocation of emissions credits. During its first phase of operation from 2005 through 2007,
the prices of emissions credits in the EU market were quite volatile. While this volatility
has sparked criticism about the design and implementation of this phase of the market,
we take advantage of it in order to examine the impact of CO2 prices on firms.
Rather than attempting to directly untangle the many competing eﬀects of the ETS
on firms, we focus on the stock market valuations of public-traded firms subject to CO2
regulation. Specifically, we examine the impact of a sharp devaluation in CO2 prices in
late April 2006 as an event study on the share prices of eﬀected firms. Such an exercise
can be interpreted in several ways. Under an assumption of fundamental market valuation
these prices should reflect the market’s expected discounted future profits of the firms.
Even if one does not adhere to an assumption that the market fully reflects expectations
of future profitability, the event provides a useful window into the beliefs of the market
about the impacts of movements in CO2 prices.
Our results imply that rather than being hurt by the imposition of CO2 regulation,
several industrial sectors benefited from the ETS. Indeed the sharpest declines in equity
prices occur within industries that are the most carbon intensive, or electricity intensive.
Such a response indicates that CO2 prices play a significant role in determining product
prices and revenues in many of these industries. We also examine the responses in relation
to a measure of international trade exposure, and find weak evidence that the benefits of
higher CO2 prices were concentrated amongst sectors with little exposure to international
trade.
In section 2, we develop a simple model of the impacts of CO2 costs on firm profitability
in order to illustrate the potential impacts. In section 3, we briefly review the EU CO2
market and its pricing from 2005-07 and examine the impact of the crash in permit prices
in late April 2006. In section 4, we examine the underlying elements of firm characteristics
that influenced the response to the change in CO2 prices. We conclude in section 5.

4

2

Emissions Regulations and Firm Profits

In this section we develop a theoretical model considering the potential impacts of environmental regulation, or more specifically emissions costs, on firm profitability and performance. The model provides a useful framework for decomposing and illustrating the
various potential impacts, both positive and negative, of emissions costs on firms. Consider
a firm producing products for a market represented by the demand curve P (Q), where Q
represents total industry production in this market. The firm is subject to cap-and-trade
regulation of its emissions, which are in turn a function of its emissions rate r and its
total production q. We assume that the production technology determines the emissions
rate, r(q) and that this rate cannot be changed over the time horizon we are considering.
The per-unit price of emissions permits is τ , resulting in direct compliance costs of τ rq,
however the firm may also receive a free allocation of emissions credits A. Considering
both input and environmental costs, the net profits of this firm can be represented as

π = P (Q) ∗ q − C(q, ω) + τ A − τ rq
where the function C(q, ω) represents the total cost of producing q with a vector of
input costs w. The impact of a change in the permit price τ can be expressed as

∂π
∂Q
∂q
∂C
∂r
=P∗
+ P0
∗q−
+ A − rq −
τ
∂τ
∂τ
∂τ
∂τ
∂τ

(1)

where for notational brevity we have combined the input price and output adjustments
of a permit price shock above. In other words

∂C
∂C ∂ω ∂C ∂q
=
+
∂τ
∂ω ∂τ
∂q ∂τ
and
∂r
∂q
= r0 ∗
∂τ
∂τ
5

For firms with market power in their product market, we can also consider the eﬀect
on product prices to be a combination of changes in their own output and the output of
other firms. In other words, for firm i

P

0 ∂Q

∂τ

0

=P ∗

µ

∂q6=i ∂qi
+
∂τ
∂τ

¶

where qi is the output of firm i and q6=i is the output of all other firms, and therefore
Q = qi + q6=i .
If we simplify the responses of firms further by assuming that emissions rates r are
constant, we can further reduce equation 1 to

∂π
∂Q
∂q
∂C
=P∗
+ P0
∗q−
+ A − rq
∂τ
∂τ
∂τ
∂τ
for shocks that have marginal influence on the output of firm i, the envelope theorem
would imply that

µ
¶
∂qi
∂C
0 ∂qi
P +P
∗ qi −
− rτ
=0
∂τ
∂q
∂τ

(2)

In other words, the change in profitability from changing own output levels would
be negligible. However, there are still eﬀects relating to direct costs, the value of ones
endowment of permits, and changes in market prices due to the responses of other firms
in the industry. Removing the terms from 2 from equation 1 we are left with

∂π i
∂q6=i
∂C ∂ω
= P0
∗ qi −
+ A − rqi
∂τ
∂τ
∂ω ∂τ

(3)

The individual terms in equation 3 illustrate the competing potential eﬀects of a change
in the permit price. First, revenues may increase due to the fact that other firms in the
industry have collectively responded by reducing output. This is similar to a “raising
rivals’ costs” eﬀect.3 Under the assumption that firms would reduce output in the face of
3

Salop and Scheﬀman, 1983

6

an increase in permit costs, this term would be positive. Second, the middle term on the
right hand side of (3) captures the impact of changes in input costs due to a change in the
permit price. To the extent that these inputs (e.g. electricity) come from industries that
are themselves subject to the environmental regulation, this term would presumably be
negative. The last term, A − rq reflects the change in direct compliance costs of a change
in permit prices. If a firm is “short” in permits, then A < rq and this term would be
negative.
The model is intended to be general, encompassing both perfectly competitive industries and those in which individual firms have market power. However, it is important
to also acknowledge aspects of oligopoly competition that are not explicitly represented
within this framework. In oligopoly settings, cost shocks such as environmental regulations
can increase profitability by increasing the severity of market power in an industry. In a
dynamic setting, the environmental regulation could serve as a barrier to entry or even as
a collusive focal point. Even in a static setting the imposition of an environmental tax can
increase margins under certain demand structures (Seade, 1985).
In the following sections, we will examine each of these potential eﬀects empirically.
The relative magnitudes of these eﬀects will largely depend upon three key factors, the
elasticity of demand for the firm’s product, the firm’s endowment of permits, and the
relationship between a firm’s marginal cost and its average cost with respect to emissions
and other input prices. Figure 1 helps to illustrate these factors. We assume here that
a firm faces a residual demand curve D, and has a marginal cost function cτ 1 before the
imposition, or increase, in permit prices. In this we figure, we also assume that the demand
curve D is unaﬀected by a change in permit prices, one condition for which is that the
firm faces competition from outside the capped region.
The classic analysis of the incidence of taxation on such a firm would imply a vertical
shift of the marginal cost curve to cτ 2 . In the context of environmental regulation, this
is equivalent to assuming that emissions rates are constant for all production quantities.

7

If true the producer surplus is clearly reduced from the sum of areas B and C to the
area A in figure 1a. The allocation of revenues collected, or of permits, would then be
critical in determining the net eﬀect of the regulation. If the firm received a free allocation
equivalent to 100% of its ex-post emissions, this would be a transfer equivalent to the areas
C and D, which totally oﬀsets the increased regulatory cost. As long as the demand for
product is suﬃciently inelastic, the firm’s net profit improves because its revenue increases
without any increase in environmental costs. Indeed as Bovenberg and Goulder (2001)
demonstrate, only a relatively small allocation of emissions credits is necessary to fully
compensate many industries for changes in profits due to CO2 costs.
However, even without an allocation of emissions, the impact on firm profits can be
ambiguous. This is due to the fact that there are both heterogeneous firms and production
technologies within most industries. Consider a case where emissions rates are increasing
with production quantities, as illustrated in figure 1b. The increase in permit costs now
raises marginal costs, and therefore prices in this perfectly competitive circumstance. The
increase in average costs is well below the increase in marginal costs, however. Now the
new producer surplus, area A, could be larger than the previous surplus of B and C. A
similar, even larger, eﬀect could arise if an individual firm happens to have a “cleaner”
technology than its rivals. Such a circumstance would have the eﬀect of decreasing the
residual elasticity of demand for the clean firm. Again product prices could rise much
faster than average production costs.
Of course, such an eﬀect strongly depends upon the fact that much of the incidence of
increased emissions costs are being passed on to consumers. If the firm in question were
instead faced with very elastic demand for its product, even a substantial convexity in the
marginal cost curve could not compensate for the fact that the producer is absorbing the
bulk of the emissions cost increase (figure 1c).
This discussion is meant to illustrate the varied potential eﬀects and emphasize the
importance of several important industry characteristics in determining the net eﬀects of

8

environmental regulations. In the following section, we develop several proxy variables
meant to reflect these characteristics in order to examine the market return of individual
firms and industries in response to a substantial decline in emissions costs.

3

The EU Emissions Trading System

The EU Emissions Trading System (ETS) was developed as one of the central mechanisms
for which the European Union member states could achieve compliance with the commitments under the Kyoto treaty and is in many ways a remarkable accomplishment. The
world’s first significant cap-and-trade system for CO2 , the ETS covers over a dozen industries and 27 countries, including several that took on no Kyoto obligations. The ETS has
been rolled out in phases. The first phase, running from 2005 through 2007, was intended
as much to develop institutions and gain regulatory experience as to achieve substantial
CO2 reductions. The overall cap for the market was an aggregation of caps developed by
each participating country through their “national allocation plans,” previously analyzed
by Betz et al. (2004). The EU established guidelines for the development of these plans,
but member states were left with significant latitude. Eﬀorts at setting an appropriate cap
were complicated by the fact that, prior to 2005, the monitoring of CO2 emissions of many
facilities and countries was unreliable at best. Caps were supposed to be set in a manner
that would place emissions reductions on a trajectory consistent with meeting the Kyoto
targets. However, the eﬀective stringency of the Kyoto targets varies greatly amongst
EU member states, and the implementation plans themselves reflected large diﬀerences in
these goals, as well as in the relative weight countries chose to give to the capped sectors
covered by the ETS as opposed to those sectors counted under Kyoto but not under the
ETS.
A second source of diversity amongst participating nations was their relative approach
to assigning permits to the covered sectors. As chronicled in Ellerman and Buchner (2008),
Kettner et al. (2008), and Joskow and Ellerman (2008), countries such as Spain, Italy,
9

and the UK appear to have imposed more stringent caps and as a consequence the eﬀected
industries in these countries, particularly in the power sector, were allocated less permits
than their observed observations and were therefore net buyers of permits within the EU.
Industries in other countries, particularly in Eastern Europe, were observed to emit far
less than their allocations.
Another important contrast lay in the allocation of permits across the various industrial
sectors. Although there were diﬀerences in countries’ approaches to the allocation of
permits to their industries, some common themes emerge. In general, many regulated firms
in the manufacturing sectors received more permits than they subsequently needed to cover
their observed emissions. Those providing power and heat, most notably electricity firms,
were generally “short” of permits, but still received allocations equivalent to a substantial
majority of their emissions.
Overall, by the end of phase I, available permits outstripped measured emissions by
about 2.8% of the total available. Although the eventual surplus in permits led to a perception of intentionally lax regulation through “over-allocation,” the picture is more nuanced.
An ex-post realization of a surplus does not necessarily imply over-allocation, since a surplus of credits can arise from either over-allocation or over-abatement. Since emissions
prices were quite high for some of this period, it is natural to expect some abatement to
have occurred, at least while emission prices were high. Studies by Ellerman and Buchner
(2008) as well as Delarue et al. (2008) indicate that at least some abatement did take
place. In addition, macro-economic and weather shocks may have played a role in lower
than expected emissions, and specific directed regulations such as aggressive subsidies for
renewable electricity production may have been suﬃcient to tip the market into surplus.4
Importantly, none of this was known for much of the first phase, and it was only after the
phase was more than 2/3 complete that the surplus conditions pushed emissions prices to
near zero.
4

See Convery et al. (2008).

10

3.1

ETS Market Performance

The most notorious aspect of the ETS during phase I was the volatility of the permit
prices, which was greatly exacerbated by the fact that permits could not be “banked” for
use beyond 2007. The ETS market was characterized by an early period in which prices
were higher than anticipated and a later period in which the price eventually reached zero
in the face of a surplus of permits that held no value beyond 2007. From the onset of trading
in January through March 2006, prices rose steadily to over 30 Euro/ton. While this price
rise appears somewhat surprising in hindsight, given the eventual surplus of permits, it
was not necessarily considered anomalous at the time. Many attribute the relatively high
prices during this phase to the fact that prices for natural gas, which largely defines the
marginal costs of reducing CO2 emissions in the power sector through its substitution
for coal, were steadily rising during this period.5 In addition, while firms from countries
“short” on permits were apparently relatively active in trading from the beginning, those
from many “long” eastern European countries were not due to delays in integrating the
regulatory platforms with that of the EU. This may have contributed to masking what
later emerged to be a surplus of available permits.
The lack of reliable information about aggregate emissions was also a critical contributor to the uncertainty about price levels. This changed on April 25, 2006 when the first
reports of country level emissions began to leak into the permit market. As can be seen in
Figure 2, the reaction was dramatic. Over the next few days, the permit price as reported
on the European Climate Exchange fell from 28 Euros/ton on April 25 to 14 Euros/ton
on April 28. The price drop hit both phase I permit prices as well as permits covering
phase II, which had begun trading in 2006. In fact, the surpluses reported during those
periods were not reflective of the more modest surplus left at the end of phase I, and even
these initial reports were revised shortly after they were made public. By May 15, when
the final emissions totals were oﬃcially released, phase I prices had rebounded and then
5

Joskow and Ellerman, 2008.

11

fallen slightly again to settle around 16 Euros/ton.
During this one month period, the general movements of prices for both the phase I and
phase II permits had been generally consistent with each other, although the magnitudes
were more muted in the case of the longer-term phase II permits. Later in 2006 the two
prices series diverged for good, with the phase I prices starting a steady decline toward
zero and the phase II series settling into a range around 20 Euros/ton.

3.2

Equity Market Eﬀects

We now turn to the question of how the sharp devaluation in permit prices in April 2006
impacted expectations about firm profitability. A few papers have empirically looked
at diﬀerent segments of the EU market. Sijm, et al. (2006) examine the implications
specifically for electricity prices in the Netherlands and Germany and find substantial
pass-through of carbon cost. Convery, et. al. (2008) note that net incomes of several large
electricity producers increased throughout phase I of the ETS. Two similar papers, Veith,
et al. (2009), and Oberndorfer (2009) (2009) examine stock market returns of electricity
companies using a panel regression of share prices on CO2 prices throughout the phase
I period. Both find that share prices of large electricity producers who were regulated
under the ETS were positively linked with prices for CO2 . However, Veith, et al., find that
share prices of “clean” electricity producers not covered under the ETS had no significant
response to CO2 prices.
In this paper we also utilize equity prices of publicly traded firms. It is important
to note that many firms directly subject to the CO2 cap, as well as those in impacted
industries, are privately held or government owned. A large number of publicly traded
firms were also eﬀected, however, and we focus our attention on these firms. We employ a
standard event-study approach.6 We examine firms contained in the Dow Jones STOXX
6

Fama et al., 1969; more recent surveys include Brown and Warner, 1985, and MacKinlay, 1997

12

600 index, which is similar to the S&P 500 but covers European firms.7 We focus on
the three days after the initial leak of permit market information, the daily returns for
April 26-28. Several papers have utilized an event study approach to assess the impact of
environmental regulation on firm profits, including Kahn and Knittel (2002), Linn (2006)
and Linn (2009). Because this approach has usually utilized a political or legal decision
as the “event,” a common concern has been that information may have leaked into the
market before the examined event date. Here we can be confident here that there was
little leakage of information as this information would have impacted the CO2 price, which
was steadily rising up until our event date.
We utilize the following specification for investigating the potential for extraordinary
returns during this event window.

ln(Si,t /Si,t−1 ) = αi + β i ln(Mt /Mt−1 ) + γ i EV ENTt +

i,t

(4)

where Si,t is the share price of firm i and Mt is the price of the market index at time
t, and EV ENTt is a dummy variable that is scaled according to the length of the event
window. For our base specification, where the event window is 3 days, EV ENTt will be
scaled by 1/3 so that GAMMA represents the cumulative excess return during the event
window.
We run regression (4) for each stock in the index individually, and aggregate individual
γ i to summarize results by industry categories. We perform this aggregation through the
following regression.

7

γ
bi = θj + εi ∀ i ∈ j.

(5)

We chose this index because of its breadth of firms and of geography. Other commonly cited European
Indices such as the FTSE 100 and the DAX are more limited in coverage of European countries and
industries.

13

Industrial categories j are based upon NAICS 2 digit classifications.8 Intuitively, the
coeﬃcient value θj therefore represents the average eﬀect of all firm specific impacts within
each industry sector.
Table 1 summarizes the event eﬀects by industrial classification. Many of the largest
significant declines were registered in industries that feature prominently in the EU ETS,
including Mining and Oil & Gas Extraction and Utilities. However, there are also notable declines in such industries as Real Estate. Accommodation & Food Services, and
Construction. As we describe below, each of these industries are relatively large users
of electricity and sell to relatively local markets. The largest increase was in Wholesale
Trade.
These results are merely meant to summarize general eﬀects. The groupings in Table 1
are somewhat problematic, as classifications can be imperfect and there can be considerable heterogeneity of firms within a classification. This latter fact is highlighted by Table
2, which summarizes the eﬀects for firms contained in the Electricity sector, using auxiliary data on electricity generation units from the Carbon Monitoring for Action project
(carma.org) published by the Center for Global Development, Washington DC.
The second column of table 2 presents the event coeﬃcient for each firm, while columns
3-5 summarize some key characteristics of the firms. When one bores down into the detailed
characteristics of a firm, as is more easily done within the electricity sector, some suggestive
patterns begin to emerge. In general, the biggest declines were concentrated within firms
who produce electricity with relatively low CO2 emissions, such as the hydro or nuclear
intensive firms Fortum, British Energy, and Electricite de France. Some coal intensive
firms such as Drax and RWE registered declines, but they were more modest than those of
the “clean” producers. Last network operators such as National Grid and Red Electrica,
with no position in the production or sale of electricity, registered almost no impact.
8

These data are provided by Compustat. Thompsons Datastream provides a classification called INDM
which provides similar results as the 2-digit NAICS, but NAICS was chosen because it is more widely used
in the literature and because it is more easily linked to other industrial characteristics discussed below.
However, Weiner (2005) evaluates several industrial classification schemes and finds drawbacks in each.

14

These results are consistent with an explanation of the eﬀects that emphasizes the
importance of revenue impacts in the product markets. All the firms in Table 2 who sell
bulk electricity experienced declines in revenues, and only some experienced significantly
declines in production costs. Many of these firms were also substantial holders of emissions
permits at the time of the crash in permit prices. In the following section we develop
several more general indices meant to capture the relative sector level and firm specific
characteristics that could influence the permit price eﬀects and test their relevance on
market returns during this event period.

4

Testing Determinants of Profitability

In this section, we examine which industry and firm characteristics determine the profitability of some firms in the face of CO2 price changes. First we test the importance of
firms’ allocation of permits, net of emissions, in determining abnormal returns. Then we
test whether the share price changes described in the previous section are consistent with
a “revenue eﬀect.”

4.1

Asset Value of Permit Holdings

We first examine the eﬀect of permit allocation, and emissions on the performance of
share prices during the event. For this task we utilize the emissions data contained in
the EU’s Community Independent Transaction Log (CITL). This dataset contains facility
level information on the allocation and emissions of over 12,000 facilities throughout the
EU. Unfortunately, firm ownership of facilities is reported inconsistently within the CITL,
making necessary a manual matching of facilities to firms, and then to individual stock
listings.
We were able to match 90 publicly-traded firms in the largest sectors regulated by
the ETS. For each of these firms, we take total 2005 emissions and permit allocations
aggregated over all covered facilities owned by the firms.
15

We examine whether these firms’ permit allocations and emissions explain abnormal
returns. Given a drop in permit prices, those firms with positive net permit positions will
lose more profits than others with a negative net position, all else equal. In theory this
will be reflected in the stock price. We test this by estimating the following equation:

γ
bij = θj + μ(Ai − Ei )/Mi + η ij ,

(6)

where Ai be the historic 2005 allocation, Ei be historic 2005 emissions (as measured in
the spring of 2006), and Mi is the firm’s historic market cap in thousands of Euros (e.g., on
April 25, 2006). In order to control for industry average diﬀerences, we examine including
industry fixed eﬀects.
Note that, although the CITL registers all transactions, only the allocations and emissions data are currently publicly available. Therefore we do not know the actual holdings
of a given firm on any day, only their initial allocations. Our values for (A − E) should
be considered only proxies for the “true” net position of firms at the time of the event.
Importantly, the broader market also did not know these “true” net position, and was
relying upon the same data, which were finalized on May 15, that we utilize here.
The net permit position (Ai − Ei ) is normalized by market capitalization. This is
done because larger firms could have greater variation of net permits. Furthermore, this
normalization implies a μ coeﬃcient of the change in market capitalization given a change
in net permits.
If profit impacts were driven completely by net emissions costs, we hypothesize that
the coeﬃcient μ would equal roughly the drop in permit price times three and then scaled
for the thousand euro denominator, or about -42. A firm with, say, 1 million tonnes of
excess permits in 2005 may be expected to have extra permits in 2006 and 2007. The value
of these unused permits fell by the drop in the permit price, which was around 15 Euros
per tonne. Hence, this hypothetical firm would have lost, 1 million tons/year * 3 years *
-14 Euro, or 42 million Euros.
16

Table 3 reports the results. We find that the coeﬃcient on net position is statistically
significantly diﬀerent from -42. In fact, we do not even find a statistically significant
coeﬃcient. In Panel A, we exclude fixed eﬀects and find a coeﬃcient of -6.9 that is
insignificant. Even after controlling for industry fixed eﬀects, in Panels B and C, we find
a very similar result (negative and insignificant).
Given the lack of market information about permit trading, investors were unlikely to
know the exact net position of firms, and may have had diﬃculty even estimating the sign
of net position. Figure 3, which plots the 90 firms’ permit allocation and emissions during
2005, demonstrates this point. Many firms had been allocated permits that were very
highly correlated with their 2005 emissions levels. We find that initial allocation explain
over 95 percent of the variation in 2005 emissions.
In Table 3, we next examine whether the abnormal returns were correlated with a firm’s
level of emissions, or allocations. We find no evidence of this in Panel A. However, the
picture becomes more clear once we control for industry fixed eﬀects. As described above,
many industry classifications were “long” in permits during this period. The important
exception is the power industry which was on net short of permits. We therefore estimate
the power industry, as the one segment known to be short, separately in Panel B. In Panel
C, we estimate the influence firm-level emissions and allocations on all other industries,
controlling for industry fixed eﬀects.
With industry fixed eﬀects a clear distinction between the power sector and other
industries emerges. Within the power sector, firms with high levels of emissions outperformed the “cleaner” firms when the allowances prices fell. There is a strong relationship
between emissions and changes in market capitalization, with each ton of emissions improving market cap by 6.25 Euros. Firms with higher allocations also had better returns,
but recall that emissions and allocations are almost completely co-linear, so this is likely
also an emissions eﬀect. Firms in the other industrial sectors, which were net long on
permits, experienced the opposite eﬀect. Firms with higher allocations suﬀered the largest

17

declines when the permit price fell, with each added ton of allocation implying a reduction
of 31.5 Euros in market capitalization. As with the power sector, both emissions and
allowances produce nearly identical coeﬃcients, reflecting the strong correlation of these
two variables.
This firm-level analysis of permit holdings and emissions implies, that within industries
that were net long on permits, dirtier firms suﬀered the largest declines. This is consistent
with a market expectation that these firms had suﬀered the largest decrease in aggregate
permit asset value, as these firms were the largest holders of permits within their industries,
and their asset values in permits exceeded their emissions liabilities. For the power sector,
it is the cleanest firms that suﬀer the most. This is consistent with a market focus on
the impact of permit values on electricity prices, combined with a view that dirtier firms
experienced a net decline in their abatement costs to somewhat oﬀset the decline in product
prices. These dirty firms in the power sector still experienced abnormal negative returns,
but they were more modest declines than those of the cleaner firms.

4.2

Tests of Revenue Eﬀects

Recall from Section 2 that the revenue eﬀect depends on how a cost shock in an industry
aﬀects the output prices, ∂p/∂τ . This in turn will depend upon the elasticity of demand
for the product, the convexity of a firm’s costs with respect to emissions costs, and the
relative emissions of other firms in the industry. For example, industries that have little
international trade exposure, use many dirty inputs, and produce substantial carbon emissions are more likely to have a strong revenue eﬀect. In order to test the importance of
these factors, we examine the abnormal returns during the event window as estimated in
equation 4, γ
bi .
γ ij = δ 0 + δ1 1(DOj > 0) + δ 2 DOj + δ 3 1(DIj > 0)
b
+δ 4 DIj + δ 5 1(T Ej > 0) + δ 6 T Ej + ν ij ,
18

(7)

where DOj is a measure of how dirty (carbon intensive) is an industry’s output, DIj is a
measure of how dirty are an industry’s inputs, and T Ej measures the trade exposure of
the industry. We describe each of these variables in more detail below.
Sectors were characterized by the “dirty output,” “dirty input,” and “trade exposure”
variables at the NAICS 3-digit level. Dirty output (DO) comes from combining CITL
emissions data with Thomson’s Datastream financial data. For all sectors j where at least
one firm was matched in the CITL, DO is given by the following formula.
P

i∈(j∩CIT L)
DOj = P

Emiti

f irm∈(j∩CIT L)

Si

(8)

where Emiti is the sum of facility level emissions in the CITL over all facilities owned
by firm i and Si is the 2005 revenue of firm i. The subscript j indexes NAICS3 sectors,
and CIT L indexes firms contained in the CITL emissions data set. The emissions factor
calculated above is then normalized to the 0-1 range. Emissions intensity for any firm in a
given NAICS sector will therefore be based upon the measured emissions of firms matched
with CITL data in that NAICS sector. There were 90 firms for whom we have been able
to match with the facility level emissions data, and 202 firms contained in the STOXX
600 index drawn from the sectors for which we have matched emissions data.
Dirty input comes from input output tables of industrial activity. DIj is the direct plus
indirect input use of the electricity sector in producing one dollar of output in sector N.
We are not aware of sources of input output tables for the EU with NAICS nomenclature,
so the index here is calculated using US figures from the Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA). As with DO, we normalize the value of DI to range between 0 and 1.
Trade Exposure (T E) is a measure of how much a given commodity is internationally
traded. We use a measure of Trade Exposure that the European Union has proposed to
be used in determining which sectors get free allocation due to industrial competitiveness
concerns.9
9

Convery, et al., 2008

19

T Ej =

(EXP ORTj + IMP ORT Sj )
(OUT P UTj + IMP ORT Sj )

EXP ORT S and IMP ORT S are with respect to the EU region, so intra-EU trade (which
is uniformly under the ETS) is not counted. US trade (from COMTRADE) and production (from BEA) data was used to construct these measures. Though European data is
preferable, US data should be equivalent if US and European input output tables and trade
profiles are similar. US data was used because it was already coded to NAICS, whereas
European data is coded in NACE codes, which require further (imperfect) translation to
NAICS via correspondence tables.
Table 4 provides the summary statistics for twenty sectors (based on two-digit NAICS
codes). For each sector, the table reports average abnormal returns during the event
window. In addition, the sectors’ industry characteristics (DOj , DIj , and T Ej ) as well
as the market capitalization are summarized. The mining, oil and natural gas extraction
sector is that which is most electricity intensive: it had the largest average abnormal stock
drop of approximately 2.7 percent. Utilities have the highest carbon emissions intensity:
its average stocks had an abnormal decline of about 1.8 percent.
Note that for each of these variables there are many sectors with no value. For DO
this is because many industries are not covered under the cap and trade system. In the
sample of 600 firms, roughly 40% are in industries covered by the ETS and therefore have
non-zero values for DO. In the case of DI, there are some (roughly five percent) firms
with NAICS codes not contained in the BEA input-output tables. In the case of trade
exposure, this is an artifact of our reliance on trade and production data. These data are
focused on the manufacturing sectors, and therefore several industries, particularly service
oriented ones, are not considered to be involved in international trade. About 60% of the
600 firms have no value for trade exposure. It is because of these issues that we include
dummy variables that are applied to all firms with non-zero values for DO, DI, and T E
respectively in the specification described above.
20

Table 5 reports the results of diﬀerent variations of regression 7. The first two columns
report the results controlling only for dirty output, or dirty input respectively. The third
column controls only for trade exposure. The fourth and fifth columns interact DI and
DO with trade exposure, under the intuition that trade exposure should matter less in
relatively “clean” industries that are unaﬀected by CO2 prices. Column seven combines
all these variables by interacting both DO and DI with trade exposure.
From table 5, it is clear there is a relationship between carbon intensity and performance during the event window. Firms from industries with high emissions (large DO) or
relatively dirty inputs (e.g., high electricity usage) saw their share prices decline. This is
suggestive of a revenue eﬀect, as firms in these industries will have experienced a decline
in their competitor’s, as well as their own, marginal costs. When DI is interacted with
trade exposure, the coeﬃcient on DI roughly doubles, suggesting that it was firms with
no trade exposure who are largely driving the negative value on DI. The interaction term
on DI and T E is positive, but very imprecisely estimated. When all terms are considered
simultaneously, higher values of both DO and DI significantly impact a decline in share
prices during the event.
It might at first seem counter-intuitive that the firms most directly impacted by CO2
regulations would be the greatest losers from a decline in CO2 prices. Keep in mind that
these values are measuring the relative carbon intensities of industries, not the individual firms within industries. Thus we interpret these results as being consistent with the
hypothesis that product prices, and therefore revenues, were negatively impacted by the
CO2 price shock. Although costs were also reduced, either through the direct or indirect
exposure to CO2 regulation, it appears that the revenue eﬀects were stronger. For regulated industries, this is almost certainly a consequence of the fact that allocations were
closely linked to emissions, as illustrated above. For these firms, the revenue eﬀects would
naturally be the strongest as the reductions in costs are largely oﬀset by a concurrent
reduction in the value of permit holdings.

21

We examine the robustness of these results in several ways. One question is the appropriate time window for the event. This is particularly true as the volatility in permit
prices continued beyond the 3 day window examined above. To address this question we
also exam a 30 day event window we call BIGEV ENT , consisting of 5 days prior and 25
days after April 25, 2006. We generate new γbi estimates using the BIGEV ENT window

and perform the same analysis on the influences on share price performance. Table 6

describes the results for these regressions. As before, both DI and DO produce negative,
although insignificant, coeﬃcients when considered on their own. When all factors are

included (column 7), the coeﬃcients for dirty inputs and dirty outputs are negative and
significant at the 10% level. Interestingly, the impacts of trade exposure are much stronger
than during the shorter event window. While firms with trade exposure in general saw
a decline in shares, the interaction terms for both DO and DI are positive and at least
weakly significant. This indicates that although dirty firms saw a decline in shares overall,
the dirtiest firms that were most exposed to international trade benefitted from the CO2
price decline.
In Table 7, we add a measure of the firm’s debt-to-equity ratio. Note that the net
present value of all future profits equal the sum of equity and debt. By including the
debt-equity ratio, we test the robustness of our results that the findings are representative
of changes in profits, not just equity. Although debt-to-equity is a significant factor, it
does not change the underlying picture with regards to dirty inputs and outputs during
the short event window. In Table 8, we test the importance of the CAPM framework to
the results by testing the event on the unadjusted returns (e.g. no β term) of the shares.
The results are very similar to those of table 5.
In Table 9, we test for the presence of possible spillovers to a neighboring market by
performing a similar analysis for the stocks in the US Standard and Poors 500 index. When
all factors are considered, the only variable of significant impact on returns is the DO index
variable, which is positive, indicating that dirty firms experienced an increase during this
period. Since many of these firms are drawn from industries with “local” markets, such
22

as utilities, this could be interpreted as implying a negligible spillover eﬀect on firms in
the US. In Table 10 we analyze a similar time frame from the year 2004, a date before
the EU CO2 market came into existence, as a form of falsification test. Although certain
characteristics were significant in determining the abnormal returns of shares during this
2004 period, the results are quite diﬀerent from the results from the 2006 CO2 price crash.

5

Conclusions

The development and application of any significant new environmental regulation will
involve some level of debate over its economic impacts. This is particularly true in the
case of regulations to combat climate change because the stakes are so high. The annual
value of permits consumed in the European ETS market we study has ranged up to nearly
$60 Billion. A market in the United States would be 2 to 3 times the size of the European
market. These values are an order of magnitude larger than any other previous emissions
trading markets. These sums have generated intense interest in the potential incidence
of these costs, and many industries are making the case for some form of free permit
allocation to oﬀset these costs.
However, the cost impact is only one part of the story from the perspective of firms and
industries. The impact of emissions costs on revenues is another critical consideration. It a
desire to examine this full portfolio of impacts that has drawn us to examine the European
ETS market. We have used an event-study approach to analyze the response of the stock
market to the devaluation of CO2 permit prices in late April 2006. This provides one of the
first opportunities to empirically test the impacts of CO2 regulation on major industries
and firms. By looking at the impact of a sharp decline in CO2 prices on the equity prices
of impacted firms, we can get a strong sense of what the market believes to be the net
impacts of CO2 regulations.
The story that emerges from an examination of this event is that the equity markets
were strongly focused on revenue eﬀects. Our results demonstrate, fairly robustly, that
23

the share prices of firms from the “dirtiest” industries experienced the largest abnormal
declines during this period. For firms that are directly regulated under the ETS program,
consideration of permit holdings almost certainly influenced investor response. Although
our data on allocations appear insuﬃcient to explicitly identify a “net holdings” eﬀect, we
do find evidence that allocations played a role in the market’s response to the CO2 price
crash.
Within the power sector, which was as a whole “short" of permits, the share prices
of firms with the highest emissions rates, perform better than the “cleaner” firms within
this sector. The share prices of many of these high emissions firms did experience abnormal declines, but these declines were less severe than those of their low carbon intensity
competitors. The fact that very low-carbon emissions firms declined the most gives strong
indication of the market’s focus on how declining CO2 prices would reduce the revenues
of these firms through lower electricity prices. The fact that the high emissions firms still
experienced declines highlights the fact that the market also understood that these firms
were holding large portfolios of allowances and experienced a loss in that portfolio that
largely oﬀset their cost savings from lower CO2 prices. Within other industries that were
in aggregate allocated more allowances than were consumed, those firms with the largest
allowances experienced the largest abnormal declines.
It is important to recognize the many caveats that must be applied to interpreting
these results. The ETS was a very new market, which was one of the causes of the volatility we utilize here. It would be heroic to assume that the stock market completely and
accurately processed the information that emerged in late April 2006. In addition, while
the crash eﬀected both near-term and long-term CO2 prices, the impact on the near-term
Phase I prices was much more pronounced. The events of 2006 may also have impacted
expectations about future allocations of emissions permits, as well as expectations about
prices. Because our event study uses the same time window for all stocks, any contemporaneous events could also be causing the abnormal returns. We looked for sector-specific
announcements in this period. Specifically, oil prices did not change dramatically.
24

Nonetheless, these results are largely consistent with what simulation studies had predicted could be the case for many of these industries. These studies forecast an increase
in revenues that would largely oﬀset the increase in regulatory costs. In fact, our results
imply that for clean firms in dirty industries, these revenue eﬀects are larger than cost
increases. These are important facts to bear in mind when setting policies regarding allocations to impacted industries. In many cases, those directly or even indirectly impacted
by CO2 costs may need little compensation. Instead it is their customers who will be most
aﬀected.

25

References
[1] Becker, Randy A. and J. Vernon Henderson. 2000. “Eﬀects of Air Quality Regulations
on Polluting Industries.” Journal of Political Economy, 108: 379-421.
[2] Betz, R., W. Eichhammer, and J. Schleich. 2004. “Designing National Allocation
Plans for EU-Emissions Trading- A First Analysis of the Outcomes.” Energy & Environment, 15(3): 375-426.
[3] Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Lawrence H. Goulder, 2001. “Neutralizing the Adverse Industry Impacts of CO2 Abatement Policies: What Does It Cost?” in Behavioral
and Distributional Eﬀects of Environmental Policy. C. Carraro and G. Metcalf ed.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 45- 85.
[4] Brown, S.J., and J. Warner. 1985. “Using Daily Stock Returns: The Case of Event
Studies.” Journal of Financial Economics, 14(1): 3-31.
[5] Burtraw, Dallas, and Karen Palmer. 2008. “Compensation Rules for Climate Policy
in the Electricity Sector.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 27(4): 819847.
[6] Convery, Frank, Denny Ellerman, and Christian De Perthuis. 2008. “The European
Carbon Market in Action: Lessons from the First Trading Period.” Report 158. MIT
Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change.
[7] Delarue, E., K. Voorspools, and W. D’haeseleer. 2008. “Fuel Switching in the electricity sector under the EU ETS,” Journal of Energy Engineering-Asce. 134: 40-46.
[8] Ellerman, Denny, and Paul Joskow. 2008. “The European Union’s Emissions Trading
System in Perspective.” Pew Center for Global Climate Change. May.
[9] Ellerman, Denny, Paul Joskow, Richard Schmalensee, Juan-Pablo Montero, and Elizabeth M. Bailey. 2000. Markets for Clean Air: The U.S. Acid Rain Program. Cambridge
University Press.
26

[10] Goulder, Lawrence, H., Hafstead, Marc, A.C., and Michael Dworsky. 2009 “Impacts of
Alternative Emissions Allowance Allocation Methods Under a Federal Cap-and-Trade
Program.” Stanford University Working Paper.
[11] Gray, Wayne B. 1987. “The Cost of Regulation: OSHA, EPA and the Productivity
Slowdown,” American Economic Review, 77: 998-1006.
[12] Gray, Wayne, and Ronald Shadbegian. 2003. “Environmental Regulation, Investment
Timing, and Technology Choice.” Journal of Industrial Economics, 46(2): 235-256.
[13] Greenstone, Michael. 2002. “The Impacts of Environmental Regulations on Industrial
Activity: Evidence from the 1970 and 1977 Clean Air Act Amendments and the
Census of Manufactures.” Journal of Political Economy, 110(6): 1175-1219.
[14] Kahn, Shulamit , and Christopher R. Knittel (2002). “The impact of the clean air
act amendments of 1990 on electric utilities and coal mines: evidence from the stock
market,” working paper CSEMWP-118, University of California Energy Institute,
2002.
[15] Kettner, C., A. Köppl, S.P. Schleicher, and G. Thenius. 2008. “Stringency and Distribution in the EU Emissions Trading Scheme: First Evidence.” Climate Policy, 8(1):
41-61.
[16] Linn, Joshua (2006), “Stock prices and the cost of environmental regulation”, AEIBrookings Related Publication 06-16, 2006.
[17] Linn, Joshua. (2009). “The eﬀect of cap-and-trade programs on firms profits: Evidence from the Nitrogen Oxides Budget Trading Program,” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management.
[18] List, John A., Daniel L. Millimet, Per G. Fredriksson, and W. Warren McHone. 2003.
“Eﬀects of Environmental Regulations on Manufacturing Plant Births: Evidence from

27

a Propensity Score Matching Estimator,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4):
944-952.
[19] List, John A., Daniel L. Millimet, and Warren McHone. 2004. “The Unintended Disincentives in the Clean Air Act.” Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy, 4(2).
[20] MacKinlay, A.C. 1997. “Event Studies in Economics and Finance.” Journal of Economic Literature, 25(1): 13-39.
[21] Oberndorfer, Ulrich. (2009). “EU Emission Allowances and the stock market: Evidence from the electricity industry,” Ecological Economics. 68: 1116-1126.
[22] Puller, Steven L. (2006). “The strategic use of innovation to influence regulatory
standards.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management. 52: 690Ð706
[23] Ryan, Stephen. (2007). “The Costs of Environmental Regulation in a Concentrated
Industry.” MIT Working Paper.
[24] Seade, Jay. (1985). “Profitable Cost Increases and the Shifting of Taxation: Equilibrium Responses of Markets in Oligopoly.” University of Warwick Working Paper.
[25] Sijm, J.P.M., K. Neuhoﬀ, Y. Chen. 2006. “CO2 cost pass-through and windfall profits
in the power sector.” Climate Policy, 6(1): 49-72.
[26] Smale, R., M. Hartley, C. Hepburn, J. Ward, and M. Grubb. 2006. “The impact of
CO2 emissions trading on firm profits and market prices.” Climate Policy, 6(1): 31-48.
[27] Veith, Stefan, Joerg Werner, and Jochen Zimmermann. 2009. “Economic Consequences of Emission Trading Schemes: Evidence from the European Power Sector.”
Energy Economics, 31(4): 605-613.

28

Figures and Tables

1a

1b

1c

Figure 1: Theoretical Change in Producer Surplus under Environmental Regulation.
Under a tax, or auctioned permits, firms gain area A but lose areas B and C.
However, if firms are allocated permits equal to their equilibrium emissions, they
gain A and D and lose only B.

29

€ 35
Carbon Price, Phase I
Carbon Price, Phase II
Event Window
€ 30

Price per tonne (EUR)

€ 25

€ 20

€ 15

€ 10

€5

€0
Apr-05

Jul-05

Sep-05

Dec-05

Mar-06

May-06

Aug-06

Nov-06

Jan-07

Apr-07

Jul-07

Sep-07

Dec-07

1.2

Prices normalized to 1 on April 26, 2006

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

BKXE Stock Index (relative to 336)
Crude Oil

(relative to 72)

Phase I Carbon

(relative to 28)

Phase II Carbon (relative to 31)
0
Apr-05

Jul-05

Sep-05

Dec-05

Mar-06

May-06

Aug-06

Figure 2: EU Carbon Prices, Stock Index, and Oil Prices

30

Nov-06

Jan-07

Apr-07

20
ln(installation emissions)
10
15

log_emit
Fitted values
95% CI

5

ln( Emit ) = −0.099 + 0.999 ln( Alloc), (R 2 = 0.96)
(0.557) (0.038)

5

10
15
ln(verified allocation)

20

year: 2005
Figure 3: Most firms’ allowances similar to emissions (Current subsample of 90 firms with emissions linked to stock market data)

31

Table 1: Stock Market Cumulative Returns by Industry
Cumulative Abnormal Returns
NAICS Sector
Coef.
Std. Err.
(0.0070) ***
21
Mining & Oil/Gas Extraction
-0.0273
(0.0000) ***
22
Utilities
-0.0179
(0.0024) ***
53
Real Estate & Rental
-0.0132
(0.0034) ***
23
Construction
-0.0115
(0.0064)
72
Accommodation & Food Services
-0.0081
(0.0031) **
33
Manufacturing (Metals, Machinery)
-0.0068
(0.0010) ***
45
Retail (General, Misc)
-0.0059
(0.0014) ***
31
Food & Textiles
-0.0053
(0.0000) ***
54
Professional, Scientific, & Technical Services
-0.0052
(0.0031)
32
Manufacturing (Paper, Plastics)
-0.0032
(0.0088)
99
Other
-0.0016
(0.0049)
48
Transportation
-0.0001
(0.0035)
51
Information
0.0002
(0.0008)
52
Finance & Insurance
0.0008
(0.0070)
44
Retail (Electronics, Gas, Health)
0.0019
(0.0101)
71
Arts, Entertainment, & Recreation
0.0043
(0.0030) ***
62
Health Care & Social Assistance
0.0110
(0.0000) ***
56
Administrative & Support
0.0130
(0.0064) **
49
Couriers & Storage
0.0139
(0.0052) ***
42
Wholesale Trade
0.0166
(0.0015) ***
All Sectors
-0.0045

Cumulative Returns
Coef.
Std. Err.
(0.0069) ***
-0.0358
(0.0001) ***
-0.0211
(0.0023) ***
-0.0169
(0.0033) ***
-0.0188
(0.0058) **
-0.0117
(0.0033) ***
-0.0143
(0.0001) ***
-0.0098
(0.0015) ***
-0.0096
(0.0000) ***
-0.0119
(0.0037) **
-0.0092
(0.0094)
-0.0083
(0.0051)
-0.0052
(0.0037) *
-0.0067
(0.0008) ***
-0.0061
(0.0059)
-0.0043
(0.0099)
-0.0011
(0.0031) *
0.0059
(0.0000) ***
0.0048
(0.0072)
0.0090
(0.0058) *
0.0098
(0.0026) ***
-0.0202

Notes: Significance is noted at the 10% (*), 5% (**) and 1% (***) levels. Standard errors are robust. There are 572 observations.
Industry is by NAICS.

32

Table 2: Stock Market Cumulative Abnormal Returns for Firms in the Electricity Sector
Panel A. Firm Level Cumulative Abnormal Returns

Stock Name
Fortum
Verbundgesellschaft
British Energy Group
EDF
RWE (XET)
A2A
Atel Holding 'R'
DRAX Group
United Utilities Group
EDP Energias de Portugal
International Power
Red Electrica de Espana
Scot.& Southern Energy
ENEL
National Grid
Terna
Union Fenosa
Schneider Electric
Iberdrola
Public Power

Event
-0.088
-0.086
-0.071
-0.050
-0.045
-0.024
-0.022
-0.019
-0.018
-0.015
-0.012
-0.005
-0.004
-0.003
-0.001
-0.001
0.004
0.011
0.015
0.052

Carbon per
MWh
0.214
0.252
0.108
0.104
0.909
0.287
0.213
1.046

Carbon per
Equity
0.265
0.941
1.117
0.466
3.049
0.360

MWh per
Equity
1.236
3.729
10.365
4.496
3.355
1.255

3.854

3.684

0.712
0.611

1.809
2.084

2.541
3.414

0.819
0.501

1.920
1.466

2.344
2.926

0.972

1.265

1.301

0.349
0.982

0.451
8.000

1.291
8.146

Panel B. Correlations

Carbon per MWh
Carbon per Equity
MWh per Equity

Event
0.593
0.580
-0.035

Carbon per
MWh
1.000
0.689
-0.091

Notes: NAICS 2211

33

Carbon per
Equity
1.000
0.476

Table 3: Tests of Net Permits at Firm Level
Panel A: All Industries (with NAICS3 Fixed Effects)
1
Net Permits

2

4

-6.90
(7.18)

Allocation

4.17
(3.57)

Emissions
Constant

3

F.E.

F.E.

0.26
(14.15)
4.10
(3.22)
F.E.

3.85
(10.90)
F.E.

3

4

Panel B: Industries Net Short in Permits (Power Industry)
1
Net Permits

2

-1.51
(11.44)

Allocation

6.65***
(1.32)

Emissions
Constant

16.35
(11.28)
6.25***
(1.50)

-0.022**
(0.008)

-0.031***
(0.007)

-0.031***
(0.008)

-9.45
(11.14)
-0.030 ***
(0.008)

Panel C: Industries Net Long in Permits (with NAICS3 Fixed Effects)
1
Net Permits

2

4

-17.11
(29.18)

Allocation

-31.53***
(6.81)

Emissions
Constant

3

F.E.

F.E.

-6.73
(20.24)
-34.56***
(6.79)
F.E.

-27.64
(17.58)
F.E.

Notes: Significance is noted at the 10% (*), 5% (**) and 1% (***) levels. Standard errors
are robust. There are 90 observations in Panel A, 21 in Panel B, and 69 in Panel
C. Firms in the power industry had an average net short position of 2.15 million
while firms in other industries were on average net long by 282 thousand.

34

Table 4: Summary Statistics

Sector
Mining & Oil/Gas Extraction
Utilities
Real Estate & Rental
Construction
Accommodation & Food Services
Manufacturing (Metals, Machinery)
Retail (General, Misc)
Food & Textiles
Professional, Scientific, & Technical Services
Manufacturing (Paper, Plastics)
Other
Transportation
Information
Finance & Insurance
Retail (Electronics, Gas, Health)
Arts, Entertainment, & Recreation
Health Care & Social Assistance
Administrative & Support
Couriers & Storage
Wholesale Trade

N
23
28
21
28
8
100
5
34
21
65
7
23
47
121
16
4
2
8
3
8

Event Return
-2.73%
-1.79%
-1.32%
-1.15%
-0.81%
-0.68%
-0.59%
-0.53%
-0.52%
-0.32%
-0.16%
-0.01%
0.02%
0.08%
0.19%
0.43%
1.10%
1.30%
1.39%
1.66%

Dirty Output
0.08
0.97
n/a
0.00
n/a
0.05
n/a
n/a
0.00
0.10
0.35
0.03
n/a
n/a
0.09
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a

Dirty Input Trade Exposure
0.39
0.58
0.04
n/a
0.14
n/a
0.10
n/a
0.24
n/a
0.22
0.52
n/a
n/a
0.24
0.26
0.03
n/a
0.30
0.35
n/a
n/a
0.09
n/a
0.05
n/a
0.01
n/a
n/a
n/a
0.22
n/a
0.09
n/a
0.03
n/a
0.13
n/a
0.05
n/a

Market Cap
15,400,000,000
18,900,000,000
4,870,000,000
6,680,000,000
7,050,000,000
9,950,000,000
27,500,000,000
18,800,000,000
4,270,000,000
30,100,000,000
31,900,000,000
6,610,000,000
18,600,000,000
22,100,000,000
11,900,000,000
6,140,000,000
6,830,000,000
5,530,000,000
16,600,000,000
5,050,000,000

Notes: The table reports the sample mean for each two digit NAICS sector. Dirty Output is ratio of industry’s emissions share to
industry’s equity share, Dirty Input is electricity costs over sales, Trade exposure is the ratio of the sum of imports and exports
over the sum of imports and sales, and market cap is equity value in $1000s.

35

Table 5: Tests of Revenue Effects at Industry Level
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Dirty Output Indicator

-0.0033
(0.0029)

-0.0015
(0.0026)

-0.0003
(0.0023)

DO Index

-0.0126***
(0.0031)

-0.0138***
(0.0036)

-0.0149***
(0.0040)

Dirty Input Indicator

-0.0010
(0.0044)

-0.0002
(0.0046)

-0.0004
(0.0046)

DI Index

-0.0236**
(0.0107)

-0.0527**
(0.0252)

-0.0535*
(0.0272)

Trade Exposure Indicator

-0.0047
(0.0039)

0.0068
(0.0058)

-0.0045
(0.0039)

0.0066
(0.0060)

Trade Index

0.0030
(0.0041)

-0.0104
(0.0120)

0.0044
(0.0067)

-0.0121
(0.0121)

DI*Trade Index

0.0507
(0.0436)

DO*Trade Index
Constant

-0.0029*
(0.0016)

-0.0007
(0.0017)

0.0012
(0.0040)

-0.0016
(0.0021)

0.0012
(0.0040)

0.0585
(0.0512)
-0.0282
(0.0272)

-0.0098
(0.0323)

-0.0001
(0.0019)

0.0028
(0.0044)

Notes: Significance is noted at the 10% (*), 5% (**) and 1% (***) levels. Standard errors are robust. There are 572 observations.
Industry is by NAICS.

36

Table 6: Robustness to Big Event Window
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Dirty Output Indicator

-0.0034
(0.0074)

0.0036
(0.0075)

0.0027
(0.0072)

DO Index

-0.0120*
(0.0067)

-0.0210**
(0.0080)

-0.0203**
(0.0079)

Dirty Input Indicator

-0.0227
(0.0174)

-0.0156
(0.0175)

-0.0153
(0.0167)

DI Index

-0.0139
(0.0169)

-0.0977**
(0.0469)

-0.1012**
(0.0485)

Trade Exposure Indicator

-0.0033
(0.0090)

0.0177
(0.0118)

-0.0050
(0.0088)

0.0167
(0.0119)

Trade Index

-0.0173
(0.0247)

-0.0775**
(0.0369)

-0.0197
(0.0223)

-0.0800**
(0.0360)

DI*Trade Index

0.2392**
(0.1057)

DO*Trade Index
Constant

-0.0136***
(0.0035)

-0.0113**
(0.0046)

0.0098
(0.0169)

-0.0095 **
(0.0041)

0.0098
(0.0169)

0.2547**
(0.1201)
0.0248
(0.1539)

-0.0397
(0.1357)

-0.0086*
(0.0044)

0.0108
(0.0161)

Notes: Significance is noted at the 10% (*), 5% (**) and 1% (***) levels. Standard errors are robust. There are 572 observations.
Industry is by NAICS.

37

Table 7: Robustness to Including Debt-Equity Ratio Control
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Dirty Output Indicator

-0.0025
(0.0029)

-0.0010
(0.0026)

0.0000
(0.0023)

DO Index

-0.0128***
(0.0031)

-0.0136***
(0.0037)

-0.0146***
(0.0040)

Dirty Input Indicator

-0.0016
(0.0045)

-0.0010
(0.0048)

-0.0010
(0.0047)

DI Index

-0.0219**
(0.0108)

-0.0480*
(0.0255)

-0.0496*
(0.0274)

Trade Exposure Indicator

-0.0044
(0.0039)

0.0061
(0.0058)

-0.0045
(0.0039)

0.0059
(0.0060)

Trade Index

0.0039
(0.0041)

-0.0076
(0.0123)

0.0052
(0.0066)

-0.0097
(0.0122)

DI*Trade Index

0.0425
(0.0442)

DO*Trade Index

0.0513
(0.0515)
-0.0300
(0.0270)

-0.0106
(0.0319)

Debt-Equity Ratio

0.0012***
(0.0003)

0.0009**
(0.0004)

0.0008**
(0.0004)

0.0010 **
(0.0004)

0.0008*
(0.0004)

0.0008**
(0.0004)

0.0006
(0.0004)

Constant

-0.0037**
(0.0016)

-0.0016
(0.0019)

0.0011
(0.0040)

-0.0026
(0.0022)

0.0011
(0.0040)

-0.0010
(0.0021)

0.0025
(0.0044)

Notes: Significance is noted at the 10% (*), 5% (**) and 1% (***) levels. Standard errors are robust. There are 572 observations.
Industry is by NAICS.

38

Table 8: Robustness to no CAPM (Cumulative returns)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Dirty Output Indicator

-0.0044
(0.0031)

-0.0025
(0.0028)

-0.0013
(0.0025)

DO Index

-0.0084**
(0.0034)

-0.0096***
(0.0035)

-0.0108***
(0.0038)

Dirty Input Indicator

-0.0011
(0.0037)

-0.0005
(0.0039)

-0.0008
(0.0038)

DI Index

-0.0258**
(0.0111)

-0.0501**
(0.0240)

-0.0502*
(0.0258)

Trade Exposure Indicator

-0.0032
(0.0040)

0.0078
(0.0056)

-0.0026
(0.0038)

0.0080
(0.0056)

Trade Index

-0.0018
(0.0047)

-0.0127
(0.0118)

0.0000
(0.0072)

-0.0139
(0.0122)

DI*Trade Index

0.0406
(0.0419)

DO*Trade Index
Constant

-0.0108***
(0.0015)

-0.0084***
(0.0016)

-0.0063*
(0.0033)

-0.0093 ***
(0.0018)

-0.0063*
(0.0033)

0.0468
(0.0486)
-0.0310
(0.0287)

-0.0080
(0.0326)

-0.0079***
(0.0017)

-0.0048
(0.0036)

Notes: Significance is noted at the 10% (*), 5% (**) and 1% (***) levels. Standard errors are robust. There are 572 observations.
Industry is by NAICS.

39

Table 9: Spillovers to the United States (data from S&P 500)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Dirty Output Indicator

-0.0089
(0.0073)

-0.0048
(0.0066)

-0.0051
(0.0066)

DO Index

0.0162 **
(0.0067)

0.0140 *
(0.0075)

0.0140 *
(0.0081)

Dirty Input Indicator

-0.0042
(0.0055)

-0.0017
(0.0069)

-0.0030
(0.0075)

DI Index

-0.0308 *
(0.0165)

-0.0687
(0.0488)

-0.0668
(0.0495)

Trade Exposure Indicator

-0.0021
(0.0087)

0.0112
(0.0101)

0.0021
(0.0082)

0.0149
(0.0101)

Trade Index

-0.0096
(0.0131)

-0.0305
(0.0208)

-0.0070
(0.0101)

-0.0328 *
(0.0193)

DI*Trade Index

0.0903
(0.0865)

DO*Trade Index
Constant

-0.0063 **
(0.0029)

-0.0044
(0.0035)

0.0015
(0.0034)

-0.0031
(0.0041)

0.0015
(0.0034)

0.1165
(0.0851)
-0.1648 *
(0.0905)

-0.1609
(0.0991)

-0.0039
(0.0047)

0.0018
(0.0034)

Notes: Significance is noted at the 10% (*), 5% (**) and 1% (***) levels. Standard errors are robust. There are 572 observations.
Industry is by NAICS.

40

Table 10: Counterfactual Event Study for April 2004.
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Dirty Output Indicator

0.0009
(0.0044)

-0.0027
(0.0035)

-0.0023
(0.0033)

DO Index

-0.0040
(0.0067)

0.0005
(0.0045)

-0.0001
(0.0041)

Dirty Input Indicator

-0.0055 **
(0.0026)

-0.0069 ***
(0.0025)

-0.0072 ***
(0.0027)

DI Index

0.0052
(0.0146)

-0.0159
(0.0302)

-0.0148
(0.0307)

Trade Exposure Indicator

0.0226 ***
(0.0065)

0.0269 ***
(0.0092)

0.0236 ***
(0.0067)

0.0275 ***
(0.0094)

Trade Index

-0.0367 ***
(0.0109)

-0.0354 *
(0.0182)

-0.0349 ***
(0.0121)

-0.0354 *
(0.0190)

DI*Trade Index

-0.0066
(0.0476)

DO*Trade Index
Constant

-0.0027
(0.0018)

-0.0028
(0.0018)

0.0019
(0.0014)

-0.0052 ***
(0.0014)

0.0019
(0.0014)

-0.0047
(0.0505)
-0.0248
(0.0301)

-0.0041
(0.0376)

-0.0046 ***
(0.0016)

0.0027
(0.0019)

Notes: Significance is noted at the 10% (*), 5% (**) and 1% (***) levels. Standard errors are robust. There are 531 observations.
Industry is by NAICS.

41

