                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES

                                          Alejandro Justiniano
                                          Giorgio E. Primiceri
                                           Andrea Tambalotti

                                          Working Paper 15570
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w15570


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2009




We wish to thank Pedro Amaral, Mark Gertler, Nicolas Groshenny, Lee Ohanian, Andrea Raffo, Juan
Rubio-Ramirez, Frank Schorfheide, Thijs van Rens, Raf Wouters, an anonymous referee and participants
to many seminars and conferences for comments and suggestions. We would also like to thank Frank
Smets and Raf Wouters for sharing their codes and data. The views in this paper are solely the responsibility
of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, any other person associated with the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Alejandro Justiniano, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Investment Shocks and Business Cycles
Alejandro Justiniano, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti
NBER Working Paper No. 15570
December 2009
JEL No. C11,E3,E32

                                              ABSTRACT

We study the driving forces of fluctuations in an estimated New Neoclassical Synthesis model of the
U.S. economy with several shocks and frictions. In this model, shocks to the marginal efficiency of
investment account for the bulk of fluctuations in output and hours at business cycle frequencies. Imperfect
competition and, to a lesser extent, technological frictions are the key to their transmission. Labor
supply shocks explain a large fraction of the variation in hours at very low frequencies, but are irrelevant
over the business cycle. This is important because their microfoundations are widely regarded as unappealing.


Alejandro Justiniano                                  Andrea Tambalotti
Economic Research Department                          Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago                       33 Liberty Street, 3rd Floor
230 S. LaSalle Street                                 New York, NY 10045
Chicago, IL 60604                                     Andrea.Tambalotti@ny.frb.org
Alejandro.Justiniano@chi.frb.org

Giorgio E. Primiceri
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
3218 Andersen Hall
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
g-primiceri@northwestern.edu
                 INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES

        ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO, GIORGIO E. PRIMICERI, AND ANDREA TAMBALOTTI


         Abstract. We study the driving forces of ‡uctuations in an estimated New Neoclassical
         Synthesis model of the U.S. economy with several shocks and frictions. In this model,
         shocks to the marginal e¢ ciency of investment account for the bulk of ‡uctuations in output
         and hours at business cycle frequencies. Imperfect competition and, to a lesser extent,
         technological frictions are the key to their transmission. Labor supply shocks explain a large
         fraction of the variation in hours at very low frequencies, but are irrelevant over the business
         cycle. This is important because their microfoundations are widely regarded as unappealing.




                                             1. Introduction

   What is the source of economic ‡uctuations? This is one of the de…ning questions of modern
dynamic macroeconomics, at least since Sims (1980) and Kydland and Prescott (1982). Yet,
the literature has not reached a consensus on the answer. On the one hand, the work that
approaches this question from the perspective of general equilibrium models tends to attribute
a dominant role in business cycles to neutral technology shocks (see King and Rebelo (1999)
for a comprehensive assessment). On the other hand, the structural VAR literature usually
points to other disturbances as the main sources of business cycles, and rarely …nds that
neutral technology shocks explain more than one quarter of output ‡uctuations (Shapiro
and Watson (1988), King, Plosser, Stock, and Watson (1991), Cochrane (1994), Gali (1999),
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Vigfusson (2004) and Fisher (2006)).
   We revisit this debate from the perspective of a New Neoclassical Synthesis model of the
US economy (Goodfriend and King (1997)), estimated with Bayesian methods. The model
adds to a neoclassical core a rich set of nominal and real frictions, along the lines of Chris-
tiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005), and several shocks, as in Smets and Wouters (2007).

   Date: First version: November 2007. This version: November 2009. We wish to thank Pedro Amaral, Mark
Gertler, Nicolas Groshenny, Lee Ohanian, Andrea Ra¤o, Juan Rubio-Ramirez, Frank Schorfheide, Thijs van
Rens, Raf Wouters, an anonymous referee and participants to many seminars and conferences for comments
and suggestions. We would also like to thank Frank Smets and Raf Wouters for sharing their codes and data.
The views in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as re‡ecting
the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or any other person
associated with the Federal Reserve System.
                                                        1
                             INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                         2

Among them, a shock to total factor productivity (or neutral technology shock), as in the
RBC literature; a shock to the marginal productivity of investment (or, for simplicity, invest-
ment shock), as in Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Hu¤man (1988); and a shock to desired wage
markups (or, equivalently, to labor supply), as in Hall (1997). This model is an ideal labora-
tory to study the driving forces of ‡uctuations, for three reasons. First, its …t is competitive
with that of unrestricted VARs (Smets and Wouters (2007), Del Negro, Schorfheide, Smets,
and Wouters (2007)). Second, it encompasses within a general equilibrium framework most
of the views on the sources of business cycles found in the literature.1 Third, its deviations
from the neoclassical growth prototype give disturbances other than the neutral technology
shock a fair chance to be plausible cyclical forces.
  In the estimated model, investment shocks account for between 50 and 60 percent of the
variance of output and hours at business cycle frequencies and for more than 80 percent of that
of investment. The contribution of neutral technology shocks is smaller, but not negligible.
They explain about a quarter of the movements in output and consumption, although only
about 10 percent of those in hours. These numbers are close to those estimated by Fisher
(2006) within a structural VAR.
  Labor supply shocks are irrelevant over the business cycle, although they dominate the
‡uctuations of hours at very low frequencies. This …nding is important because labor supply
shocks are a key ingredient of many business cycle models, but many economists …nd them
intellectually unappealing (see Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2008) and especially Shimer
(2009) for an extensive discussion and references). According to our results, these distur-
bances can be ignored when studying business cycles, although they are necessary to account
for the low level of hours worked in the seventies and early eighties.

  Other papers in the literature study the sources of ‡uctuations in empirical medium-scale
DSGE models. In particular, Smets and Wouters (2007) present an analysis of the driving
forces of output as one of the applications of their estimated model of the U.S. economy. In
contrast to our results, however, they conclude that “it is primarily two “supply”shocks, the
productivity and the wage mark-up shock, that account for most of the output variations in
the medium to long run,” while they …nd almost no role for the investment shocks beyond
the shortest horizons.

  1
     We do not analyze the role of news shocks, which have recently received much attention in the literature
(e.g. Beaudry and Portier (2006) and Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009))
                             INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                              3

  We show that these conclusions depend on the unusual de…nition of consumption and
investment adopted by Smets and Wouters (2007). They include durable expenditures in
consumption, while excluding (the change in) inventories from investment, although not
from output. When investment is de…ned as including inventories, but especially durables,
as in most of the literature, it becomes more volatile and more procyclical. Consequently,
investment adjustment costs decline substantially and the investment shock becomes the
fundamental driving force of ‡uctuations at business cycle frequencies. To demonstrate that
these conclusions are not the product of an arbitrary measurement choice, we also estimate
a model with an explicit role for durable consumption goods in home production, as in
Greenwood and Hercowitz (1991). In this model, investment shocks account for an even
larger share of the business cycle variance of output and hours than in the baseline.
  In another closely related paper, Justiniano and Primiceri (2008) …nd that investment
shocks are the main contributors to the Great Moderation in output. Moreover, according
to their estimated DSGE model with time varying volatilities, the share of the variance of
output growth accounted for by investment disturbances oscillates around 60 percent until
the mid-eighties, and declines gradually to about 20 percent in the last years of the sample.
These numbers are consistent with the 50 percent average share over the entire post-War
period computed here.
  Compared to Justiniano and Primiceri (2008), this paper abstracts from stochastic volatil-
ity, but probes deeper into the sources ‡uctuations in at least three dimensions. First, it
provides a more comprehensive analysis of the contribution of shocks to the variance of the
observable variables, focusing in particular on the business cycle frequencies. Second, it inves-
tigates in detail why the role of investment shocks was muted in Smets and Wouters (2007).
Third, it analyzes the economic mechanisms that turn these disturbances into the key driving
forces of business cycles.

  The crucial role of investment shocks we uncover is surprising, since these disturbances are
unlikely candidates to generate business cycles in neoclassical environments. The reasoning
was …rst outlined by Barro and King (1984). In an e¢ cient equilibrium, the marginal rate of
substitution between consumption and leisure–the marginal value of time–equals the marginal
product of labor. With standard preferences, this equality implies that consumption and
hours move in opposite directions in response to exogenous impulses that do not shift the
marginal product, such as the investment shock. Therefore, this shock cannot be a signi…cant
                         INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                4

driving force of business cycles, since their distinguishing feature is the comovement of all
real variables.
  Our results contradict this conclusion, because the frictions included in the model transform
the transmission mechanism of investment shocks with respect to the neoclassical benchmark,
contributing to ameliorate the comovement problem. These frictions were …rst introduced in
the literature to bring the impulse responses to monetary shocks in DSGE models closer to
those from identi…ed VARs (Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005)). They also play a
crucial role in turning investment shocks into a viable driving force of ‡uctuations.
  In particular, monopolistic competition with sticky prices and wages is the fundamental
mechanism for the transmission of these shocks. This friction breaks the intratemporal ef-
…ciency condition described above, by driving an endogenous wedge between the marginal
product of labor and the marginal value of time. As a result, the relative movements of
consumption and hours are not as tightly constrained as in a perfectly competitive economy.

  The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines our baseline model and
section 3 describes the approach to inference and the parameter estimates. Section 4 presents
the implications of these estimates for the sources of ‡uctuations. Section 5 compares our
results to those of Smets and Wouters (2007). Section 6 discusses the role of frictions in the
transmission of investment shocks, both qualitatively and quantitatively. Section 7 conducts
a series of robustness checks. Section 8 concludes. Technical details and additional results
on some of the models estimated in the paper are available in the appendix, as well as in an
online appendix.


                                 2. The Model Economy

  This section outlines our baseline model of the U.S. business cycle. It is a medium scale
DSGE model with a neoclassical growth core, augmented with several “frictions”–departures
from the simplest assumptions on tastes, technology and market structure–now common in
the literature.
  The economy is populated by …ve classes of agents. Producers of a …nal good, which
“assemble”a continuum of intermediate goods produced by monopolistic intermediate goods
producers. Households, who consume the …nal good, accumulate capital, and supply di¤er-
entiated labor services to competitive “employment agencies”. A Government. We present
their optimization problems in turn.
                                 INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                                                  5

2.1. Final goods producers. At every point in time t, perfectly competitive …rms produce
the …nal consumption good Yt combining a continuum of intermediate goods fYt (i)gi , i 2
[0; 1]; according to the technology
                                                   Z    1                  1
                                                                                        1+       p;t
                                                                         1+ p;t
                                          Yt =              Yt (i)                 di                  .
                                                    0

The elasticity   p;t   follows the exogenous stochastic process

           log (1 +     p;t )   = (1       p ) log (1   +           p)   +   p log (1      +           p;t 1 )   + "p;t   p "p;t 1 ,


where "p;t is i:i:d:N (0;        2 ).   The literature refers to this as a price markup shock, since
                                 p                                                                                                     p;t

is the desired markup of price over marginal cost for intermediate …rms. As in Smets and
Wouters (2007), the ARMA(1,1) structure helps capture the moving average, high frequency
component of in‡ation.
  Pro…t maximization and the zero pro…t condition imply that the price of the …nal good,
Pt , is a CES aggregate of the prices of the intermediate goods, fPt (i)gi
                                                        Z       1            1             p;t

                                             Pt =                   Pt (i)   p;t   di            ,
                                                            0

and that the demand function for the intermediate good i is
                                                                                  1+ p;t
                                                                Pt (i)              p;t
(2.1)                                       Yt (i) =                                        Yt .
                                                                 Pt

2.2. Intermediate goods producers. A monopolist produces the intermediate good i ac-
cording to the production function

(2.2)                           Yt (i) = max At1                Kt (i) Lt (i)1                         At F ; 0 ,

where Kt (i) and Lt (i) denote the amounts of capital and labor employed by …rm i: F is a …xed
cost of production, chosen so that pro…ts are zero in steady state (Rotemberg and Woodford
(1995), Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005)). At represents exogenous technological
progress. Its growth rate (zt                log At ) follows a stationary AR(1) process

                                          zt = (1               z)       +   z zt 1     + "z;t ,

with "z;t i:i:d:N (0;    2 ),   which implies that the level of technology is non stationary. This is
                         z

our neutral technology shock :
                                 INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                                                 6

  As in Calvo (1983), every period a fraction                        p   of intermediate …rms cannot choose its price
optimally, but reset it according to the indexation rule

                                                                             p   1    p
                                             Pt (i) = Pt           1 (i) t 1              ,

               Pt
where   t     Pt 1   is gross in‡ation and                is its steady state. The remaining fraction of …rms
choose their price Pt (i) optimally, by maximizing the present discounted value of future pro…ts
      (1                                                                                 )
        X       s
                  t+s           Q
                                s
             s                        p    1 p                              k
   Et        p           Pt (i)      t+k 1       Yt+s (i) Wt+s Lt+s (i) rt+s  Kt+s (i) ,
        s=0          t                 k=1

subject to the demand function 2.1 and to cost minimization. In this objective,                                               t   is the
marginal utility of nominal income for the representative household that owns the …rm, while
Wt and rtk are the nominal wage and the rental rate of capital.

2.3. Employment agencies. Firms are owned by a continuum of households, indexed by
j 2 [0; 1]. Each household is a monopolistic supplier of specialized labor, Lt (j); as in Erceg,
Henderson, and Levin (2000). A large number of competitive “employment agencies”combine
this specialized labor into a homogenous labor input sold to intermediate …rms, according to
                                     Z 1          1
                                                          1+ w;t
                                Lt =     Lt (j) 1+ w;t dj        .
                                                      0

As in the case of the …nal good, the desired markup of wages over the household’s marginal
rate of substitution,        w;t ,   follows the exogenous stochastic process

         log (1 +    w;t )   = (1        w ) log (1   +       w)   +     w   log (1 +         w;t 1 )   + "w;t   w "w;t 1 ,


with "w;t i:i:d:N (0;    2 ).    This is the wage markup shock. We also refer to it as a labor supply
                         w

shock, since it has the same e¤ect on the household’s …rst order condition for the choice of
hours as the shock to the preference for leisure popularized by Hall (1997).
  Pro…t maximization by the perfectly competitive employment agencies implies the labor
demand function
                                                                             1+ w;t
                                                              Wt (j)           w;t
(2.3)                                     Lt (j) =                                    Lt ,
                                                               Wt
where Wt (j) is the wage received from employment agencies by the supplier of labor of type
j, while the wage paid by intermediate …rms for their homogenous labor input is
                                      Z 1        1      w;t

                                Wt =      Wt (j) w;t dj     :
                                                          0
                             INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                                                 7

2.4. Households. Each household maximizes the utility function
                          (1                                                                         )
                           X                                                         Lt+s (j)1+
                                  s
                    Et                bt+s log (Ct+s          hCt+s        1)      '                     ,
                                                                                       1+
                          s=0


where Ct is consumption, h is the degree of habit formation and bt is a shock to the discount
factor, which a¤ects both the marginal utility of consumption and the marginal disutility of
labor. This intertemporal preference shock follows the stochastic process


                                           log bt =       b log bt 1       + "b;t ,


with "b;t   i:i:d:N (0;   2 ).   Since technological progress is non stationary, utility is logarithimic
                          b

to ensure the existence of a balanced growth path. Moreover, consumption is not indexed by
j because the existence of state contingent securities ensures that in equilibrium consumption
and asset holdings are the same for all households.
  As a result, the household’s ‡ow budget constraint is


 Pt Ct + Pt It + Tt + Bt         Rt    1 Bt 1   + Qt (j) +        t   + Wt (j)Lt (j) + rtk ut Kt         1      Pt a(ut )Kt   1,



where It is investment, Tt are lump-sum taxes, Bt is holdings of government bonds, Rt is the
gross nominal interest rate, Qt (j) is the net cash ‡ow from household’s j portfolio of state
contingent securities, and         t   is the per-capita pro…t accruing to households from ownership
of the …rms.
  Households own capital and choose the capital utilization rate, ut ; which transforms phys-
ical capital into e¤ective capital according to


                                                   Kt = u t Kt            1:



E¤ective capital is then rented to …rms at the rate rtk . The cost of capital utilization is a(ut )
                                                                                                    a00 (1)
per unit of physical capital. In steady state, u = 1, a(1) = 0 and                                  a0 (1) :   In the log-linear
approximation of the model solution this curvature is the only parameter that matters for
the dynamics.
  The physical capital accumulation equation is

                                                                                    It
                             Kt = (1            )Kt   1   +   t       1        S             It ,
                                                                                   It    1
                                 INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                                    8

where     is the depreciation rate. The function S captures the presence of adjustment costs
in investment, as in Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005). In steady state, S = S 0 = 0
and S 00 > 0.2
  The investment shock             t   is a source of exogenous variation in the e¢ ciency with which
the …nal good can be transformed into physical capital, and thus into tomorrow’s capital
input. Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2009) show that this variation might stem
from technological factors speci…c to the production of investment goods, as in Greenwood,
Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997), but also from disturbances to the process by which these
investment goods are turned into productive capital. Here, we ignore that distinction and
maintain an agnostic stance on the ultimate source of these disturbances.
  The investment shock follows the stochastic process

                                                log   t   =    log   t 1      +"    ;t ,


where "        is i:i:d:N (0;   2 ):
          ;t

  As in Erceg, Henderson, and Levin (2000) , every period a fraction                               w   of households cannot
freely set their wage, but follows the indexation rule

                                 Wt (j) = Wt          1 (j) ( t 1 e
                                                                   zt     1
                                                                              ) w ( e )1   w
                                                                                               .

The remaining fraction of households chooses instead an optimal wage Wt (j) by maximizing
                   (1                                                  )
                     X                 Lt+s (j)1+
                          s s
                Et        w     bt+s '            + t+s Wt (j) Lt+s (j) ,
                                         1+
                           s=0

subject to the labor demand function 2.3.

2.5. The Government. A monetary policy authority sets the nominal interest rate following
a feedback rule of the form
                                            "                            #1     R
                   Rt       Rt 1        R
                                                  t           Xt     X
                                                                                      Xt =Xt   1
                                                                                                   dX
                      =                                                                                  mp;t ,
                   R         R                                Xt                      Xt =Xt   1

where R is the steady state of the gross nominal interest rate. As in Smets and Wouters
(2007), interest rates responds to deviations of in‡ation from its steady state, as well as to
the level and the growth rate of the GDP gap (Xt =Xt ).3 The monetary policy rule is also
   2 Lucca (2005) shows that this formulation of the adjustment cost function is equivalent (up to …rst order)
to a generalization of the time to build assumption.
   3 The GDP gap is the di¤erence between actual GDP (C + I + G ) and its level under ‡exible prices and
                                                           t   t     t
wages, and no markup shocks (Woodford (2003)).
                             INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                 9

perturbed by a monetary policy shock,                mp;t ,   which evolves according to

                                    log   mp;t   =    mp log mp;t 1              + "mp;t ,

where "mp;t is i:i:d:N (0;       2 ).
                                 mp

  Fiscal policy is fully Ricardian. The Government …nances its budget de…cit by issuing
short term bonds. Public spending is determined exogenously as a time-varying fraction of
output
                                                                 1
                                               Gt =       1               Yt ,
                                                                 gt
where the government spending shock gt follows the stochastic process

                                 log gt = (1         g ) log g   +    g   log gt    1   + "g;t ,

with "g;t   i:i:d:N (0;   2 ).
                          g


2.6. Market clearing. The aggregate resource constraint,

                                        Ct + It + Gt + a(ut )Kt              1    = Yt ,

can be derived by combining the Government’s and the households’budget constraints with
the zero pro…t condition of the …nal goods producers and of the employment agencies.

2.7. Solution. In this model, consumption, investment, capital, real wages and output ‡uc-
tuate around a stochastic balanced growth path, since the level of technology At has a unit
root. Therefore, the solution involves the following steps. First, rewrite the model in terms
of detrended variables. Second, compute the non-stochastic steady state of the transformed
model, and log-linearly approximate it around this steady state. The details of these steps
can be found in the online appendix. Third, solve the resulting linear system of rational
expectation equations to obtain its state space representation. This representation forms the
basis for the estimation procedure, which is discussed in the next section.


                                          3. Bayesian Inference

  We use Bayesian methods to characterize the posterior distribution of the structural pa-
rameters (see An and Schorfheide (2007) for a survey). The posterior distribution combines
the likelihood function with prior information.
                            INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                      10

3.1. Data and priors. The likelihood is based on the following vector of observable variables
                                                                         Wt
(3.1)                [   log Xt ;   log Ct ;   log It ; log Lt ;   log      ;   t ; log Rt ];
                                                                         Pt
where      denotes the temporal di¤erence operator. The data is quarterly and spans the period
from 1954QIII to 2004QIV. A detailed description of the time series used in the estimation
is in appendix A.
   The prior information on the structural parameters is summarized in Table 1.4 Two
parameters are …xed using level information not contained in our dataset: the quarterly
depreciation rate of capital ( ) to 0:025; the steady state ratio of government spending to
GDP (1      1=g) to 0:22, which corresponds to the average value of Gt =Xt in our sample. The
other priors are fairly di¤use and broadly in line with those adopted in previous studies (e.g.
Del Negro, Schorfheide, Smets, and Wouters (2007), Levin, Onatski, Williams, and Williams
(2005)).
   For all but two persistence parameters we use a Beta prior, with mean 0:6 and standard
deviation 0:2. One of the two exceptions is neutral technology, which already includes a unit
root. For this reason, the prior for the autocorrelation of its growth rate ( z ) is centered at
0:4 instead. The prior for the persistence of the monetary policy shocks is also centered at
0:4, because the policy rule already allows for interest rates inertia.
   The intertemporal preference, price and wage markup shocks are normalized to enter with
a unit coe¢ cient in the consumption, price in‡ation and wage equations respectively (see
appendix B for details). The priors on the innovations’standard deviations are quite disperse
and chosen to generate volatilities for the endogenous variables broadly in line with the data.
Their covariance matrix is diagonal.
   To evaluate jointly the economic content of the priors on the exogenous processes and the
structural parameters, it is useful to look at the implications of these priors for the variance
decomposition of the observable variables. This representation of the prior information is
more useful than a series of comments on the distributions for speci…c coe¢ cients, given the
focus of the paper on the sources of ‡uctuations. The view of business cycles built a priori in
the estimation is in line with the RBC tradition. In particular, the neutral technology shock
accounts on average for 34, 38, 43 and 29 percent of the variability of output, consumption,
investment and hours respectively. The second most important shock for output and hours
   4 In section 7 we show that results change little when estimating the model by maximum likelihood (i.e.
with ‡at priors).
                            INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                    11

is the government spending shock, which accounts for 31 and 17 percent of their variance
(see the online appendix for the full prior variance decomposition). On the contrary, the
a priori role of investment shocks for all variables is negligible, with essentially no mass on
the variance decomposition that emerges a posteriori. This divergence may be a concern for
model comparison, but it also indicates that our results are not driven by the prior.

3.2. Parameter estimates. Table 1 reports the estimates of the model’s parameters. The
table includes posterior medians, standard deviations and 90 percent probability intervals.
These estimates imply a substantial degree of price and wage stickiness, habit formation in
consumption and adjustment costs in investment, in line with previous studies (e.g. Altig,
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Linde (2005), Del Negro, Schorfheide, Smets, and Wouters
(2007) and Smets and Wouters (2007)). Capital utilization is not very elastic, as also found
by Del Negro, Schorfheide, Smets, and Wouters (2007). In response to a 1 percent positive
change in the rental rate of capital, utilization increases by slightly less than 0:2 percent.
  The estimates of the income share of capital ( ) and of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply
(1= ) are both lower than the values typically adopted in the RBC literature, although close
to those of Smets and Wouters (2007). The main results change little when these parameters
are calibrated to more standard values, as shown in section 7.


                                4. Shocks and Business Cycles

  This section analyzes the driving forces of ‡uctuations by looking at the variance decom-
position of the main macroeconomic variables implied by the estimated model.
  Table 2 reports the contribution of each shock to the variance of the level of the observable
variables at business cycle frequencies, which encompass periodic components with cycles
between 6 and 32 quarters, as in Stock and Watson (1999).5 The fourth column of the table
makes clear that investment shocks account for 50 percent of the ‡uctuations in output,
almost 60 percent of those in hours and more than 80 percent of those in investment, by far
the largest shares. On the basis of this evidence, we conclude that investment shocks are the
leading source of business cycles.
  One quali…cation to this result comes from consumption. Investment shocks are responsi-
ble for only a small fraction of its variability, which is instead largely driven by the otherwise
  5 We compute the spectral density of the observable variables implied by the DSGE model and transform
it to obtain the spectrum of the level of output, consumption, investment and wages.
                           INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                             12

irrelevant intertemporal preference shock. This is a symptom of the well-known failure of
standard consumption Euler equations to capture the empirical relationship between con-
sumption and interest rates, as argued in Primiceri, Schaumburg, and Tambalotti (2005) (see
also Canzoneri, Cumby, and Diba (2007) and Atkeson and Kehoe (2008)).
  Figure 1 provides a time series decomposition of the contribution of investment shocks to
the variance of output by plotting year-to-year GDP growth in the data (the grey line) and in
the model, conditional on the estimated sequence of the investment shocks alone (the black
line). The comovement between the two series is striking. In particular, investment shocks
appear largely responsible for “dragging”GDP growth down at business cycle troughs. This
is especially evident for the last two downturns, as well as for the recessions of the sixties.
The main exceptions are the “twin”recessions of the early eighties, in which monetary factors
are in fact believed to have played a fundamental role.
  Looking at the other shocks and variables in table 2, two results stand out. First, the
neutral technology shock remains fairly important. It explains around one quarter of the
volatility of output and consumption, and 40 percent of the variance of real wages. This
contribution is more limited than usually found in the RBC literature mainly because, in our
estimated model, positive productivity shocks have a negative e¤ect on hours (see …gure 6
in Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2008)). This fall in hours is consistent with the
…ndings of Smets and Wouters (2007) and of a large empirical literature (Gali (1999), Francis
and Ramey (2006), Canova, Lopez-Salido, and Michelacci (2006), Fernald (2007), Basu,
Fernald, and Kimball (2007)), although it remains controversial (Christiano, Eichenbaum,
and Vigfusson (2004), Uhlig (2003), Chang and Hong (2006)).
  The second result to highlight in table 2 is that wage markup shocks explain only 5 and 7
percent of the volatility of output and hours. Interestingly, the contribution of these shocks
to ‡uctuations in hours is much higher (58 percent) if we consider their overall variance,
rather than focusing on business cycle frequencies alone. Figure 2 studies the source of this
discrepancy by plotting the share of the variance of hours due to the wage markup shock, as
a function of the spectrum frequencies. Business cycles correspond to the band within the
dotted vertical lines.6 The contribution of wage markup shocks is substantial at very low
frequencies, but declines steeply towards the business cycle range, where it is mostly below
10 percent.

  6 The business cycle frequencies are in the band between 2 =32 = 0:19 and 2 =6 = 1:05:
                             INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                          13

   This spectral pro…le of the contribution of labor supply shocks is consistent with the
forecast error variance decomposition for GDP presented by Smets and Wouters (2007),
in which the share of variance associated with this shock increases monotonically with the
forecast horizon. The advantage of the spectral decomposition in Figure 2 is that it isolates
more clearly the contribution of labor supply shocks at business cycle frequencies.7 This
clari…cation is important, because medium scale DSGE models à la Smets and Wouters
(2007) have been criticized as tools for both monetary policy and business cycle analysis,
since they need large labor supply shocks to …t the data (e.g. Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan
(2008), Shimer (2009)). These critiques become less stringent if these shocks are important
only to account for low frequency movements in hours, which might be due for example to
demographic developments largely unrelated to the business cycle.

   In summary, our analysis proposes a parsimonious view of the sources of business cycles.
Investment shocks impart the main impetus to ‡uctuations, which spread from investment to
output and hours. Consumption, however, is largely insulated from these disturbances and
its comovement with the rest of the economy is mainly driven by neutral technology shocks.
Finally, labor supply shocks account for a large fraction of the movements in hours, but these
are concentrated at very low frequencies.
   As for wages and prices, their movement is mainly driven by exogenous variation in desired
markups, as would be expected in an economy in which monetary policy is well calibrated.
In this respect, it is especially remarkable that in‡ation and wages are almost completely
insulated from investment shocks. However, the signi…cant contribution of these shocks
to the movements in nominal interest rates suggests that achieving this degree of nominal
stabilization required a fair amount of activism on the part of monetary policy.

                     5. A Comparison with Smets and Wouters (2007)

   The prominent role of investment shocks in our variance decomposition is at odds with
some …ndings in a very in‡uential paper by Smets and Wouters (2007, SW hereafter). SW
also study the driving forces of output ‡uctuations in their DSGE model, but …nd that their
investment shock accounts for less than 25 percent of the forecast error variance in GDP at
   7 Even Smets and Wouters’(2007) interpretation of the role of labor supply shocks is unclear. They write
in the introduction: “While “demand”shocks such as the risk premium, exogenous spending, and investment-
speci…c technology shocks explain a signi…cant fraction of the short-run forecast variance in output, both wage
mark-up (or labor supply) and, to a lesser extent, productivity shocks explain most of its variation in the
medium to long run.”
                             INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                        14

any horizon. Our estimates of the contribution of this shock to output are twice as large.This
section documents the sources of this discrepancy.
  There are several di¤erences between our baseline model and that of SW, both in the
details of the theoretical speci…cation and in the measurement of the observable variables.
The …rst two columns of table 3 show that the di¤erences in speci…cation play a negligible role
in reconciling the two results. In fact, estimation of our model with SW’s dataset attributes
only 19 and 22 percent of the business cycle variance of output and hours to investment
shocks. These numbers are close to those obtained estimating SW’s model with the same
dataset (23 and 26 percent), and much lower than the 50 and 59 percent in our baseline
estimation. Therefore, the discrepancy in the variance decompositions stems largely from
di¤erences in measurement.8
  Compared to our baseline, SW’s dataset excludes (the change in) inventories from investment—
although not from output— and includes purchases of consumer durables in consumption.9
As a result, our investment series is more volatile and procyclical, while consumption is less
so. Moreover, the comovement between the two series is less pronounced in our dataset. This
is not surprising, since durables and inventories are both volatile and procyclical components
of GDP (Stock and Watson (1999)).
  Of course, these di¤erences in sample autocovariances translate into changes in parameter
estimates. Most strikingly, the inferred investment adjustment cost parameter more than
doubles (from 2:85 to 6:47) when moving to SW’s de…nition of the observables. This change
dampens the impact of investment shocks on investment, but also on output and hours. At the
same time, the habit persistence parameter declines (from 0:78 to 0:66), making consumption
and investment more countercylical in response to investment and intertemporal preference
shocks respectively. Moreover, the standard deviation of the latter shock increases substan-
tially (from 0:04 to 0:08), while that of the former, perhaps surprisingly, hardly changes (from
6:03 to 6:07).10


  8 “SW’s dataset”uses their de…nition of the seven observable variables, applied to our sample period, from
1954QIII to 2004QIV.
   9 SW also use di¤erent series for hours and wages, but this does not have any material impact on the
results.
   10 Detailed results for our model estimated using SW’s dataset are included in the online appendix. These
results include posterior parameter estimates and business cycle variance decompositions, as well as a com-
parison of the impulse responses implied by this estimation with those in the baseline. Also included are the
autocovariance structure for output, consumption and investment in the two datasets.
                            INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                           15

  Overall, the parameter estimates obtained with our dataset imply two main changes in the
transmission of shocks. First, a more powerful ampli…cation of investment shocks, without
exacerbating the countercyclicality of consumption. Second, a weaker response of output
and hours to intertemporal preference shocks, but with a more pronounced countercyclical
reaction of investment. As a consequence of these changes, we attribute to investment shocks
a higher share of the variance of output and hours and a correspondingly lower share to the
intertemporal preference shock.
  Our de…nition of investment di¤ers from SW’s in two respects: it includes both the change
in inventories and expenditures on durable goods. However, the latter di¤erence accounts
for about two thirds of the discrepancy between our variance decomposition and SW’s. In
fact, estimation of our model with durables included in (…xed) investment, rather than in
consumption, increases the contribution of investment shocks to business cycle ‡uctuations
from 19 to 42 percent for output and from 22 to 47 percent for hours (third column of table
3). The inclusion of inventories accounts for the rest of the gap (8 and 12 percentage points
for output and hours).
  Our treatment of consumer durables as a form of investment is standard in the business
cycle literature (see for example Cooley and Prescott (1995), Christiano, Eichenbaum, and
Evans (2005), Del Negro, Schorfheide, Smets, and Wouters (2007)). However, this measure-
ment choice requires a stronger argument in its defense, given its consequences for the answer
to the central question of the paper. One such argument comes from the estimation of a gen-
eralized version of the baseline model, with a more explicit role for durable goods.11 In this
model, as in Greenwood and Hercowitz (1991) and Chang and Schorfheide (2003), house-
holds consume nondurable goods and the service ‡ow of durables. This ‡ow is produced by
a home-production technology that combines durables and non-market hours. Households’
new purchases of durable goods increase their stock through an accumulation equation that
is a¤ected by two shocks: the same investment shock that impinges on the standard capital
accumulation and a shock speci…c to the accumulation of durables. This assumption captures
the idea that shocks to the marginal e¢ ciency of …rms’investment are correlated with shocks
to the e¢ ciency of consumer durables, although not perfectly. This version of the model is
estimated with the growth rate of consumer durables as an additional observable variable.


  11 We thank Frank Schorfheide (the editor) for this suggestion.
                            INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                       16

  A formal description of the model with durables is in appendix C, while details on its
estimation and on the implied variance decomposition are available in the online appendix.
Here we only report that this model attributes to investment shocks an even larger share of the
business cycle volatility of output and hours than our baseline (last column of table 3). This
result does not change when measuring household investment as the sum of consumer durables
and residential investment, as in Greenwood and Hercowitz (1991). We conclude that the
treatment of durables as one component of investment, as in our the baseline model, delivers
more reliable results on the sources of ‡uctuations than their inclusion in consumption, as in
SW.


   6. Inspecting the Mechanism: How Investment Shocks Become Important

  In standard neoclassical environments, neutral technology shocks are the most natural
source of business cycles, since they can easily produce the typical comovement of macroeco-
nomic variables. In fact, Barro and King (1984) show that generating this kind of comovement
in response to most other shocks is problematic. In particular, they explicitly identify in-
vestment shocks as an unlikely driving force of business cycles. Intuitively, a positive shock
to the marginal productivity of investment increases the rate of return, giving households an
incentive to save more and postpone consumption. With lower consumption, the marginal
utility of income increases, shifting labor supply to the right–an intertemporal substitution
e¤ect. Along an unchanged labor demand schedule, this supply shift raises hours and output,
but depresses wages and labor productivity.
  In our estimated model, on the contrary, investment shocks trigger procyclical movements
in all the key macroeconomic variables, as shown in …gure 3.12 This is due to a signi…-
cant change in the transmission mechanism, relative to the neoclassical benchmark, that
allows investment shocks to emerge as the single most important source of business cycle
‡uctuations. This section considers more closely how the frictions included in the baseline
model contribute to this result. Some of these frictions, such as endogenous capital utiliza-
tion and investment adjustment costs, have been analyzed before in a similar context, most
prominently by Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Hu¤man (1988) and Greenwood, Hercowitz, and

   12 Consumption is ‡at initially and increases with a delay of about one year. This response explains why
investment shocks account for a small fraction of the movements in consumption. Eusepi and Preston (2009),
Furlanetto and Seneca (2009), Guerrieri, Henderson, and Kim (2009) and Khan and Tsoukalas (2009) explore
several mechanisms that enhance the procyclicality of consumption in response to investment shocks.
                           INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                     17

Krusell (2000). Others, such as monopolistic competition with sticky prices and wages, have
not.13
  To organize this discussion, start from the e¢ ciency equilibrium condition that must hold
in a neoclassical economy:


(6.1)                              M RS C ; L      = MPL L .
                                            + +



With standard preferences and technology, the marginal rate of substitution (M RS) depends
positively on consumption (C) and hours (L), while the marginal product of labor (M P L) is
decreasing in hours. As a result, any shock that boosts hours on impact, without shifting the
marginal product of labor schedule, must also generate a fall in consumption for 6.1 to hold
at the new equilibrium. This is precisely what happens in response to investment shocks in
a neoclassical model, as was discussed above.
  Equation 6.1 also highlights the three margins on which the frictions included in our base-
line model must be operating to make the transmission of investment shocks more conformable
with the typical pattern of business cycles. Departures from the standard assumptions on
tastes a¤ect the form of the M RS, technological frictions a¤ect the form of the M P L, while
departures from perfect competition create a wedge between the two.
  For instance, with internal habit formation, the M RS also becomes a function of past
and future expected consumption. Intuitively, households become reluctant to sharply adjust
their consumption, which reduces their willingness to substitute over time. As a consequence,
consumption is less likely to fall signi…cantly in response to a positive investment shock.
  Endogenous capital utilization, instead, acts as a shifter of the M P L, as …rst highlighted
by Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Hu¤man (1988). By increasing the utilization of existing
capital, investment shocks increase the marginal product of labor on impact, shifting labor
demand. Along a …xed labor supply schedule, this shift implies a rise in hours and wages, as
well as in consumption.
  Finally, monopolistic competition in goods and labor markets drives a wedge between the
M RS and the M P L. Sticky prices and wages make this wedge endogenous, so that equation


   13 Rotemberg and Woodford (1995) point out that endogenous markup variation is an additional channel
through which aggregate shocks might a¤ect ‡uctuations, especially in employment. However, they do not
consider investment shocks in their analysis.
                            INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                       18

6.1 becomes

(6.2)                           ! L M RS C ; L       = MPL L ;
                                               + +

where ! denotes the wedge. In our model, ! is the sum of two equilibrium markups, that of
price over marginal cost and that of real wages over the marginal rate of substitution. If this
markup is countercyclical (i.e. it falls when hours rise, as suggested for example by Rotemberg
and Woodford (1999) and Gali, Gertler, and Lopez-Salido (2007)), consumption and hours
can move together in response to an investment shock, without violating the equilibrium
condition 6.2.
    More speci…cally, in our estimated model, a positive investment shock produces a drop
in the price markup, as evident from the fact that the real marginal cost rises in …gure 3.
This fall in the markup induces a positive shift in labor demand, which ampli…es the shift
associated with changes in utilization. At the same time, the wage markup also falls, shifting
the labor supply schedule to the right. Unlike in the perfectly competitive case, though,
this shift in labor supply is consistent with an increase in hours at an unchanged level of
consumption.
    In our economy, the endogeneity of markups is due to price and wage stickiness. However,
equation (6.2) suggests that any other friction resulting in countercyclical markups would
propagate investment shocks in a similar way.

    The rest of this section investigates the quantitative role of all these frictions in turning
investment shocks into the dominant source of ‡uctuations. For this purpose, we re-estimate
several restricted versions of the baseline model, shutting down one category of frictions
at-a-time, and study the resulting variance decomposition. The restricted models under con-
sideration are the following. First, a model with no habit in consumption, which corresponds
to h = 0. Second, a model with no capital utilization margin and investment adjustment
costs, obtained by setting 1= = 0:001 and S 00 = 0. Third and fourth, models with (nearly)
competitive labor and goods markets, in which        w   = 0:01,   w   = 0,   w   = 1:01 and   p   = 0:01,
p   = 0,   p   = 1:01 respectively. Finally, a model with no frictions, which corresponds to the
neoclassical core embedded in the baseline speci…cation.
    The results of this exercise are reported in table 4. The table focuses on the contributions
of investment shocks to the volatility of output and hours at business cycle frequencies.
The …rst result to note is that removing any of the frictions reduces the contribution of
                            INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                       19

investment shocks to ‡uctuations. This is as expected, given the preceding discussion of how
these frictions alter the transmission mechanism.
  In terms of relative contributions, imperfect competition has the most signi…cant marginal
impact. In the perfectly competitive model, the contribution of investment shocks to ‡uctu-
ations in output and hours drops to 4 and 8 percent respectively. Shutting down imperfect
competition in goods and labor markets separately produces a roughly equal decline in the
importance of investment shocks. Endogenous utilization and adjustment costs come next.
Their exclusion reduces the contribution of investment shocks to ‡uctuations in both hours
and output by more than half, compared with the baseline. The friction that plays the
smallest role at the margin is time non-separability.
  Finally, the last column in table 4 shows that the contribution of the investment shock
disappears entirely in the frictionless model. This result suggests that the estimation proce-
dure is not a¤ecting our …ndings on the role of this shock in business cycles. In the estimated
version of the neoclassical model obtained by restricting the baseline speci…cation, investment
shocks do not play any role in ‡uctuations, as it should be expected in light of the theoretical
analysis of Barro and King (1984) and Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Hu¤man (1988).14
  The models in table 4 encompass a wide range of views on the sources of business cycles.
In this paper, we proposed investment shocks as the key driving force. Other researchers
might look at table 4 and conclude otherwise if, for instance, they prefer the neoclassical
growth model to our baseline. However, one compelling reason to prefer the latter is that its
…t is far superior to that of any of the alternatives considered here, as shown by the marginal
data densities (or marginal likelihoods) reported in the last row of table 4. The marginal
likelihood of the baseline model is more than 100 log-points higher than that of the next best
model, implying overwhelming posterior odds in its favor.15



                                     7. Robustness Analysis

  This section investigates the robustness of our main …nding to a number of alternative
speci…cations of the model. The results of these robustness checks are summarized in table


   14 In the estimated frictionless model, the neutral technology and labor supply shocks explain 43 and 45
percent of the variance of output and 4 and 77 percent of that of hours at business cycle frequencies.
   15 Del Negro and Schorfheide (2008) discuss reasons why posterior odds should be interpreted with some
care when priors are not adjusted as the model speci…cation is altered.
                             INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                         20

5, which reports the share of the variance of output and hours explained by the investment
shock at business cycle frequencies for the baseline and several alternative speci…cations.

7.1. Standard calibration of capital income share and labor supply elasticity ( =
0:3 and     = 1). The baseline estimates of the share of capital income ( ) and of the Frisch
elasticity of labor supply (1= ) are di¤erent from the typical values used in the RBC literature.
However, the second column of table 5 shows that the contribution of investment shocks to
the business cycle ‡uctuations of output and hours increases with respect to the baseline, if
these two parameters are calibrated to the more typical values of                = 0:3 and      = 1:

7.2. No ARMA shocks. Following Smets and Wouters (2007), the baseline model includes
an ARMA(1,1) speci…cation for the wage and price markup shocks. Results are very similar
when markup shocks are assumed to follow an AR(1) process instead, as illustrated in column
three of table 5.

7.3. GDP growth in the policy rule. We also experimented with a model in which the
interest rate responds to output growth, rather than to the output gap, since both speci…ca-
tions are common in the literature. In this case, the contribution of investments shocks falls
slightly with respect to the baseline case, as shown in column four of table 5.

7.4. Maximum likelihood. The last robustness check is with respect to the priors on the
model parameters. The baseline exercise uses the prior information reported in table 1,
following the recent literature on Bayesian estimation of DSGE models. One objection to this
methodology is that the results might be unduly in‡uenced by this information, although the
role of investment shocks is negligible in the prior variance decomposition described in section
3.1. As a further check, we also estimated the model by maximum likelihood. Maximizing
the likelihood is numerically much more challenging than maximizing the posterior, since
the use of weakly informative priors ameliorates the problems caused by ‡at areas in the
likelihood surface and by multiple local modes. These di¢ culties notwithstanding, we were
able to compute maximum likelihood estimates for the model parameters.16 The implications
of these estimates for the variance decomposition are illustrated in the last column of table 5,

   16 More precisely, to maximize the likelihood we need to calibrate {, since the likelihood is not very
informative on this parameter and this creates convergence problems in the maximization routine. Therefore,
we calibrated { = 5, which is our prior mean. This value of { implies a low elasticity of capital utilization,
which makes the propagation of investment shocks if anything more problematic.
                          INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                               21

which makes clear that investment shocks still account for around 60 percent of the business
cycle ‡uctuations in output and hours.


                                 8. Concluding Remarks

  What is the source of business cycle ‡uctuations? We revisited this fundamental question
of macroeconomics from the perspective of an estimated New Neoclassical Synthesis model.
The main …nding is that investment shocks— shocks to the marginal e¢ ciency of investment—
are the main drivers of movements in hours, output and investment over the cycle. Imperfect
competition with endogenous markups is crucial for the transmission of these shocks. Neutral
technology shocks also retain a non negligible role in the ‡uctuations of consumption and
output and are mainly responsible for their comovement. Shocks to labor supply account for
a large share of the variance of hours at very low frequencies, but their contribution over the
business cycle is negligible.
  One quali…cation to these results is that the estimated volatility of our investment shock is
larger than that of the price of investment relative to consumption measured in the data. In a
simple two-sector representation of our model, in which the sector producing investment goods
is perfectly competitive, the two would be the same. As we argue in Justiniano, Primiceri,
and Tambalotti (2009), however, there are important sources of variation in the marginal
e¢ ciency of investment that are not captured by changes in the relative price. One example
are frictions in the capital accumulation process, perhaps related to the intermediation ability
of the …nancial sector. Models that explicitly include these type of frictions, such as that in
Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2007), therefore represent a promising avenue for future
research.


                                  Appendix A. The Data

  Our dataset spans the period from 1954QIII to 2004QIV. All data are extracted from
the Haver Analytics database (series mnemonics in parenthesis).          Following Del Negro,
Schorfheide, Smets, and Wouters (2007), real GDP is constructed by diving the nominal
series (GDP) by population (LF and LH) and the GDP De‡ator (JGDP). Real series for
consumption and investment are obtained in the same manner, although consumption corre-
sponds only to personal consumption expenditures on non-durables (CN) and services (CS),
while investment is the sum of personal consumption expenditures on durables (CD) and
                         INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                                    22

gross private domestic investment (I). Real wages correspond to nominal compensation per
hour in the non-farm business sector (LXNFC), divided by the GDP de‡ator. The labor in-
put is measured by the log of hours of all persons in the non-farm business sector (HNFBN),
divided by population. The quarterly log di¤erence in the GDP de‡ator and the e¤ective
Federal Funds rate are our measures of in‡ation and the nominal interest rate. No series is
demeaned or detrended.

                      Appendix B. Normalization of the Shocks

  As in Smets and Wouters (2007), some of the exogenous shocks are re-normalized by a
constant term. In particular, we normalize the price and wage markups shocks and the
intertemporal preference shock, but not the investment shock.
  More speci…cally, the log-linearized Phillips curve is
                                                        1
                      ^t =               Et ^ t+1 +                 ^t   1   + s^t + ^ p;t .
                                1+   p                1+        p

The normalization consists of de…ning a new exogenous variable, ^ p;t                          ^ p;t , and estimating

the standard deviation of the innovation to ^ p;t instead of ^ p;t . We do the same for the wage
markup and the intertemporal preference shock, for which the normalizations are
                               0                            1
                      ^        @      (1     w ) (1  w )    A ^ w;t
                        w;t =
                                              1
                                   1 + (1 + w ) (1 + ) w

                          ^b             (1     b ) (e      h    b ) (e          h) ^
                            t    =                                                  bt :
                                                e h+     e2     + h2
These normalizations are chosen so that these shocks enter their equations with a coe¢ cient
of one. In this way, it is easier to choose a reasonable prior for their standard deviation.
Moreover, the normalization is a practical way to impose correlated priors across coe¢ cients,
which is desirable in some cases. For instance, imposing a prior on the standard deviation
of the innovation to ^ p;t corresponds to imposing priors that allow for correlation between
and the standard deviation of the innovations to ^ p;t . Often, these normalizations improve
the convergence properties of the MCMC algorithm.

                     Appendix C. A Model with Durable Goods

  Section 5 presents the results of a variance decomposition exercise based on a model with an
explicit role for durable goods in home production. This appendix describes it in some detail.
                            INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                                                23

The optimization problems of the …nal and intermediate good producers, the employment
agencies and the behavior of the government are identical to those in the baseline model of
section 2. The household problem is instead somewhat more involved.
  Each household maximizes the utility function
                 1
                          "                                                                               #
                 X                                                   (Lt+s + Lh;t+s )1+
                    s
              Et      bt+s log (Ct+s hCt+s 1 )                     '                                          ,
                                                                           1+
                    s=0

where Lt now denotes market hours and Lh;t is the amount of hours spent in home produc-
tion. Unlike in the baseline speci…cation, we follow SW and assume that households’labor
is homogenous and gets di¤erentiated by labor unions with market power. These unions
purchase labor from the households at wage Wth and sell it to the employment agencies as a
di¤erentiated product at wage Wt (j) for labor of type j.
  Ct is now a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) aggregate of consumption of non-
durable goods and services (Nt ) and of the service ‡ow from durable goods (St )

                                                 1                       1           1
                                Ct =        Nt       + (1        ) St                    ,

where    is the elasticity of substitution between the two components. The service ‡ow from
durables is itself a CES aggregate of the stock of durable goods available to the household
and the time spent in the home-production process:

                                                      1                          1           1
                            St =      (At Lh;t )          + (1          ) Dt                     ,

where Dt is the stock of durable goods and we are assuming that neutral technology also
a¤ects the e¢ ciency of home production. This speci…cation encompasses cases in which time
and durables are complements or substitutes. If                   = 1, the home technology reduces to a
Cobb-Douglas production function. If             = 0, the service ‡ow from durable goods is simply
a constant share of the stock of durables.
  With this generalization, the household’s budget constraint becomes

 Pt Nt + Pt Id;t + Pt It + Tt + Bt     Rt   1 Bt 1    + Qt +        t   + Wth Lt + rtk ut Kt              1       Pt a(ut )Kt   1.


Id;t denotes purchases of durable goods, whose stock evolves according to

                                                                             Id;t
                          Dt+1 = (1     ) Dt +        t t   1      S                             Id;t .
                                                                          Id;t       1
                                  INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                         24

Note that the accumulation of durable goods is a¤ected by two shocks: the same investment
shock that impinges on the standard capital accumulation,                      t,   and a shock speci…c to the
accumulation of durables, which evolves as

                                         log   t   =   log   t 1   + " ;t ,

where "         is i:i:d:N (0;   2 ):
           ;t

     This model involves six additional parameters with respect to the baseline, which corre-
spond to the coe¢ cients of the CES aggregators ( , ,                         and ) and the autocorrelation
and innovation variance parameters      and . We derive the mapping between [ ; ] and
h       i
  Lh Id
  L ; I , and estimate the latter instead of the former. Our prior for the two elasticities of
substitution ( and ) is centered on the Cobb-Douglas case, using a Gamma density with
mean equal to 1 and standard deviation equal to 0:2. In line with Chang and Schorfheide
(2003), we adopt a Gamma prior for the two steady-state ratios ( LLh and                      Id
                                                                                               I )   with mean 0:7
and standard deviation 0:1. The prior for                is a Beta with mean 0:4 and standard devia-
tion 0:2, while the prior for           is an Inverse-Gamma centered with mean 0:25 and standard
deviation 1. The priors on the remaining coe¢ cients are identical to those of the baseline
model.
     We estimate this version of the model with the growth rate of consumer durables as an
additional observable variable. As we show in the online appendix, the posterior modes
     Lh          Id
of   L    and     I   are 0:47 and 0:72 respectively. The former is broadly consistent with the
estimates of Chang and Schorfheide (2003), while the latter is in line with the average ratio
of durable to investment goods in the data. The posterior modes of                      and    are 0:58 and 0:61
respectively. These estimates imply that nondurable consumption and the service ‡ow from
durables, as well as durable goods and time, are complements. This result is at odds with the
estimates of Chang and Schorfheide (2003), but is consistent with the …ndings of Greenwood
and Hercowitz (1991), who stress the importance of technological complementarity in home
production for the allocation of capital and time across sectors.


                                                   References

Altig, D., L. J. Christiano, M. Eichenbaum, and J. Linde (2005): “Firm-Speci…c Capital, Nominal
 Rigidities and the Business Cycle,” NBER Working Paper No. 11034.
An, S., and F. Schorfheide (2007): “Bayesian Analysis of DSGE Models,” Econometric Reviews, 24(2-4),
 113–172, forthcoming.
                             INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                      25

Atkeson, A., and P. J. Kehoe (2008): “On the Need for a New Approach to Analyzing Monetary Policy,”
 NBER Working Papers 14260, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Barro, R. J., and R. G. King (1984): “Time-Separable Preference and Intertemporal-Substitution Models
 of Business Cycles,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 99(4), 817–839.
Basu, S., J. Fernald, and M. Kimball (2007): “Are Technology Improvements Contractionary?,” Amer-
 ican Economic Review, Forthcoming.
Beaudry, P., and F. Portier (2006): “Stock Prices, News, and Economic Fluctuations,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 96(4), 1293–1307.
Calvo, G. (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
 12(3), 383–98.
Canova, F., D. Lopez-Salido, and C. Michelacci (2006): “On the Robust E¤ects of Technology Shocks
 on Hours Worked and Output,” mimeo, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
Canzoneri, M. B., R. E. Cumby, and B. T. Diba (2007): “Euler equations and money market interest
 rates: A challenge for monetary policy models,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(7), 1863–1881.
Chang, Y., and J. H. Hong (2006): “Do Technological Improvements in the Manufacturing Sector Raise
 or Lower Employment?,” American Economic Review, 96(1), 352–368.
Chang, Y., and F. Schorfheide (2003): “Labor-supply shifts and economic ‡uctuations,” Journal of
 Monetary Economics, 50(8), 1751–1768.
Chari, V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2008): “New Keynesian Models Are Not Yet Useful for
 Policy Analysis,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Working Paper 664.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic E¤ect
 of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” The Journal of Political Economy, 113(1), 1–45.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and R. Vigfusson (2004): “What Happens After a Technology
 Shock?,” mimeo, Northwestern University.
Christiano, L. J., R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2007): “Financial Factors in Business Cycles,” mimeo,
 Northwestern University.
Cochrane, J. H. (1994): “Shocks,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 41, 295–364.
Cooley, T. F., and E. Prescott (1995): “Economic Growth and Business Cycles,”in Frontiers of Business
 Cycle Research, ed. by T. F. Cooley, chap. 1, pp. 1–38. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Del Negro, M., and F. Schorfheide (2008): “Forming Priors for DSGE Models (And How It A¤ects the
 Assessment of Nominal Rigidities),” mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Del Negro, M., F. Schorfheide, F. Smets, and R. Wouters (2007): “On the Fit and Forecasting Per-
 formance of New Keynesian Models,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 25(2), 123–162, Forth-
 coming.
Erceg, C. J., D. W. Henderson, and A. T. Levin (2000): “Optimal Monetary Policy with Staggered
 Wage and Price Contracts,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46(2), 281–313.
Eusepi, S., and B. Preston (2009): “Labor Supply Heterogeneity and Macroeconomic Co-Movement,”
 mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
                            INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                       26

Fernald, J. (2007): “Trend Breaks, Long-Run Restrictions, and Contractionary Technology Improvements,”
 Federal Reserve bank of San Francisco Working Paper Series, No. 2005-21.
Fisher, J. D. M. (2006): “The Dynamic E¤ect of Neutral and Investment-Speci…c Technology Shocks,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 114(3), 413–451.
Francis, N. R., and V. A. Ramey (2006): “Measures of Hours Per Capita and their Implications for the
 Technology-Hours Debate,” University of California, San Diego, mimeo.
Furlanetto, F., and M. Seneca (2009): “Investment-Speci…c Technology Shocks and Consumption,”
 mimeo, Norges Bank.
Gali, J. (1999): “Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks Explain Aggregate
 Fluctuations?,” American Economic Review, 89(1), 249–271.
Gali, J., M. Gertler, and D. Lopez-Salido (2007): “Markups, Gaps and the Welfare Costs of Business
 Fluctuations,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1), 44–59.
Goodfriend, M., and R. G. King (1997): “The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the Role of Monetary
 Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 12, 231–283.
Greenwood, J., and Z. Hercowitz (1991): “The Allocation of Capital and Time over the Business Cycle,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 99(6), 1188–214.
Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and G. W. Huffman (1988): “Investment, Capacity Utilization, and the
 Real Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 78(3), 402–417.
Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and P. Krusell (1997): “Long Run Implications of Investment-Speci…c
 Technological Change,” American Economic Review, 87(3), 342–362.
         (2000): “The role of investment-speci…c technological change in the business cycle,” European Eco-
 nomic Review, 44(1), 91–115.
Guerrieri, L., D. Henderson, and J. Kim (2009): “Interpreting Investment-Speci…c Technology Shocks,”
 mimeo, Federal Reserve Board.
Hall, R. E. (1997): “Macroeconomic Fluctuations and the Allocation of Time,”Journal of Labor Economics,
 15(2), 223–250.
Jaimovich, N., and S. Rebelo (2009): “Can News About the Future Drive the Business Cycle?,”American
 Economic Review, forthcoming.
Justiniano, A., and G. E. Primiceri (2008): “The Time Varying Volatility of Macroeconomic Fluctua-
 tions,” American Economic Review, 98(3), 604–41.
Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2008): “Investment Shocks and Business Cycles,”
 CEPR Discussion Papers 6739, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2009): “Investment Shocks and the Relative Price
 of Investment,” mimeo, Northwestern University.
Khan, H., and J. Tsoukalas (2009): “Investment Shocks and the Comovement Problem,”mimeo, Carleton
 University.
King, R. G., C. I. Plosser, J. H. Stock, and M. W. Watson (1991): “Stochastic Trends and Economic
 Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, 81(4), 819–840.
                              INVESTMENT SHOCKS AND BUSINESS CYCLES                                     27

King, R. G., and S. T. Rebelo (1999): “Resuscitating Real Business Cycles,” in Handbook of Macroeco-
 nomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, Amsterdam. North-Holland.
Kydland, F. E., and E. C. Prescott (1982): “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,”Econometrica,
 50(6), 1345–70.
Levin, A. T., A. Onatski, J. C. Williams, and N. Williams (2005): “Monetary Policy Under Uncertainty
 in Micro-Founded Macroeconometric Models,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Lucca, D. O. (2005): “Resuscitating Time to Build,” mimeo, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
 System.
Primiceri, G. E., E. Schaumburg, and A. Tambalotti (2005): “Intertemporal Disturbances,” mimeo,
 Northwestern University.
Rotemberg, J. J., and M. Woodford (1995): “Dynamic General Equilibrium Models with Imperfectly
 Competitive Product Markets,” in Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, ed. by T. F. Cooley, chap. 9, pp.
 243–293. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
           (1999): “The Cyclical Behavior of Prices and Costs,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B.
 Taylor, and M. Woodford, chap. 16, pp. 1051–1135. Elsevier.
Shapiro, M. D., and M. Watson (1988): “Sources of Business Cycle Fluctuations,” in NBER Macroeco-
 nomics Annual, pp. 111–148. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Shimer, R. (2009): “Convergence in Macroeconomics: The Labor Wedge,” American Economic Journal:
 Macroeconomics, 1(1), 280–97.
Sims, C. A. (1980): “Macroeconomics and Reality,” Econometrica, 48(1), 1–48.
Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian Approach,”
 American Economic Review, 97(3), 586–606, forthcoming.
Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson (1999): Business Cycle Fluctuations in US Macroeconomic Time Se-
 rieschap. 1, pp. 3–64. Elsevier.
Uhlig, H. (2003): “Do Technology Shocks Lead to a Fall in Total Hours Worked?,” mimeo, University of
 Chicago.
Woodford, M. (2003): Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton Univer-
 sity Press, Princeton, NJ.


  Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
  E-mail address: ajustiniano@frbchi.org


  Northwestern University, CEPR and NBER
  E-mail address: g-primiceri@northwestern.edu


  Federal Reserve Bank of New York
  E-mail address: andrea.tambalotti@ny.frb.org
                Table 1: Prior densities and posterior estimates for the baseline model
                                                                                              2
                                                        Prior                     Posterior
                                             Prior
Coefficient     Description                             Mean    Std    Median   Std    [      5   ,   95     ]
                                            Density 1

α               Capital share                  N        0.30    0.05    0.17    0.01   [   0.16   ,   0.18   ]


ιp              Price indexation               B        0.50    0.15    0.24    0.08   [   0.12   ,   0.38   ]


ιw              Wage indexation                B        0.50    0.15    0.11    0.03   [   0.06   ,   0.16   ]


100γ            SS technology growth rate      N        0.50    0.03    0.48    0.02   [   0.44   ,   0.52   ]


h               Consumption habit              B        0.50    0.10    0.78    0.04   [   0.72   ,   0.84   ]


λp              SS price markup                N        0.15    0.05    0.23    0.04   [   0.17   ,   0.29   ]


λw              SS wage markup                 N        0.15    0.05    0.15    0.04   [   0.08   ,   0.22   ]


logL ss         SS log-hours                   N        0.00    0.50    0.38    0.47   [ -0.39 ,      1.15   ]


100(π-1)        SS quarterly inflation         N        0.50    0.10    0.71    0.07   [   0.58   ,   0.82   ]


100(β -1 -1)    Discount factor                G        0.25    0.10    0.13    0.04   [   0.07       0.21   ]


ν               Inverse Frisch elasticity      G        2.00    0.75    3.79    0.76   [   2.70   ,   5.19   ]


ξp              Calvo prices                   B        0.66    0.10    0.84    0.02   [   0.80   ,   0.87   ]


ξw              Calvo wages                    B        0.66    0.10    0.70    0.05   [   0.60   ,   0.78   ]

                Elasticity capital
χ               utilization costs
                                               G        5.00    1.00    5.30    1.01   [   3.84   ,   7.13   ]

                Investment adjustment
S''             costs
                                               G        4.00    1.00    2.85    0.54   [   2.09   ,   3.88   ]


φπ              Taylor rule inflation          N        1.70    0.30    2.09    0.17   [   1.84   ,   2.39   ]


φX              Taylor rule output             N        0.13    0.05    0.07    0.02   [   0.04   ,   0.10   ]


φ dX            Taylor rule output growth      N        0.13    0.05    0.24    0.02   [   0.20   ,   0.28   ]


ρR              Taylor rule smoothing          B        0.60    0.20    0.82    0.02   [   0.79   ,   0.86   ]

( Continued on the next page )
                 Table 1: Prior densities and posterior estimates for the baseline model
                                                                                                          2
                                                         Prior                               Posterior
                                              Prior
Coefficient      Description                             Mean     Std         Median      Std     [       5   ,   95      ]
                                             Density 1

ρ mp             Monetary policy                B        0.40     0.20         0.14      0.06     [ 0.05      ,   0.25 ]


ρz               Neutral technology growth      B        0.40     0.20         0.23      0.06     [ 0.14      ,   0.32 ]


ρg               Government spending            B        0.60     0.20         0.99      0.00     [ 0.99      ,   0.99 ]


ρμ               Investment                     B        0.60     0.20         0.72      0.04     [ 0.65      ,   0.79 ]


ρp               Price markup                   B        0.60     0.20         0.94      0.02     [ 0.90      ,   0.97 ]


ρw               Wage markup                    B        0.60     0.20         0.97      0.01     [ 0.95      ,   0.99 ]


ρb               Intertemporal preference       B        0.60     0.20         0.67      0.04     [ 0.60      ,   0.73 ]


θp               Price markup MA                B        0.50     0.20         0.77      0.07     [ 0.61      ,   0.85 ]


θw               Wage markup MA                 B        0.50     0.20         0.91      0.02     [ 0.88      ,   0.94 ]


100σ mp          Monetary policy                 I       0.10     1.00         0.22      0.01     [ 0.20      ,   0.25 ]


100σ z           Neutral technology growth       I       0.50     1.00         0.88      0.05     [ 0.81      ,   0.96 ]


100σ g           Government spending             I       0.50     1.00         0.35      0.02     [ 0.33      ,   0.38 ]


100σ μ           Investment                      I       0.50     1.00         6.03      0.96     [ 4.71      ,   7.86 ]


100σ p           Price markup                    I       0.10     1.00         0.14      0.01     [ 0.12      ,   0.17 ]


100σ w           Wage markup                     I       0.10     1.00         0.20      0.02     [ 0.18      ,   0.24 ]


100σ b           Intertemporal preference        I       0.10     1.00         0.04      0.00     [ 0.03      ,   0.04 ]

(log) Likelihood at median                                                                      -1072.8
1
    N stands for Normal, B Beta, G Gamma and I Inverted-Gamma1 distribution
2
 Median and posterior percentiles from 3 chains of 120,000 draws generated using a Random walk Metropolis algorithm. We
discard the initial 20,000 and retain one every 10 subsequent draws.
                                       Table 2: Posterior variance decomposition at business cycle frequencies
                                                                in the baseline model1
                                                                     Medians and [5th,95th] percentiles

Series \ Shock           Policy              Neutral        Government          Investment       Price mark-up Wage mark-up            Preference
Output                    0.05                 0.25             0.02                0.50                  0.05          0.05               0.07
                       [ 0.03, 0.08]        [ 0.19, 0.33]    [ 0.01, 0.02]      [ 0.42, 0.59]       [ 0.03, 0.07]    [ 0.03, 0.08]      [ 0.05, 0.10]


Consumption               0.02                 0.26             0.02                0.09                  0.01          0.07               0.52
                       [ 0.01, 0.04]        [ 0.20, 0.32]    [ 0.02, 0.03]      [ 0.04, 0.16]       [ 0.00, 0.01]    [ 0.04, 0.12]      [ 0.42, 0.61]


Investment                0.03                 0.06             0.00                0.83                  0.04          0.01               0.02
                       [ 0.02, 0.04]        [ 0.04, 0.10]    [ 0.00, 0.00]      [ 0.76, 0.89]       [ 0.02, 0.06]    [ 0.01, 0.02]      [ 0.01, 0.04]


Hours                     0.07                  0.1             0.02                0.59                  0.06          0.07               0.08
                       [ 0.04, 0.10]        [ 0.08, 0.13]    [ 0.02, 0.03]      [ 0.52, 0.66]       [ 0.04, 0.09]    [ 0.04, 0.11]      [ 0.06, 0.12]


Wages                     0.00                  0.4             0.00                0.04                  0.31          0.23               0.00
                       [ 0.00, 0.01]        [ 0.30, 0.52]    [ 0.00, 0.00]      [ 0.02, 0.07]       [ 0.23, 0.41]    [ 0.16, 0.32]      [ 0.00, 0.01]


Inflation                 0.03                 0.14             0.00                0.06                  0.39          0.34               0.02
                       [ 0.02, 0.06]        [ 0.09, 0.21]    [ 0.00, 0.00]      [ 0.02, 0.13]       [ 0.29, 0.50]    [ 0.26, 0.42]      [ 0.01, 0.04]


Interest Rates            0.17                 0.09             0.01                0.47                  0.05          0.04               0.16
                       [ 0.13, 0.22]        [ 0.06, 0.12]    [ 0.00, 0.01]      [ 0.37, 0.56]       [ 0.03, 0.07]    [ 0.03, 0.07]      [ 0.11, 0.23]

1
 Business cycle frequencies correspond to periodic components with cycles between 6 and 32 quarters. The decomposition is obtained using the
spectrum of the DSGE model and an inverse first difference filter for output, consumption, investment and wages to reconstruct the levels. The spectral
density is computed from the state space representation of the model with 500 bins for frequencies covering that range of periodicities. Medians need
not add up to one.
                  Table 3: Variance share of output and hours at business cycles frequencies 1 due to
                              investment shocks, comparison with Smets and Wouters

                                                                                                               Durables in
                  Smets and
Model                                                               Ours                                         Home
                   Wouters
                                                                                                               Production

                                                                 Investment
                                                                                                               Baseline with
                                                                   includes
Definition of      Smets and               Smets and                                                          consumption of
                                                                  consumer                Baseline
observables         Wouters                 Wouters                                                            durable goods
                                                               durables but not
                                                                                                                observable
                                                                 inventories
Series


Output                0.23                    0.19                   0.42                   0.50                    0.65

Hours                 0.26                    0.22                   0.47                   0.59                    0.74

1
 Business cycle frequencies correspond to periodic components with cycles between 6 and 32 quarters. Variance decompositions are
performed at the mode of each specification.
                                  Table 4: Variance share of output and hours at business cycle frequencies 1 due to
                                                       investment shocks, restricted models


                                                               No
                                                          investment        Perfectly
                                                           costs and       competitive        Perfectly
                                                            variable        goods and        competitive         Perfectly
                                                             capital          labor            goods           competitive
                         Baseline           No habits2    utilization3      markets4          markets5        labor market6       No frictions7
Series

Output                     0.50                 0.39         0.23              0.04               0.30              0.31               0.02


Hours                      0.59                 0.51         0.30              0.08               0.51              0.42               0.03

log
Marginal                 -1176.3              -1302.6       -1283.3          -1457.1            -1415.1           -1274.7            -1512.0
Likelihood
1
 Business cycle frequencies correspond to periodic components with cycles between 6 and 32 quarters. Variance decompositions are performed at the
mode of each specification.
2
    h calibrated at 0.01
3
    S'' calibrated at 0.01, 1/χ calibrated at 0.001
4
    λ w, ξ w, ι w, λ p , ξ p and ι p calibrated at 0.01
5
    λ w, ξ w and ι w calibrated at 0.01
6
    λ p, ξ p and ι p calibrated at 0.01
7
    Combines the calibration for all specifications above, except baseline
                Table 5: Variance share of output and hours at business cycles
                      frequencies1 due to investment shocks, robustness


                                                                         Taylor rule
                                    v = 1 and          No MA             with output
                  Baseline           α = 0.3         components2          growth 3      MLE4
Series


Output              0.50               0.63                0.54               0.47       0.59

Hours               0.59               0.75                0.56               0.52       0.65

1
  Business cycle frequencies correspond to periodic components with cycles between 6 and 32
quarters. Variance decompositions are performed at the mode of each specification.
2
  Moving average component for price and wage mark-up shocks calibrated to zero.
3
    Taylor rule responds to observable output growth instead of the output gap.
4
    Baseline specification estimated by maximum likelihood.
Figure 1: Year−to−year output growth, data and counterfactual with investment shocks



 8



 6



 4



 2



 0



−2



−4
                                                           Only Investment Shocks
                                                           Data

−6
        1960    1965    1970     1975    1980    1985    1990        1995           2000
                   Figure 2: Variance share of hours explained by wage markup shocks at all frequencies
                 0.9



                 0.8



                 0.7



                 0.6
variance share




                 0.5



                 0.4



                 0.3



                 0.2



                 0.1




                                     0.5              1              1.5              2              2.5              3
                                                                    frequency
                       Vertical dashed lines mark the frequency band associated with business cycles of 6 to 32 quarters
Figure 3: Impulse responses to a one standard deviation
                   investment shock
