                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DISCONTINUOUS BEHAVIORAL RESPONSES TO RECYCLING LAWS AND
                    PLASTIC WATER BOTTLE DEPOSITS

                                          W. Kip Viscusi
                                           Joel Huber
                                            Jason Bell
                                          Caroline Cecot

                                       Working Paper 15585
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15585


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2009




This research was supported in part by a grant from EPA to Vanderbilt University. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by W. Kip Viscusi, Joel Huber, Jason Bell, and Caroline Cecot. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Discontinuous Behavioral Responses to Recycling Laws and Plastic Water Bottle Deposits
W. Kip Viscusi, Joel Huber, Jason Bell, and Caroline Cecot
NBER Working Paper No. 15585
December 2009, Revised December 2010
JEL No. K23,K32,Q50,Q58

                                              ABSTRACT

Economic theory predicts that individual recycling behavior gravitates toward extremes—either diligent
recycling or no recycling at all. Using a nationally representative sample of 3,158 bottled water users,
this article finds that this prediction is borne out for consumer recycling of plastic water bottles. Both
water bottle deposits and recycling laws foster recycling through a discontinuous effect that converts
reluctant recyclers into diligent recyclers. Within this context, a number of factors influencing recycling
emerge. The warm glow from being both an environmentalist and an environmental group member
is about equal to the monetary value of 5 cent bottle deposits. Respondents from states with stringent
recycling laws and bottle deposits have greater recycling rates. Consistent with recycling being a threshold
response, the efficacy of these policy interventions is greater for those who do not already recycle,
have lower income, and do not consider themselves to be environmentalists.


W. Kip Viscusi                                       Jason Bell
Vanderbilt Law School                                Fuqua School of Business
131 21st Avenue South                                Duke University
Nashville, TN 37203-1181                             Durham, NC 27706
and NBER                                             jason.bell@duke.edu
kip.viscusi@vanderbilt.edu
                                                     Caroline Cecot
Joel Huber                                           Vanderbilt Law School
Fuqua School of Business                             131 21st Avenue South
Duke University                                      Nashville, TN 37203
Durham, NC 27706                                     cecot@fas.harvard.edu
Joel.Huber@Duke.edu
1. Introduction

         Waste associated with plastic water bottles has become an issue of substantial national

prominence. In six years, U.S. sales of bottled water for individual consumption tripled from

about 12 billion water bottles in 2000 to 36 billion in 2006.1 In 2008 alone, U.S. consumption of

bottled water was more than 28 gallons per capita, with industry wholesale dollar sales

exceeding $11 billion.2 Bottled water typically comes in polyethylene terephthalate (PET)

bottles. More than 2 million tons of PET bottles, including those for beverages other than water,

were incinerated or left in landfills in 2006. The Container Recycling Institute estimates that

increasing PET recycling rates to about 85% would save more than 60 trillion BTUs and avoid

about a million metric tons of carbon equivalent greenhouse gas emissions. Plastic water bottles

comprise almost half of the total PET bottle sales and represent a growing share of sales.

However, bottle deposit laws in most states do not include these water bottles. This paper

examines the efficacy of the economic incentives generated by policies that encourage the

recycling of these plastic water bottles.3

         There are two principal policy instruments that promote water bottle recycling—bottle

deposits and recycling laws. Bottle deposits for plastic water bottles establish a financial

incentive to foster recycling while recycling laws generally encourage that behavior by reducing

the time cost and increasing the convenience cost of recycling.4 In some instances recycling



1
  See the Container Recycling Institute (2008) for detailed statistics through 2006.
2
  See Rodwan (2009).
3
  We do not analyze whether increased recycling of water bottles would pass a cost-benefit test. Such an analysis
would need to consider the implementation and operating costs of the various policies against the benefits of
reducing greenhouse gas emissions, increasing landfill space, saving natural resources through the possibility of
reuse, and experiencing the warm glow benefits of recycling. See, e.g., Kinnaman (2006) and Morris, Smith, and
Hlavka (2005). To the extent that a state or a municipality would like to increase its water bottle recycling through a
bottle deposit bill or other recycling law, however, our analysis identifies the impact that each policy is likely to
have on individual recycling behavior.
4
  There also may be financial incentives through penalties imposed for noncompliance if recycling is mandatory.

                                                          1
laws may impose monetary penalties on failure to recycle properly. Recycling laws exhibit a

range of policy stringency, from requiring local recycling to merely defining it as a goal.

         While the economics literature on recycling behavior has been growing, this study is

novel in its focus on individual recycling behavior for a nationally representative sample that can

be linked to different recycling law regimes in the fifty U.S. states.5 To date, there have been no

comprehensive studies of plastic water bottle recycling or national studies of individual recycling

behavior. Most studies have focused on states or narrowly defined regions.6 Some studies of

material-specific recycling have used individual data, but have not analyzed the different state

law regimes, have not used nationally representative samples, and have not focused on plastic

water bottles specifically.7

         Our study uses an original national data set of 3,158 households. Data at the individual

level make it possible to examine the determinants of recycling decisions controlling for

household characteristics and to examine the different levels of individual recycling rates. Many

of the variables included in our analysis, such as whether the respondent is a member of an

environmental organization, are unique to our recycling study. On a theoretical basis, we predict



5
  Jenkins et al. (2003) and Yang and Innes (2007) review previous empirical recycling studies. Most, but not all
studies in the literature have analyzed recycling behavior on a regional basis. These studies include Fullerton and
Kinnaman (1996), Callan and Thomas (1997), Nester and Podolsky (1998), Hong and Adams (1999), Van Houtven
and Morris (1999), and Suwa and Usui (2007). Kinnaman and Fullerton (2000) examine community-level recycling
behavior using a national dataset, and Jenkins et al. (2003) analyze material specific recycling for a sample in 20
metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) of middle and upper-middle income households who had curbside collection
available. Ashenmiller (2009) used individual survey data from CA to examine the effect of bottle bills and
concluded that they increase recycling.
6
  Three such regional studies are Saltzman et al.’s (1993) analysis of glass and newspaper recycling (by quantity) in
53 communities in PA and NJ, Beatty et al.’s (2007) analysis of aluminum, glass, and plastic recycling (by quantity)
in regional CA communities, and Yang and Innes’s (2007) regional Taiwan analysis of paper, metal, plastic, and
glass recycling (by weight).
7
  Three studies using household-level data are Reschovsky and Stone’s (1994) analysis of the proportion of many
different materials recycled in an upstate NY county, Sterner and Bartelings’ (1999) analysis of recycling (by
weight) of materials other than plastic using regional data in Sweden, and Jenkins et al.’s (2003) analysis of the
recycling (by proportion recycled) of newspaper, glass bottles, aluminum, plastic bottles, and yard waste by middle
and upper income households in 20 major MSAs. Kinnaman (2005) examines the effect on curbside recycling of
legal contexts categorized by a survey of state officials reported in Biocycle magazine by Kaufman et al. (2004).

                                                          2
that people gravitate toward an extreme of either being a non-recycler or a diligent recycler, a

mechanism which can only be revealed using individual data rather than aggregative data.

       The use of individual data also makes it possible to examine the individual heterogeneity

of the recycling responses to the incentives created by the recycling laws and bottle deposit laws

of different states. To capture the incentive effects of these laws, our study uses our own

detailed categorization of state recycling statutes and bottle bills presented in Appendix B. The

data set enables us to answer several kinds of questions. Are some segments of the population

less motivated by recycling policies, and does their responsiveness hinge on the particular form

of intervention? Will those in upper income groups respond to the financial incentives of bottle

deposits or be deterred by the time costs associated with recycling? Differences in individuals’

valuation of the environment also may be consequential if environmentalists already recycle

without additional financial incentives. Our results demonstrate a substantial muting of the

financial incentives for recycling for those with higher income levels and strong environmental

preferences.

       The next section of this paper presents a conceptual model of recycling behavior, which

predicts that once people begin to recycle they tend to become diligent recyclers so that

successful policy interventions have a discontinuous effect on individual behavior. After

describing the sample and the recycling policy regimes, Section 3 presents overview statistics

indicating a strong bimodal aspect to recycling behavior. The regression analyses of the

determinants of the fraction of bottles recycled in Section 4 and the use of curbside recycling and

bottle returns in Section 5 provide estimates of the efficacy of the different recycling

interventions. Section 6 presents corroborative results on the effect of bottle deposits based on

the natural experiments in Oregon and Connecticut during the course of survey administration.



                                                  3
Section 7 concludes. Incentives matter, consistent with both economic theory and the

hypothesized discontinuous recycling decision.

2. The Consumer’s Recycling Decision

         Recycling decisions depend on what items the consumer has purchased. Following the

standard dynamic programming approach, we assume that in the first stage the consumer chooses

the consumption mix conditional on the optimal disposal and recycling decisions in the second

stage. The consumer makes the purchase decisions in the initial period anticipating optimal

disposal thereafter so that it is appropriate to analyze the second stage disposal and recycling

decision, taking as given the prior purchase decisions.8

Recycling Decision Notation and Framework

         Although not all disposal options are available in every locale, if we abstract from

littering, there are three possible ways to dispose of plastic bottles: curb recycling, denoted by c,

returning the bottle for deposits, d, and putting the bottles in the garbage, g. If we denote the total

number of bottles as x, then x = c + d + g. For each bottle returned for deposit, the consumer

receives a unit price p.9

         Let the utility for each disposal mode be represented by an additively separable function

of the environmental benefit minus the net cost of disposal. The person’s wage rate, w, reflects

opportunity cost of time.10 We also assume there is no warm glow benefit from bottles that are




8
  Similar formats that focus on the recycling stage decision are used by Kinnaman and Fullerton (2000), Jenkins et
al. (2003), and Beatty et al. (2007). Bohm (1981) considers a different model of the refund-disposal decision that
involves the time decision of when to stop using the product and dispose of it. Our analysis assumes that individuals
must choose a way to dispose of their water bottles once they are empty.
9
  If the bottles are returned to a recycling center in a no deposit state, the price is zero.
10
   For simplicity, we abstract from the exogenous labor supply decision and focus on the wage rate w. Assuming a
fixed predetermined number of hours worked, the wage rate also serves as a measure of the level of income.

                                                         4
not recycled but that environmental benefit that the consumer derives for each bottle recycled is

the same whether the bottle is recycled at the curb or returned for deposit.11

        For each recycling mode, there is a fixed cost time component as well as a time cost

component that increases linearly with the number of bottles recycled. Thus, the time

commitment tc for recycling c bottles with curbside recycling is

                                            tc = tc0 + tc1c ,                                               (1)

and for d bottles returned for deposit it is

                                            td = td0 + td1d ,                                               (2)

and for g bottles put in the garbage it is

                                           tg = tg0 + tg1g .12                                              (3)

The personal cost of this time commitment is tcw, tdw, and tgw for the three different types of

bottle disposal. States that have effective recycling programs, such as those with convenient

curbside recycling and accessible recycling centers, promote recycling by decreasing the

recycling cost components. In some instances the cost structure may be different, as when

drinking bottled water at a sporting event or while traveling, in which case even diligent

recyclers may not find it desirable to recycle their bottles.

        The attractiveness of any recycling option will depend on the other choices available and

whether the particular recycling mode is already being used, in which case the fixed cost

component of the time cost drops out. There are many commonalities across the different

recycling options, and these general economic aspects of the decision will be our focus here

rather than attempting to inventory results for every disposal combination.



11
   This benefit term may, of course, vary with demographic characteristics such as whether the person is a member of
an environmental group. Kinnaman (2006) provides an overview of the literature on the utility benefit of recycling.
12
   The linearity assumption in this model is the key assumption leading to the corner solution outcome.

                                                         5
Curbside Recycling Versus Garbage

            The recycling decisions in different contexts involve similar economic issues that can be

illustrated by considering the binary decision of whether to recycle n bottles curbside or to put

the bottles in the garbage, where we assume that this is the initial disposal for each mode.13

Curbside recycling will be more attractive if

                                    en – (tc0 + tc1n)w > -(tg0 + tg1n)w .                      (4)

Recycling at the curbside is preferable if the environmental benefit exceeds any net cost in

disposal time, or

                                      en > [(tc0 – tg0) + (tc1 – tg1)n]w .                     (5)

            How much people will choose to recycle will depend on a succession of marginal

choices, but it may be preferable to adopt a common recycling strategy for all bottles. Suppose

that it is desirable for a consumer to recycle n bottles at the curb, and that the consumer already

uses garbage disposal for other items so that tg0 = 0.14 Then the overall comparison of the

benefits of recycling these n bottles rather than putting them in the garbage is

                                         en – (tc0 + tc1n)w > -tg1nw,                          (6)

or

                                                       t c1  t g1 w .
                                                 t c0
                                            e>                                                 (7)
                                                  n

For the n + 1’st bottle, the use of curbside recycling will be preferred if

                                               e – tc1w > -tg1w ,                              (8)

which can be written as

                                               e > (tc1 – tg1)w .                              (9)

But since
13
     If the consumer already uses the garbage disposal mode for other items, tg0 = 0.
14
     The analysis if no garbage disposal is already being used is generally less realistic.

                                                               6
                                      t c1  t g1 w > t c1  t g1 w ,
                                t c0
                                                                                                  (10)
                                 n

if inequality 7 is satisfied so that it is desirable to recycle n bottles, then it will also be desirable

to recycle n + 1 bottles. Because of the small incremental cost of recycling an additional bottle,

consumers will tend to gravitate to corner solutions of no recycling or complete recycling.

Returning bottles for deposit as opposed to disposing of the bottles in the garbage also leads to a

similar corner solution, as does the decision to use curbside recycling or to return the bottles for

deposit.

Empirical Predictions

        This exploration of recycling decisions has led to several empirical predictions. First,

people will exhibit discrete modal choices in their recycling behavior. Thus, to the extent that

policies such as curbside recycling laws or bottle deposit laws are influential, people will switch

from doing little or no recycling of that type to using that mode almost exclusively. Because of

this discontinuous response, there should be few individuals with intermediate levels of recycling

for any particular recycling mode. Second, placing a high value on the warm glow effect

increases the attractiveness of recycling by curbside or through bottle returns as compared to

putting the bottles in the garbage. If the environmental utility value is identical for both

recycling and returns, this environmental benefit component will not have a differential effect

across those domains. Third, bottle deposits increase the likelihood of recycling bottles.

3. Sample Characteristics and Recycling Laws

        The data set used in the empirical analysis is from a national survey of households

undertaken for this study by Knowledge Networks (KN) in 2008 and 2009. The KN panel is

based on probability sampling of both online and offline populations. If a person does not have

internet access or a computer, KN provides the necessary hardware and internet access. Our

                                                          7
survey is Web-based and was administered to a nationally representative sample, with a 71%

response rate.15 The characteristics of the full sample, as reported in Appendix Table A1, closely

parallel the characteristics of the adult U.S. population. Of the 5,213 survey participants, 3,158

are bottled water users.16 Based on the summary of the sample characteristics in Table A1,

bottled water consumption is quite widespread across the population. Compared to those who do

not drink bottled water, bottled water drinkers are more likely to be female, younger, nonwhite,

and have high income. Our empirical analysis focuses on the bottled water subsample, because

this is the population for which the recycling decision is pertinent. While the entire survey took

around 25 minutes, the sections on individual attitudes and practices related to bottled water and

recycling took less than 10 minutes. Appendix Table A2 summarizes the pertinent survey

questions.

         While the data only pertain to the amounts of plastic water bottles recycled, the survey

did include a recycling question that asked respondents to compare their recycling of all

recyclable materials relative to their neighbors. As indicated by the data in Appendix Table C1,

the self-assessed relative degree of recycling is similar for bottled water users and those who do

not drink bottled water. The main result of interest is that the distribution across response

categories is remarkably similar for those in the plastic water bottle sample and for those not in

this group suggesting that an analysis of recycling aluminum cans or newspapers would produce

similar results.




15
   Our use of KN for our EPA-funded water surveys has been specifically reviewed and approved by the Office of
Information and Regulatory Affairs, U.S. Office of Management and Budget (OMB). The KN panel also meets the
U.S. government’s quality standards for RDD surveys. For additional information on the characteristics of the KN
panel, see http://www.knowledgenetworks.com/knpanel/KNPanel-Design-Summary.pdf.
16
   To be classified as a bottled water user the person must meet two tests. First, the person must “use bottled water
at home, work, exercise, car, or other.” Second, the person must have “bought water in plastic bottles in the past
month.”

                                                          8
         The focus of our analysis is on the recycling of plastic bottles for bottled water. As a

result, we restrict the sample to the 3,158 people who indicated that they use bottled water.17 The

focal recycling question for the plastic bottles was the following: “Out of every 10 plastic bottles,

how many would you say that you recycled or returned for reuse?” On average, the sample

members indicated they recycled or returned a mean of 6.0 out of 10 plastic water bottles. This

amount is greater than the U.S. Government Accountability Office’s (GAO) report of an estimate

of total plastic bottle recycling rate of 24% in 2006 based on data from the National Association

of PET Container Resources, which reports a 27% estimate for 2008.18 However, those statistics

do not pertain to the household recycling rate of plastic water bottles, which is the focus of our

study. The relatively low national recycling rate figures also include the 69.1% of all bottled

water that is consumed away from home at restaurants, workplaces, hotels, sporting events,

conventions, and other locales.19 As indicated below, our household recycling patterns are

comparable to those found by Jenkins et al. (2003) for areas with curbside recycling for some

materials.20 If, however, all sample respondents overstated their recycling rate relative to the

GAO figure by a common factor, one would multiply all recycling rates by 0.45.

         The matter of interest is less on the average recycling rates than on how reported bottle

return rate varies with the different recycling and deposit regimes and, in particular, whether the

economic incentives created by these regimes influence recycling behavior. Consideration of

17
   The sample is restricted to the 3,158 respondents who indicated how often they recycle their bottles. Many of the
excluded respondents used water cooler containers that were collected on a regular basis by the supplier and
consequently did not involve the same kind of recycling decisions being analyzed here.
18
   The U.S. Government Accountability Office (2009) indicated that it “did not independently verify the accuracy
and completeness of the data provided by [the environmental nonprofit] organizations.” The National Association
of PET Container Resources report, which provides the details for the estimate, is available at
http://www.napcor.com/pdf/RRate2008.pdf.
19
   See http://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/err1/err1a.pdf.
20
   Jenkins et al. (2003) found that the majority of respondents recycled over 95% of plastic bottles. Our results
similarly show that a majority of respondents recycle 9 or 10 out of 10 plastic bottles. Additionally, the findings of
Jenkins et al. suggest a plastic bottle recycling rate of around 69% using the midpoints of their reported ranges, a
number similar to our 60% result.

                                                          9
relative gradations of recycling behavior in our empirical analysis should be less susceptible to

reporting bias than statements of the absolute number of bottles recycled.

           Table 1 summarizes the sample characteristics of the variables used in the analysis. In

addition to data on recycling practices and state laws, the data include detailed personal

characteristic information. Over two-fifths of the sample consider themselves to be

environmentalists and 8% are members of national environmental groups.21 This proportion is

similar for both bottled water users and non-bottle water users. Bottled water users spend about

$11 per month on bottled water, while non-bottled water users spend no money at all, leading to

a sample spending average of just under $8 per month on bottled water.

           States differ by the extent to which they encourage recycling either through bottle deposit

laws and their specific recycling policies. Bottle deposits create a direct financial incentive for

recycling bottles for which deposits are required, which in most states do not include plastic

water bottles.22 The deposit rate is 5 cents per bottle, except in Michigan where the rate is 10

cents.23 The unit price deposit raises the price paid at the time of purchase, but for every bottle

returned to a recycling location or to stores that accept recycled bottles, the recycler is paid the

deposit amount. The bottle can be recycled by anyone and need not be recycled by the original

purchaser.24 About 16% of the sample members reside in the states with non-water bottle

deposit laws, and only 12% of the sample resides in the five states (California, Connecticut,

Hawaii, Maine, and Oregon) that had bottle deposit laws in 2009 that included plastic water

bottles.


21
   These groups included Environmental Defense Fund, Greenpeace, National Audubon Society, National Wildlife
Federation, Nature Conservancy, Natural Resources Defense Council, and Sierra Club.
22
   See Bohm (1981) for an early detailed analysis of deposit-refund systems.
23
   Separate analyses failed to demonstrate any differential effect of the higher bottle deposits in Michigan.
24
   For example, homeless people and scavengers often collect bottles from litter, garbage, and curbside recycling
bins and return the bottles for cash. This leeway no doubt contributes to the role of bottle deposits as an income
supplement for the poor, which in turn decreases crime rates. See Ashenmiller (2006, 2009, 2010).

                                                         10
       The survey inquired whether the respondent received payment for plastic bottle recycling.

The survey responses follow the expected pattern given the bottle deposit regime in the

respondent’s state of residence. The theory developed earlier suggests that bottle deposit

requirements for other types of bottles will increase the recycling of water bottles. We will test

whether bottle deposits lead consumers to sort their garbage and bring the bottles for which there

are deposits to a recycling center. To the extent that there are fixed costs associated with

returning bottles to a recycling center, the additional costs of also bringing the plastic water

bottles may be less than if there were no bottle deposit policies. Recycling centers in states with

bottle deposit requirements may also include opportunities to recycle plastic water bottles even

though there is no payment for such recycling.

       There is substantial diversity in the structure of recycling laws across states. State laws

often include one or more regulatory components, summarized in Appendix B. For example, a

state with mandatory recycling may also include recycling goals. For purposes of categorization,

we treat states hierarchically in terms of the most stringent component in the state’s recycling

law. States are grouped into those that have mandatory recycling or that require an opportunity

for recycling for all citizens, those that require local communities to have a recycling plan, those

that have recycling goals but lack a specific plan, and, finally, those that have no recycling law.

       Our empirical analysis indicates that recycling goals alone do not have a statistically

significant positive effect on recycling whereas the other three recycling laws do. Thus, for

purposes of our first two overview tables we will denote “effective recycling laws” as those

states with mandatory recycling, opportunities for recycling, or regional waste management

plans with recycling considerations.




                                                 11
       Table 2 summarizes the recycling practices for water bottle users under different

recycling regimes. The average number of bottles out of 10 that are recycled rises from 4.30 for

states with no effective recycling law and no water bottle deposit law to 5.86 if the state also has

an effective recycling law and to 8.59 if the state also has a water bottle deposit law. All states

with a water bottle deposit law also have an effective recycling law.

       The most prevalent form of recycling is at curbside. Almost half of all water bottle users

use curbside recycling for some of their bottles, while only one-fifth of the sample returns bottles

for deposit or takes them to a recycling center. In states with water bottle deposit laws, about

half return the bottles for deposit, and the percentage using curbside recycling is not substantially

lower than in states without such bottle deposit laws.

       The distribution of the number of bottles recycled shown in Table 3 is consistent with the

theoretical model in which recycling behavior follows a discrete threshold rather than a

continuous process. For all bottled water users, 29.1% recycle 0 bottles out of 10, while 42.0%

recycle 10 out of 10. The next most prevalent levels of recycling are 9 and 8 bottles out of 10, as

people attempt to recycle most but not all of their bottles, perhaps because they are drinking the

water in the car or at some other location. Interestingly, there is minimal clustering of responses

at 5 out of 10, which one might have expected if respondents were focusing on salient numerical

responses rather than attempting to assess their actual recycling amount.

       Columns 2-4 in Table 3 break the sample by three recycling regime categories. The first

recycling policy shown in column 3 of Table 3 is the presence of an effective recycling law but

no water bottle deposit law. Such a law shifts the mass of the distribution, decreasing the

percentage of respondents who indicate that they do not recycle at all, and increasing the

percentage who indicate 100% recycling. As column 5 indicates, almost the entire mass shift is



                                                 12
from 0 out of 10 bottles recycled to 9 or 10 bottles recycled. The addition of water bottle

deposits is shown in column 4. As the calculation of the differences in column 6 indicates, there

is a negligible incremental effect of water bottle deposits except at the tails of the distribution,

where the percent of those indicating zero recycling drops by 24.7 percentage points and the

percent indicating complete recycling increases by 26.2 points. 25

         The consistent pattern across all these results is that most people adopt a recycling

strategy of either being a diligent recycler or not recycling at all. The introduction of effective

recycling laws or water bottle deposit laws consequently has a discontinuous effect across the

distribution of recycling patterns as water bottle users shift recycling levels through a threshold

transformation of behavior.

4. Determinants of the Total Recycling Amount

         The first series of regression analyses focuses on the proportion of water bottles recycled.

To demonstrate robustness across analyses, four different estimation approaches are used. The

first column in Table 4 presents ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates for which we report

robust heteroskedasticity-corrected standard errors. To take into account the bounded nature of

the responses that cluster at 0 and 10, the second column of Table 4 presents the two-sided Tobit

regression estimates. Finally, one might hypothesize that respondents were not giving precise

estimates of the actual number of bottles recycled but were simply indicating their relative

degree of recycling and perhaps overstating the actual number of bottles recycled. We explore


25
  This efficacy of water bottle deposits is consistent with Ashenmiller’s (2009) finding that bottle deposit laws
increase the amount of material recycled at Santa Barbara, CA redemption centers. Beatty et al. (2007) find that
curbside recycling largely cannibalizes the effect of drop-off recycling centers when incomes are high or
unemployment is low. Their analysis is within state for California, but if the comparison instead is with states with
no effective recycling law, then the incremental effect of such recycling policies potentially may be greater. Several
previous studies focused on bag/tag programs and pricing by weight programs. Reschovsky and Stone (1994),
Fullerton and Kinnaman (1996), Kinnaman and Fullerton (2000), and Jenkins et al. (2003) found no statistically
significant effect of unit pricing on recycling. Van Houtven and Morris (1999) found that unit pricing affected
whether people recycle but not the amount of recycling.

                                                         13
this possibility in two ways. The third column of results in Table 4 presents the ordered logit

estimates, for which the three ordered categories are 0, 1-7, and 8-10 out of 10 bottles. The final

column of Table 4 reports probit estimates, for which the dependent binary variable is equal to 1

if the individual recycles 1-10 out of 10 bottles and 0 if the individual does not recycle any

bottles.26 These formulations of the model address the possibility that the responses have ordinal

rather than cardinal significance or are binary, indicating only whether someone is a recycler or

not.27 Moreover, the categories reflect the different discontinuous recycling groupings of

consumers. Because of the strong parallels across the four analyses, the discussion here focuses

on the OLS estimates where the coefficients reflect the linear impact of the variable on recycling

behavior.

         The first pair of policy variables pertains to the state’s bottle deposit laws. The deposit

state variable is a 0-1 indicator variable for whether the state has a bottle deposit law. A second

0-1 variable then indicates if the deposit law covers water bottles. Both of the state deposit

variables raise the number of bottles recycled. The broad deposit variable raises the number of

water bottles recycled number by 0.6 out of 10 bottles, while the presence of a specific water

bottle deposit law increases plastic water bottle recycling by 2.1 out of 10 bottles. Together,

consumers in states with both laws recycle an additional 2.7 out of 10 bottles, controlling for all

other influences, including the recycling law regime.

         The next set of three variables pertains to the state recycling law. The two most stringent

forms of laws—mandatory recycling and required opportunities for recycling—are combined

into a single category of 14 states plus the District of Columbia because the small number of the
26
   Other ordered logit specifications yielded similar results. For example, treating each of the 0 to 10 responses as a
separate ordered response leads to estimates that have the same signs and statistical significance as those reported
here.
27
   Jenkins et al. (2003) also use an ordered logit approach to analyze categorical responses for recycling behavior
that they collapsed into three gradations of recycling rates. Similarly, Halvorsen (2008) uses an ordered probit
model.

                                                          14
component groups makes it impossible to reject the hypothesis that the coefficients for these two

categories are equal.28 These laws should have the greatest influence since they have the greatest

effect on the costs of recycling as they make available low cost recycling options, and in the case

of mandatory recycling, impose penalties on those who fail to recycle. Laws that require either

mandatory recycling or the opportunity to recycle increase recycling by 1.9 out of every 10

bottles.

           Laws that only require regional waste management plans with recycling considerations

also have a significant positive effect on recycling, boosting the recycling out of 10 bottles by 0.7

bottles. This effect has a significantly smaller point estimate than of the 1.9 effect of the more

stringent mandatory/opportunity recycling laws.29

           The weakest of the recycling law variables is for states that have a waste reduction goal,

but no required action. This variable does not have a statistically significant effect compared to

the no recycling law states.30 The pattern of coefficient magnitudes is consistent with the relative

stringency of the laws. Mandatory recycling and required recycling opportunity laws have the

greatest effect, followed by planning laws, with no statistically significant effect of the weakest

laws that are limited to specifying a waste reduction goal. Because of the significant effects on

recycling of mandatory/opportunity laws and planning regimes we refer to these as the effective

recycling laws.

           Next we consider user demographics on recycling. Higher income levels increase the

time opportunity costs of recycling. Income may also influence the value the consumer places

on recycling. The effect of income on the number of bottles recycled is positive, but small,

28
   The F test had a value of 1.66 with a probability value of 0.1977. Similarly, Jenkins et al. (2003) found that for
plastic bottles generally, mandatory recycling had no additional effect when curbside recycling is already available.
29
   The pertinent F value is 32.40, with a probability value 0.0000.
30
   Planning states are more effective than goals states. The F statistic for the test for whether the planning variable
coefficient equals that of the goals variable is 9.81, with a probability value of 0.0017.

                                                          15
suggesting that the increased opportunity costs are not sufficient to totally offset the higher

amount of recycling among higher income respondents.31                 Individual education has a positive

effect on recycling, which serves both as a measure of the respondent’s knowledge of available

recycling options as well as lifetime wealth.32

         The value that the respondents place on environmental quality is captured directly by

whether the respondents consider themselves to be environmentalists as well as by whether the

respondent is a member of a major national environmental organization.33 Each of these

variables has the expected positive effect, with people who consider themselves to be

environmentalists recycling an additional 1.6 out of 10 bottles, and members of environmental

organizations recycling an additional 0.5 bottles after taking into account the effect of being an

environmentalist and other variables.

         To the extent that these environmental variables correspond to the warm glow benefit

from recycling, then it is possible to monetize this effect. The water bottle deposit variable

reflects the inducement of a 5 cent per bottle payment. Being a self-described environmentalist

is 77% as influential, or equivalent to about a 4 cent per bottle value, while being a member of an

environmental organization is 21% as effective, or a value of about 1 cent per bottle. Since

environmental organization members are also self-described environmentalist, their combined

warm glow benefit is 5 cents per bottle, or almost equivalent to the effect of the bottle deposit.

         Several of the other personal characteristic variables are influential as well. Recycling

rates increase with age, are lower for African Americans, and are higher for larger households.

31
   Higher income respondents may also live in communities with more access to recycling options that minimize
opportunity costs (income is positively correlated with curbside recycling).
32
   In contrast, income and education did not significantly affect plastic bottle recycling in Jenkins et al.’s (2003)
study that was restricted to primarily middle and upper income groups. Collins et al. (2006) found that recycling
rates increase with income in Scotland. Kinnaman (2005) found no significant effect of the percent of state residents
with a high school diploma on the percent of state waste that is recycled.
33
   Previous studies concerned with the household’s pro-environment preferences include Halvorsen’s (2008) study
of recycling in Norway.

                                                         16
Recycling rates increase for homeowners, but that may reflect the greater availability of curbside

recycling and convenient recycling locations for this group. The volume of recycling as

measured by the dollars spent on bottled water does not have a significant effect on the percent

of bottles recycled, but including this variable nevertheless serves an important role in the

analysis to account for the volume of bottled water purchased.34 Otherwise, variables such as

income might be capturing the quantity effect. Use of bottled water in the car does not

significantly reduce recycling even though recycling may be more difficult for such users, and

reusing water bottles does not affect the recycling rate.

         The regional variables are influential and indicate the considerable geographic

differences in recycling rates. Urban and suburban residents of metropolitan statistical areas

(MSAs) recycle an additional 1.3 out of 10 additional bottles, a result consistent with the greater

availability of curbside recycling and convenient recycling centers in such locales. In addition,

state laws generally exempt rural areas from recycling requirements.

         To explore these differences further, Appendix Table C2 reports separate regressions for

the urban (MSA) and non-urban subsamples.35 The principal differences are that state deposit

laws and state recycling planning requirements significantly increase plastic water bottle

recycling in urban areas but not outside of these areas. Plastic water bottle deposits are equally

effective in each context.

         The efficacy of the policy measures in promoting recycling behavior also may vary

across the populations and in different policy regimes. Table 5 reports selected coefficients from

additional regressions including interactions of the policy variables and both income and whether

the respondent is an environmentalist. Given a threshold model, we expect negative interactions

34
  The dollars spent variable remains statistically insignificant if the income variable is omitted from the equation.
35
  The estimated parameters from the two regressions differ statistically, with an F (32, 3094) statistic of 3.30 and a
probability value of 0.0000.

                                                          17
between positive factors, because either one can drive one over the threshold. The negative

interactive effect of income and water bottle deposit laws implies that higher income people are

less likely to recycle their bottles.36 Having a water bottle deposit law also reduces the marginal

effect of being an environmentalist by more than a half.37 Because environmentalists will

already have an incentive to recycle without a financial inducement, bottle bills are less effective

among this group. On balance, the self described environmentalists return 0.7 additional bottles

out of 10 in states with bottled water deposit laws. The separate regressions for

environmentalists and non-environmentalists reported in Appendix Table C2 indicate many

parallels in behavior with one notable difference being that the financial inducements of general

state deposit laws do not significantly boost plastic water bottle recycling for environmentalists,

but are effective for non-environmentalists.38 The other interaction terms in Table 5 are not

statistically significant, as the effect of the water bottle deposit variable on recycling exhibits

more individual heterogeneity than do the other recycling law variables.

5. Determinants of Curbside Recycling and Returning Bottles for Deposit

         While both recycling laws and bottle deposit laws should each increase the degree to

which people recycle plastic water bottles, the composition of the recycling should differ. Laws

that increase the availability of curb pickups reduce the costs of curb recycling relative to

returning the bottles to a recycling center and should have a positive effect on curb recycling and

a negative effect on returning bottles for deposit. Likewise, water bottle deposit laws increase

the economic benefits of returning bottles for deposit, consequently increasing the likelihood of

returning the bottles and decreasing the attractiveness of using curbside pickup for which there is
36
   The income effect pattern is consistent with Ashenmiller’s (2009) finding that bottle returns are a relatively more
important income source for people in lower income groups.
37
   A comparable interaction with being a member of an environmental organization did not have a statistically
significant effect and is not included in Table 5’s regressions.
38
   One can reject the hypothesis that the estimated parameters from the two regressions are the same, with an F (31,
3080) statistic of 6.21 and a probability value of 0.0000.

                                                          18
no payment. The analysis below tests these propositions by focusing on respondent answers to a

question regarding two forms of recycling behavior over the past month.39

         The probit regression for whether the respondent used curbside recycling for plastic water

bottles in the past month is reported in Table 6, where all coefficients have been transformed to

reflect marginal probabilities. State deposit laws generally do not significantly affect curbside

recycling. Residents of states that have mandatory recycling or opportunity for recycling laws

have a 0.26 higher probability of using curbside recycling for plastic water bottles, while states

with recycling plans have a 0.07 higher probability of using curbside recycling than residents of

states with no recycling laws. The presence of recycling goals has no statistically significant

effect on use of curbside recycling.40

         Many of the other patterns shown in Table 6 parallel the earlier results with respect to the

number of bottles recycled. All recycling laws variables except for those restricted to recycling

goals boost curbside recycling. The use of curbside recycling is an increasing function of

income, education, age, whether the respondent is an environmentalist, and whether the

respondent lives in a MSA.

         We also interacted the various legal and policy regimes with income and whether the

individual is an environmentalist. The mean interaction effect between mandatory or

opportunity laws and whether the respondent is an environmentalist on curbside recycling is

about 0.01 with a standard error of 0.04 and z-statistic of 0.351. The interaction effect ranged,

however, from a negative 0.04 to a positive 0.06, with the z-statistic as high as 2.429 for some



39
  See Appendix Table A2 for the survey question wording.
40
  Kinnaman (2005) found that mandatory beverage container deposits and recycling goals do not significantly affect
the availability of curbside recycling, while laws imposing curbside recycling requirements do increase the
availability of curbside recycling. Additionally, he found no statistically significant effects on the availability of
curbside recycling of several other laws: bans on yard waste from landfills, bans of recyclable materials from
landfills, tax credits for facilities, or requirements that government agencies purchase recycled material.

                                                         19
probability levels of using curbside recycling.41 The other interaction effects were never

statistically significant.

           The presence of bottle deposits for plastic water bottles should foster the returns of these

bottles. Table 7 includes three sets of probit estimates for the probability that the respondent

returns bottles for deposit or to the recycling center and for the two components of this

probability—whether the respondent returned the bottles for deposit, presumably to a store

where such bottles are purchased, and when the respondent returned the bottles to a recycling

center.

           The overall return probability for plastic bottles increases by 0.10 if the state is a general

bottle deposit state. Since all plastic water bottle states also require deposits for other bottles, the

additional 0.15 probability of bottle returns in a water bottle deposit state implies an overall 0.25

probability of returning plastic water bottles in states with water bottle deposits. Financial

incentives to return bottles are effective, and the presence of other deposit requirements also

boosts the return rate because there will be a greater total payoff to bottle returns. In terms of the

composition of the influence, the water bottle deposit variable has a much stronger influence on

returning bottles to the recycling center than it does on returning bottles for deposit. This greater

marginal effect may be because returning bottles for deposit to the store does not involve

additional fixed costs if a trip was already planned for shopping.

           Bottles recycled at curbside will not give consumers a financial payoff, but the presence

of curbside recycling in providing the environmental benefit may reduce the relative utility of

returning the bottles. Indeed, for respondents in states with the strongest recycling laws that

provide for mandatory recycling or the opportunity to recycle, there is a 0.04 lower probability of

returning the bottles to a recycling center or for a deposit. This effect reduces the benefit of
41
     This analysis uses the Stata command “inteff” per Norton, Wang, and Ai (2004).

                                                         20
water bottle deposits by about one-fourth. Recycling planning law states have a small significant

negative effect on returns for deposit.

        The principal demographic factors that influence deposit returns are income and whether

the respondent is an environmentalist. Income has a negative effect because the time cost of

bottle returns is higher and the financial gains from returning bottles for money are less

consequential for those in higher income groups. Environmentalists are more likely to return the

bottles for deposit. Finally, the interaction results indicate that being an environmentalist and

having higher income reduces the average efficacy of water bottle deposits on returning bottles

for deposit or returning bottles to a recycling center.42

6. Effects of Law Changes

        The results indicate that recycling rates are higher in states with stringent recycling law or

deposit policies. It is possible, however, that states that initiated more stringent or expansive

legal measures already had many diligent recyclers, though the empirical analysis controlled for

many contributing factors such as whether the person is an environmentalist. To investigate this

question of causation, we take advantage of two legal changes that occurred during the

administration of the survey. Specifically, Oregon and Connecticut both added water bottles to

their deposit bills in 2009. The sample from these states includes 68 observations from 2008 and

37 from 2009, thus providing data on recycling behavior for Oregon and Connecticut both before

and after they each implemented their expanded bottle bills. Although the sample of households

experiencing changes is modest, the results are consistent with previous evidence of recycling

responses to plastic water bottle deposits.

42
  The inteff command calculates the mean interaction effect of water deposits and being an environmentalist as
-0.084 with mean standard error 0.048 and mean z-statistic -1.730. The mean interaction effect of water deposits
and having higher income is -0.007 with mean standard error 0.005 and mean z-statistic -1.285. We also interacted
water deposits with mandatory/opportunity laws but we do not report the results because the negative interaction
coefficient was never statistically significant.

                                                       21
Oregon

         Oregon implemented its bottle bill expansion on January 1, 2009. The sample includes

38 individuals before the expansion and 14 individuals surveyed in October 2009, nine months

after the expansion. Table 8 summarizes the bottle recycling breakdown for those two groups.

After the expansion, mean water bottle recycling increased from 7.2 to 8.5 bottles out of 10.

Specifically, about 13% more people became diligent recyclers after the change. Analysis of

differences in recycling rates within Oregon before and after the bottle deposit law, however,

indicates that the changes are not statistically significant.43 As with the earlier results, there is a

pronounced shift in the mass of the distribution from people who did not recycle at all to the

diligent recycling group. Table 9 presents the difference-in-difference regression results.

Although the interaction term between 2009 and Oregon has a positive coefficient, it is not

statistically significant at the usual levels for the analysis of the number out of 10 bottles

recycled.

         The percentage of respondents who return their bottles for deposit exhibits a remarkable

shift after the introduction of plastic water bottle deposits. As indicated by the data in the final

column of Table 8, that percentage rises by almost 50 percent. Moreover, the difference-in-

difference analysis of the probability of returning bottles for deposit in Table 9 also indicates a

positive and statistically significant effect of introducing plastic water bottle deposits.44

Connecticut

         Connecticut’s bottle bill expansion was implemented on October 1, 2009. The sample

included information from Connecticut residents between October 16 and October 27 in 2009,
43
  The t-statistic was -1.08, with a one-sided test probability value of 0.1421.
44
  The notes to Table 9 summarize the return for deposit inteff results, which are consistent with the results for the
simple means tests. The decrease in the number of respondents indicating that they curb recycle was not statistically
significant.



                                                         22
resulting in 30 CT individuals before the change and 23 individuals about two weeks after the

enactment of plastic water bottle deposits. Consequently, there may not have been sufficient

time for the full effects of the policy change to be manifested, as 13 of the 23 people were

interviewed only two weeks after the change. Of the 23 individuals interviewed after the change,

9 of these answered questions on their recycling behavior both before and after the change.

There is evidence of substantial awareness of the policy shift as 21 out of the 23 interviewed

after the change indicated that they were aware that Connecticut recently included water bottles

in its deposit bill.

         Table 8 summarizes the recycling behavior in Connecticut before and after the change.45

The level of recycling in CT increased from 8.0 to about 9.0 bottles out of 10, although this

change was not statistically significant.46 The increase in the frequency of diligent recyclers who

recycle 8-10 out of 10 bottles exceeded the increase in the non-recycling percentage.

Pooled Oregon and Connecticut Experiments

         Pooling the results from CT and OR increases the number of people who experienced the

policy shift of the introduction of water bottle deposits. The mean increase in recycling rates

shown in Table 8 is statistically significant.47 The differences-in-differences regressions for both

the number of bottles recycled and whether people return bottles for deposit both indicate effects

consistent with the efficacy of water bottle deposits. The regressions for the number of bottles

recycled out of 10 in Table 9 yield interaction effects that exceed the estimated standard errors,

and recycling rates are higher in CT and OR in 2009 in the Tobit results at about the 0.10 level,

45
   We also analyzed the Connecticut residents that were aware of the change and the nine individuals interviewed
before and after the change. The composition of the results was similar to the composition for the overall sample
from Connecticut, and also not significant, so we do not report those in Table 8.
46
   The t-statistic was 1.16, with a one-sided test probability value of 0.1261. The increase in the number of
respondents indicating that they return bottles for deposit after the bottle bill extension was also not statistically
significant, with a t-statistic of 0.27 and a one-sided test probability value of 0.3933. Changes in the number of
respondents indicating that they curb recycle are also not statistically significant.
47
   The t-statistic was 1.76, with a two-sided test probability value of 0.0806.

                                                           23
one-sided test.48 A much stronger indication of the efficacy of the plastic water bottle deposits is

the results in Table 9 for whether the respondent returned the bottles for deposit. The interaction

of the 2009 variable with the two states that introduced this policy is positive and statistically

significant at the usual level.

        The overall thrust of the analysis of the water bottle deposit experiments is to reinforce

the implications of the earlier cross sectional results. The observed patterns of changes in

recycling behavior are consistent with the efficacy of the bottle deposit policies. The statistical

significance of the effects for the pooled OR and CT samples in the differences-in-differences

analysis is quite striking given that only 37 members of the sample of 3,158 experienced the

policy change, and 23 of these 37 are from CT, where the policy was implemented at the start of

the survey month.

7. Conclusion

        Water bottle deposits and recycling laws foster recycling efforts in different ways. The

bottle deposits provide a financial inducement to recycle, while the recycling laws reduce the

time costs by providing curbside recycling and convenient recycling centers. Recycling laws

also may include financial penalties for noncompliance. We find both water bottle deposits and

recycling laws to be effective. Moreover, the strength of effects for the recycling laws follows

the degree of stringency of these measures.

        The analysis of the interaction between factors testifies to the diminishing marginal

efficacy of recycling incentives as predicted by a threshold model of response at the individual

level. Mandatory recycling laws offer only modest recycling gains compared to planning laws.

Self-described environmentalists are more likely to recycle without bottle deposits so that these


48
  The probability value on the pooled Oregon and Connecticut interaction term in the reported Tobit regression is
0.109.

                                                        24
interventions have less effect on their recycling behavior than on less environmentally oriented

respondents. For people in upper income groups, the financial inducements provided by bottle

deposits are less effective, and the time costs of taking bottles to recycling centers loom large.

       The central role of economic analysis in predicting the consumer response manifests

perhaps most clearly in the stark pattern of individual recycling activity. For most policy

interventions, one would expect modest policy impacts throughout the range of behavior. Thus,

non-recyclers would become modest recyclers, and modest recyclers would become more

diligent recyclers. This kind of continuous policy influence is not borne out empirically.

Instead, the observed shifts reflect starker changes in behavior that are consistent with the

economic structure of the recycling decision and how policies will influence this decision.

Given the high fixed costs associated with recycling efforts, the hypothesis generated from

rational economic behavior theory is that people will tend to gravitate toward extremes in their

efforts, recycling either a few or most of their bottles. Empirically, this prediction is borne out,

as there are few intermediate recyclers. Both recycling laws and bottle deposit laws have

discontinuous effects on recycling behavior. In each case, the measures have a transformative

effect, shifting individual consumers from not recycling at all to becoming committed recyclers.

Consistent with our result that people respond in a discontinuous manner to recycling incentives,

policies have their greatest effect among those who would not already choose to recycle.




                                                 25
References


Ashenmiller, Bevin. 2006. “The Effect of Income on Recycling Behavior in the Presence of a

       Bottle Law: New Empirical Results,” working paper.

_____. 2009. “Cash Recycling, Waste Disposal Costs, and the Incomes of the Working Poor:

       Evidence from California,” 85 Land Economics 539-51.

_____. 2010. “Externalities from Recycling Laws: Evidence from Crime Rates,” 12(1) American

       Law and Economics Review 245-61.

Beatty, Timothy K.M., Peter Berck, and Jay P. Shimshack. 2007. “Curbside Recycling in the

       Presence of Alternatives,” 45 Economic Inquiry 739-55.

Bohm, Peter. 1981. Deposit-Refund Systems: Theory and Applications to Environmental,

       Conservation, and Consumer Policy. Published for Resources for the Future, Inc.

       Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Bottle Bill Resource Guide, www.bottlebill.org/about.htm.

Callan, Scott and Janet Thomas. 1997. “The Impact of State and Local Policies on the Recycling

       Effort,” 23 Eastern Economic Journal 411- 24.

Collins, Alan, Richard O’Doherty, and Martin C. Snell. 2006. “Household Participation in Waste

       Recycling: Some National Survey Evidence from Scotland,” 49 Journal of

       Environmental Planning and Management 121-40.

Container Recycling Institute. 2008. “Wasting and Recycling Trends: Conclusions from CRI’s

       2008 Beverage Market Data Analysis,” http://www.container-

       recycling.org/assets/pdfs/reports/2008-BMDA-conclusions.pdf.

Derksen, Linda, and John Gartrell. 1993. “The Social Context of Recycling,” 58 American

       Sociological Review 434–42.


                                              26
Fullerton, Don, and Thomas C. Kinnaman. 1996. “Household Responses to Pricing Garbage by

       the Bag,” 86 American Economic Review 971–83.

Gaba, Jeffrey M., and Donald W. Stever. 2008. Law of Solid Waste, Pollution Prevention and

       Recycling. Eagan, MN: Thomson/West.

Halvorsen, Bente. 2008. “Effects of Norms and Opportunity Cost of Time on Household

       Recycling,” 84 Land Economics 501-16.

Hong, Seonghoon, Richard M. Adams, and H. Alan Love. 1993. “An Economic Analysis of

       Household Recycling of Solid Waste: The Case Study of Portland, Oregon,” 25 Journal

       of Environmental Economics and Management 136–46.

Hong, Seonghoon, and Richard M. Adams. 1999. “Household Responses to Price Incentives for

       Recycling: Some Further Evidence,” 75 Land Economics 505–14.

Jenkins, Robin R., Salvador A. Martinez, Karen Palmer, and Michael J. Podolsky. 2003. “The

       Determinants of Household Recycling: A Material-Specific Analysis of Recycling

       Program Features and Unit Pricing,” 45 Journal of Environmental Economics and

       Management 294-318.

Kaufman, Scott M., Nora Goldstein, Karsten Millrath, and Nickolas J. Themelis. 2004. “The

       State of Garbage in America,” 45 BioCycle 31-41.

Kinnaman, Thomas C. 2005. “Why do Municipalities Recycle?,” 5 Topics in Economic Analysis

       and Policy http://www.bepress.com/bejeap/topics/vol15/iss1/art5.

____. 2006. “Examining the Justification for Residential Recycling,” 20 Journal of Economic

       Perspectives 219-32.

Kinnaman, Thomas C., and Don Fullerton. 2000. “Garbage and Recycling with Endogenous

       Local Policy,” 48 Journal of Urban Economics 419-42.



                                              27
Morris, Jeffrey, Bill Smith, and Rick Hlavka. 2005. “Economic and Environmental Benefits of a

       Deposit System for Beverage Containers in Washington State,” Prepared for City of

       Tacoma Solid Waste Management, http://www.container-

       recycling.org/assets/pdfs/reports/2004-EconEnviroWA.pdf.

Nestor, Deborah Vaughn, and Michael J. Podolsky. 1998. “Assessing Incentive-Based

       Environmental Policies for Reducing Household Waste Disposal,” 16 Contemporary

       Economic Policy 401-12.

Norton, Edward C., Hua Wang, and Chunrong Ai. 2004. “Computing Interaction Effects and

       Standard Errors in Logit and Probit Models,” 4 Stata Journal 154-67.

Porter, Richard C. 1983. “Michigan’s Experience with Mandatory Deposits on Beverage

       Containers,” 59 Land Economics 177-94.

Reschovsky, James D., and Sarah E. Stone. 1994. “Market Incentives to Encourage Household

       Waste Recycling: Paying for What You Throw Away,” 13 Journal of Policy Analysis and

       Management 120-39.

Rodwan, Jr., John G. 2009. “Confronting Challenges: U.S. and International Bottled Water

       Developments and Statistics for 2008,” Bottled Water Reporter 12-8.

Saltzman, Cynthia, Vijaya G. Duggal, and Mary L. Williams. 1993. “Income and the Recycling

       Effort: A Maximization Problem,” 15 Energy Economics 33-8.

Simmons, Phil, Nora Goldstein, Scott M. Kaufman, Nickolas J. Themelis, and James Thompson,

       Jr. 2006. “The State of Garbage in America,” 47 BioCycle 26-43.

Sterner, Thomas, and Heleen Bartelings. 1999. “Household Waste Management in a Swedish

       Municipality: Determinants of Waste Disposal, Recycling and Composting,” 13

       Environmental and Resource Economics 473–91.



                                              28
Suwa, Tatsuo, and Takehiro Usui. 2007. “Estimation of Garbage Reduction and Recycling

       Promotion under the Containers and Packaging Recycling Law and Garbage Pricing,” 8

       Environmental Economics and Policy Studies 239-54.

Tchobanoglous, George, and Frank Kreith. 2002. Handbook of Solid Waste Management, 2nd

       ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2003. “Analysis and Findings of The Gallup

       Organization’s Drinking Water Customer Satisfaction Survey,” Office of Groundwater

       and Drinking Water,

       http://www.epa.gov/ogwdw/ccr/pdfs/tools_survey_gallup_customersatification2003.pdf.

____. 2007. “Municipal Solid Waste in the United States: 2007 Facts and Figures,”

       http://www.epa.gov/waste/nonhaz/municipal/pubs/msw07-rpt.pdf.

____. 2008. “Factoids: Drinking Water and Ground Water Statistics for 2008,” Office of Water,

       EPA 816-K-08-004, www.epa.gov/safewater/data.

U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2009. “Bottled Water: FDA Safety and Consumer

       Protections Are Often Less Stringent Than Comparable EPA Protections for Tap Water,

       GAO-09-610,” Washington, D.C.: GAO

Van Houtven, George L., and Glenn E. Morris. 1999. “Household Behavior Under Alternative

       Pay-As-You-Throw Systems for Solid Waste Disposal,” 75 Land Economics 515-37.

Yang, Hai-Lan, and Robert Innes. 2007. “Economic Incentives and Residential Waste

       Management in Taiwan: An Empirical Investigation,” 37 Environmental and Resource

       Economics 489-519.




                                              29
Table 1: Sample Characteristics

                                                    Mean      Std. Dev.
Dependent variables
Number/10 plastic bottles recycled                   6.0811      4.3849
Use curb recycling                                   0.4624      0.4987
Return to recycling station/for deposit              0.2130      0.4095
Return bottles for deposit                           0.0414      0.1991
Return to recycling station                          0.1820      0.3859
State law variables
State has deposit law                                0.2806      0.4494
State has deposit law covering water bottles         0.1212      0.3264
State has mandatory recycling or provides an
                                                     0.3566      0.4790
opportunity to recycle
State requires a regional recycling plan             0.4362      0.4960
State requires a recycling goal                      0.0357      0.1855
Personal characteristics
Income/10,000                                        6.0633      4.1846
Highest income category (over $175,000)              0.0267      0.1611
Years of education                                  13.7720      2.5946
Considers self an environmentalist                   0.4284      0.4949
Environmental organization member                    0.0817      0.2739
Age                                                 48.8362     16.2024
Gender: Female                                       0.5189      0.4997
Race: Black                                          0.1003      0.3005
Race: Asian                                          0.0182      0.1338
Race: American Indian                                0.0129      0.1126
Race: Other                                          0.0481      0.2141
Hispanic                                             0.0953      0.2937
Household size                                       2.5191      1.4230
Homeowner                                            0.7654      0.4238
Married                                              0.5818      0.4933
Household head                                       0.8210      0.3834
Urban (lives in a MSA)                               0.8335      0.3726
Northeast                                            0.1895      0.3920
South                                                0.3503      0.4771
West                                                 0.2193      0.4138
Midwest                                              0.2409      0.4277
$/month spent on bottled water                       7.9586      9.8112
Use bottled water in car                             0.3721      0.4834
Times reuse bottles                                  1.2220      0.2078
Year 2009                                            0.2603      0.4388

                                               30
Table 2: Recycling Practices by State Recycling Legal Regimea

                                               Percent of
                   Mean                       respondents      Percent of
                                Percent of                                     Percent of
                number/10                     who return      respondents                       Bottles
                               respondents                                    respondents
    Group          bottles                     for deposit    who return                      collected by
                                who curb                                      who return
                  recycled                        or to       to recycling                      bottler
                                 recycle                                       for deposit
                 (std. dev)                     recycling        center
                                                 center


Full sample        6.08            46.2            21.3            18.2           4.1             1.3
(N=3,158)         (4.38)

No effective
recycling          4.30            30.6            17.6            17.6           3.1             0.5
law and no        (4.47)
water bottle
deposit law
(N=644)

Effective
recycling          5.86            48.7            15.4            15.1           0.7             1.5
law only          (4.43)
(N=1,696)

Both
effective          8.59            47.5            49.5            40.1          14.3             1.5
recycling         (2.82)
law and
water bottle
deposit law
(N=404)
a
 Notes: “Effective recycling law” is either a mandatory recycling or opportunity to recycle law or a
planning law. All states with a water deposit law (CA, HI, ME, OR, CT) have either a mandatory
recycling or opportunity to recycle law or a planning law.




                                                   31
Table 3: Percentage Distribution of Number Recycled out of 10 Bottles by Recycling Legal
Regimea

                 1      2                3                     4                  5              6
                    Neither
Number/10          recycling                                                  Difference   Difference
                                     Effective         Effective recycling
  bottles    Full   law nor                                                    between      between
                                     recycling        law and water bottle
 recycled   sample    water                                                    column 3     column 4
                                     law only           deposit law (%)
              (%)     bottle                                                 and column and column
                                       (%)            (CA,HI,ME,OR,CT)
                     deposit                                                 2 (% points) 3 (% points)
                    law (%)
 Percent of
              100       20.4             53.7                   12.8
  sample
     0        29.1      46.4             31.1                    6.4             -15.3          -24.7
     1         1.5        2.2             1.4                    1.0              -0.8           -0.4
     2         2.4        2.6             2.7                    0.5               0.1           -2.2
     3         1.2        0.6             1.4                    1.5               0.8            0.1
     4         1.3        1.2             1.4                    0.5               0.2           -0.9
     5         3.6        4.2             3.7                    2.5              -0.5           -1.2
     6         1.7        1.9             1.4                    2.2              -0.5            0.8
     7         1.7        2.2             1.5                    1.5              -0.7             0
     8         6.6        6.5             6.6                    6.4               0.1           -0.2
     9         8.9        5.6             9.3                   11.6               3.7            2.3
    10        42.0      26.6             39.6                   65.8              13.0           26.2

                                                                                 1.56          2.73
              6.00/10    4.30/10      5.86/10
    Mean                                                 8.59/10 bottles     additional/10 additional/10
              bottles    bottles      bottles
                                                                                bottles       bottles
a
  Notes: Sample size is 3,158 respondents. “Effective recycling law” is either a mandatory
recycling or opportunity to recycle (M/O) law, or a planning law. All states with a water deposit
law (CA, HI, ME, OR, CT) have either a M/O law or a planning law.




                                                 32
Table 4: Regressions of Number of Bottles Recycleda

                                  Number out of 10 bottles          Ordered        Recycle at
                                                                      coding            all
                                                                  (0, 1-7, 8-10)    (0, 1-10)
                                     OLS             Tobit       Ordered Logit       Probit

State has deposit law               0.574            1.741            0.237          0.084
                                   (0.228)**        (0.747)**        (0.135)*       (0.026)***
State has deposit law covering
water bottles                       2.124            7.721            1.467          0.194
                                   (0.326)***       (1.199)***       (0.226)***     (0.028)***
State has mandatory recycling
or provides an opportunity to
recycle                             1.907            5.919            1.033          0.169
                                   (0.223)***       (0.708)***       (0.116)***     (0.021)***
State requires a recycling plan     0.733            2.162            0.351          0.067
                                   (0.229)***       (0.699)***       (0.114)***     (0.023)***
State requires a recycling goal    -0.467           -1.644           -0.166         -0.040
                                   (0.402)          (1.307)          (0.217)        (0.046)
Income/10,000                       0.075            0.187            0.039          0.010
                                   (0.021)***       (0.071)***       (0.012)***     (0.003)***
Highest income category            -0.509           -1.364           -0.278         -0.090
                                   (0.389)          (1.472)          (0.273)        (0.065)
Years of education                  0.149            0.360            0.106          0.024
                                   (0.029)***       (0.100)***       (0.017)***     (0.004)***
Considers self environmentalist     1.632            5.385            0.877          0.157
                                   (0.146)***       (0.502)***       (0.085)***     (0.016)***
Environmental organization
member                              0.456            1.253            0.380          0.061
                                   (0.232)**        (0.881)          (0.163)**      (0.032)*
Age                                 0.018            0.064            0.008          0.001
                                   (0.005)***       (0.018)***       (0.003)***     (0.001)
Female                              0.025            0.458            0.012         -0.005
                                   (0.140)          (0.456)          (0.079)        (0.016)
Black                              -0.918           -2.772           -0.439         -0.070
                                   (0.242)***       (0.755)***       (0.127)***     (0.030)**
Asian                              -0.161           -0.780           -0.191          0.011
                                   (0.432)          (1.616)          (0.294)        (0.072)
American Indian                    -0.310           -0.748           -0.134         -0.027
                                   (0.557)          (1.970)          (0.300)        (0.063)
Other                               0.083            0.329            0.088          0.039
                                   (0.309)          (1.038)          (0.186)        (0.035)
Hispanic                            0.156            0.343            0.079          0.019
                                   (0.240)          (0.782)          (0.142)        (0.028)

                                               33
Household size                       0.169            0.506            0.105            0.018
                                    (0.057)***       (0.182)***       (0.033)***       (0.007)***
Homeowner                            0.616            1.921            0.339            0.062
                                    (0.187)***       (0.605)***       (0.104)***       (0.023)***
Married                             -0.204           -0.516           -0.063           -0.019
                                    (0.164)          (0.533)          (0.091)          (0.019)
Household head                      -0.233           -0.974           -0.121           -0.034
                                    (0.201)          (0.647)          (0.109)          (0.022)
$/month spent on bottled water       0.004            0.020            0.001           -0.001
                                    (0.007)          (0.024)          (0.004)          (0.001)
Use bottled water in car            -0.004           -0.024           -0.003            0.013
                                    (0.140)          (0.462)          (0.079)          (0.017)
Times reuse bottles                 -0.165           -1.406           -0.036            0.024
                                    (0.351)          (1.133)          (0.195)          (0.041)
Urban (lives in a MSA)               1.275            4.058            0.666            0.133
                                    (0.208)***       (0.649)***       (0.110)***       (0.026)***
Northeast                            0.779            2.725            0.499            0.115
                                    (0.265)***       (0.880)***       (0.156)***       (0.026)***
South                               -1.043           -3.069           -0.503           -0.082
                                    (0.199)***       (0.615)***       (0.100)***       (0.021)***
West                                -0.402           -1.489           -0.271           -0.036
                                    (0.275)          (0.872)*         (0.148)*         (0.032)
Year 2009                            0.114            0.398            0.075            0.007
                                    (0.160)          (0.528)          (0.091)          (0.019)
Constant                            -0.576          -11.013
                                    (0.740)          (2.460)***
a
 Notes: * Significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1%
level; robust standard errors in parentheses for the OLS, Ordered Logit, and Probit regressions;
standard errors in parentheses for the Tobit regression. R squared = 0.24 for OLS regression.
Probit coefficients have been transformed to correspond to marginal effects. The regressions
also include dummy variables for missing data for environmentalist, environmental organization
membership, and times reuse bottles. These variables were not statistically significant in the
equations. Sample size = 3,158.




                                               34
Table 5: Regressions of Number of Bottles Recycled Including Interaction Effectsa

                                                                    Number out of 10
                                                                      bottles, OLS

State has deposit law                                                      0.571
                                                                          (0.229)**
State has deposit law covering water bottles                               3.638
                                                                          (0.489)***
State has mandatory recycling or provides an opportunity to
recycle                                                                    2.345
                                                                          (0.410)***
State requires a recycling plan                                            0.589
                                                                          (0.416)
State requires a recycling goal                                           -0.431
                                                                          (0.407)
Income/10,000                                                              0.110
                                                                          (0.040)***
Considers self environmentalist                                            1.825
                                                                          (0.349)***
State with deposit law covering water bottles x Income/1,000              -0.137
                                                                          (0.042)***
State with deposit law covering water bottles x Considers
self environmentalist                                                     -1.165
                                                                          (0.357)***
State has mandatory recycling or provides an opportunity to
recycle x Income/1,000                                                    -0.045
                                                                          (0.044)
State has mandatory recycling or provides an opportunity to
recycle x Considers self environmentalist                                 -0.388
                                                                          (0.407)
State requires a recycling plan x Income/1,000                             0.005
                                                                          (0.048)
State requires a recycling plan x Considers self
environmentalist                                                           0.226
                                                                          (0.430)
a
 Notes: * Significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1%
level; robust standard errors in parentheses for the OLS regression. R squared = 0.24. The
regression also includes all of the other variables listed in Table 4, as well as dummy variables
for missing data for environmentalist, environmental organization membership, and times reuse
bottles. These variables were not statistically significant in the equations. Sample size = 3,158.




                                                   35
Table 6: Probit Regressions of Use of Curbside Recyclinga

                                                    Use curbside recycling

State has deposit law                                        0.019
                                                            (0.032)
State has deposit law covering water bottles                 0.019
                                                            (0.048)
State has mandatory recycling or provides an
opportunity to recycle                                       0.257
                                                            (0.029)***
State requires a recycling plan                              0.068
                                                            (0.030)**
State requires a recycling goal                             -0.089
                                                            (0.058)
Income/10,000                                                0.016
                                                            (0.003)***
Highest income category                                     -0.044
                                                            (0.061)
Years of education                                           0.026
                                                            (0.004)***
Considers self environmentalist                              0.120
                                                            (0.020)***
Environmental organization member                            0.060
                                                            (0.038)
Age                                                          0.002
                                                            (0.001)**
Female                                                      -0.026
                                                            (0.019)
Black                                                       -0.118
                                                            (0.031)***
Asian                                                       -0.049
                                                            (0.064)
American Indian                                             -0.082
                                                            (0.072)
Other                                                        0.044
                                                            (0.043)
Hispanic                                                     0.034
                                                            (0.032)
Household size                                               0.011
                                                            (0.008)
Homeowner                                                    0.051
                                                            (0.025)**
Married                                                     -0.036
                                                            (0.022)

                                               36
Household head                                                 -0.039
                                                               (0.028)
$/month spent on bottled water                                 -0.001
                                                               (0.001)
Use bottled water in car                                       -0.008
                                                               (0.019)
Times reuse bottles                                            -0.052
                                                               (0.047)
Urban (lives in a MSA)                                          0.295
                                                               (0.023)***
Northeast                                                       0.055
                                                               (0.037)
South                                                          -0.131
                                                               (0.025)***
West                                                           -0.130
                                                               (0.035)***
Year 2009                                                       0.002
                                                               (0.022)
a
 Notes: * Significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1%
level; robust standard errors in parentheses. Coefficients have been transformed to reflect
marginal effects. The regression also includes dummy variables for missing data for
environmentalist, environmental organization membership, and times reuse bottles. Sample size
= 3,158.




                                               37
Table 7: Probit Regressions of Recycling Behaviorsa

                                               Return to
                                                                Return for       Return to
                                            recycling center
                                                                 deposit      recycling center
                                             or for deposit
State has deposit law                               0.102         0.104            -0.005
                                                   (0.026)***    (0.019)***        (0.023)
State has deposit law covering water
bottles                                             0.153         0.020             0.174
                                                   (0.043)***    (0.014)           (0.043)***
State has mandatory recycling or provides
an opportunity to recycle                          -0.040        -0.008            -0.019
                                                   (0.022)*      (0.005)           (0.021)
State requires a recycling plan                     0.013        -0.012             0.028
                                                   (0.023)       (0.006)*          (0.022)
State requires a recycling goal                    -0.049        -0.006            -0.028
                                                   (0.037)       (0.010)           (0.036)
Income/10,000                                      -0.006        -0.001            -0.004
                                                   (0.002)***    (0.001)           (0.002)*
Highest income category                            -0.015        -0.004            -0.020
                                                   (0.046)       (0.011)           (0.042)
Years of education                                 -0.002        -0.002             0.000
                                                   (0.003)       (0.001)*          (0.003)
Considers self environmentalist                     0.063         0.003             0.055
                                                   (0.016)***    (0.004)           (0.015)***
Environmental organization member                   0.023         0.001             0.035
                                                   (0.029)       (0.007)           (0.027)
Age                                                -0.001        -0.000            -0.000
                                                   (0.001)       (0.000)**         (0.001)
Female                                             -0.015        -0.008            -0.008
                                                   (0.015)       (0.004)**         (0.014)
Black                                              -0.046         0.009            -0.047
                                                   (0.022)**     (0.009)           (0.020)**
Asian                                               0.060        -0.010             0.069
                                                   (0.051)       (0.006)           (0.050)
American Indian                                    -0.050         0.007            -0.042
                                                   (0.051)       (0.022)           (0.046)
Other                                               0.012         0.017            -0.012
                                                   (0.032)       (0.011)           (0.029)


                                              38
Hispanic                                            -0.016           -0.007                0.005
                                                    (0.023)          (0.004)              (0.022)
Household size                                       0.005            0.001                0.003
                                                    (0.006)          (0.001)              (0.005)
Homeowner                                            0.037            0.001                0.018
                                                    (0.018)**        (0.004)              (0.017)
Married                                             -0.004            0.001               -0.007
                                                    (0.017)          (0.004)              (0.016)
Household head                                       0.004            0.001               -0.001
                                                    (0.021)          (0.005)              (0.019)
$/month spent on bottled water                       0.000           -0.000                0.000
                                                    (0.001)          (0.000)              (0.001)
Use bottled water in car                             0.025            0.001                0.030
                                                    (0.015)*         (0.004)              (0.014)**
Times reuse bottles                                 -0.004            0.005               -0.007
                                                    (0.035)          (0.009)              (0.033)
Urban (lives in a MSA)                              -0.108            0.004               -0.117
                                                    (0.023)***       (0.005)              (0.022)***
Northeast                                            0.034           -0.001                0.018
                                                    (0.031)          (0.008)              (0.029)
South                                                0.011           -0.004                0.009
                                                    (0.021)          (0.007)              (0.020)
West                                                 0.072           -0.006                0.069
                                                    (0.031)**        (0.007)              (0.029)**
Year 2009                                            0.013            0.003                0.012
                                                    (0.017)          (0.005)              (0.016)

a
 Notes: * Significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1%
level; robust standard errors in parentheses. Coefficients have been transformed to reflect the
marginal effects on the probability of returns. The regressions also include dummy variables for
missing data for environmentalist, environmental organization membership, and times reuse
bottles. Sample size = 3,158.




                                               39
Table 8: Percentage Distribution of Number Recycled out of 10 Bottles for Oregon and
Connecticut Before and After the Inclusion of Water Bottles to the Bottle Bill


                          Number out of every 10 bottles recycled     Percent Who
                                                                       Return for
                                                           Mean         Deposit
                        Raw #    0      1-7       8-10
                                                         (Std. Dev)
                                                            6.08
  Full sample (%)        100    29.1    13.4      57.5                     4.1
                                                           (4.38)
Oregon before water                                         7.24
                         38     15.8    18.4      65.8                    15.8
     deposits                                              (3.99)
 Oregon after water                                         8.50
                         14      0      21.3      78.5                    64.3
     deposits                                              (2.88)
 Connecticut before                                         8.00
                         30     3.3      20       76.7                     6.7
   water deposits                                          (3.05)
  Connecticut after                                         8.96
                         23     8.7      0        91.3                     8.7
   water deposits                                          (2.88)
  Connecticut and
                                                            7.57
  Oregon (pooled)        68     10.3    19.1      70.6                    11.8
                                                           (3.60)
      before
  Connecticut and                                           8.78
                         37     5.4     8.1       86.5                    29.7
Oregon (pooled) after                                      (2.85)




                                             40
Table 9: Difference-in-Difference Regressions on Oregon and Oregon/Connecticut Pooled
Samplesa

                                              Number out of 10
                   Number out of 10                                         Return for Deposit
                                             bottles, Oregon and
                    bottles, Oregon                                              Probit
                                             Connecticut (pooled)
                                                                                        Oregon/
                   OLS          Tobit          OLS           Tobit        Oregon       Connecticut
                                                                                        (pooled)
State
    OR           1.251         5.330                                    0.123
                (0.646)*      (2.497)**                                 (0.060)***
    OR and
    CT
    (pooled)                                 1.684      6.023                          0.084
                                            (0.444)*** (1.868)***                      (0.040)***
Year 2009        0.275         0.907         0.227      0.694           0.002          0.001
                (0.180)       (0.605)       (0.183)    (0.610)          (0.008)        (0.008)
Interaction
    OR x
    Year
    2009         0.988         4.976                                    0.298
                (0.995)       (5.105)                                   (0.158)***
    OR and
    CT x
    Year
    2009                                     0.763      5.446                          0.085
                                            (0.669)    (3.397)                         (0.063)**
Constant         5.986         7.463         5.958      7.373
                (0.092)***    (0.308)***    (0.092)*** (0.308)***
a
  Notes: * Significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1%
level; robust standard errors in parentheses for the OLS regression. Probit coefficients have been
transformed have been transformed to reflect the marginal effects on the probability of returns.
The mean inteff results are 0.483 (interaction), 0.141 (standard error), and 3.420 (z-statistic) for
the Oregon probit regression, and they are 0.169 (interaction), 0.084 (standard error), and 2.018
(z-statistic) for the Oregon and Connecticut (pooled) probit regression. Sample size = 3,158.




                                                41
                       Appendix A. Sample Characteristics and Survey Questions

             Appendix Table A1: Comparison of KN Sample to the National Adult Populationa

Demographic Variable                        US Adult         Survey         Bottled        Do Not Use
                                           Population      Participants   Water Users     Bottled Water
                                                            (n=5,213)      (n=3,158)        (n=2,055)
                                             Percent         Percent        Percent          Percent
Gender
   Male                                        48.4           48.1            44.2            54.1
   Female                                      51.6           51.9            55.8            45.9
Age
       18 - 24 years old                       12.6            7.9             8.7             6.7
       25 - 34 years old                       17.9           13.6            14.9            11.5
       35 - 44 years old                       18.8           19.1            21.0            16.2
       45 - 54 years old                       19.6           21.1            22.1            19.6
       55 - 64 years old                       14.8           20.6            19.7            22.0
       64 - 74 years old                        8.7           12.0            10.3            14.6
       75 years old or older                    7.7            5.8             3.4             9.5
Educational Attainment
   Less than HS                                14.2           11.1            10.1            12.6
   HS Diploma or higher                        58.8           60.0            59.7            60.4
   Bachelor or higher                          26.9           29.0            30.2            27.0
Race / Ethnicity
    White                                      81.3           81.9            79.6            85.3
    Black/African-American                     11.7           10.0            11.5             7.8
    American Indian or Alaska Native            2.4            1.3             1.4             1.1
    Asian/Pacific Islander/Other                4.6            6.6             7.4             5.6
    Hispanic                                   13.5            9.5            10.3             8.3
Marital Status
   Married                                     55.0           58.2            60.9            54.1
   Single (never married)                      26.0           21.4            20.9            22.2
   Divorced                                    10.4           12.6            11.5            14.4
   Widowed                                      6.4            5.5             4.5             7.0
Household Income
   Less than $15,000                           13.3           11.5             9.1            15.2
   $15,000 to $24,999                          11.6            9.8             8.6            11.6
   $25,000 to $34,999                          10.7           10.4             9.1            12.4
   $35,000 to $49,999                          14.2           16.8            16.0            18.0
   $50,000 to $74,999                          18.2           20.8            22.6            18.1
   $75,000 or more                             32.0           30.8            34.8            24.6
   a
       U. S. Census Bureau (http://www.census.gov/). 2008 adult population (18 years+).

                                                      42
               Appendix Table A2: Survey Questions Pertaining to Bottled Water

WELCOME.
Welcome to our survey on the value of drinking water quality. This survey was put together by
researchers at Vanderbilt and Duke Universities to help the government understand your views
on the value of drinking water quality. The survey should take less than half an hour to
complete, and you may stop at any time.

We hope that you will find this survey interesting. Thanks very much for your responses.

For most of the questions in this survey, there are no right or wrong answers. We are simply
interested in your opinions.


HHSIZE.
How many members of your family (spouse, children, parents, or other relatives) currently live
in your home, including yourself?

                                                       One ......................................................................1
                                                       Two .....................................................................2
                                                       Three ...................................................................3
                                                       Four .....................................................................4
                                                       Five .....................................................................5
                                                       Six or more ..........................................................6



[SHOW IF HHSIZE = 1 OR REFUSED]
FAM2A.
For the rest of this survey, when a question refers to your family or members of your family who
live in your home, think of it as referring only to you.



[SHOW IF HHSIZE > 1]
FAM2B.
For the rest of this survey, when a question refers to you, think of it as referring to you and the
members of your family who currently live in your home.




                                                 43
REMEDY4.
Do you use bottled water? (distilled, filtered, or spring water bought in small bottles, gallon
jugs, or a water cooler)

                                                      Yes, in the home .................................................1
                                                      Yes, at work ........................................................2
                                                      Yes, while exercising ..........................................3
                                                      Yes, in the car .....................................................4
                                                      Yes, other (specify)_________ ...........................5
                                                      No, I do not use bottled water [SP] .....................6



[ASK IF REMEDY4=1 – 5: ANY YES ANSWER]
EXPENSE1.
How much would you estimate that your household spends each month on bottled water?

                                                      $1 or Less ............................................................1
                                                      More than $1 up to $5 .........................................2
                                                      More than $5 up to $10 .......................................3
                                                      More than $10 up to $25 .....................................4
                                                      More than $25 up to $40 .....................................5
                                                      Over $40 per month ............................................6
                                                      Don’t Know ........................................................7



[ASK IF REMEDY4=1 – 5: ANY YES ANSWER]
BOTKIND1.
When you drink bottled water, what kind do you most often use?

Filtered water
Spring water
Distilled water
Other (specify______)
Don’t know




                                                 44
[ASK IF REMEDY4=1 – 5: ANY YES ANSWER]
BOTKIND2.
How do you most often buy your bottled water?

Single serving bottles
Gallon jugs
Containers larger than one gallon


[ASK IF REMEDY4=1 – 5: ANY YES ANSWER]
BOTBUY.
In the last month, what kinds of bottled water have you purchased?

                                                   Plastic bottles ......................................................1
                                                   Glass bottles ........................................................2
                                                   Plastic gallon jugs ...............................................3
                                                   Water cooler containers ......................................4
                                                   Other (specify)_______ ......................................5


[ASK IF BOTBUY=1]
BOTRECP.
In the last month, have you recycled your empty plastic water bottles using…

                                                   Curbside recycling ..............................................1
                                                   Take recycling to a recycling station ..................2
                                                   Return bottles for deposit ....................................3
                                                   Bottler collects empty bottles when
                                                      new ones are delivered ...................................4
                                                   I have not recycled plastic bottles .......................5



[ASK IF BOTBUY=2]
BOTRECG.
In the last month, have you recycled your empty glass bottles using…

                                                   Curbside recycling ..............................................1
                                                   Take recycling to a recycling station ..................2
                                                   Return bottles for deposit ....................................3
                                                   Bottler collects empty bottles when
                                                      new ones are delivered ...................................4
                                                   I have not recycled glass bottles .........................5


                                              45
[ASK IF BOTBUY=3]
BOTRECJ.
In the last month, have you recycled your empty plastic gallon jugs using…

                                                   Curbside recycling ..............................................1
                                                   Take recycling to a recycling station ..................2
                                                   Return bottles for deposit ....................................3
                                                   Bottler collects empty bottles when
                                                      new ones are delivered ...................................4
                                                   I have not recycled plastic gallon
                                                      jugs .................................................................5


[ASK IF BOTBUY=4]
BOTRECW.
In the last month, have you recycled your empty water cooler containers using…

                                                   Curbside recycling ..............................................1
                                                   Take recycling to a recycling station ..................2
                                                   Return bottles for deposit ....................................3
                                                   Bottler collects empty bottles when
                                                      new ones are delivered ...................................4
                                                   I have not recycled water cooler
                                                      containers........................................................5


[ASK IF BOTRECP=3]
BOTDEPP.
How much money (in cents) per plastic bottle do you get for returning them for deposit?

_____ cents


[ASK IF BOTRECG=3]
BOTDEPG.
How much money (in cents) per glass bottle do you get for returning them for deposit?

_____ cents


[ASK IF BOTRECJ=3]
BOTDEPJ.
How much money (in cents) per plastic gallon jugs do you get for returning them for deposit?

_____ cents


                                              46
[ASK IF BOTRECW=3]
BOTDEPW.
How much money (in cents) per water cooler container do you get for returning them for
deposit?

_____ cents


[ASK IF BOTBUY=1]
BOT10P.
Out of every 10 plastic bottles, how many would you say that you recycled or returned for reuse?



[ASK IF BOTBUY=2]
BOT10G.
Out of every 10 glass bottles, how many would you say that you recycled or returned for reuse?



[ASK IF BOTBUY=3]
BOT10J.
Out of every 10 plastic gallon jugs, how many would you say that you recycled or returned for
       reuse?



[ASK IF BOTBUY=4]
BOT10W.
Out of every 10 water cooler containers, how many would you say that you recycled or returned
       for reuse?




[ASK IF BOTBUY=1]
BOTREUSE.
How often do you re-fill your plastic water bottles using tap water or filtered water?

                                              Never ...............................................................................1
                                              Rarely (1-2 out of every 10 bottles) ................................2
                                              Sometimes (3-4 out of every 10 bottles) .........................3
                                              Often (refill half or more of your bottles) .......................4



                                                 47
RECYCLE.
Consider all of the recyclable materials that you use. Relative to your neighbors, would you say
you recycle …

 Much Less               Less              About the                  More                           Much More
   Of my                Of my             Same as my                  Of my                            Of my
 Recyclables          Recyclables          Neighbors                Recyclables                      Recyclables



[ASK IF STATE=CT]
AWARE.
Were you aware that Connecticut recently changed its bottle deposit law to include a 5 cent
deposit on plastic water bottles?

Yes            1
No             2


GREEN1.
Would you describe yourself as an environmentalist?

                                                    Yes ......................................................................1
                                                    No ........................................................................2


ENVORG.
Are you a member of any of the following organizations?

                                                    Environmental Defense Fund .............................1
                                                    Greenpeace ..........................................................2
                                                    National Audubon Society ..................................3
                                                    National Wildlife Federation .............................4
                                                    Nature Conservancy ...........................................5
                                                    Natural Resources Defense Council ..................6
                                                    Sierra Club .........................................................7
                                                    None of these ......................................................8




                                               48
                    Appendix B: Bottle Deposit Laws and State Recycling Laws


        Concerns about diminishing landfill space have prompted many states to pass legislation

encouraging recycling.49 States with the highest disposal fees and limited amounts of disposal

capacity remaining were the first to pass waste reduction legislation. The legislation has taken

various forms in different states; states have set waste reduction goals, required comprehensive

local planning, adopted disposal bans, enacted mandatory provisions for source separation and

curbside recycling, and required refundable deposits on containers.

Bottle Deposit Laws

        A bottle deposit bill, or container deposit law, requires a refundable deposit on beverage

containers, usually about 5 to 10 cents, and encourages consumers to return these containers for

recycling to receive their deposit back.50 As of 2009, eleven states—California, Connecticut,

Delaware, Hawaii, Iowa, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, New York, Oregon, and Vermont—

have bottle deposit laws. These states represent 29% of the U.S. population and 28% of our

sample. In our survey, five of these states—California, Connecticut, Hawaii, Maine, and

Oregon—included deposits on bottled water in their regulatory scheme.51 Most states have a

modest 5 cent deposit on beverages; only Michigan has a 10 cent deposit on all covered

beverages. Six states retain the unredeemed deposits, which provide state revenue in the

millions.52 Many states without bottle deposit bills are contemplating such legislation. Seven

states considered new deposit bills and three states considered updates to their existing deposit

49
   For discussion of the legal and policy context for the emergence of recycling laws see Tchobanoglous and Kreith
(2002) and Gaba and Stever (2008).
50
   The exact deposit system can vary from state to state. The Bottle Bill Resource Guide,
www.bottlebill.org/about.htm, provides information on each state’s bottle bill.
51
   Connecticut’s addition of bottled water to its bottle deposit scheme was implemented on October 1, 2009. New
York had already passed a bill that would add bottled water, but a court order delayed implementation of this bill
until October 30, 2009, which was after the final round of the survey used for this paper.
52
   This statistic includes Michigan, which has a mixed system, but does not include New York, which passed a bill
that would create a mixed system, but implementation of this bill was delayed to past the scope of this paper.

                                                        49
bills in 2009.53 Connecticut and New York both passed updated bills allowing the state to retain

unredeemed deposits.54 While Connecticut’s update has already been implemented, New York’s

update has been delayed by a court ruling.55 The seven states with new deposit bill proposals

were Florida, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, North Carolina, Tennessee, and West

Virginia. Most of these state bills proposed bottle deposits of at least 10 cents—with Florida’s

bill proposing 20 to 30 cent deposits.56 Florida’s bill is the only bill to propose that bottlers

retain unclaimed deposits; the rest proposed that the state retains unredeemed deposits.57 All

proposed laws, except New Hampshire’s, would cover water bottles.

State Recycling Laws

         State laws that mandate source separation and recycling or ban disposal of certain

materials in almost all municipalities were especially popular in the late 1980s and early 1990s.

Many of these laws require all municipalities, counties, or cities to establish pick-up of separated

materials at curbside or other convenient locations.58 These kinds of programs are usually

implemented at the municipality or county level,59 but statewide recycling initiatives are also

possible. For example, Pennsylvania requires all municipalities with more than 5,000 people to

offer curbside recycling. In 2004, there were 974 curbside recycling programs in Pennsylvania,



53
   Maryland only considered setting up a task force to study the possibility of a bottle deposit, so it was not included
in this statistic.
54
   New York’s bill would also add water bottles to its list of bottles covered by the deposit.
55
   Confessore, Nicholas. Bottle Bill, Bottled Up, City Room, N.Y. Times (May 27, 2009), available at
http://cityroom.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/05/27/bottle-bill-bottled-up/?scp=1-
b&sq=bottle+deposit+new+york&st=nyt.
56
   Only Tennessee and one West Virginia bill proposed 5 cent deposits.
57
   New Jersey’s bill proposed a mixed retention plan, where the state retains 75 percent of the unredeemed deposits.
58
   Kinnaman (2005, 2006) finds that about 18 to 22 states mandate curbside recycling. Because we did not have this
information for 2008, we group states with comprehensive statewide recycling provisions with those with mandatory
curbside recycling programs.
59
   In 2007, more than 8,600 curbside recyclables collection programs were reported in the United States (EPA
2007). The EPA (2007) found that 84 percent, 76 percent, 61 percent, and 30 percent of the populations in the
Northeast, West, Midwest, and South, respectively, were served by curbside recycling. These percentages are
calculated based on the populations in states reporting data.

                                                          50
serving roughly 80% of the population.60 In addition to the curbside recycling requirement,

Pennsylvania requires all citizens to separate at least three materials from their other waste and to

store the materials until collection. Connecticut, the District of Columbia, New Jersey, New

York, West Virginia, and Wisconsin have passed similar “mandatory” recycling laws. Table B1

summarizes these laws and provides excerpts from key provisions of the laws.

        Other states have required all municipalities to give residents an “opportunity to recycle.”

Minnesota, for example, requires all counties to make curbside pickup or collection centers for

recyclable materials available at sites that are convenient for residents to use. In 2004, there

were 730 curbside recycling programs in Minnesota, serving roughly 72% of the population.61

Arizona, Arkansas, Florida, Nevada,62 Oregon, South Carolina, and Washington have passed

similar laws ensuring adequate recycling opportunities for their populations. These laws are

grouped with mandatory recycling laws in Table B1.

        Many states have sought to encourage recycling at the local level by either requiring local

governments to consider recycling initiatives in their waste reduction plans or setting statewide

recycling goals. The local planning requirements frequently force counties or municipalities to

assess their current recycling programs and to consider more comprehensive programs in the

future. All of the states that have mandatory recycling or opportunity to recycle programs,

except Nevada, have planning requirements and most have a statewide recycling goal. The


60
   The number of curbside recycling programs and the population with access to curbside collection (10,000,000)
was taken from Simmons et al. (2006). The percentage of the population with access to curbside collection was
calculated using Pennsylvania’s estimated population in 2004, prepared by the State Data Center of the
Pennsylvania State University (12,406,292), available at
http://www.dsf.health.state.pa.us/health/lib/health/Vital_Stat/2004/2004_statepop.pdf.
61
   The number of curbside recycling programs and the population with access to curbside collection (3,750,000) is
from Simmons et al. (2006). The percentage of the population with access to curbside collection was calculated
using Minnesota’s estimated population in 2005, prepared by the U.S. Census Bureau (5,174,743), available at
http://www.census.gov/population/projections/SummaryTabA1.pdf.
62
   Although only two counties meet Nevada's high county population cut-off of 100,000 or more for the
requirements (Clark County and Washoe County), this cut-off still covers about 88 percent of Nevada's population.

                                                       51
remaining states that have a planning requirement are summarized in Table B2, which provides

documentation of the applicable laws. Finally, the states that only have a statewide recycling

goal are summarized in Table B3, which also lists the specified recycling goal amount. It is not

clear whether such goals are followed by policies that are implemented in order to achieve these

goals.




                                               52
Appendix Table B1: States that either require recycling or an opportunity to recycle
                                                                                              State
              Mandatory                                                                       recycling or
              recycling or                                                                    waste
              opportunity to                                                                  reduction
 State        recycle?         Source         Notes                                           goal?

 Arizona      Opportunity to   Ariz. Rev.     "A city or town shall provide its residents     No
              recycle          Stat. Ann. §   with an opportunity to engage in recycling
                               9-500.07.      and waste reduction."

 Arkansas     Opportunity to   Ark. Code      "Each regional solid waste management           Yes (40%)
              recycle          Ann. § 8-6-    board shall ensure that its residents have an
                               720.           opportunity to recycle."

 Connecticut Mandatory         Conn. Gen.     "The Commissioner of Environmental              Yes (25%)
             recycling         Stat. § 22a-   Protection shall adopt regulations...
                               241b.          designating items that are required to be
                                              recycled.... Each person who generates
                                              solid waste from residential property
                                              shall… separate from other solid waste the
                                              items designated for recycling pursuant to
                                              subsection (a) of this section."

 DC           Mandatory        D.C. Code §    "Occupants of residential property shall        Yes (45%)
              recycling        8-1007.        separate from their solid waste and
                                              separately bundle or containerize all yard
                                              waste and newspaper for recycling… [and]
                                              all metals and glass in 1 container."

 Florida      Opportunity to   Fla. Stat. §   "A county with a population of 100,000 or       Yes (30%)
              recycle          403.706.       less may provide its residents with the
                                              opportunity to recycle in lieu of achieving
                                              the goal set forth in paragraph (a)."

 Minnesota    Opportunity to   Minn. Stat.    "Counties shall ensure that residents,          Yes (35%)
              recycle          § 115A.552.    including residents of single and
                                              multifamily dwellings, have an opportunity
                                              to recycle."

 Nevada       Opportunity to   Nev. Rev.      "The board of county commissioners in a         Yes (25%)
              recycle          Stat. Ann. §   county whose population is 100,000 or
                               444A.040.      more, or its designee, shall make available
                                              for use in that county a program for... [t]he
                                              separation at the source of recyclable
                                              material from other solid waste ...[and]
                                              [t]he establishment of recycling centers for
                                              the collection and disposal of recyclable
                                              material..."



                                                 53
Appendix Table B1: States that either require recycling or an opportunity to recycle (cont’d.)
                                                                                               State
               Mandatory                                                                       recycling or
               recycling or                                                                    waste
               opportunity to                                                                  reduction
 State         recycle?         Source           Notes                                         goal?

 New Jersey    Mandatory        N.J.S.A.         "The governing body of each                   Yes (60%)
               recycling        13:1E-99.16      municipality shall adopt an ordinance
                                                 which requires persons... to source
                                                 separate from the municipal solid waste
                                                 stream... the specified recyclable
                                                 materials for which markets have been
                                                 secured."

 New York      Mandatory        McKinney's       "[A] municipality shall adopt such a          Yes (40%)
               recycling        General          local law or ordinance to require that
                                Municipal        solid waste... shall be separated into
                                Law § 120-       recyclable, reuseable or other
                                aa               components for which economic
                                                 markets for alternate uses exist."

 Oregon        Opportunity      Or. Rev. Stat.   "The 'opportunity to recycle' means at        Yes (50%)
               to recycle       §§ 459A.005      least that the city, county or
                                to .010.         metropolitan service district... [p]rovides
                                                 a place for collecting source separated
                                                 recyclable material located either at a
                                                 disposal site or at another location more
                                                 convenient to the population being
                                                 served and, if a city has a population of
                                                 4,000 or more, collection at least once a
                                                 month of source separated recyclable
                                                 material from collection service
                                                 customers within the city's urban growth
                                                 boundary."

 Pennsylvania Mandatory         53 Pa. Cons.     "The source-separation and collection         No
              recycling         Stat. Ann. §     program shall include... [a]n ordinance
                                4000.1501.       or regulation adopted by the governing
                                                 body of the municipality, requiring...
                                                 [p]ersons to separate at least three
                                                 materials deemed appropriate by the
                                                 municipality from other municipal waste
                                                 generated at their homes, apartments
                                                 and other residential establishments and
                                                 to store such materials until collection."




                                                 54
Appendix Table B1: States that either require recycling or an opportunity to recycle (cont’d.)
                                                                                                 State
               Mandatory                                                                         recycling
               recycling or                                                                      or waste
               opportunity to                                                                    reduction
 State         recycle?         Source          Notes                                            goal?

 South         Opportunity to   S.C. Code       "Each county or region submitting a solid        Yes (35%)
 Carolina      recycle          Ann. § 44-      waste management plan... shall provide its
                                96-80.          residents with the opportunity to recycle the
                                                categories of solid waste materials
                                                designated in the county or regional solid
                                                waste management plan."

 Washington    Opportunity to   Wash. Rev.      "In urban areas, these programs shall            Yes (50%)
               recycle          Code Ann. §     include collection of source separated
                                70.95.090.      recyclable materials from single and
                                                multiple family residences... In rural areas,
                                                these programs shall include but not be
                                                limited to drop-off boxes, buy-back centers,
                                                or a combination of both, at each solid
                                                waste transfer, processing, or disposal site,
                                                or at locations convenient to the residents of
                                                the county."

 West          Mandatory        W. Va.          "Each municipality with a population of ten      Yes (50%)
 Virginia      recycling        Code Ann. §     thousand or more people… shall establish
                                22-15A-18.      and commence implementation of a source
                                                separation and curbside collection program
                                                for recyclable materials."

 Wisconsin     Mandatory        Wis. Stat.      "No person may dispose of in a solid waste       No
               recycling        Ann. §§         disposal facility or burn without energy
                                287.07 to       recovery in a solid waste treatment facility
                                .09.            in this state any of the following: [e.g.,
                                                aluminum cans, newspaper and other paper,
                                                foam packaging, glass bottles, magazines,
                                                plastic containers, etc.]."

 Notes: All of these states, except Nevada, have a planning requirement.




                                                   55
Appendix Table B2: States that require regional waste management plans
                    with recycling considerations

                                                     State recycling
                                                     or waste
    State         Source for plan requirements       reduction goal?
    Alabama       Ala. Code § 22-27-45.              Yes (25%)
    California    Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 41821.       Yes (50%)
    Hawaii        Haw. Rev. Stat. § 342G-26.         Yes (50%)
    Illinois      415 Ill. Comp. Stat. Ann. 15/4.    Yes (25%)
    Iowa          Iowa Code Ann. § 455B.306.         Yes (50%)
    Maine         Me. Rev. Stat. Ann. tit. 38, §     Yes (50%)
                  2133.
    Maryland      Md. Code Ann., Envir. § 9-505.     Yes (20%)
    Michigan      Mich. Comp. Laws Ann. §§           No
                  324.11533 to .11538.
    Nebraska      Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 13-2031 to      Yes (50%)
                  2032.
    New Mexico    N. M. S. A. 1978, §§ 74-9-4 - 7.   Yes (50%)
    North         N.C. Gen. Stat. Ann. § 130A-       Yes (40%)
    Carolina      309.03.
    Ohio          Ohio Rev. Code Ann. §              No
                  3734.53.
    Tennessee     Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-211-813.      Yes (25%)
    Texas         Tex. Health & Safety Code          Yes (40%)
                  Ann. § 363.062.
    Virginia      Va. Code Ann. § 10.1-1411.         Yes (25%)




                                   56
    Appendix Table B3: States that only have a recycling or waste reduction goal


State            Source                            Goal Amount
Louisiana        La. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 30:2413.    25%
Mississippi      Miss. Code Ann. § 17-17-221       25% (waste reduction)
Montana          Mont. Code Ann. § 75-10-803.      17%
New Hampshire    N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 149-M:2.   40% (waste reduction)
Rhode Island     R.I. Gen. Laws §§ 23-18.8-2 to    35% (recycling waste); 50%
                 .12-3.                            (recycling beverage containers)
South Dakota     SDCL § 34A-6-60                   50% (waste reduction)




                                          57
                          Appendix C. Supplementary Tables

            Appendix Table C1: Recycling Perceptions Relative to Neighbors

                                                    About the
                          Much Less      Less                   More      Much More
    Sample Group                                     Same as
                          Recyclables Recyclables             Recyclables Recyclables
                                                    Neighbors
Overall Sample              10.44%       7.66%       41.10%     24.09%       16.70%
Non-Bottled Water Users      8.62%       6.82%       42.99%     23.75%       17.82%
Bottled Water Users         11.22%       8.03%       40.29%     24.24%       16.22%




                                          58
    Appendix Table C2: Regressions of Number of Bottles Recycled: Urban/Non-Urban and
                 Considers Self an Environmentalist/Non-Environmentalista


                                            Number out of 10 bottles, OLS by Subgroup
                                                                                     Non-
                                      Urban   Non-urban Environmentalist
                                                                               environmentalist

State with deposit law                0.564            0.885        0.293            0.827
                                     (0.246)**        (0.620)      (0.322)          (0.323)**
State with deposit law covering
water bottles                         2.100            2.101        2.226            2.048
                                     (0.349)***       (1.005)**    (0.444)***       (0.466)***
State has mandatory recycling or
provides an opportunity to recycle    1.884            1.898        1.822            1.870
                                     (0.245)***       (0.595)***   (0.346)***       (0.291)***
State requires a recycling plan       0.781            0.379        0.604            0.764
                                     (0.254)***       (0.553)      (0.369)          (0.292)***
State requires a recycling goal      -0.412           -0.661       -0.889           -0.245
                                     (0.497)          (0.703)      (0.829)          (0.458)
Income/10,000                         0.085           -0.034        0.036            0.100
                                     (0.022)***       (0.069)      (0.030)          (0.030)***
Highest income category              -0.659            1.415        0.563           -1.121
                                     (0.395)*         (3.325)      (0.427)          (0.595)*
Years of education                    0.165            0.034        0.126            0.167
                                     (0.031)***       (0.083)      (0.042)***       (0.041)***
Considers self environmentalist       1.646            1.683
                                     (0.155)***       (0.445)***
Environmental organization
member                                0.398            0.522        0.505            0.623
                                     (0.238)*         (0.712)      (0.261)*         (0.524)
Age                                   0.014            0.038        0.003            0.029
                                     (0.006)**        (0.015)***   (0.008)          (0.007)***
Female                                0.147           -0.604        0.459           -0.295
                                     (0.151)          (0.390)      (0.209)**        (0.189)
Black                                -0.952           -0.377       -1.174           -0.715
                                     (0.256)***       (0.802)      (0.421)***       (0.303)**
Asian                                -0.219            1.133       -0.253            0.008
                                     (0.435)          (1.010)      (0.571)          (0.657)
American Indian                      -0.291           -0.199        0.332           -0.768
                                     (0.628)          (1.224)      (0.759)          (0.762)
Other                                 0.078           -0.097       -0.637            0.762
                                     (0.336)          (0.876)      (0.485)          (0.401)*
Hispanic                              0.151            0.793        0.484           -0.043
                                     (0.251)          (0.851)      (0.333)          (0.335)

                                                 59
Household size                         0.114          0.482               0.256                0.144
                                      (0.062)*       (0.144)***          (0.081)***           (0.074)*
Homeowner                              0.691          0.215               0.696                0.539
                                      (0.200)***     (0.525)             (0.282)**            (0.248)**
Married                               -0.011         -1.058              -0.426               -0.056
                                      (0.177)        (0.436)**           (0.233)*             (0.223)
Household head                        -0.257         -0.300               0.185               -0.489
                                      (0.220)        (0.510)             (0.309)              (0.262)*
$/month spent on bottled water         0.004          0.021              -0.001                0.005
                                      (0.008)        (0.020)             (0.011)              (0.010)
Use bottled water in car              -0.034          0.181               0.095               -0.152
                                      (0.151)        (0.407)             (0.205)              (0.191)
Times reuse bottles                   -0.227          0.087              -0.585                0.044
                                      (0.381)        (0.902)             (0.524)              (0.468)
Urban (lives in a MSA)                                                    1.316                1.209
                                                                         (0.339)***           (0.267)***
Northeast                              0.786          0.835               0.026                1.364
                                      (0.287)***     (0.721)             (0.375)              (0.370)***
South                                 -0.958         -1.645              -1.120               -0.963
                                      (0.219)***     (0.517)***          (0.301)***           (0.266)***
West                                  -0.408         -0.198              -0.948               -0.052
                                      (0.297)        (0.724)             (0.404)**            (0.373)
Year 2009                              0.093          0.427               0.094                0.175
                                      (0.172)        (0.450)             (0.230)              (0.220)
Constant                               0.583          0.502               2.636               -1.518
                                      (0.792)        (1.875)             (1.131)**            (0.991)
a
 Notes: * Significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1%
level; robust standard errors in parentheses. R squared = 0.22, 0.25, 0.19, and 0.22, respectively.
The regressions also include a dummy variable for missing data for environmental organization
membership and times reuse bottles, as well as a dummy variable for missing data for
environmentalist in the urban/non-urban regressions. Sample sizes are 2672, 486, 1259, and
1883, respectively.




                                                60
