NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAXES AND TIME ALLOCATION:
EVIDENCE FROM SINGLE WOMEN
Alexander M. Gelber
Joshua W. Mitchell
Working Paper 15583
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15583

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2009

We thank Raj Chetty, David Cutler, Daniel Hamermesh, Erik Hurst, Lawrence Katz, Louis Kaplow,
Bruce Meyer, Claudia Olivetti, Daniel Sacks, Karl Scholz, Daniel Silverman, Todd Sinai, Justin Wolfers,
and seminar participants at Harvard, IIES, NBER, the National Tax Association, the Nordic Summer
Institute in Empirical Labor Economics, SOFI, Stanford, the Stockholm School of Economics, UBC,
the University of Wisconsin-Madison, Uppsala, and Wharton for suggestions. We are grateful to Adam
Looney, Bruce Meyer, and Mel Stephens for generously sharing data. We are also grateful to Mark
Aguiar and Erik Hurst for making their data and code available on the web. Daniel Sacks provided
outstanding research assistance. Gelber acknowledges financial support from the National Institute
on Aging, Grant Number T32-AG00186. All errors are our own. Email: agelber@nber.org. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Alexander M. Gelber and Joshua W. Mitchell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Taxes and Time Allocation: Evidence from Single Women
Alexander M. Gelber and Joshua W. Mitchell
NBER Working Paper No. 15583
December 2009
JEL No. E32,H2,H24,H3,J22
ABSTRACT
Hundreds of papers have investigated how incentives and policies affect hours worked in the market.
This paper examines how income taxes affect time allocation in the other two-thirds of the day. Using
the Panel Study of Income Dynamics from 1975 to 2004, we analyze the response of single women's
housework, labor supply, and other time to variation in tax and transfer schedules across income levels,
number of children, states, and time. We find that when the economic reward to participating in the
labor force increases, market work increases and housework decreases, with the decrease in housework
accounting for approximately two-thirds of the increase in market work. Analysis of repeated cross-sections
of time diary data from 1975 to 2004 shows that changes in "home production" account for at least
half of the increase in market hours of work in response to policy changes. Data on expenditures from
the Consumer Expenditure Survey from 1980 to 2003 show some evidence that expenditures on market
goods likely to substitute for housework increase in response to a greater incentive to join the labor
force. The baseline estimates imply that the elasticity of substitution between consumption of home
and market goods is 2.43. The results are consistent with the classic time allocation model of Becker
(1965).

Alexander M. Gelber
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1403 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
agelber@nber.org
Joshua W. Mitchell
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
mitchel6@fas.harvard.edu

Hundreds of papers have investigated how incentives and policies affect hours worked.
This paper examines how income taxes affect time allocation in the other two-thirds of the day,
as well as market work. This promises to give us a richer understanding of how taxation affects
the lives that people live.
We assess whether policy reforms induced single mothers to shift from one productive
activity—work at home—to another—work in the market. Over the past thirty years, policymakers sought to increase the labor force participation of single mothers by expanding the
Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) and reforming the welfare system. One key motivation for
reform was the perception that some single mothers were choosing to be idle and ought instead
to contribute more productively to society by working (Robert Moffitt 2006). Phrased in
efficiency terms, single mothers’ leisure is considered by some to be the opposite of a “merit
good,” in the sense that it may be considered “intrinsically bad.”
Understanding time allocation decisions is a core area of interest in labor economics. We
interpret our results through the canonical model of time use of Gary S. Becker (1965). In this
framework individuals derive utility from consumption of “commodities,” each of which is
produced using both a time input and a market goods input. Among other things, the model
predicts that in response to a compensated wage increase, individuals’ expenditures on market
goods inputs rise relative to their time inputs into a given commodity.1 Using exogenous policy
variation allows us to test this theory.
Estimating the impact of the tax rate on the distribution of non-market time allows us to
examine several further issues of interest. We examine whether the observed trends in the data
are due to policy changes or other trends across groups in the economy; address to what extent
taxes, as opposed to other policy changes, were responsible for changes in time allocation;
investigate whether taxes affect different components of non-market time differently or are
neutral with respect to non-market time; and quantify the elasticity of the responses with respect
to the tax rate. The estimation of elasticities, in turn, allows us to calculate the elasticity of
substitution between home and market consumption. The analysis in the PSID also allows us to
1

We discuss later the conditions under which this holds true.

2

examine whether a fixed effect panel data model yields similar results to those obtained with the
repeated cross sections of data that have typically been used. Compositional changes, such as
the large increase in the share of single mothers in the population over our period, could bias
results based on repeated cross sections.
Employed individuals take substantially less “leisure” time than the unemployed
(Michael Burda and Daniel Hamermesh 2009), and we confirm in our data that the employed do
only a bit less housework than the non-employed. It is perhaps surprising, then, that when we
use tax policy to identify the estimates, the majority of the increase in market work is accounted
for by decreases in housework. Using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics from 1975-2004, we
find that among single women, labor force participation rises significantly when the fraction of
their earnings taken away in taxes falls, consistent with findings in previous literature (Nada O.
Eissa and Jeffrey B. Liebman 1996; Bruce D. Meyer and Dan T. Rosenbaum 2001). The
baseline specification shows that when hours worked rise by 1 hour in response to lower taxes,
time spent on housework falls by about 47 minutes. The finding that market work rises
substantially and housework falls substantially in response to decreased taxation of labor
earnings is robust to a wide variety of specification checks.
We supplement our examination of the PSID with an analysis of two additional
datasets.2 The repeated cross sections on time use assembled by Mark Aguiar and Erik Hurst
(2007a) allow us to disaggregate non-market time into detailed categories. This analysis also
shows that an increased net-of-tax share causes a substantial and significant increase in market
hours worked and a decrease in housework. We investigate a variety of definitions of "home
production" and "leisure" and find consistent evidence that the increase in market work
corresponds to substantial and significant decreases in home production or non-market work.
We also find some evidence that leisure decreases. The sum of time spent on eating, sleeping,
and personal care, which is sometimes considered a separate category of interest, changes
insignificantly. We examine a number of other disaggregated outcomes of interest. These

2

The important work of Meyer and James X. Sullivan (2008) examines the time use and expenditures of single
mothers in 1993 and 2003; Meyer and Sullivan (2004) examine expenditures of single mothers before and after
several policy reforms.

3

include time spent eating and preparing food, which decreases, and time spent sleeping—a
hallmark of “idleness”—which changes insignificantly.
Analysis of the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) allows us to investigate how these
changes in market and home work interact with expenditure patterns. We find that expenditure
on food prepared away from home—which could substitute for time spent on food preparation—
increases in response to an increase in the incentive to participate in the labor force, whereas
expenditure on food at home decreases significantly. In one specification, we find that overall
food expenditure rises significantly, but food expenditure changes insignificantly in other
specifications. In combination with the finding that time spent eating and preparing food falls,
we interpret our results as evidence consistent with the Becker model.
Section 1 briefly reviews some of the major changes in tax policy impacting single
women over the time period in question. Section 2 describes the data. Section 3 discusses our
empirical specifications. Section 4 turns to the results from the PSID. Section 5 contains the
results from the repeated cross-sections on time use. Section 6 describes results from the CEX.
Section 7 concludes.
1. Policy Environment
During the period under consideration, a series of tax acts, passed in 1981, 1986, 1990,
1993, 2001 and 2003, dramatically changed the federal income tax code. We review the policies
that affected single women the most.3 Among low-income taxpayers, the primary changes came
from large expansions of the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), which increased the incentive to
participate in the labor force. The size of the EITC, which is a refundable tax credit, depends on
earned income and the number of qualifying children. The EITC tax schedule has three regions.
Over the “phase-in” range, a percentage of earnings is transferred to individuals. Over the
“plateau” region, an individual receives the maximum credit, after which the credit is phased out
(currently at a rate of 21.06%).

3

See Rebecca M. Blank (2002), V. Joseph Hotz and John Karl Scholz (2003), Moffitt (2002), Moffitt (2003), Eissa
and Hilary W. Hoynes (2005), and Meyer (2009) for reviews of the literature on welfare and the Earned Income Tax
Credit.

4

A small EITC was first introduced in 1975. The EITC was expanded substantially in the
tax acts of 1986, 1990, and 1993. The 1986 expansion of the EITC increased the phase-in rate
and region. These changes were reinforced by increases in the standard deduction and the
dependent exemption to reduce income tax liabilities for tax filers at the bottom of the income
distribution. The largest expansion of the EITC was in 1993. This reform increased the
additional maximum benefit for taxpayers with two or more children, which reached $1400 in
1996. The phase-in rate for the lowest-income recipients increased from 18.5% to 34% for
families with one child and from 19.5% to 40% for families with two or more children. The tax
act of 2001 reduced the bottom tax bracket rate from 15% to 10%. Figure 1 summarizes
important features of the changes in tax policy over this period for our PSID sample of single
women. From the mid-1980s to the mid-to-late 1990s, the fraction of earnings a woman keeps if
she participates in the labor force rose substantially for single women with children relative to
those without children.
While we primarily focus on tax policy in this paper, it is worth noting changes in
welfare policy, which we sometimes include as a control variable. Prior to 1997, Aid to Families
with Dependent Children (AFDC) provided cash payments primarily to single mothers with
children. The Food Stamp program gives low-income households coupons to purchase food.
AFDC program parameters were set by the states. Most Food Stamp parameters are the same in
all states, but because eligibility for Food Stamps and AFDC interact, people in similar situations
in different states may receive different benefits under Food Stamps. Both of these programs had
secularly growing expenditures until the mid-1990s. The typical effective tax rate imposed by
the AFDC program was two-thirds. From 1980 through 1993, mean benefits for a working
single mother remained roughly constant as implicit tax rates were reduced. Under AFDC, states
could receive waivers to experiment with the parameters of their welfare programs. Between
January 1993 and August 1996, the federal government approved welfare waivers in 43 states.
Under waiver programs, states usually made welfare eligibility criteria more stringent and
reduced the generosity of welfare benefits. In 1997, the Personal Responsibility and Work
Opportunity Reconciliation Act replaced AFDC with Temporary Assistance to Needy Families
(TANF), resulting in a wide variety of changes to the welfare system, including further cuts in
average welfare benefits, work requirements, and more stringent time limits.
5

2. Data
We use three datasets that are described more fully in our data appendix. Our core
analysis uses the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. We use data from 1976-2005 on unmarried
female heads of household aged 25-55 (inclusive), excluding cohabitators, who appear in at least
two survey waves.4 We also exclude the PSID poverty sample and observations with allocated
values of any outcome variables. We focus on single women for a number of reasons. First,
many of the policies we examine were specifically oriented toward increasing the labor force
participation of single mothers, providing fruitful exogenous variation. Second, it is difficult to
measure the true average tax rate for married individuals: this can be done by assuming that one
spouse takes the other spouse’s earnings as given in making the labor supply decision, but there
is evidence that this produces substantially biased estimates of labor supply parameters
(Alexander M. Gelber 2009). Third, because married women’s labor supply decisions interact
with their husbands’, their labor supply responses cannot be interpreted in terms of a canonical
single-agent model such as Becker (1965). We have also run our regressions on a PSID sample
of single male heads of household and find no evidence of a significant response to the policy
parameters, consistent with existing literature on the labor supply of single men that typically
finds little to no labor supply response to wages or taxes.
We measure labor force participation, usual weekly hours of market and home work,
earned and unearned income, and demographics. Usual weekly hours worked includes hours
worked at both main and extra jobs during the previous calendar year. We construct a binary
variable measuring labor force participation equal to one if the respondent has positive usual
hours worked and equal to zero otherwise.5 As our measure of housework, we use the answer to
the following question: “About how much time do you spend on housework in an average week?
I mean time spent cooking, cleaning, and doing other work around the house.” We use PSID
data beginning in survey year 1976 because that is the first year this question was asked. For
further details about the construction of our dependent variables, please refer to the Data
Appendix. All observations are weighted by the PSID cross-sectional weights.

4

Survey years 1976-2005 contain data on activities in the previous year, i.e. data on years 1975-2004.
In Appendix Table 1 we show that our main results are robust to alternative measures of hours worked and labor
force participation.
5

6

The sample includes 9,242 observations, corresponding to 1,243 individuals. Summary
statistics for the primary variables of interest are in Table 1. It is notable that individuals in the
sample work nearly a full workweek (37.50 hours) on average. 89% of the sample works a
positive number of hours during the year. For a comparison with the CPS, please see the Data
Appendix. Figure 2 shows the trends over time in mean market work and housework among
single women with and without children, using PSID data. Over the period of the primary policy
changes, from the mid-1980s to the mid-to-late 1990s, mean hours worked rose markedly for
single women with children relative to those without children. In other time periods, little
relative change is seen over time in the two groups. The trends in housework in the two groups
look almost like a mirror image of the trends in market work. Housework fell substantially for
single women with children relative to those without during the period of the primary policy
changes, and the relative change in housework in the two groups is over half as large as the
relative change in market work.
Our more detailed time use data use come primarily from the repeated cross sections
assembled by Aguiar and Hurst (2007a), henceforth AH.6 The reader can review their paper for
a detailed description of the data. AH use data from 1965, 1975, 1985, 1992-4 (referred to as
“1993” for concision), and 2003. AH code time use categories as consistently as possible across
cross sections. We make the following changes relative to the AH data. We use data from 19752004 and restrict the sample to unmarried female heads of household aged 25-55 (inclusive). We
exclude the 1965 cross section since it is unrepresentative of the country (with no sample
weights to make it representative), and since it is outside of the time frame we consider in our
analysis of the PSID and CEX. For the 1993 cross-section, number of children is missing,
though a variable measuring the presence of a child is not missing. As a result, we impute it by
assuming that everyone with at least one child has exactly two children.7 The 2003 AH data
come from the American Time Use Survey (ATUS), and we supplement the 2003 data with data
from the 2004 ATUS cross-section to increase sample size and match exactly the final labor
market year in the PSID.
6

Books on time use include Becker and Gilbert Ghez (1975), Thomas Juster and Frank Stafford (1985), John
Robinson and Geoffrey Godbey (1999), and Hamermesh and G.A. Pfann (2005). Valerie Ramey (2008) critiques
some aspects of the AH definition of leisure; AH (2008) respond.
7
The results are not sensitive to other imputation strategies.

7

We follow AH in defining several alternative measures of leisure and home production.
Leisure 1 consists of activities broadly relating to socializing, relaxing, and enjoyment of life.
Leisure 2 includes all of the activities in Leisure 1, plus eating, sleeping, and personal care.
Leisure 3 includes all of the activities in Leisure 2, plus child care. AH define Home Production
as preparing meals, housework, and gardening and pet care. They define Non-Market Work as
Home Production plus time spent obtaining goods and services. Summary statistics from the
time use data are displayed in Table 1. The time use data cover only selected years during the
period 1975-2004, so it is unsurprising to find some minor differences in the summary statistics.
There are two notable differences between the PSID and the time diary data. Market hours of
work are lower in the time diary data than in the PSID, consistent with the standard finding that
time use data show lower hours worked than the PSID or Current Population Survey (Aguiar and
Hurst 2007a). Mean hours of housework is substantially lower in the time diary data; as noted
by John Knowles (2005) and confirmed in our data, housework in the PSID corresponds much
more closely to “home production” in the time diary data.
We use data from the CEX interview sample from 1980-2003 on unmarried female heads
of household aged 25-55 (inclusive). We use the raw CEX data produced by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics measuring expenditures on various disaggregated expenditure categories of
interest, such as expenditures on domestic service, major appliances, and food, as well as
demographics including state of residence and number of children. As in Kerwin Charles, Hurst,
and Nikolai Roussanov (2009), we collapse the quarterly CEX data to the yearly level as
described in the Appendix. Summary statistics for the CEX are shown in Table 1.
Demographics are within the range expected from the PSID, given the differing sampling
methods and time periods covered. Mean yearly expenditures on food are $2,847, and $2,123 is
spent on food at home.
3. Empirical Specifications
In our basic empirical specification in the PSID, we perform an OLS regression of usual
weekly hours of time spent on an activity (market work, housework, or other time) for individual
i in year t on the average net-of-tax share (1-τ), a measure of unearned income Y, a set of

8

demographic control variables X, year fixed effects θ, individual fixed effects Γ, and an error
term ε:
hit = β1(1-τit) + β2Yit + Xitβ + θt + Γi + εit

(1)

The effective average net-of-tax share is in turn defined as the fraction of an individual’s
earnings that she would keep, if she chose to work:
(1-τit) = [Eit – (Tw,it – Tnw,it)]/Eit
where E is earnings if you work, Tw is net taxes paid if you work, and Tnw is net taxes paid if you
do not work. This measures an individual’s incentive to participate in the labor force and is
relevant if an individual makes a choice between staying out of the labor force and participating
in the labor force and earning the pre-tax amount E. This may be the relevant choice if
individuals face fixed costs of work or a discrete menu of options of numbers of hours to work.8
Since earnings-if-work E is unobserved, we impute E by performing a regression of
actual annual earnings on demographic variables, year effects, and an error term:9
ln(Eit) = Xitβ + θt + εit

(2)

The demographics included are a full set of dummies representing all possible values of age,
education, and number of children. Since earnings are approximately lognormally distributed,
we log earnings before including it in the regression; similar but slightly less precise results are
obtained when we use a linear regression to impute earnings. So that zeroes of the dependent
variable can be included in the regression, we add 10 to all values of earnings before logging.10
We obtain very similar results with other choices, such as adding 1 or 100 to all values of
earnings before logging. We then form a measure of imputed earnings for each individual in
each year using the coefficients estimated from this regression. Earnings are imputed for those
with both positive earnings (whose actual earnings could be endogenous) and for those with zero
earnings (whose earnings if they worked are unobserved). This imputation strategy bears
8

Previous work has found a strong extensive margin response to tax incentives for single mothers but no evidence
of an intensive margin response (see the surveys cited above). Consistent with these findings, when we include both
the average and marginal tax rate in our regressions, the coefficient on the marginal tax rate is small and
insignificant, and the coefficient on the average tax rate is large, highly significant, and very similar to the
coefficient estimates in the main specifications. Our specification above omits the wage because wages are not
observed for women who do not work. We later address this by including a measure of the wage in several
specifications.
9
We address self-selection into the labor force in several specifications discussed later.
10
When we exclude zeroes of earnings from the income imputation, we obtain very similar but slightly less precise
results.

9

similarities to the strategies in Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001) and Francine D. Blau and
Lawrence M. Kahn (2007).
Using imputed earnings Eit for each individual in each year, we then construct simulated
average and marginal tax rates using the Taxsim program of the National Bureau of Economic
Research (Daniel Feenberg and Elizabeth Coutts 1993). We include federal and state income
and payroll taxes.11 For calculating welfare benefits, we use earnings to construct the value of
food stamp and AFDC/TANF benefits if the individual does and does not work. These are
constructed using the information on food stamp and AFDC/TANF generosity at different
income levels in the Urban Institute’s TRIM3 database. For constructing these, we incorporate
the same information as Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001). Since all versions of (1) include
individual fixed effects, as well as controls for (at a minimum) the same demographic variables
that appear in the imputation regression (2), identifying variation in constructed tax rates in (1)
will derive from variation across individuals and time in national and state policy changes. We
also investigate a substantial number of variants of (1), described more fully in our results
section. It is worth noting that estimates of the response to taxation in a panel must address
mean reversion in income (Moffitt and Mark O. Wilhelm 2000; Jonathan Gruber and Emmaneul
Saez 2002). As Moffitt and Wilhelm (2000) note, this imputation procedure avoids the problem
of mean reversion.
In the repeated cross sections of data from the CEX, we impute tax rates in the same way,
and our basic specification is the same as (1) but lacks individual fixed effects:
hit = β1(1-τit) + β2Yit + Xitβ + θt + εit

(3)

In the repeated cross sections of data on time use, our specification is the same as (3), but we
lack a consistent measure of unearned income and omit this from the regression:
hit = β1(1-τit) + Xitβ + θt + εit

(4)

To hold the method constant across datasets, we use the vector of coefficients from the PSID to
impute earnings and simulated tax rates in the time use and CEX data.
Limitations

11

Following Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001), we do not use capital income in constructing marginal tax rates. The
results are not sensitive to this choice.

10

This basic strategy has a number of limitations, some of which are addressed in detail in
the results section. It is important to note two remaining issues. First, the labor supply
specification we consider can be derived from a model of utility maximization in a static context
(Richard Blundell and Thomas MaCurdy 1999). This can be interpreted in a dynamic context
only in the presence of myopia or constrained capital markets. We interpret our findings on
consumption in terms of a static Becker model of consumption and time allocation, but we
acknowledge that this interpretation is less clear in a dynamic model in which consumption and
labor supply decisions are made jointly.12 Second, individuals who go from single to married are
excluded from the sample, and those who choose to divorce are included in the sample. These
choices could themselves be influenced by policy variation (see Meyer 2009 for a survey).
James Alm and Leslie Whittington (1995) find substantial responses to the additional tax liability
a couple faces from the decision to get married rather than stay single among cohabitators, who
are excluded from our sample, and little evidence of responses among other groups.
4. Results: Panel Study of Income Dynamics
The main PSID results are in Table 2, organized into four panels. Panel A shows results
from the PSID with a dummy for labor force participation as the outcome and a linear probability
model; Panel B shows usual hours worked as the outcome; Panel C shows usual hours of
housework as the outcome; and Panel D shows residual (non-housework, non-market work) time
as the outcome.13
Basic Estimates
Column 1 of Table 2 shows the results with the basic specification, including individual
and year fixed effects, as well as a full set of dummies representing all possible values of age and
number of children. The effect on labor force participation in Panel A is strong and precisely
estimated. The implied elasticity of participation with respect to the net-of-tax share is .43,
which falls within the existing range of estimates (.35 to 1.7, with a central elasticity of .7; see

12

In a two-stage budgeting framework, controlling for consumption-based income will yield an estimate of the
effect of anticipated wage changes on labor supply. We controlled for food expenditure plus labor earnings as a
proxy for consumption-based income (and also experimented with imputing overall consumption using food
consumption). The coefficient on the net-of-tax share is always within 20% of the specifications shown in the
tables, with a similar standard error. When we instrument for food expenditure plus labor earnings using the welfare
benefits a woman would receive if she did not work (controlling separately for the welfare average tax rate), the
point estimate of the effect of the wage is usually similar but the standard error increases somewhat.
13
The point estimates of the effect of the net-of-tax share on hours worked, housework, and other time always add
to zero, consistent with the requirement of the time budget constraint.

11

Eissa, Henrik Kleven, and Claus Kreiner 2008). Column 1 of Panel B likewise shows a strong
and highly significant effect on usual hours worked, with an elasticity of .43. Column 1 of Panel
C shows that this corresponds to a strong negative effect of the net-of-tax share on usual hours of
housework. The coefficient on the net-of-tax share variable (-14.65) is 78% as large as the
coefficient (18.87) when hours worked was the dependent variable in Panel A Column 1,
suggesting that most of the increase in hours worked is accounted for by decreases in time spent
on housework. Column 1 of Panel D shows a smaller and insignificant decrease in other time,
with a corresponding coefficient of -4.21.14 The coefficient on the net-of-tax share when
housework is the dependent variable is significantly more negative than the coefficient on the
net-of-tax share when other time is the dependent variable (p<.01).15
Specification Checks
We now turn to various specification checks. Throughout all of these robustness checks,
the same pattern of results will hold: a strong positive effect of the net-of-tax share on market
work, a negative effect on housework that accounts for around half or more of the increase in
market work—with a central estimate of this fraction around two-thirds—and a negative and
insignificant effect on other time. Column 2 of Table 2 addresses the possibility of self-selection.
We perform a Heckman selection correction and add the inverse Mills ratio to the right-handside of the imputation regression (2).16 We identify the selection term by calculating the average
net-of-tax share that an individual with their true number of children and with average income
(over all individuals in the sample) would face in a given year. We add this tax rate to the first
stage predicting labor force participation but omit it from the second stage. We then estimate (2)
and compute imputed incomes for each individual, on the basis of which we calculate imputed
net-of-tax shares using the method described in Section 3. Column 2 shows results using the

14

When we remove individual fixed effects from the regressions and treat the data as repeated cross sections, we
obtain highly significant results with coefficients that are usually around 65 to 70% of the size of the estimates with
fixed effects. See the data appendix for further discussion.
15
We consider the baseline estimates to be a central specification for a number of reasons. The baseline
specification includes the longest possible time period, does not include many controls (leading to efficiency and
precision), and generates broadly similar results to all other specifications except two: controlling for extra fixed
effects (Column 9 of Table 2) and the IV for the average net-of-tax share (Column 6 of Table 2). Controlling for
extra fixed effects involves a substantial efficiency loss because of the hundreds of extra independent variables; the
coefficient estimates are correspondingly less precise. The IV for the net-of-tax share could be considered a second
central specification but cannot be performed in the time use and expenditure results because they are not panel
datasets and therefore lack a measure of a person’s average income over several years.
16
This is similar to the imputation in Eissa and Hoynes (2004).

12

selection-corrected average tax rate, which yields similar results to Column 1, with somewhat
larger point estimates.
Column 3 adds to the regression a measure of the incentives created by transfer
programs. We control for the “welfare average tax rate,” defined as welfare transfers if an
individual works minus welfare transfers if an individual does not work, as a fraction of imputed
earnings. “Welfare” includes both food stamps and AFDC/TANF transfers.17 The coefficient on
the net-of-tax share is nearly unchanged from Column 1. Welfare benefits do not have a
significant effect on labor supply or home production, though the standard error does not rule out
a substantial effect. Column 4 limits the sample to the period prior to 1993, when state welfare
waivers were first implemented, in order to isolate tax variation from variation in welfare
program parameters other than monetary benefits. We again find a similarly-sized and
significant effect on housework but a larger point estimate of the effect on market work and other
time.
In Column 5, we recognize that non-labor income is not exogenously determined and
instrument for it using the size of welfare benefits that a woman would receive if she did not
work. We recognize that welfare benefits have both price and income effects on labor supply,
and so we also control separately for the welfare average tax rate from Column 3. A limitation
of this approach is that the welfare average tax rate is separately identified from the instrument,
welfare benefits if an individual does not work, solely off functional form. This must be traded
off against the gain of a plausibly exogenous source of variation in non-labor income. The
results are again similar to those in Column 1, with a slightly larger fraction of the change in
market work accounted for by the change in housework. While the welfare average tax rate has
only a small impact on labor supply and other time use outcomes, it is important to note that the
point estimate of the coefficient on non-labor income implies that increases in welfare benefits
have a substantial negative income effect on labor supply.
In Column 6, we address the fact that our measure of the average net-of-tax share is a
noisy measure of the true fraction of earnings taken away from a given individual, both because
17

Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001) find no evidence for an effect of Medicaid benefits on labor supply.

13

our imputation may not measure the true earnings potential of any given individual, and because
we do not have administrative data on variables such as taxable income and number of
dependents. To address measurement error, we form a second measure of the average net-of-tax
share that an individual faces. Our second measure of the average net-of-tax share is calculated
using an individual’s average labor income over the full sample period. In a given year, we
calculate the average net-of-tax share that each woman would face given that she earned her
average labor income over the full sample period and faced the true tax schedule in that year.
We then instrument for this measure of the average net-of-tax share using the measure based on
imputed earnings that we have used in Columns 1 and 3-5. This makes a large difference to the
estimated coefficients, more than doubling them relative to Column 1, and moving the implied
elasticity of participation a bit above the midpoint of elasticities previously estimated in the
literature. The larger coefficient estimates suggest that, in fact, measurement error may be
leading to attenuation bias in other specifications. It is important to note that the central
conclusion that we take away from the tables—that at least half of the increase in market work
came from housework—still holds.
Column 7 instruments for the net-of-tax wage using the net-of-tax rate. Since wages are
not observed for those who do not work, we impute wages using demographics. We perform
regression (2) for labor force participants with the hourly wage rate as the dependent variable,
where the hourly wage rate is constructed by dividing yearly earnings by yearly hours worked.
The endogenous variable is then the imputed wage rate multiplied by the net-of-tax rate
constructed using average earnings as in Column 6. As in Column 6, the instrument is the netof-tax rate constructed using earnings imputed with demographics.18 The coefficient on the netof-tax wage represents the effect on hours worked or hours of housework of a $1 increase in the
net-of-tax wage. While they are scaled differently, the results in Column 7 are similar to those
we have found previously, both in terms of the estimated elasticities and in the sense that most of
the increase in hours worked is accounted for by the change in hours of housework, with an
insignificant effect on residual time.

18

Note that division bias should not affect the results, both because we use the imputed (rather than actual) wage,
and because the instrument is not affected by division bias.

14

In our later discussion of our results, we interpret an increase in the net-of-tax rate as
representing an increase in the net-of-tax wage. Single women with and without children
respond similarly to economic shocks such as changes in the unemployment rate.19 It is
therefore reasonable that demand shocks to the two groups changed their wages in similar ways.
Because they are competing in similar labor markets, it is unlikely that the incidence of the
policy changes on the pre-tax wage was different in the two groups. As a piece of evidence that
the pre-tax wage was not positively correlated with the net-of-tax share (due to tax incidence or
demand shocks), we regressed pre-tax hourly wages of labor market participants on the imputed
net-of-tax share, plus age, number of child, and year fixed effects, and found a small and
insignificant negative coefficient on the imputed net-of-tax share.
To investigate further the responsiveness of hours worked with respect to the net-of-tax
wage, we ran a selection-corrected Tobit. Following the procedure suggested in Wooldridge
(2002), we first ran a Tobit of hours worked on the actual net-of-tax hourly wage rate and the
basic control variables (omitting individual fixed effects and treating the data as repeated cross
sections); for observations with positive hours, we obtained the Tobit residuals; for observations
with positive hours, we regressed the net-of-tax hourly wage on the basic control variables, the
Tobit residuals, and the average net-of-tax share computed using an individual’s actual number
of children and the average income over all years in the full sample (the last of which provides
the identifying variation); obtained the fitted values; and finally ran a Tobit of hours worked on
the basic controls (omitting individual fixed effects) and the fitted values. This effectively
constitutes an entirely different way of assigning net-of-tax wages to non-participants, than our
imputation procedure for assigning tax rates in the main specification; the method for assigning
the net-of-tax rate here is the standard selection correction technique. The estimated elasticity of
hours worked with respect to the net-of-tax wage, computed at the mean, is .37 (with a standard
error of .16). This is remarkably similar to our baseline elasticity of .43.
Column 8 controls for various other factors that could impact labor force and housework
activity: the minimum wage in the state, state GDP, the presence of a welfare waiver, average
labor income for an individual over the full sample period interacted with year, and education19

Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001) discuss the validity of this control group in detail.

15

by-year fixed effects. We used five education groups: no high school diploma, high school
diploma, some college, college graduate, and post- graduate. The interaction of education group
with year fixed effects controls for demand shocks potentially arising from sources such as skillbiased technological change. We also tried including a dummy for whether states had a time
limit for welfare receipt, which is highly correlated with the waiver variable and made little
difference to the results. The results are remarkably similar to the basic set of results in Column
1.
Column 9 adds a very stringent set of controls: number-of-child-by-year fixed effects
(interacting dummies for all possible numbers of children with dummies for each year), state-byyear fixed effects, and number-of-child-by-state fixed effects. All told, the regression has well
over 1,000 dummy variables. Despite all of these controls, the results still show a significant
positive impact of the net-of-tax share on labor force participation and a significant negative
impact on housework (as well as a significant positive impact on yearly hours worked, which is
not shown). The coefficients fall substantially relative to Column 1, but as before, the effect of
taxes on hours of housework is greater than half of the effect of taxes on hours of market work.
This is particularly noteworthy since the number-of-child-by-year fixed effects take out all of the
variation displayed in Figures 1 and 2. In other words, we know that usual hours worked
increased substantially for single women with children relative to single women without children
over the sample period, and that the net-of-tax share rose for single women with children relative
to single women without children over this period. By putting in number-of-child-by-year fixed
effects, we investigate whether other sources of variation also drive increased hours worked and
decreased housework. As shown in Figure 3, the net-of-tax share rose much more for lowincome women with children than for higher-income women with children.20 The figure shows
that, correspondingly, the change in market work was substantially more positive, and the change
in housework substantially more negative but smaller in absolute value than the change in market
work, for high-income women with children than for low-income women with children.
We also performed other robustness checks. We performed the earnings imputation
instead by matching labor market participants and non-participants through a propensity score
20

Education and age appear in our imputation regression and drive substantial variation in imputed income.

16

(calculated through a logistic regression of a labor force participation dummy on dummies for
age, education, number of children, race, and year). We then replaced the net-of-tax share of a
non-participant with the net-of-tax share of the participant to which she was matched and used
this as our measure of the non-participant’s net-of-tax share. To take account of higher moments
of the distribution of average tax rates conditional on demographics—rather than only the
mean—we performed quantile regressions of earnings on our demographic variables for the 10th,
20th, 30th…90th, 99th quantile of the earnings distribution. We then imputed income at each of
these quantiles, calculated the implied average net-of-tax share at each quantile, and for each
individual in each year averaged together the implied net-of-tax shares over all quantiles. We
then used this measure of the average net-of-tax share in (1). We obtained similar results to the
baseline specification, less precise but still highly significant. We also experimented with various
combinations of the specifications in Columns 1-9. To address the possibility that an
individual’s number of children could be endogenous to tax policy, we calculated the maximum
number of children that an individual has over the full sample period, rather than using the actual
number of children that the individual has at a given point in time, and use this (maximum)
number of children to calculate the net-of-tax share in each year. We also tried controlling for
state welfare waivers and their interaction with number of children. We removed individuals
who are living with adult relatives (who might also be doing housework). Through all of these
specifications, we continued to obtain similar results. Finally, we used the log of the net-of-tax
share (or the log of the net-of-tax wage in the relevant specifications), rather than entering it
linearly, and estimated similar elasticities.
In Column 1 of Appendix Table 1, we show the results when yearly hours of market
work is the dependent variable. Putting the coefficient on the average net-of-tax rate (839.17) in
weekly terms by dividing by 52 yields an estimated a weekly increase of 16.14, which is similar
to the coefficient estimate (18.87) in the baseline specficiation. We defined labor force
participation as positive usual weekly hours of work, in order to be consistent with the definition
of our hours worked variable. In Column 2 of Appendix Table 1, we instead define labor force
participation as “currently working” and obtain similar results. In Column 3, we define labor
force participation as positive hours of work over the course of the year and again obtain similar
results.
17

Heterogeneity Analysis
Table 3 shows an analysis of the heterogeneity of the effects across population groups.
Individuals under 40 show a larger reaction to the net-of-tax share than those over 40. We split
the sample into women with and without children. The labor supply elasticity is substantially
higher in the group without children. Interestingly, for women with children, the point estimates
show that nearly all of the increase in market work is accounted for by decreases in housework,
whereas for women without children, most of the increase in market work is accounted for by
decreases in residual time. Since we obtain significant hours worked responses when we run the
regression on each of these groups separately, this again demonstrates that our results rely on
more variation than the comparison over time of outcomes and tax rates among single women
with and without children. In results not shown, we split the sample into halves by imputed
income, in order to assess whether the policy changes tended to affect those expected to be in
lower or higher income ranges. The point estimates suggest that among lower-income
individuals, housework responds to taxation more than among higher-income individuals
(similar to the results in Meyer and Sullivan 2008).
Correlations between Housework and Market Work
To investigate how market work and housework relate in the summary statistics, we
regressed usual hours of market work on a dummy for participating in the labor force, individual
fixed effects, year fixed effects, and the controls from our basic specification; in a second
regression, we performed this regression but with usual hours of housework as the dependent
variable; and in a third regression, we performed this regression but with residual time as the
dependent variable. The results are shown in Columns 4 through 6 of Appendix Table 1. When
individuals participate in the labor force, the decrease in their housework time accounts for only
a small fraction of the increase in their hours of market work. We obtain very similar results
when we omit individual fixed effects.
This finding is noteworthy for two reasons. First, this is the opposite result from what we
obtain using variation coming from policy changes, highlighting the important role that these
changes play in identifying the results. A potential reason for the divergence is unobserved
heterogeneity: individuals who do larger amounts of market work also tend to do larger amounts
of housework. It is likely that in a cross-section, employed individuals have substantially
18

different tastes for market work and leisure than individuals who are not employed. The results
in Columns 4 to 6, furthermore, are quite similar when we do and do not include individual fixed
effects. This leads us to believe that the fixed effects estimates in Columns 4 to 6 are also
strongly driven by (time-varying) unobserved heterogeneity. Second, one possible objection to
the main results of the paper is that individuals could inaccurately report a roughly constant sum
of housework and market work, perhaps because they feel they ought not admit that they do little
work in either the market or the home. Column 5 shows that reported housework is only slightly
lower among labor force participants than among non-participants, so such a story cannot explain
our main results.
5. Results: Time Use Data
We next examine in greater detail the effect of taxes on time use using the repeated cross
sections of time diary data assembled by AH (2007a). The basic results are shown in Table 4.
Columns 1 and 2 show that as in the PSID, labor force participation and hours of market work
rise significantly in response to an increase in the net-of-tax share. The coefficient on the net-oftax share is somewhat higher than the basic specification in Column 1, Panel B of Table 2, but
the results are well within the range estimated in the PSID. Column 3 shows that housework
falls in response to an increase in the incentive to participate in the labor force. The point
estimate of the fall in housework is insignificantly smaller than in the PSID, which is
unsurprising since mean hours of housework is lower in the time diary data. Similarly, the
broader AH measure of “Home Production” falls substantially and significantly, with a
coefficient over half the size of the coefficient in Column 2. The effect on “Non-Market Work,”
equal to Home Production plus time spent obtaining goods and services, is similarly sized and
significantly different from zero. Columns 6 through 8 show the effect on AH’s various
measures of leisure, Leisure 1 through Leisure 3. The estimated effect on leisure is always
negative but is only marginally significant for Leisure 2. We cannot reject at conventional
significance levels that the effect on home production is different than the effect on any of the
measures of leisure.
Columns 9 through 12 show other outcomes of interest. Time spent preparing and eating
meals falls significantly, with a coefficient of substantial size. Interestingly, time spent with
children increases insignificantly, with a standard error that rules out a large decrease in time
19

spent with children. To the extent that this regression is identified off the comparison over time
of women with and without children, this result must be interpreted with caution because women
without children spend little time with children. To address this concern, we estimated the
regression only for women with children. This regression also showed no evidence that child
care decreased significantly: with a sample size of 2,108, the coefficient on the net-of-tax share
was -1.61, and the standard error was 9.92. “Hard-working” individuals are often thought to
sleep less than “lazy” individuals. In light of the view of some that “idle” single mothers need
motivation from policy to “work harder,” it is noteworthy that sleep is insignificantly changed by
an increase in the net-of-tax share.21 Finally, eating, sleeping, and personal care are sometimes
considered together as a “tertiary” category alongside home production and leisure (e.g. Burda,
Hamermesh and Philippe Weil 2008). Column 12 shows that this category falls insignificantly.
6. Results: Expenditure Data
Table 5 shows results using expenditure data.22 Since time spent preparing and eating
food fell in response to an increased incentive to participate in the labor force, it is of interest to
test how expenditures on food changed.23 In Column 1 of Table 5, we use PSID data on food
expenditures and find a substantial positive but insignificant effect of the net-of-tax share on
food expenditures. Columns 2 through 7 rely on data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey.
Column 2 shows that food expenditures have a small negative and insignificant response to an
increased net-of-tax share. We next break down food expenditures into their component parts:
food at home (primarily food purchased at grocery stores), food away from home (primarily food
purchased from restaurants), and food at work. Column 3 shows that food away from home—
which seems the most likely to substitute for time spent preparing food—rises significantly.
Food at home falls significantly, while food at work rises significantly (Columns 4 and 5). We
investigate expenditures on domestic services and major appliances in Columns 6 and 7, since
these seem most likely to be substitutable with home time.24 The point estimates indicate that
both rise, although the coefficients are insignificant. Overall, a reasonable conclusion from the
data on expenditures is that they usually respond in the expected directions, but that the sample
21

Jeff E. Biddle and Hamermesh (1990) explore the relationship between market work and sleep.
When we run regressions in the Consumer Expenditure Survey of hours worked or labor force participation on the
net-of-tax rate, analogous to those we ran in the PSID and time diary settings, we obtain similar results to those
shown in Tables 2 through 4.
23
Thomas DeLeire and Helen Levy (2005) examine food expenditures by single mothers.
24
The estimated effect on child care expenditures is very similar to the effect on expenditures on domestic services.
22

20

size is usually not large enough to detect significant responses and that there should
correspondingly large uncertainty about the true magnitude of the effects.
Comparison with the Becker Model
The rise (or insignificant response) of food expenditures, in combination with the
decrease in the time use data on time spent preparing and eating food, can be seen as consistent
with the Becker model.25 In the Becker model, individuals derive utility U(Z1, Z2,…Zm) from
consumption of commodities Z1, Z2,…Zm. Each of the Zi, in turn, is produced using goods xi and
time Ti: Zi=fi(xi, Ti). This utility function is maximized subject to the time constraint
(T1+…Tm+Tw=T, where T is the time endowment and Tw is the time spent on market work) and
the budget constraint (p1x1+…pmxm=V+Tww, where pi are prices, w is the wage, and V is
unearned income). We consider the version of the Becker model in which substitution between
goods and time is possible in producing a commodity (i.e. production of the commodity is not
Leontief in goods and time). As Becker (1965) notes, for a given amount of a commodity—
holding Zi constant—a compensated wage increase will cause xi/Ti to rise. If the wage change
causes substitution across commodities, then it is possible that the associated change in the level
of Zi could cause a fall in goods relative to time, if f is not homothetic and this effect of the scale
of Zi on the ratio of goods to time is large enough to overwhelm the substitution effect between
goods and time holding Zi constant. In the leading case of a homothetic production function f,
the ratio of time to goods is invariant to the scale of Zi, and so it is unambiguously the case that a
compensated wage increase causes a rise in goods relative to time:26,27

d ( xi / Ti )
|u > 0 .
dw

We observe pixi in the data, but in a competitive market, pi should be the same in our
treatment and control groups. Thus, if we observe that pixi/Ti rises, we interpret this as an
25

See Hamermesh (2008) on the substitutability of goods and time in producing consumption of food.
This more generally holds when the effect of the scale of Zi does not cause goods to fall too much relative to time.
27
The Becker model prediction is about the time and market goods responses to a compensated wage change.
Policy-induced changes in labor supply and other time use outcomes along the extensive margin are typically
considered compensated changes (see e.g. Eissa, Kleven, and Kreiner 2004). It is nonetheless worth noting that we
investigated the effect of unearned income on time spent eating and preparing food in the 2003 ATUS cross section
(since most time use cross sections lack a measure of unearned income). We found a positive and insignificant
effect of unearned income, with a coefficient of .00000007 and a standard error of .0000008, which would imply
that income effects are very small. We then calculated the compensated elasticity of food expenditures, using the
income effect implied by the coefficient on capital income as a measure of the income effect, and found that the
compensated elasticity is insignificantly different from zero in both the PSID and Consumer Expenditure Survey.
These findings are therefore likewise supportive of the Becker model.
26

21

increase in xi/Ti. Expenditures on the market input (food bought in the market) should rise
relative to the time input (time spent preparing and eating food) into a commodity (food
consumption).28 If the initial level of xi differs across the treatment and comparison groups, then
an equal change in the price level for each group should cause a larger response of expenditures
in the group with the larger initial level of xi. To address this issue, we estimate the response of
log food expenditures to the net-of-tax rate in Appendix Table 2. Importantly, we find that log
food expenditures in the PSID rise significantly in response to an increase in the net-of-tax rate,
which is stronger evidence in favor of the Becker framework.29
7. Conclusion
We examine how income taxes affect time allocation. We find that when individuals
keep a greater fraction of their earnings when participating in the labor force, they work
substantially more: the baseline estimates show that the elasticity of hours worked with respect to
the average net-of-tax share is .43. This represents one of the first examinations of the effect of
tax incentives on hours worked using panel data and individual fixed effects. We find that this
corresponds to a substantial and significant decrease in housework: across our specifications, the
point estimates center around showing that two-thirds of the increase in hours worked
corresponds to a decrease in housework. These results are robust to a wide variety of
specification checks in the PSID and also hold in repeated cross sections of data on time use. In
the repeated cross-sections of data, we find a bit of evidence that “leisure” time decreases
significantly in response to an increase in the incentive to join the labor force. We also find
some evidence that expenditures on goods that appear substitutable with housework increase in
response to an increased incentive to enter the labor force.
Our results have implications for several areas of economic inquiry. The finding that the
increase in market work corresponds largely to a decrease in housework suggests that public
policies affecting labor force incentives largely shift people from one productive activity to
another. In light of the fact that the policy reforms pursued over the period in question were
28

The Becker model also predicts that as the net-of-tax wage increases, individuals’ consumption of earningsintensive commodities should fall relative to consumption of less earnings-intensive commodities. However, we do
not directly observe the relative earnings intensities of different commodities.
29
We do not estimate the response of the log of other expenditure categories to the tax rate because they are often
equal to zero, whereas food expenditures are rarely equal to zero. Adding 1 or 10 or 100 to the dependent variable
before logging it yields similar results to those shown in Appendix Table 2.

22

motivated in part by decreasing the “unproductive” activity of “idle” single mothers, it is notable
that the policies in fact mainly shifted individuals from work at home to work in the market.
Externalities or internalities from time use decisions would lead to efficiency consequences of
the housework and other time outcomes examined. The results suggest that taxes are not neutral
with respect to non-market time, as housework changes more than other non-market time.
When the net-of-tax rate rises, implying that the net-of-tax wage rises, food expenditures
rise significantly or change insignificantly, but the fall in the time spent preparing and eating
food is substantial and (marginally) significant. Collectively, we interpret this evidence as
consistent with the classic Becker (1965) model. The results in the time use data are consistent
with the model of Reuben Gronau (1977), which, in the presence of homothetic preferences and
fixed costs of work, predicts a decrease in both home production and leisure in response to entry
into the labor force induced by a decrease in the tax rate.
Our results are perhaps surprising in view of the Burda and Hamermesh (2009) finding
that employed individuals enjoy substantially less leisure time, and only a bit less home
production time, than the unemployed, which is similar to the regression results in our Appendix
Table 1.30 Our findings are supportive of the literature in macroeconomics, spawned by Jess
Benhabib, Richard Rogerson, and Randall Wright (1991), that explains the magnitude of
business cycle fluctuations in part through substitutability between market and home goods.
Following their analysis, if utility is defined as
e
U i = ln[ai c mi
+ (1 − ai )c nie ] + vi (1 − hmi − hni )

where cmi is consumption of market goods equal to net-of-tax earnings wihmi(1-τi) (where wi is the
wage and τi is the tax rate), cni is consumption of non-market goods, hmi is market work, hni is
non-market work, vi is the utility of leisure, and all agents have the same production technology

c nie = Bhni , then the first order condition for agent i implies
1 − ai
e
1
e
1
ln(
)
ln( B) −
ln(wi ) −
ln(1 − τ i ) +
ln(hmi / hni ) =
e −1
e −1
ai
e −1
e −1
30

Burda and Hamermesh (2009) do find, however, that in areas in which unemployment has suddenly risen,
individuals offset the loss of market work with an increase in home production. Richard Freeman and Ronald
Schettkat (2005) find that individuals work more in the market and less at home in the U.S. than in Europe, but
Alberto Alesina, Edward Glaeser, and Bruce Sacerdote (2006) and Burda, Hamermesh, and Weil (2008) find little
evidence for this.

23

Assuming that the final term is a constant that is taken out by individual fixed effects, and that
the wage wi changes equally for individuals in the treatment and control groups in the empirical
analysis (as our data bear out) so that the wage term can be treated as a constant, we can estimate
e/(e-1) by dividing the elasticity of market work with respect to the net-of-tax share by the
elasticity of housework with respect to the net-of-tax share. Our baseline estimates of the
relevant elasticities imply that e is .59,31 which is remarkably close to their estimate of .60.32
This implies that the elasticity of substitution 1/(1-e) of market and home consumption is 2.43.
Our baseline estimates also allow us to calculate that the changes in tax policy documented here
should have caused a decrease of 3.50 hours per week of housework, 43% of the actual decrease.
In light of the fact that microeconomic studies tend to estimate smaller labor supply elasticities
than macroeconomic studies (Edward Prescott 2004; Rogerson and Johanna Wallenius 2009), it
is noteworthy that we examine a panel of 30 years and estimate an elasticity of labor supply that
is still well below what is typically estimated in studies in the macroeconomics literature.
Future work could fruitfully examine a number of further questions. Further work on a
dynamic model of labor supply, housework, leisure, and consumption decisions would be
relevant. Valuing the output of housework or home production would be relevant to welfare
analysis. The estimates could be used as inputs into a calculation of equivalence weights in lifecycle analysis (e.g. John Laitner and Daniel Silverman 2005). Finally, investigating how public
policy affects married couples’ decisions about housework, labor supply, leisure, and
consumption would be a natural extension of the issues examined in this paper.

31

When we implement this specification more directly by regressing the log of the ratio of market work to
housework on the log of the net-of-tax share and the controls in our baseline specification (adding one to both
market work and housework before logging so that we include zeroes in the regression), we estimate a coefficient on
the log net-of-tax share of 2.39 with a standard error of .39, implying that the elasticity of substitution is 3.39.
Adding 5 to both market work and housework before logging yields an elasticity of substitution of 2.56.
32
Peter Rupert, Rogerson, and Wright (1995) estimate an elasticity of substitution between home and market goods
for single women of 1.8. Aguiar and Hurst (2007b) estimate an elasticity of substitution between time and goods in
home production for single women of 1.95.

24

References
Aguiar, Mark, and Erik Hurst. 2007a. “Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time
over Five Decades.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122: 969-1006.
Aguiar, Mark, and Erik Hurst. 2007b. “Life-Cycle Prices and Production.” American
Economic Review, 97: 1533-1559.
Alesina, Alberto, Edward Glaeser, and Bruce Sacerdote. 2006. “Work and Leisure in the U.S.
and Europe: Why So Different?” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005.
Alm, James, and Leslie A. Whittington. 1995. “Does the Income Tax Affect Marital
Decisions?” National Tax Journal, 48: 565-572.
Becker, Gary. 1965. “A Theory of the Allocation of Time.” Economic Journal, 125: 493-517.
Becker, Gary, and Gilbert Ghez. 1975. The Allocation of Time and Goods Over the Life Cycle.
Chicago, IL: NBER.
Benhabib, Jess, Richard Rogerson, and Randall Wright. 1991. “Homework in
Macroeconomics: Household Production and Aggregate Fluctuations.” Journal of Political
Economy, 99: 1166-1187.
Biddle, Jeff E., and Daniel Hamermesh. 1990. “Sleep and the Allocation of Time.” Journal of
Political Economy, 98: 922-943.
Blank, Rebecca M. 2002. “Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States.” Journal of
Economic Literature, 50: 1105-1166.
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2007. “Changes in the Labor Supply Behavior of
Married Women: 1980-2000.” Journal of Labor Economics, 25: 393-438.
Blundell, Richard, and Thomas MaCurdy. 1999. “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
Approaches.” Handbook of Labor Economics, 3: 1559-1695.
Burda, Michael, and Daniel Hamermesh. 2009. “Unemployment, Market Work, and
Household Production.” NBER Working Paper No.14676.
Burda, Michael, Daniel Hamermesh and Philippe Weil. 2008. “The Distribution of Total
Work in the EU and US.” In Working Hours and Job Sharing in the EU and USA: Are
Americans Crazy? Are Europeans Lazy? eds. Tito Boeri, Michael Burda and Francis
Kramarz. New York: Oxford University Press.
Charles, Kerwin, Erik Hurst, and Nikolai Roussanov. 2009. “Conspicuous Consumption and
Race.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124: 425–467.
DeLeire, Thomas, and Helen Levy. 2005. “The Material Well-Being of Single Mother
Households in the 1980s and 1990s: What Can We Learn from Food Spending?”
National Poverty Center Working Paper No. 01-05.
Eissa, Nada, and Hilary Hoynes. 2004. “Taxes and the Labor Market Participation of Married
Couples: the Earned Income Tax Credit.” Journal of Public Economics, 88: 1931-1958.
Eissa, Nada, and Hilary Hoynes. 2006. “Behavioral Responses to Taxes: Lessons from the
EITC and Labor Supply.” Tax Policy and the Economy, 20: 73-110.
Eissa, Nada, Henrik Kleven, and Claus Kreiner. 2008. “Evaluation of Four Tax Reforms in
the United States: Labor Supply and Welfare Effects for Single Mothers.” Journal of
Public Economics, 92: 795-816.
Eissa, Nada, and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 1996. “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income
Tax Credit.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111: 605-637.
Feenberg, Daniel, and Elisabeth Coutts. 1993. “An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model.”
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 12: 189-194.
Gelber, Alexander. 2009. “Taxation and Family Labor Supply.” NBER Working Paper.

25

Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri, and Mehmet Yorukoglu. 2005. “Engines of
Liberation,” Review of Economic Studies, 72: 109-133.
Gronau, Reuben. 1977. “Leisure, Home Production, and Work — the Theory of the Allocation
of Time Revisited.” Journal of Political Economy, 85: 1099-1123.
Gruber, Jonathan and Emmanuel Saez. 2002. “The Elasticity of Taxable Income: Evidence
and Implications.” Journal of Public Economics, 84: 1-32.
Hamermesh, Daniel. 2008. “Direct Estimates of Household Production.” Economics Letters,
98: 31–34.
Hamermesh, Daniel, and G.A. Pfann. 2005. The Economics of Time Use. Amsterdam,
Netherlands: Elsevier.
Hotz, V. Joseph, and John Karl Scholz. 2003. “The Earned Income Tax Credit.” In MeansTested Transfer Programs in the United States, ed. Robert Moffitt. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press and NBER.
Juster, Thomas, and Frank Stafford, eds. 1985. Time, Goods and Well-Being. Ann Arbor, MI:
University of Michigan Press.
Knowles, John. 2005. “Why are Married Men Working So Much?” University of Pennsylvania
Working Paper.
Laitner, John, and Daniel Silverman. 2005. “Estimating Life-cycle Parameters from
Consumption Behavior at Retirement.” NBER Working Paper 11163.
Meyer, Bruce. 2009. “The Effects of the EITC and Recent Reforms.” In Tax Policy and the
Economy, Jeffrey Brown, ed. Boston, MA: M.I.T. Press.
Meyer, Bruce, and Dan Rosenbaum. 2001. “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the
Labor Supply of Single Mothers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116: 1063-1114.
Meyer, Bruce, and James X. Sullivan. 2008. “Changes in the Consumption, Income, and WellBeing of Single Mother Headed Families.” American Economic Review, 98: 221-241.
Meyer, Bruce, and James X. Sullivan. 2004. “The Effects of Welfare and Tax Reform: The
Material Well-Being of Single Mothers in the 1980s and 1990s.” Journal of Public
Economics, 88: 1387-1420.
Moffitt, Robert. 2003. “The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program.” In MeansTested Transfer Programs in the United States, ed. Robert Moffitt. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press and NBER.
Moffitt, Robert. 2006. “Welfare Work Requirements with Paternalistic Government
Preferences.” Economic Journal, 116: 441-458.
Moffitt, Robert, and Mark O. Wilhelm. 2000. “Taxation and the Labor Supply Decision of the
Affluent.” In Does Atlas Shrug? Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich, ed. Joel
Slemrod. Cambridge, MA: Russell Sage Foundation and Harvard University Press.
Prescott, Edward. 2004. “Why Do Americans Work So Much More than Europeans?” Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 28: 2-13.
Ramey, Valerie. 2008. “How Much has Leisure Really Increased Since 1965?” UC San Diego
Working Paper.
Rogerson, Richard, and Johanna Wallenius. 2009. “Micro and Macro Elasticities in a Life
Cycle Model with Taxes.” Journal of Economic Theory, forthcoming.
Robinson, John, and Geoffrey Godbey. 1999. Time for Life. University Park, PA:
Pennsylvania State University Press.
Rupert, Peter, Richard Rogerson, and Randall Wright. 1995. “Estimating Substitution
Elasticities in Household Production Models.” Economic Theory, 6(1): 179–93.

26

Data Appendix
Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID): The PSID is a large representative longitudinal survey that
contains detailed information on a wide array of topics including demographics, labor market
participation, housework, and income. Individuals in family units were surveyed ever year from 19681997 and every two years thereafter. Our analysis covers survey years 1976-2005 (excluding survey year
1982) because hours of housework are consistently measured only during these years. The sample is
restricted to members of and movers into the core sample but excludes the poverty sample. We focus on
unmarried and non-cohabitating female heads of household age 25-55 who are present in the PSID for at
least two years.33 We further exclude observations that have allocated values for hours of work and
housework. Weights are used throughout to ensure the sample remains representative.
The PSID asks for usual weekly hours of housework as follows: “About how much time do you spend on
housework in an average week? I mean time spent cooking, cleaning, and doing other work around the
house.” We measure usual weekly hours worked in the previous calendar year. We use responses to
several questions to construct this variable. The PSID asks about work at a main job in the previous
calendar year. The following is the typical main job hours question: “We’re interested in how you spent
your time from January through December <previous calendar year>…On the average, how many hours a
week did you work on your main job(s).” The PSID then asks respondents about extra jobs: “Did you
have an extra job or other way of making money in addition to your main job in <previous calendar
year>?...On the average, how many hours a week did you work on this job?” Responses to the main and
extra jobs questions are then added together to form our measure of total usual weekly hours worked per
week.34
The mean of our measure of usual weekly hours worked is 37.47, whereas for the same population over
the same set of years in the Current Population Survey (CPS), the mean of usual weekly hours worked is
32.32. This discrepancy is largely explained by labor force participation rates: over the full sample
period, in the CPS, 81.31% of the population of female heads of household aged 25-55 reported doing
any work last year, whereas 89.25% of the sample reported doing any work last year in the PSID. In light
of these discrepancies, it is worth noting that despite these differences in the level of hours worked, the
trend over time in hours worked in the full sample is extremely similar in the PSID and CPS, as is the
relative trend among women with and without children. Indeed, when we run the same set of regressions
on the same sample population in the CPS with hours worked as the dependent variable and the net-of-tax
share as the independent variable (as well as the other regressors that appear in the PSID except
individual fixed effects), we obtain similar results to those we obtain in the PSID when we remove
individual fixed effects from the estimation. The coefficient on the net-of-tax share when a dummy for
labor force participation is the dependent variable is .33 in the CPS (standard error .0097; N = 365,703);
the coefficient in the PSID when we remove individual fixed effects (but control for education dummies
that appear in the imputation but are absorbed by the fixed effects in the main specification) is .34
(standard error .08; N = 9,242). The coefficient on the net-of-tax share when usual hours worked is the
dependent variable is 11.15 in the CPS (standard error .43; N = 365,703); the coefficient in the PSID

33

Our sample excludes what the PSID calls “permanent” cohabitators defined as having lived together for at least a
year or present for two or more waves of data collection. There remain a small number of “temporary” cohabitators
in our sample.
34
Before asking about work at main and extra jobs, the PSID first asks respondents to report current employment
status. Regardless of the answer to the current employment status question, the PSID then asks the questions above
about previous calendar year work experience, but respondents’ answers are coded as one variable if the respondent
is currently employed, and a second variable if the respondent is not currently employed. We naturally combine
these responses (for those currently employed and not) to form our measure of previous calendar year work hours.

27

when we remove individual fixed effects (but control for education dummies) is 12.89 (standard error
4.35; N = 9,242).
The PSID also contains a constructed measure of total annual hours in the previous calendar year. Total
annual hours is defined as the sum over all jobs of the product of total weeks worked and usual weekly
hours worked plus total annual overtime hours. We define a binary variable for labor force participation
as equal to one if the respondent has positive usual hours worked and zero otherwise. We define
“residual time” in the PSID as total hours in a week (168) less usual hours of housework less usual hours
of market work.
Time Use Data: We draw on four cross-sections of time use data assembled and described in great detail
in Aguiar and Hurst (2007a).35 These data ask respondents to account for time spent during the previous
day. We use data from the 1975 Time Use in Economic and Social Accounts, the 1985 Americans’ Use
of Time, the 1993 National Human Activity Pattern Survey, and 2003 American Time Use Survey. We
choose these datasets because they are nationally representative and overlap with the period of analysis in
the PSID. We also add the 2004 year of the American Time Use Survey to increase sample size and
correspond exactly with the final year of analysis in the PSID. We use Aguiar and Hurst’s coding of
activities and refer the reader to their variable glossary. Given the lack of consistent labor income data in
the time use surveys, we instead impute labor income for each respondent using demographic information
and the coefficients obtained from the PSID labor income imputation described in the text. We then feed
imputed labor income into TAXSIM to calculate the simulated average net-of-tax share. We use weights
throughout and follow Aguiar and Hurst (2007a) in weighting each survey equally.
We select our sample to be as consistent as possible across survey years as well as with the PSID sample.
In all years we require non-missing data on education and number of children, as well as complete time
diaries that account for activities in all 168 hours in a week. We select the sample as follows: 1975:
unmarried female heads of household age 25-55; 1985: unmarried females who answered the telephone
survey age 25-55; 1993: female adults living in one adult household age 25-55; 2003/2004: unmarried
female heads of household age 25-55.
Consumer Expenditure Survey: Total food, food away from home, food at home, and food at work are
coded consistently with the National Income and Product Accounts expenditure categories. Total food is
calculated by summing food away from home, food at home, and food at work. Data on expenditures on
domestic services and major appliances are taken from the quarterly CEX interview files. Domestic
services include babysitting, day care, and hired help for cleaning. The underlying CEX UCC codes are
340310, 340410, 340420, 340520, 340530, 340903, 340906, 340914, 340210, 340211, 340212, and
670310. Expenditure on major appliances is calculated as expenditures on washers, dryers, stove ovens,
microwave ovens, portable dishwashers, electric cleaning equipment, and refrigerators (UCC codes
300210, 300220, 300310, 300320, 300330, 320511, and 300110).
Since state of residence is missing for a substantial fraction of the sample, we use only Federal tax
variation for identifying the estimates; we obtain similar results when we use the state data that are
available. For comparability with the NBER data, we collapse the raw quarterly data to the yearly level
by summing expenditures across a year. To address attrition, we follow Charles, Hurst, and Roussanov
(2009) in imputing expenditures in quarters in which an individual is missing by assuming that a woman
would have spent as much in the quarters in which data is missing as the average amount she spent in the
quarters in which she is in the data. We use survey weights throughout. All dollar amounts are expressed
in real 2005 dollars.

35

The data are available for download at http://troi.cc.rochester.edu/~maguiar/timeuse_data/datapage.html

28

Figure 1. Changes in tax rates over time: mean imputed average net-of-tax share by year for
single women with and without children

Notes: The figure shows that starting in the mid-1980s, there was an increasing incentive to
participate in the labor force for low-income single women with children relative to those
without children: the average net-of-tax share (defined as the share of earnings a woman keeps if
she participates in the labor force) rose substantially for single women with children relative to
those without children. Average tax rates are calculated using Taxsim by calculating a woman’s
tax liability if she works and if she does not work, and then calculating the fraction of her
earnings that would be taken away in taxes if she works. A woman’s tax liability if she works is
calculated by applying Taxsim to the woman’s imputed earnings. Earnings are imputed by
regressing earnings on age, number of children, education, and year fixed effects in the full
sample and deriving the fitted values, as described in Section 3. The average net-of-tax share for
women with children is greater than one primarily because the EITC transfers a substantial
amount of money to a low-income woman if she works, often implying that the effective tax rate
is negative. The data are taken from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics.

29

Figure 2. Mean usual hours of market work and housework of single women with and without
children, 1975-2004

45
40
35
30
25
20
15

No Child
Market Work
Child Market
Work
No Child
Housework
Child
Housework

10
5
0

Notes: The data are taken from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. The figure shows mean
usual hours worked and usual hours of housework for single female heads of household aged 2555, excluding cohabitators, with and without children. The figure shows that mean usual hours
of market work increased substantially for single women with children relative to those without
children from the mid-1980s to the mid-to-late 1990s, a period coincident with the relative tax
policy changes shown in Figure 1. During this period, mean hours of housework fell
substantially for women with children relative to those without. This suggests that much of the
increase in hours of market work during this period corresponded to a decrease in hours of
housework. During the period without the policy changes that differentially affected women
with and without children, there is little discernable trend in housework and market work for
single women with children relative to those without.

30

Figure 3. Additional identifying variation: mean change in usual weekly hours of market work
and housework in high and low income groups (y-axis), plotted against mean change in net-oftax share in high and low income groups (x-axis), among women with children

Notes: Figure 3 shows that among women with children, the mean tax cut was larger for lowerincome individuals than for high-income individuals, and the mean increase in market work and
decrease in housework was also larger for low-income individuals than for high-income
individuals. This demonstrates that in addition to the identifying variation shown in Figures 1
and 2 coming from a comparison across women with and without children over time, there is
additional identifying variation stemming from a comparison of changes in market/home work
and taxes in low and high income groups over time. “High income” refers to individuals with
imputed income above the median, and “low income” refers to all others. The “change” in
market work, housework, and the net-of-tax share is computed by calculating the change in the
mean of the variables from the 1975-1986 period to the 1987-2004 period.

31

Table 1. Means and Standard Deviations of Main Variables
Panel A: PSID
Work > 0 Hours During the Year
Weekly Hours Worked
Weekly Housework
Weekly Residual Time
Average Net-of-Tax Share
Age
Number of Children
N
Panel B: Time Diary Data
Work > 0 Hours During the Week
Weekly Hours Worked
Weekly Housework
Weekly Home Production
Weekly Non-Market Work
Weekly Leisure 1
Weekly Leisure 2
Weekly Leisure 3
Weekly Food Preparation and Eating
Weekly Sleep
Weekly Child Care
Average Net-of-Tax Share
Age
Number of Children
N
Panel C: Consumer Expenditure Survey

Mean (Standard Deviation)
.89 (.31)
37.47 (17.54)
12.66 (10.55)
117.86 (17.75)
.86 (.16)
38.72 (8.82)
.71 (1.04)
9,242
Mean (Standard Deviation)
.75 (.43)
27.34 (29.53)
6.13 (10.37)
14.17 (15.55)
19.91 (18.69)
33.83 (23.56)
107.39 (27.47)
112.31 (27.61)
12.29 (9.85)
59.06 (16.24)
4.91 (9.92)
.94 (.17)
39.14 (9.04)
.91 (1.24)
4,444

Mean (Standard Deviation)
Food
2846.71 (2135.78)
Food Away from Home
697.95 (995.62)
2122.99 (1629.11)
Food at Home
25.77 (178.47)
Food at Work
236.77 (792.97)
Domestic Services
88.78 (329.59)
Major Appliances
Average Net-of-Tax Share
.91 (.17)
Age
38.15 (8.78)
Number of Children
.88 (1.18)
N
25,395
Notes: The table shows the means and standard deviations of the central variables in the analysis. In
Panel A, the sample is taken from the PSID data from 1975-2004. In Panel B, the data are taken from
repeated cross sections on time use assembled by Aguiar and Hurst (2007a) and the 2004 American Time
Use Survey, spanning 1975-2004. Panel C shows data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey from
1980-2003. Expenditure amounts are expressed in real 2005 dollars. The sample consists of unmarried
female heads of household aged 25-55.

32

Table 2. Regressions of time allocations on imputed average net-of-tax share, non-labor income, individual fixed effects, and control variables
Panel A: Dependent Variable is Dummy for Labor Force Participation
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Basic
Control for Control for Sample is
IV for
Controls
SelfWelfare
pre-1993
Non-Labor
Selection
Income
ANTR
.45
.43
.44
.71
.44
(.08)***
(.13)***
(.08)***
(.18)***
(.09)***
Non-Labor
.00008
.00006
.0001
.0002
-.01
Inc.
(.001)
(.001)
(.01)
(.0002)
(.02)
Welfare
.05
.03
.04
ATR
(.04)
(.05)
(.05)
Net Wage

(6)
IV for
ANTR
1.15
(.22)***
.002
(.01)

(7)
IV for Netof-Tax
Wage
.000001
(.001)

(8)
Extra
Controls
.35
(.09)***
.00006
(.01)
.033
(.041)

(9)
Extra
Fixed
Effects
.28
(.11)***
.0003
(.001)

.03
(.005)***

R-Squared
0.04
.04
.04
.04
.06
.28
N
9,242
9,242
9,242
5,736
9,242
9,242
9,242
9,242
9,242
Elasticity
.43
.42
.43
.68
.43
1.11
.40
.34
.27
Notes: “ANTR” refers to the average net-of-tax rate, calculated using income imputed with demographics, as described in the text. The average
net-of-tax rate is the percentage of income that a woman would keep if she participated in the labor force. Standard errors are clustered by
individual. Each regression has 1,243 clusters. All regressions control for dummies for all possible values of age and number of children, as well
as individual and year fixed effects; this is also the set of “basic controls” used in Column 1. Column 2 uses a Heckman selection correction in
imputing income, as described in the text. Column 3 controls for the incentives created by AFDC, TANF, and food stamps, summarized by the
variable “Welfare ATR,” equal to the difference between welfare benefits if a woman works and does not, as a fraction of earnings if she works.
Column 4 limits the sample to the period before 1993. Column 5 instruments for non-labor income with the value of the welfare benefits a woman
would receive if she did not work. Column 6 instruments for one measure of the average net-of-tax share using another measure, as described in
the text. Column 7 instruments for the imputed net-of-tax wage using the average net-of-tax share. Column 8 adds controls for the state minimum
wage, state GDP, the presence of a welfare waiver, average labor income interacted with year, and education-by-year fixed effects. Column 9
controls for number-of-child-by-year, number-of-child-by-state, and state-by-year fixed effects. The actual coefficients and standard errors on
non-labor income have been multiplied by 1,000. “Elasticity” refers to the implied elasticity of the dependent variable with respect to the ANTR,
calculated at the means. *** denotes significance at 1%; ** at 5%; * at 10%.

33

Table 2, Panel B: Dependent Variable is Usual Weekly Hours of Market Work
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
IV for
Basic
Control for Control for Sample is
Welfare
pre-1993
Non-Labor
Controls
SelfIncome
Selection
ANTR
18.87
25.48
18.67
29.78
17.81
(4.86)***
(7.76)***
(4.83)*** (10.11)*** (5.60)***
Non-Labor
-.02
-.02
-.023
-.015
-1.52
Inc.
(.06)
(.06)
(.060)
(.073)
(1.28)
Welfare
1.06
.87
-.98
ATR
(1.83)
(2.49)
(2.46)
Net Wage

(6)
IV for
ANTR
47.78
(12.28)***
-.020
(.060)

(7)
IV for Netof-Tax
Wage
-.027
(.061)

(8)
Extra
Controls
16.86
(5.43)***
-.033
(.060)
.53
(1.89)

(9)
Extra
Fixed
Effects
5.18
(6.05)
-.030
(.057)

1.24
(.32)***

R-Squared
.04
.04
.04
.03
.06
.26
N
9,242
9,242
9,242
5,736
9,242
9,242
9,242
9,242
9,242
Elasticity
.43
.58
.43
.68
.41
1.10
.40
.39
.12
Notes: “ANTR” refers to the average net-of-tax rate, calculated using income imputed with demographics, as described in the text. The average
net-of-tax rate is the percentage of income that a woman would keep if she participated in the labor force. Standard errors are clustered by
individual. Each regression has 1,243 clusters. All regressions control for dummies for all possible values of age and number of children, as well
as individual and year fixed effects; this is also the set of “basic controls” used in Column 1. Column 2 uses a Heckman selection correction in
imputing income, as described in the text. Column 3 controls for the incentives created by AFDC, TANF, and food stamps. These incentives are
summarized by the variable “Welfare ATR,” which is equal to the difference between welfare benefits if a woman works and does not, as a
fraction of the woman’s earnings if she works. Column 4 limits the sample to the period before 1993. Column 5 instruments for non-labor income
with the value of the welfare benefits a woman would receive if she did not work. Column 6 instruments for one measure of the average net-of-tax
share using another measure, as described in the text. Column 7 instruments for the net-of-tax wage using the average net-of-tax share. Column 8
adds controls for the state minimum wage, state GDP, the presence of a welfare waiver, average labor income interacted with year, and educationby-year fixed effects. Column 9 adds number-of-child-by-year, number-of-child-by-state, and state-by-year fixed effects. The actual coefficients
and standard errors on non-labor income have been multiplied by 1,000. “Elasticity” refers to the implied elasticity of the dependent variable with
respect to the ANTR, calculated at the means. *** denotes significance at 1%; ** at 5%; * at 10%.

34

Table 2, Panel C: Dependent Variable is Usual Weekly Hours of Housework
(4)
(5)
(3)
(1)
(2)
IV for
Control Sample is
Basic
Control
pre-1993
Nonfor
Controls
for SelfLabor
Selection Welfare
Income
ANTR
-14.65
-16.17
-14.87
-14.14
-15.33
(2.36)*** (4.04)*** (2.36)*** (6.35)** (2.96)***
Non-Labor Inc.
.017
.018
.018
.031
-.73
(.021)
(.021)
(.021)
(.028)
(.81)
Welfare ATR
1.16
.08
.16
(1.26)
(1.76)
(1.74)
Net Wage

(6)
IV for
ANTR
-37.11
(6.49)***
.015
(.022)

(7)
IV for
Net-ofTax
Wage
.020
(.021)

(8)
Extra
Controls

(9)
Extra
Fixed
Effects

-12.25
(2.67)***
-.013
(.022)
1.51
(1.30)

-7.95
(3.42)**
-.006
(.020)

-.96
(.15)***

R-Squared
.09
.09
.09
.08
.11
.29
N
9,242
9,242
9,242
5,736
9,242
9,242
9,242
9,242
9,242
Elasticity
-1.00
-1.10
-1.01
.96
-1.04
-2.52
-.91
-.84
-.54
Notes: “ANTR” refers to the average net-of-tax rate, calculated using income imputed with demographics, as described in the text. The average
net-of-tax rate is the percentage of income that a woman would keep if she participated in the labor force. Standard errors are clustered by
individual. Each regression has 1,243 clusters. All regressions control for dummies for all possible values of age and number of children, as well
as individual and year fixed effects; this is also the set of “basic controls” used in Column 1. Column 2 uses a Heckman selection correction in
imputing income, as described in the text. Column 3 controls for the incentives created by AFDC, TANF, and food stamps. These incentives are
summarized by the variable “Welfare ATR,” which is equal to the difference between welfare benefits if a woman works and does not, as a
fraction of the woman’s earnings if she works. Column 4 limits the sample to the period before 1993. Column 5 instruments for non-labor income
with the value of the welfare benefits a woman would receive if she did not work. Column 6 instruments for one measure of the average net-of-tax
share using another measure, as described in the text. Column 7 instruments for the net-of-tax wage using the average net-of-tax share. Column 8
adds controls for the state minimum wage, state GDP, the presence of a welfare waiver, average labor income interacted with year, and educationby-year fixed effects. Column 9 adds number-of-child-by-year, number-of-child-by-state, and state-by-year fixed effects. The actual coefficients
and standard errors on non-labor income have been multiplied by 1,000. “Elasticity” refers to the implied elasticity of the dependent variable with
respect to the ANTR, calculated at the means. *** denotes significance at 1%; ** at 5%; * at 10%.

35

Table 2, Panel D: Dependent Variable is Weekly Residual Time
(4)
(3)
(1)
(2)
Control Sample is
Basic
Control
pre-1993
for
Controls
for SelfSelection Welfare
ANTR
Non-Labor Inc.
Welfare ATR
Net Wage

-4.21
(4.93)
.006
(.06)

-9.30
(7.77)
.006
(.06)

-3.80
(4.89)
.005
(.056)
-2.22
(2.00)

-15.64
(10.80)
-.016
(.074)
-.95
(2.88)

(5)
IV for
NonLabor
Income
-2.49
(6.59)
2.25
(1.57)
.82
(3.15)

(6)
IV for
ANTR
-10.68
(12.43)
.005
(.06)

(7)
IV for
Net-ofTax
Wage
.007
(.06)

(8)
Extra
Controls

(9)
Extra
Fixed
Effects

-4.61
(5.37)
.021
(.058)
-2.04
(2.17)

2.77
(6.42)
.035
(.055)

-.28
(.32)

R-Squared
.03
.03
.03
.02
.04
.23
N
9,242
9,242
9,242
5,736
9,242
9,242
9,242
9,242
9,242
Elasticity
-.03
-.07
-.03
-.12
-.02
-.08
-.03
-.04
.02
Notes: “Weekly residual time” is defined as time not spent on housework or market work. “ANTR” refers to the average net-of-tax rate,
calculated using income imputed with demographics, as described in the text. The average net-of-tax rate is the percentage of income that a
woman would keep if she participated in the labor force. Standard errors are clustered by individual. Each regression has 1,243 clusters. All
regressions control for dummies for all possible values of age and number of children, as well as individual and year fixed effects; this is also the
set of “basic controls” used in Column 1. Column 2 uses a Heckman selection correction in imputing income, as described in the text. Column 3
controls for the incentives created by AFDC, TANF, and food stamps. These incentives are summarized by the variable “Welfare ATR,” which is
equal to the difference between welfare benefits if a woman works and does not, as a fraction of the woman’s earnings if she works. Column 4
limits the sample to the period before 1993. Column 5 instruments for non-labor income with the value of the welfare benefits a woman would
receive if she did not work. Column 6 instruments for one measure of the average net-of-tax share using another measure, as described in the text.
Column 7 instruments for the net-of-tax wage using the average net-of-tax share. Column 8 adds controls for the state minimum wage, state GDP,
the presence of a welfare waiver, average labor income interacted with year, and education-by-year fixed effects. Column 9 adds number-of-childby-year, number-of-child-by-state, and state-by-year fixed effects. The actual coefficients and standard errors on non-labor income have been
multiplied by 1,000. “Elasticity” refers to the implied elasticity of the dependent variable with respect to the ANTR, calculated at the means. ***
denotes significance at 1%; ** at 5%; * at 10%.

36

Table 3. PSID Heterogeneity Analysis: OLS regressions of time allocation outcome on imputed average net-of-tax share, non-labor
income, individual fixed effects, and control variables. Dependent variable shown in column heading
Age Under 40
Age 40 and Over
No Children
At Least One Child
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
Weekly
Weekly
Weekly
Weekly
Weekly
Weekly
Weekly
Weekly
Weekly
Weekly
Weekly
Weekly
Hours
HouseResidual
Hours
HouseResidual
Hours
HouseResidual
Hours
HouseResidual
Worked
work
Time
Worked
work
Time
Worked
work
Time
Worked
work
Time
ANTR
23.06
-14.84
-8.22
9.04
-6.83
-2.21
51.30
-11.41
-39.90
14.63
-13.56
-1.07
(7.07)*** (3.10)***
(6.86)
(7.58)
(3.73)*
(8.75)
(24.68)**
(9.37)
(26.36) (5.23)*** (2.84)***
(5.35)
Non.059
.034
-.093
-.065
.001
.064
.053
-.027
-.025
-.10
.062
.041
Lab. Inc.
(.097)
(.042)
(.096)
(.080)
(.024)
(.080)
(.069)
(.021)
(.067)
(.09)
(.032)*
(.090)
R-Sq.
.04
.08
.02
.04
.05
.04
.05
.02
.05
.05
.12
.03
N
5,275
5,275
5,275
3,857
3,857
3,857
3,651
3,651
3,651
5,591
5,591
5,591
Elas.
.55
-.99
-.06
.21
-.45
-.02
1.17
-.78
-.28
.33
-.93
-.01
Notes: “ANTR” refers to the average net-of-tax rate, calculated using income imputed with demographics, as described in the text. Standard errors are
clustered by individual. All regressions control for dummies for all possible values of age and number of children, as well as individual and year fixed
effects. See other notes to Table 2. The total sample size is smaller than in Table 2 because singletons are dropped from the regressions, and the set of
singletons is larger when a subset of the data is used. The actual coefficients and standard errors on non-labor income have been multiplied by 1,000.
“Elas.” refers to the implied elasticity of the dependent variable with respect to the ANTR, calculated at the means. *** denotes significance at 1%; ** at
5%; * at 10%.

37

Table 4. Time Use Data: OLS regressions of time allocation outcome on imputed average net-of-tax share and control variables.
Dependent variable shown in column heading
(1)
LFP

(2)
Hours
Worked

(3)
Housework

(4)
Home
Production

(5)
NonMarket
Work

(6)
Leisure
1

(7)
Leisure
2

(8)
Leisure
3

(9)
Food
Prep and
Eating

(10)
Child
Care

(11)
Sleep

(12)
Eating,
Sleep,
Personal
Care
ANTR
.59
30.01
-11.14
-18.80
-18.41
-16.09
-22.99
-15.77
-8.24
7.22
-2.82
-6.91
(0.22)*** (14.00)** (5.37)** (7.26)** (8.45)** (13.19) (13.09)* (13.80)
(4.53)*
(5.30)
(9.26)
(10.10)
R-Sq.
.22
.09
.08
.12
.08
.05
.06
.07
.14
.24
.05
.05
N
4,444
4,444
4,444
4,444
4,444
4,444
4,444
4,444
4,444
4,444
4,444
4,444
Elas.
.74
1.03
-1.71
-1.25
-.87
-.45
-.20
-.13
-.63
1.38
-.04
-.09
Notes: The table shows the effect of the Average Net-of-Tax Rate (ANTR) on the weekly amount of time spent on each activity in question. The
data are the repeated cross sections of time use data in Aguiar and Hurst (2007), in addition to the 2004 American Time Use survey. “LFP” refers
to labor force participation. The definitions of the time use outcomes can be found in Section 2. All regressions control for dummies for year, five
education categories, and all possible values of age and number of children. “Elas.” refers to the implied elasticity of the dependent variable with
respect to the ANTR, calculated at the means. *** denotes significance at 1%; ** at 5%; * at 10%.

38

Table 5. Expenditure Data: OLS regressions of expenditure category on imputed average net-of-tax share and control variables.
Dependent variable shown in column heading
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Total Food
Total Food
Food at Home
Food Away
Food at Work
Domestic
Major
(PSID)
(CEX)
from Home
Services
Appliances
ANTR
1,963.08
-19.47
-417.85
340.80
57.58
62.06
27.72
(1,737.87)
(227.28)
(173.17)**
(99.84)***
(22.24)**
(99.51)
(35.89)
Capital Income
.04
.04
.03
.02
-.0004
.01
.003
(.02)
(.01)***
(.004)***
(.003)***
(.0003)
(.003)***
(.001)***
R-Squared
.01
.12
.18
.09
.01
.05
.02
N
8,293
25,395
25,395
25,395
25,395
25,395
25,395
Elasticity
.33
-.006
-.18
.44
2.03
.24
.28
Notes: The table shows the effect of the Average Net-of-Tax Rate (ANTR) on expenditures on different items, expressed in real 2005 dollars.
Column 1 is based on PSID expenditure data; food expenditures are calculated by summing food at home and food away from home. Columns 2
through 7 are based on Consumer Expenditure Survey data. Total food, food away from home, food at home, and food at work are coded to be
consistent with the National Income and Product Accounts expenditure categories. Total food is calculated by summing food away from home,
food at home, and food at work. CEX data are taken from the CEX interview files. All regressions control for dummies for year, five education
categories, and all possible values of age and number of children. In Column 1 we also include individual fixed effects and cluster the standard
errors at the individual level. “Elasticity” refers to the implied elasticity of the dependent variable with respect to the ANTR, calculated at the
means. *** denotes significance at 1%; ** at 5%; * at 10%.

39

Appendix Table 1. Alternative specifications: Dependent variable shown in column heading

ANTR

(1)
Yearly Hours
Worked
839.17
(236.85)***

(2)
Currently
Working
.41
(.11)***

(3)
Positive Yearly
Hours of Work
.44
(.08)***

(4)
Weekly Hours
Worked

(5)
Weekly
Housework

(6)
Weekly Other
Time

Participation
35.87
-4.71
-31.16
Dummy
(.71)***
(.73)***
(.94)***
R-Squared
.06
.04
.04
.41
.10
.26
N
9,242
9,242
9,242
9,242
9,242
9,242
Notes: “ANTR” refers to the average net-of-tax rate, calculated using income imputed with demographics, as described in the text. The average
net-of-tax rate is the percentage of income that a woman would keep if she participated in the labor force. Standard errors are clustered by
individual. Each regression has 1,243 clusters. All regressions control for dummies for all possible values of age and number of children, as well
as individual and year fixed effects. Yearly hours worked includes hours on secondary jobs and overtime hours. The “participation dummy” is a
dummy that equals one if usual weekly hours worked is positive, zero otherwise. “Currently working” refers to a dummy that measures whether
someone’s employment status is “working now.” “Positive yearly hours of work” is a dummy that equals one if the person reports working a
positive number of hours over the course of the entire year. *** denotes significance at 1%; ** at 5%; * at 10%.

40

Appendix Table 2. Food expenditure results with log of food expenditures as dependent variable: OLS regressions of log of food expenditures

on imputed average net-of-tax share and control variables. Dependent variable shown in column heading
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Log Total Food (PSID)
Log Total Food (CEX)
Log Food at Home (CEX)
Log Food Away (CEX)
ANTR
.55
-.05
-.33
.77
(.23)**
(.08)
(.08)***
(.13)***
Capital Income
.004
.009
.007
.01
(.001)***
(.001)***
(.001)***
(.002)***
R-Squared
.07
.13
.19
.11
N
8,108
25,360
25,261
22,813
Notes: The table shows the effect of the Average Net-of-Tax Rate (ANTR) on the log of expenditures on different items, expressed in real 2005
dollars. Column 1 is based on PSID food expenditure data. Columns 2 through 4 are based on Consumer Expenditure Survey data. Food away
from home and food at home are coded to be consistent with the National Income and Product Accounts expenditure categories. Total food is
calculated by summing food away from home, food at home, and food at work. CEX data are taken from the CEX interview files. All regressions
control for dummies for year, five education categories, and all possible values of age and number of children. In Column 1 we also include
individual fixed effects and cluster the standard errors at the individual level. We do not examine the log of expenditures on items other than food
because they more frequently take on a value of zero. The sample size differs across Columns 2 through 4 because zeroes of the dependent
variable are not included as observations. Adding 1 or 10 or 100 to the dependent variable before logging it yields similar results. The actual
coefficients and standard errors on capital income have been multiplied by 1,000. *** denotes significance at 1%; ** at 5%; * at 10%.

41

