                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE GREAT DEPRESSION ANALOGY

                                          Michael D. Bordo
                                           Harold James

                                        Working Paper 15584
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15584


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2009




Paper prepared for the conference, “ Past and Present: From the Great Depression of 1929 to the Great
Recession of 2009” BBVA Foundation, Madrid October 29, 2009 The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Michael D. Bordo and Harold James. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Great Depression Analogy
Michael D. Bordo and Harold James
NBER Working Paper No. 15584
December 2009, Revised January 2011
JEL No. E58,N0,N12

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper examines three areas in which analogies have been made between the interwar depression
and the financial crisis of 2007 which reached a dramatic climax in September 2008 with the collapse
of Lehman Brothers and the rescue of AIG: they can be labeled macro-economic, micro-economic,
and geo-political. First, the paper considers the story of monetary policy failures; second, there follows
an examination of the micro-economic issues concerned with bank regulation and the reorganization
of banking following the failure of one or more major financial institutions and the threat of systemic
collapse; third, the paper turns to the issue of global imbalances and asks whether there are parallels
that might be found in this domain too between the 1930s and the events of today.


Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

Harold James
History Department and Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton NJ 08544
hjames@princeton.edu
The Great Depression Analogy




Michael Bordo and Harold James




In the discussion of our contemporary economic disease, the
Great Depression analogy refuses to go away.   Almost every
policy-maker referred to conditions that had “not been seen
since the Great Depression,” even before the failure of Lehman.
Some even went further – the Deputy Governor of the Bank of
England notably called the crisis the worst “financial crisis in
human history”.   In its April 2009 World Economic Outlook, the
IMF looked explicitly at the analogy not only in the collapse of
financial confidence, but also in the rapid decline of trade and
industrial activity across the world.   In general, history
rather than economic theory seems to offer a guide in
interpreting wildly surprising and inherently unpredictable
events.   Some observers, notably Paul Krugman, concluded that a
Dark Age of macroeconomics has set in (Krugman 2009).   There are
however substantial uncertainties about what precisely the
lessons of history might be. Charles Plosser, president of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, recently said tellingly
that:   “We are still rewriting the narrative, and gaining an
understanding, of what happened in the Great Depression   and
why. No doubt it will be at least 50 years before we understand
very well what happened in 2008 and 2009 and whether the Federal
Reserve undertook the right policies or the wrong policies.”
(New York Times, 2010)

                                 2
     This paper examines three areas in which analogies have
been made between the interwar depression and the financial
crisis of 2007 which reached a dramatic climax in September 2008
with the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the rescue of AIG: they
can be labeled macro-economic, micro-economic, and global.
First, the paper considers the story of monetary policy
failures; second, there follows an examination of the micro-
economic issues concerned with bank regulation and the
reorganization of banking following the failure of one or more
major financial institutions and the threat of systemic
collapse; third, the paper turns to the issue of global
imbalances and asks whether there are parallels that might be
found in this domain too between the 1930s and the events of
today.




Monetary Policy




     Almost every contemporary use of the depression analogy
takes the year 1929 as a reference point.   But there are really
two completely different pathologies during the Great
Depression, which involve different diagnoses and different
cures.

     The first, and the most famous, pathology is the U.S. stock
market crash of October 1929. No other country had a stock
market panic of the magnitude of the American one, in large part
because no other country had experienced the euphoric run-up of
stock prices that sucked large numbers of Americans, from very
different backgrounds, into financial speculation.   The second

                                3
sickness, contagious banking panics, was decisive in turning a
bad recession into the Great Depression.   A series of bank
panics beginning in October 1930 in the United States converted
a not unusual recession from 1929-1930 into a serious slump.
Through the fixed exchange rate gold standard the U.S.
depression also affected the rest of the world. Events took a
turn for the worst after the collapse and rescue of the
Creditanstalt bank in Vienna in May 1931 and a major banking
crisis in Germany in June. This spread financial contagion to
Great Britain, to France   and back to the US .

     The 1929 panic has dominated a great deal of the analysis
of the depression for two rather peculiar reasons.   First, no
one has ever satisfactorily been able to explain the collapse of
the market in October 1929 in terms of a rational explanation,
in which market participants reacted to a specific news event.
So the crash presents an intriguing intellectual puzzle, and
economists can build reputations on trying to find innovative
accounts.   Some people just conclude that markets are simply
irrational.   Indeed, there is considerable evidence that the
most disturbing shocks to market expectations do not arise from
identifiable “news” (Bouchaud 2010).   Others (notably White)
have argued that investors might have been able to foresee the
Depression, or that they were pondering the likelihood of
protectionist reactions in other countries to the American
(Smoot Hawley) tariff act which had not yet even been cast in
its final form.

     The second reason that 1929 has been popular with academic
and political commentators is that the aftermath of the collapse
provides a clear motive for taking particular policy measures.
Stock exchange collapses or the end of asset bubbles do not
                                 4
necessarily lead to prolonged recessions of deep depression.     In
October 1987 and again in March 2000 sharp stock market
collapses triggered both an extension of liquidity by the
central bank and fiscal easing.       Keynesians thought that
government fiscal demand can stabilize the expectations of the
market, and thus provide an overall framework of stability.
Monetarists saw monetary stability as the key to avoiding
dramatic output contractions.   Much of this debate has focused
on the United States: in other countries, especially debtor
countries, the gold standard constrained monetary policy so that
it is hard to speak of policy options.      The only country where
there was an equivalent room for maneuver to the United States
is France.

     The Great Contraction of 1929-1933 in the United States
during which prices, real output and money supply declined by
about a third,and which spread to the rest of the world, was
precipitated by policy failures at the Federal Reserve. A tight
monetary policy to kill stock market speculation in 1928 led to
a recession beginning in August 1929. This policy was based on
the real bills view that stock market speculation would lead to
inflation, a bust and then deflation. The stock market crash in
October exacerbated the downturn but did not cause the
depression. The failure of the Fed to follow its mandate from
the Federal Reserve Act of 1913 to act as lender of last resort
and to allay a series of four banking panics beginning in
October 1930 led to the serious downturn that followed. The Fed
adhered to the flawed Burgess Riefler doctrine ( Meltzer 2003)
which viewed low levels of its borrowed reserves( i.e discount
window borrowing) and short-term interest rate indicators as
signs of monetary ease and hence did not act. In addition some

                                  5
Fed officials believed in the liquidationist doctrine and saw
bank failures as beneficial. A major hike in the discount rate
in the fall of 1931 to protect the dollar after sterling exited
from the gold standard added fuel to the fire.

     Recovery began in March 1933 with Roosevelt’s banking
holiday, ending the fourth banking panic. The nation’s banks
were closed for a week during which an army of bank examiners
separated the insolvent from the rest. Insolvent banks were
closed ending the uncertainty driving the panic. This action was
quickly followed by FDR taking the U.S. off the gold standard in
April, Treasury gold ( and silver) purchases designed to raise
gold prices and prices in general, and formal devaluation of the
dollar by close to 60% in January 1934. These policies produced
a big reflationary impulse from gold inflows which were
unsterilized passing directly into the money supply. They also
helped convert deflationary expectations into inflationary ones
( Eggertsson 2008).Also of key importance in preventing future
banking panics was the institution of federal deposit
insurance(FDIC) in the Banking Act of 1933   which went into
effect January 1 1934.

      The recovery of 1933 to 1941 in the United States was
largely driven by gold inflows (initially reflecting Treasury
policy and the devaluation, later reflecting capital flight from
Europe as war loomed). Expansionary fiscal policy, despite the
conventional wisdom, played only a minor role in the recovery of
the 1930s (Romer 1992). Recovery was impeded somewhat by New
Deal cartelization policies like the NIRA which in an attempt to
raise wages and prices artificially reduced labor supply and
aggregate supply (Cole and Ohanian 2004).    Over the period 1933-
1937 output increased by 33%.
                                6
     The Federal Reserve was largely passive in the 1930s.
Along with the bankers, it had been blamed by the Roosevelt
administration for the failures of the 1920s and early 1930s.
Major reforms in the Banking Acts of 1933 and 1935 greatly
increased the powers of the Federal Reserve Board in Washington
at the expense of the Reserve banks and especially the New York
Fed. Despite its increase in power, the reconstituted Board of
Governors under Chairman Mariner Eccles was passive and largely
subservient to the dictates of Treasury Secretary Morgenthau.
The Fed in the 1930s continued to follow the same precepts as it
did in the 1920s and early 1930s. Its policy indicator continued
to be the level of free reserves( excess reserves less
borrowings from the Fed). In the 1930s borrowed reserves were
negligible so excess reserves became the indicator. As the
decade wore on member banks largely absorbed the gold inflows
into excess reserves, held as a precaution against a repeat of
the type of turbulence experienced in the early thirties. By
1935 excess reserves amounted to 50% of total reserves.   Fed
officials increasingly viewed the build up of excess reserves as
a threat to future speculation and inflation.   They also saw the
presence of sizable excess reserves as preventing them from
future tightening. Similar concerns have been voiced about the
build up in bank excess reserves in 2008-2009. According to the
Burgess Riefler doctrine which prevailed at the Fed, the way the
Fed could control interest rates was by forcing banks to borrow
from the Fed. Once borrowed reserves were less than the open
market portfolio, then open market sales could force the banks
to borrow. Banks would then want to reduce their indebtedness by
contracting their lending   ( Meltzer 2003 pp 520-521).




                                 7
     The Recession of 1937-1938: The recovery was interrupted by
a serious recession (the third worst of the twentieth century)
from May 1937 to June 1938. Friedman and Schwartz ( 1963) and
Meltzer (2003) and others attribute the recession to a serious
policy mistake by the Federal Reserve. Mounting concern by the
Fed over the build up in excess reserves in member banks led the
Board to double reserve requirements in three steps between
August 1936 and May 1937. The rationale for this action was to
restore the Fed’s control over monetary policy and remove the
inflationary threat posed by the excess reserves. The Fed used
the blunt instrument of raising reserve requirements rather than
conducting an open market sale of securities because   excess
reserves exceeded the Fed’s portfolio of securities and sales
would reduce the income earned from it. According to Friedman
and Schwartz the banks were holding excess reserves as a
precaution against a repeat of the banking panics of the 1930s.
When the Fed locked up these reserves the banks cut back on
lending and sold earning assets to restore the precautionary
cushion they had held. The Fed’s contractionary policy action
was complemented by the Treasury’s decision in late 1936 to
sterilize gold inflows in order to reduce excess reserves. These
policy actions led to a spike in short-term interest rates and a
severe decline in money supply precipitating a 5 % decline in
real GDP.

     Other explanations given for the recession of 1937-38
include: a tightening of fiscal policy when the Administration
ended a generous veteran’s bonus, increased income tax rates and
imposed a tax on undistributed profits; gold hoarding brought
about by fears of another dollar devaluation coupled with a
boost to money wages by the Wagner Act (Sumner 2009) and a

                                8
switch back from inflationary to deflationary expectations
(Eggertsson and Pugsley 2006).

     The recession ended after FDR in April 1938 pressured the
Fed to roll back reserve requirements, the Treasury stopped
sterilizing gold inflows and desterilized all the remaining gold
sterilized since December 1936, and the Administration began
pursuing expansionary fiscal policy. The recovery from 1938 to
1942 was spectacular, output grew by 49% fueled by gold inflows
from Europe and a major defense build up.

     The Liquidity Trap:    The 1930s were characterized by very
low interest rates. Short-term rates were close to zero through
much of the decade. Long-term rates were close to 2%. The
traditional Keynesian view has been that monetary policy was
impotent because the U.S. economy was in a liquidity trap. Like
the 1930s a Federal Funds rate in 2008 close to zero( the zero
lower bound) has again raised the issue of policy impotence.

      Subsequent research by Brunner and Meltzer (1968) found no
evidence for the liquidity trap. There was a spectrum of rates
well above zero throughout the 1930s and the Fed could just as
easily have bought securities other than short-term Treasury
bills (Basile and Rockoff   2009). The real problem was not that
Fed policy didn’t work but rather that the Fed was unwilling to
use the tools that it had to conduct expansionary monetary
policy because it feared a resurgence of asset market
speculation and inflation (Orphanides 2004).




     Lessons for Today: The history of the 1930s experience has
several lessons for the present discussion over the policies

                                  9
that the Fed could follow to ensure a rapid recovery without
engendering inflation.

     The first lesson is that the Fed like its predecessor
seventy years ago has the tools to reflate the economy and to
prevent a resurgence of inflation. In the 1930’s the Fed was
only a minor player in the recovery because it was reluctant to
use expansionary open market purchases for fear of rekindling
speculation and inflation. It was not in reality stuck in a
liquidity trap or hampered by the zero lower bound. Instead the
Treasury through its policies towards gold and the consequence
of devaluing the dollar did more of the heavy lifting to promote
recovery.

     In the recent crisis the Fed’s policy of sterilizing the
effects on the monetary base of its diverse liquidity operations
through much of 2008 (until September) made monetary policy
tighter than it had to be and likely exacerbated the recession
which began in December 2007( Hetzel 2009) .However since
October 2008 the base greatly expanded and the policy adopted in
January 2009 of quantitative easing ( and continued in November
2010) by purchasing long-term Treasuries and mortgage backed
securities can be viewed as a replay of the expansionary
Treasury gold policy of the 1930s.

     Second, the Fed will eventually have to tighten as the
economy recovers and excess capacity is reduced. Some have
raised the fear that this could produce a repeat of the
recession of 1937-1938 were the Fed to attempt to reduce the
excess reserves and the banks (still gun-shy from the recent
crisis) to scramble to replace them. This should not be a
problem for a number of reasons. First the excess reserves were

                               10
built up in the two eras under very different Fed operating
procedures. In the 1930s the Fed could not target the interest
rate as it had done in the 1920s because the banks were
reluctant to borrow reflecting a stigma from doing so.    Moreover
the build up of excess reserves was a consequence of the gold
inflows and, given the Fed’s preferred operating procedures,
created a problem for it.

      Today the Fed follows an interest rate target and it can
pay interest on reserves (IOR). The build up of reserves
reflected sterilization of the Fed’s liquidity operations using
interest on reserves,(when the federal funds rate was close to
zero), as the mechanism to get banks to hold them. Were the Fed
to wish to tighten it can separate its monetary policy
operations from its liquidity policy by changing the spread
between the funds rate and the IOR. (Goodfriend 2009). Unlike
the Fed of the 1930s, today’s Fed can use reverse repos or open
market sales of its long-term securities to do the tightening.
Were it to wish to reduce excess reserves to encourage banks to
lend it could pay negative interest on reserves as was done
recently by the Riksbank in Sweden.

      The main concern for today is not that the Fed can not
exit from its present strategy because it can, but that when it
exits and begins tightening that if unemployment were still to
be high and were to begin to rise again in the face of the
tightening, that the Fed would come under political pressure to
abandon its efforts and cave in under the pressure. In that case
inflationary pressures would build up as the bond markets and
the public began to doubt the Fed’s resolve. This is what
happened in 1966 and 1969 under William McChesney Martin and in
1973 under Arthur Burns, leading to the Great Inflation.
                               11
The Financial Sector




     Banking collapses played a crucial role in the deepening of
the global crisis in 1931.   Unlike the United States, where
banking was highly localized, continental European economies
were dominated by financial systems in which a small number of
very large banks dominated the economy.   In Austria, where the
crisis began in May 1931, the Creditanstalt controlled some 60
percent of Austrian firms through ownership stakes (Nötel 1984).
The failure or potential failure of very large financial
institutions thus posed a major policy problem.

     The collapses were the result of the shocks of the
international depression imposed upon bank weakness in countries
that had been wrecked by the aftermath of bad policies that
produced inflation, hyper-inflation, and a destruction of banks’
balance sheets.   An intrinsic vulnerability made for a
heightened exposure to political shocks, and disputes about a
central European customs union and about the postwar reparations
issue was enough to topple a house of cards.

     Banks in 1931 were vulnerable as a result of poor monetary
policy, and they were victims of monetary deflation (Temin
2007).   But there were plenty of specific issues which long-
antedated the collapses of the early 1930s (James 1986). They
are the result of specific design features of the financial
system that could not simply be corrected by macro-economic
policy, whether monetary or fiscal.   U.S. banking was highly
localized, and thus vulnerable to geographically limited shocks

                                12
(such as the agricultural depression); while larger nationwide
banking in Canada was much more resilient.     Banks in many debtor
countries in South America and Central Europe accumulated
mismatches between assets (in local currency) and liabilities
(in dollars or other key currencies), that made for a
vulnerability to currency turmoil.     Universal banks suffered
large losses on their shareholdings, and as their capitalization
fell, cut back on their lending.      Some British banks (the so-
called merchant banks) had heavy overseas exposures that made
them vulnerable to foreign crises (James 2001, Accominotti
2009).

     One of the striking features of the Depression analogy is
how many of the answers regarding the banking sector are popular
again today: in particular, the provision of state guarantees to
attempt to revive the interbank market and bank lending;
recapitalization of banks with public money; and the
establishment of “bad banks” to take problematic assets off
banks’ balance sheets.   All of these policy responses were tried
in the 1930s, most notably in the epicenter of the central
European collapse, in Germany.

     Some of the initiatives that the German government took had
a quite modern ring to them. Indeed this was an area in which
the German government appeared to act swiftly in order to
implement a crisis management strategy.     First, the government
reorganized the banks, merging the two weakest ones, Danat and
Dresdener Bank, that had been at the origin of the banking
collapse, and injecting government money into all of them.
Initially, the government had tried hard to get private money as
well, and there were intense negotiations with the leading
figures of the powerful Rhine-Ruhr steel lobby.     In the end the
                                 13
business leaders only agreed if the government would put in more
money, and if the government advanced them the sums that they
were supposed to invest in the recapitalization of Danat Bank.
By 1932, 91 percent of the Dresdner Bank’s capital, 70 percent
of Commerzbank’s and 35 percent of Deutsche Bank’s was in public
ownership.

     Second, the German central bank (the Reichsbank) pushed for
a new institution which would allow it to discount bills from
banks which could not be traded because the interbank market had
stopped operating.   This institution, named the Akzept- und
Garantiebank, was established with breath-taking speed.   It was
given a public guarantee in order to provide the additional
signature that made bills eligible for Reichsbank lending
(rediscounting).

     Third, the Reichsbank eventually (in December 1932) created
what would now be called a “bad bank” to take over troubled
assets whose prices no longer corresponded to the value at which
they were set in the banks’ balance sheet. Two new institutions
would take assets off firms’ and banks’ balance sheets:     the
first, the Deutsche Finanzierungsinstitut AG took over up to
three quarters of the bad assets of a bank, but required an
annual amortization at 3 percent.    The second, the Tilgungskasse
für gewerbliche Kredite, required a much lower rate of
servicing, only 1 percent, for an initial three year period,
followed by higher rates as economic recovery set in.

Lessons for today

     The consequence of the long academic and popular discussion
of the 1929 crisis and the appropriate policy response is that
people have come to the expectation that there must be easy
                                14
answers.   But the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008
was a 1931-like event, the failure of a large financial
institution.   The answers required are less obvious than in the
domain of monetary or fiscal policy, where lessons of the Great
Depression are much clearer.

     Finding a way out of the damage created by the collapse of
a systemically important financial institution was and is very
tough.    Unlike in the case of a 1929-type event, there are no
obvious macro-economic answers to financial distress,
particularly when it involves institutions that are deemed to be
“too big to fail”.   Some famous macro-economists, including
Larry Summers, the chief economic thinker of the Obama
administration until late 2010, in consequence tried to play
down the role of financial sector instability in causing
depressions.   Robert Lucas’s claim in 2003 that the “central
problem of depression-prevention has been solved” is one of the
central pieces of evidence for Krugman’s onslaught on
conventional macro-economics.

     1.    A key problem at the heart of both the 1931 crisis in
Central Europe (but not in the United States) and of 2008 in the
U.S. and Europe was the doctrine of “too big to fail”.    For the
U.S., this doctrine was born only in the aftermath of the Latin
American debt crisis of 1982, which threatened the solvency of
almost all financial institutions in the industrial countries.
In 1984 the doctrine was applied to justify the decision to bail
out Continental Illinois, the fourth biggest U.S. bank which was
insolvent. As banks grew in the 1990s and 2000s, and their
interconnectedness increased, the doctrine evolved and was
augmented by an argument about banks being “too interconnected
to fail”. In 2008 the doctrine contributed to the worsening of
                                 15
financial crisis, as the belief that large commercial banks
would not be allowed to fail was extended to investment banks
with the rescue of Bear Stearns in March 2008. Then in September
when Lehman Brothers was allowed to fail and AIG was rescued the
resulting confusion led to panic. Too big to fail has also
hampered the recovery by preventing the use of the good bank/bad
bank solution (that had been used so successfully in the past by
Sweden and other countries) towards Citigroup, Bank of America
in the US and some big banks in Europe: RBOS, Lloyds-HBOS, UBS.
In consequence, governments took on too large shares in
financial institutions in order to recapitalize them, a move
analogous to what happened in 1931 in Germany.   And as in
Germany in 1931 several governments have already been repaid by
some of the banks which were rescued at a profit. A major
collapse of a large part of the financial system requires a slow
and painful cleaning up of balance sheets; and in micro-economic
restructuring, which cannot be solely imposed from above by an
all-wise planner but also requires many businesses and
individuals to change their outlook and behavior.   The
improvement of regulation and supervision, while a good idea, is
better suited to avoiding future crises than dealing with the
consequences of a catastrophe that has already occurred.

     3. The involvement of government in financial rescues
transfers private debt into the public sector, and creates
difficulties for public finance unless there is a dramatic and
quick recovery of the prices of financial assets. The Austrian
government’s answer to the 1931 Creditanstalt crisis involved
taking over the bank, and eventually merging it with other
weakened Austrian banks, the Wiener Bankverein and the
Niederösterreichische Escompte Gesellschaft.   The government

                               16
subsidy was expensive, amounting to 9 to 10 percent of GNP,
substantially less than the cost of bailouts for Mexico or Japan
in the 1990s, but much less than the cost of the Irish
government’s ill-conceived guarantee of Irish bank deposits in
2008, which was responsible for sending the government deficit
to over 30 percent of GDP in 2010.   In the 1930s, the aftermath
of the bailout paralyzed Austrian policy throughout the 1930s
and made the country vulnerable to internal extremism and
external attack.   It is likely that Irish politics will be
profoundly transformed in the wake of 2011 elections.

      4. Bailouts create political economy problems.     Bailouts
are inherently controversial, because they distribute public
money in an arbitrary way, to one recipient rather than another.
In the United States, Herbert Hoover’s innovative Reconstruction
Finance Corporation of 1932 quickly ran into problems because of
this issue: it turned out that the credits were going to banks,
farms and businesses that were well connected with Republican
politics.   Germany offers an even more dramatic example of this
kind of problem.   As part of the bank bailout in the aftermath
of the 1931 crisis, 2.5 m. Reichsmarks was put into a small
Berlin institution, Hardy & Co., that was a subsidiary of the
Dresdner Bank.   This money was primarily intended to flow into
the electoral campaign coffers of Paul von Hindenburg, the
veteran First World War commander who had been elected President
of Germany and was standing for reelection in 1932 (Bähr and
Ziegler).

     In the fragile situation of Weimar Germany, the bailout
that was at the center of the government’s response to the
banking crisis ran into every kind of objection. The claim that
the government had been engaged in the “socialization of losses”
                                17
became an important part of the turbulent electoral campaigns of
1932. In order to get support from the Akzeptbank, banks had to
demonstrate that “important economic interests” were at stake,
and in practice the majority of Akzeptbank credit went to the
savings banks (Sparkassen).    It was also used to support
enterprises in strategically vital areas, notably Silesia.      The
special issues involved in the support of Silesian industry, and
the fear of an opportunistic takeover by foreign issues, led to
the Chancellor Heinrich Brüning’s most problematical and indeed
scandalous rescue operation, the so-called Gelsenberg purchase
concluded on the last day that Brüning and his Finance Minister
Hermann Dietrich, the driving force of this bailout, were in
office.   In this transaction, the government, which as a result
of the banking crisis had become Flick’s largest creditor,
bought out Flick’s interest in the steel giant Vereinigte
Stahlwerke. Dietrich’s former State Secretary Hans Schäffer
referred to the operation as “extreme stupidity”.

     The rescue of the Creditanstalt was also accompanied by
massive corruption, the revelation of which became the stock-in-
trade of the opposition Nazi movement in Austria. Then, as now,
there was massive public hostility to the idea of a bailout, in
that it appeared to be a form of support for the institutions
and people who really bore the responsibility for the crisis.

     The cost of bailouts, even when they seemed to have been
administered promptly and with high efficiency as in the German
case, thus exceeded the simple fiscal arithmetic.   They brought
the state into a series of contentious micro-level decisions on
the health of particular enterprises and on the fate of
individual bank directors.    Given the poisonous ideological
backdrop of anti-Semitism in the context of Central Europe in
                                 18
the 1930s, it is unsurprising that this radical doctrine was
fanned by the character of the government’s response to banking
crises, and that both in Germany and more explicitly in Austria
a process of expropriating Jewish property (“aryanization”) that
was at first called Germanization or Austrianization set in even
before the Nazis took power in those countries. The episodes of
managing bank failures in retrospect look like the beginning of
a process of state-domination, corruption, and even racial
persecution that would roll on like an ever more menacing
snowball.

     The politics of bank and industrial bailouts after 2008
raised fears of a new financial and economic nationalism, as
governments become more directly involved in the micro-
management of the economy.   Banks in state ownership of with a
substantial degree of public investment – Citigroup, Lloyds-
HBOS, RBS, Commerzbank –cut back on foreign activities and sold
foreign assets, at least in part because of government pressure
that taxpayer money should not be used for the benefit of
foreign borrowers.   Economic nationalism was even more evident
in the debate about government rescues of the automobile
industry in 2009, where domestic jobs are protected at the cost
of foreign jobs in an industry dealing with global overcapacity.




Global Imbalances




     Global imbalances played a major role in the origins of the
Great Depression and many argue that they are also a significant
cause of the Great Recession.   In the Great Depression, the

                                19
imbalances were unwound and reversed: capital after 1931-33
flowed back to the creditor countries, above all to the U.S.
The unwinding of imbalances involved an asymmetric adjustment.
Creditor countries did little, while the deficit countries
reduced their level of economic activity in order to make
transfers.

     Of course not all imbalances are bad or unsustainable.      In
the nineteenth century, some countries ran persistent deficits
because they were growing more quickly (Australia or the U.S.)
and others had substantial surpluses because of high savings
accumulation in a mature economy (UK and France).   Some
countries (such as the Ottoman empire or Russia, or Greece) had
public debt induced deficits that were unsustainable, and which
led to isolated debt crises but no general reversal of capital
flows.   In the 1920s, the imbalances that built up in central
Europe were heavily driven by unsustainable expansions of public
spending and private consumption; and the simultaneous collapse
led to a general reversal of capital flows.

     There was in the Great Depression a great deal of
discussion about the need for more and better international
cooperation.   In 1930, the Bank for International Settlements
began work in Basel.   Its creators, above all the influential
Governor of the Bank of England, Montagu Norman, envisaged its
role as not only arranging for the safe and painless transfer of
German reparations (its primary role) but also in devising
crisis support mechanisms for troubled debtors.

     The highpoint of international cooperation was supposed to
be the 1933 London World Economic Conference.   But its failure
was almost predestined. The plenary meeting was paralyzed by the

                                20
way in which the preparatory commissions had worked. Monetary
experts argued that an agreement on currency stabilization would
be highly desirable, but that it required a prior agreement on
the dismantling of trade barriers – all the high tariffs and
quotas that had been introduced in the course of the depression.

     Trade experts met in parallel and made the mirror image of
this argument. They agreed that protectionism was obviously a
vice, but thought that it was a necessary one that could not be
addressed without monetary stability.   Only leadership by a
determined great power, prepared to sacrifice its particular
national interests in order to break the resulting impasse,
might conceivably have saved the meeting. But such leadership
was as unlikely then as it is now.

     A further lesson of the London Conference of 1933 consists
in governments’ unwillingness in times of great economic
difficulty to make sacrifices that might entail a short-term
cost. Even if the result would have been longer-term stability,
the immediate political consequences were too unpleasant. In
adverse economic circumstances, governments felt vulnerable and
unsure, and they could not afford to alienate public support.

     Finally, faced by a realization of inevitable failure,
participants look for a scapegoat. The 1933 Conference looked
like a classic detective novel in which every party had a reason
to be a suspect. Britain and France had turned away from
internationalism, adopting trade systems known as “Imperial
Preference,” which favored their vast overseas empires.
Germany’s president had just appointed Adolf Hitler’s radical
and aggressive government. The German delegation was led by
Alfred Hugenberg, who was not a Nazi but wanted to show that he
                               21
was an even more implacable nationalist than Hitler himself. The
Japanese government had just sent troops into Manchuria.    Of all
the major powers in London, the United States looked the most
reasonable and internationalist by far. It had a new,
charismatic president, who was known as an Anglophile and a
cosmopolitan spirit. Franklin Roosevelt was already taking
vigorous action against the depression, and was trying to
reorder the failed US banking system.   Roosevelt did not know
what line to take at the conference, and his stream of advisers
offered inconsistent counsel. At last, he lost patience and
announced that for the moment the US had no intention of
stabilizing the dollar. This message, delivered on July 3, 1933,
was known as “the bombshell.” Roosevelt talked about the need to
restore “the sound internal economic system of a nation” and
condemned the “old fetishes of so-called international bankers.”

     Everyone pretended to be shocked at the failure of
internationalism. But, at the same time, they were delighted to
have found someone who could be blamed for the failure of the
conference.

Lessons from the Failure of International Cooperation:

     The most obvious lesson from the history of the Great
Depression concerned the desirability of an institutional
mechanism to prevent a collapse of trade as a result of
protective and retaliatory measures – tariffs and quotas.    The
international trade regime has been institutionalized, first
through the GATT and then through the WTO.   Although a large
number of countries introduced some protective measures in the
wake of the financial crisis, only about 1 percent of world
imports were affected by the new trade measures instituted
                               22
between October 2008 and October 2009, in other words in the
most severe phase of the crisis (OECD 2010).   G-20 meetings in
November 2008 and April and September 2009 produced agreements
on anti-protectionist measures, and some countries (notably
Australia, Mexico and Canada) instituted a systematic reduction
of tariffs (though Mexico, like Russia, took measures to
restrict the import of foreign automobiles).

     There was a rapid collapse of trade in the six months after
the collapse of Lehman in September 2008, whose major cause was
the unavailability of trade finance rather than trade protection
measures.   OECD exports fell by 12.9 percent in the last quarter
of 2008 and by 30.0 percent in the first quarter of 2009.   After
April 2009, trade recovered rapidly.   Nevertheless, world trade
in 2009 was around 12.5 percent lower than in 2008 although it
has almost recovered in 2010. (OECD 2010)

     In the debates before the World Economic Conference, a
critical issue was how trade and foreign exchange policy
interacted.   Multilateral institutions in the Great Recession by
contrast have dealt largely with a different coordination
exercise: they have been concerned both with the coordination of
fiscal stimulus and with exchange rate coordination.   In
addition, central banks extended swaps, less as an act of
monetary policy coordination but rather largely in order to deal
with the currency requirements resulting from large currency
mismatches in the balance sheets of major cross-national banking
groups.

     Both the fiscal and the exchange rate sides of the
coordination exercise are potentially problematic.   The emphasis
on fiscal stimulus in the early phase of the crisis made some
                                23
countries vulnerable to doubts about fiscal sustainability in
the second part of the crisis.   In the European Union, Greece
and Spain at first presented their stimulus packages as
contributions to European recovery rather than as sources of
fragility.

     More importantly, the modern discussion of foreign exchange
policy is much more controversial and difficult to resolve than
trade issues, and the international institutional setting – the
International Monetary Fund - which originally managed this
issue in the Bretton Woods era has largely lost competence in
this field.   There has been a great deal of discussion of
strengthening multilateral surveillance in the wake of the
crisis, but such surveillance has not had a major policy impact.
Instead, there are repeated accusations that exchange rates are
being manipulated in order to achieve trade advantages,
accusations which recall the bitter polemics of the 1930s.    The
United States believes that China is undervaluing the renminbi
in order to drive exports; Europeans complain that quantitative
easing is a trade policy designed to drive down the dollar;
Americans assert that the Euro troubles are a mechanism for
lowering the European exchange rate; and even more troublingly,
in the European context, southern Europeans are beginning to
interpret the story of the locked exchange rate of the single
currency as a device to obtain export advantages by Germany (and
other northern European states).

     The result of these controversies has been an erosion of
international economic cooperation.   In the half year following
the 2008 collapse of Lehman, during the most intense phase of
the current financial crisis, the world’s political leaders
reassured themselves that this time international cooperation
                                 24
was working splendidly – by contrast with the grim precedent of
the nationalistic and autarkic 1930s.   The global elite
constantly rehearsed and replayed a soothing mantra.   Heroic
figures, led by Gordon Brown, were rescuing the world through
far-sighted and beneficent public action. But since then, in an
uncanny echo of the earlier collapse of international efforts at
understanding, the prospects for sustained cooperation and for
agreement on who should adjust have faded. Growth is returning
for both the major surplus and the deficit countries, and it
might in consequence be argued that the coordination failure
does not matter.   But the global imbalances are still there, and
to the extent to which they are driven by the expansion of
public debt liabilities may be “bad” imbalances capable of
leading to a 1930s style reversal.

     The 2010 equivalent of Roosevelt’s bombshell has come from
the Republican “shellacking” of President Obama in the mid-term
elections.   The outcome is a restoration for the logical and
beautifully designed system of checks and balances that the
eighteenth century constitutional fathers drew up.   That system
can work as intended and produce an accurate reflection of the
concerns of ordinary Americans.    It is likely to prevent further
big bailouts, further economic stimulus measures, but also to
block efforts at government budget balancing.   The final
confirmation of the new U.S. stance came one day later, with the
Fed’s announcement of the new $600 bn. quantitative easing
program (QE2).   The Fed was quite right to claim that the
program was not unusual, and that it represented merely monetary
policy as usual.   It may be that it is exactly what the U.S.
economy needs at the moment – in precisely the same way as in
1933 the U.S. needed a flexible exchange rate and benefited from

                                  25
escaping from golden fetters.   Some commentators however argue
that the pace of recovery as a result of the private sector’s
own energy and continuous monetary stimulus since late 2008 may
have made QE2 redundant.   The decision however was justified by
Fed officials by reference to the dual mandate of the Fed, to
maintain price stability (where for the moment there is no
threat of either significant inflation or of any deflation) and
also a level of economic activity that might generate an
improvement in the labor market.

     It is only when it comes to the international arena that
the Fed’s actions are inconsistent with price stability in other
countries – or “clueless” as German Finance Minister Wolfgang
Schäuble undiplomatically put it.    A howl of outrage about U.S.
monetary policy followed from the finance ministries of every
emerging market economy.   The Brazilian Finance Minister, Guido
Mantega spoke of a new “currency war” involving competitive
devaluation (Financial Times, 2010).    The American complaint
that China was deliberately under-valuing its exchange rate
looked out of place as   expansionary Fed policy may have fuelled
currency wars by weakening the dollar and providing cheap funds
that would surge in a wave of lending to fuel potential emerging
market bond bubbles.   U.S. monetary policy is having an impact
on emerging markets.   Low U.S. rates are fueling a new version
of the carry trade, and setting off inflationary booms in east
Asia which are difficult to control by conventional means.    The
new U.S. policy mix is likely to be interpreted   by some as a
return to the 1930s experience, when the U.S. turned on in
itself, abandoning attempts to steer a global economy.

     The failure of currency coordination which would go against
perceived sovereign interest is not surprising from a political
                                26
economy viewpoint, and the logic for it in a regime of floating
exchange rates compared to the interwar gold exchange standard
is not compelling in terms of economic theory.   There were
similar failures in the early 1970s, after the Smithsonian
meeting to determine a set of new exchange rates, or in the mid-
1980s, when attempts at coordination in the Plaza and Louvre
Finance Ministers’ meetings increased rather than decreased
financial instability.   The only major reason to worry about
such failures today is that frustration about the currency
regime can translate potentially into powerful demands in
parliaments and other representative assemblies for trade
retaliation as a response to a currency war.   So far, this trade
counterblast remains a topic for discussion rather than a
reality.

     Moreover, the consequence of failure of international
cooperation has not been nearly as negative as in the 1930s,
because there has as yet been no sudden reversal of capital
flows.   So far, in the aftermath of 2008, some smaller debtor
countries have been obliged to undertake a sharp adjustment
(Latvia moved from a current account deficit of 13.1 percent in
2008 to a 8.6 percent surplus in 2009, and Hungary from – 7.1
percent to + 0.2 percent)).   But there has been no reversal of
the position of the largest debtors, the United States or the
United Kingdom.   Even the Eurozone problem cases, Greece,
Ireland and Spain continues to run a substantial current account
deficit, with (increasingly nervous) foreign investors still
buying government debt (at a substantial premium).

     In the Great Depression, the major international policy
problem lay in the export of deflation by the surplus countries,
France and the U.S.   Today’s equivalent to France’s
                                27
sterilization of gold inflows in the 1920s would be the argument
that China is exporting deflation through the sterilization of
foreign exchange purchases.       But the other side of the modern
story, the continued large deficits of the major deficit
economies (US, UK etc.) do not parallel the dramatic adjustment
of the 1930s.    In the Great Recession, instead the export of
inflation recalls the experience of the late 1960s and the early
1970s    reflecting the exorbitant privilege (in the events that
produced the breakdown the par value or Bretton Woods system).
Again, this 1970s analogy would point to the danger that
currency uncertainty may lead to new trade policies.




        Why Lessons are Painful

        There are many lessons from the Great Depression that can
and should be learnt in respect to the management of our current
crisis; but they are often not as simple or as easy as many
commentators believe.    The most important and most unproblematic
lesson is concerned with the avoidance of the monetary policy
error of not intervening in the face of banking crises.      The
policies of the major central banks – the Federal Reserve, the
European Central Bank, the Bank of England – suggest that this
is a lesson that has been in the main learnt. However the Fed
after expanding liquidity in the fall of 2007 then followed too
contractionary a policy in the first three quarters of 2008
which may have exacerbated the recession that began in December
2007.    Some major economies, notably the United States and
China, have also embarked on large fiscal stimulus programs
although the jury is still out on how effective they      were .     In
the Chinese case, there is an acute danger of inflationary

                                    28
overheating; in the U.S. case, there is the fear that the fiscal
stimulus will significantly worsen already fundamentally
unsustainable debt dynamics.

     Learning from the Great Depression in other areas is much
harder.   A major financial collapse has long-lasting
consequences, which cannot easily be removed.   Both the lesson
from the Great Depression about the slowness and the painfulness
of bank reconstruction, and the lesson about dependence on a
large external provider of capital, are unpalatable. Limiting
the size of banks that are too big or too interconnected to fail
is a major political problem, especially as such institutions
constitute a powerful lobbying force.   The current strategy of
guaranteeing banks, but also deposits and a broad range of other
liabilities, is likely to encourage a further extension rather
than a roll-back of the too-big-to-fail doctrine.   Bank rescues
have also had a significant impact on the deterioration of the
fiscal position of many countries.

     Trade is another area where major vulnerabilities will
continue.   Currency breakdowns are often followed by trade
fights.   Monetary policy is not perceived any longer as   solely
promoting a stable measure of value, but also ( as in the
1930’s) as a tool with which countries can fight each other for
trade advantages.

     For a long time, it was much easier to repeat the soothing
mantra that collectively the world community has learned how to
avoid a 1929-type of collapse, and that the world’s central
banks in 1987 or 2001 clearly showed that they had learned the
right lesson. It is undoubtedly meritorious of governments to
stabilize expectations, and to prevent a worse spiraling of

                                29
crisis.   But policy-makers and their advisers will create
inappropriate expectations when some simple policy proposals are
built up as the basis for the hope that they alone can guarantee
recovery.   As both Europe and the United States are likely to
continue to have rather anemic recoveries, it is as important to
take a sober and realistic approach to the unpalatable lessons
of the Great Depression as it is to celebrate the fundamental
point that we do know more about monetary policy.




                                30
References

Johannes Bähr and Dieter Ziegler (2006), Die Dresdner Bank in
der Wirtschaft des Dritten Reichs (Munich : R. Oldenbourg)




Peter F. Basile and Hugh Rockoff ( 2009) “Money and Interest
Rates in the Interwar years” Rutgers University ( mimeo).
September.




Bouchaud, Jean-Philippe (2010), “The Endogenous Dynbamics of
Markets: price Impact, Feedback Loops and Instabilities,”
European Central Bank, Central Banking Conference, November 2010
paper.




Karl Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer ( 1968) “ Liquidity Traps for
Money,Bank Credit, and Interest Rates.” Journal of Political
Economy.   76( Jan-Feb) pp 1-37.




Hal Cole and Lee Ohanian ( 2004) “ New Deal Policies and the
Persistence of the Great Depression: A General Equilibrium
Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy . August.




Gauti Eggertsson and Benjamin Pugsley ( 2006) “ The Mistake of
1937: A General Equilibrium Analysis.” Center for Financial
Studies Working Paper 2007/06
                                   31
Gauti Eggertsson ( 2008) “Great Expectations and the End of the
Depression”   American Economic Review Vol 94 ( 4) pp 1476-1516.




Financial Times, September 27, 2010, “Brazil in ‘currency war’
alert”




IMF (2009) World Economic Outlook (April).




Milton Friedman and Anna J Schwartz ( 1963) A Monetary History
of the United States: 1867-1960. Princeton: Princeton University
Press




Marvin Goodfriend ( 2009) “ Central Banking in the Credit
Turmoil: an Assessment of Federal Reserve Practice” Bank of
Japan Conference. May.




Robert Hetzel ( 2009) Monetary Policy in the 2008-2009
Recession.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review.
September




Yasheng Huan (2008) Capitalism with Chinese characteristics:
Entrepreneurship and the State. Cambridge, New York: Cambridge
University Press.

                                32
Harold James (1986) The German Slump: Politics and Economics
1924-1936. Oxford: Oxford University Press.




Harold James (2001) The End of Globalization: Lessons from the
Great Depression.   Cambridge Mass.: Harvard University Press.




Charles Kindleberger (1973) The World in Depression. Berkeley:
University of California Press.




Paul Krugman (2009) “How Did Economists Get It So Wrong?”, New
York Times Magazine, September 6, 2009




Allan H. Meltzer ( 2003) A History of the Federal Reserve.
Volume 1: 1913-1951.Chicago: University of Chicago Press



New York Times, (2010), Fed Chief Defends Action in Face of
Criticism, November 5, 2010



Rudolf Nötel (1984) “Money, Banking and Industry in Interwar
Austria and Hungary,” Journal of European Economic History 13/2.

OECD, Trade and Economic Effects of Responses to the Economic
Crisis, October 2010

Olivier Accominotti (2009), Contagion and the Sterling Crisis of
1931, Working Paper.
                                  33
Athanasios Orphanides (2004) “ Monetary Policy in Deflation: The
Liquidity Trap in History and Practice” North American Journal
of Economics and Finance. 15(1) pp 101-124.




Christina Romer (1992) “ What Ended the Great Depression?”
Journal of Economic History 52 ( 4) December pp 757-784.




Scott Sumner (2009)   “ Chapter 12. The Roosevelt Depression”
Bentley College (mimeo). September.




Peter Temin (2007) “The German Crisis of 1931: Evidence and
Tradition,” Cliometrica.




                                34
