                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 MOMENTUM CYCLES AND LIMITS TO ARBITRAGE EVIDENCE FROM VICTORIAN
         ENGLAND AND POST-DEPRESSION US STOCK MARKETS

                                          Benjamin Chabot
                                            Eric Ghysels
                                          Ravi Jagannathan

                                        Working Paper 15591
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15591


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2009




We thank Nick Barberis, Jennifer Conrad, Gautam Kaul, Jegadeesh Narasimhan, Lu Zhang, and seminar
participants at the University of Michigan for helpful comments. We also thank Soohun Kim for invaluable
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Benjamin Chabot, Eric Ghysels, and Ravi Jagannathan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Momentum Cycles and Limits to Arbitrage Evidence from Victorian England and Post-Depression
US Stock Markets
Benjamin Chabot, Eric Ghysels, and Ravi Jagannathan
NBER Working Paper No. 15591
December 2009
JEL No. G0,G10,G12,G14

                                             ABSTRACT

We evaluate the importance of “Limits to Arbitrage” to explain profitability of momentum strategies.
Specifically, when the availability of arbitrage capital is in short supply, momentum cycles last longer,
and breaks in momentum cycles are shorter. We demonstrate the robustness of our findings with a
unique database of stock returns from1866-1907 London and the CRSP database. Momentum cycle
durations are similar in both databases and all other momentum facts documented in the literature
using the CRSP database hold for the Victorian period as well, except for the January reversal due
to the absence of capital gains taxation.


Benjamin Chabot                                     Ravi Jagannathan
Department of Economics                             Kellogg School of Management
Yale University                                     Northwestern University
27 Hillhouse Ave, Rm 33                             2001 Sheridan Road
New Haven, CT 06520                                 431 Jacobs Center
and NBER                                            Evanston, IL 60208-2001
benjamin.chabot@yale.edu                            and NBER
                                                    rjaganna@northwestern.edu
Eric Ghysels
Department of Economics
University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill
Gardner Hall, CB 3305
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3305
eghysels@unc.edu
       Momentum strategies – buying winners and selling losers – have generated abnormal
returns for over 160 years. We make use of recently collected historical data to document the
returns to momentum investing in the CRSP era United States and the Victorian era London
Stock Exchange. A consistently applied momentum strategy generated similar abnormal returns
and profit cycles across both periods. We suggest an explanation for the both the persistence and
cyclical nature of abnormal momentum profits. While buying winners and selling losers
consistently generates abnormal returns, the momentum strategy does expose investors to large
losses with enough regularity to limit leverage. We show that while the average return to the
momentum strategy is high and uncorrelated with the market index, capturing these abnormal
returns exposes the momentum investor to occasional sudden losses. We speculate that these
losses make it difficult for sophisticated investors to consistently employ leverage with other
people’s money. This “separation of brains from capital” can explain both the occasional large
losses to the momentum strategy apparent in the time series of returns and why momentum
continued to be a profitable strategy for 140 years. Sophisticated momentum traders subject to
margin or capital constraints can exacerbate losses if forced to unwind positions at the end of
profit cycles and this may impose a classic limit to arbitrage.
       The paper makes three contributions. First, we document that the momentum strategy has
generated abnormal returns for over 140 years – using a new hand-collected data set of the
London Stock Exchange during the Victorian era and comparing it with the Post
Depression US. Second, we establish the fact that momentum portfolios have been subject to
similar cycles since the 1860s. Third, we suggest a new approach to testing the sources of
momentum cycles based on the duration dynamics of moment profit cycles. More specifically,
we examine return distributions and the duration spells of momentum profit and losses from both
eras. We test the underlying null hypothesis that the momentum portfolio returns and duration
spells are drawn from the same distributions across eras. What then explains the persistence of
momentum? We think the answer lies in the fact that while momentum portfolios do generate
high returns orthogonal to market and business cycle risks, the momentum strategy also exposes
investors to high variance and frequent losses. The frequent loses associated with momentum
strategies make it difficult for investors who use other people’s money or leverage to drive
momentum profits out of the market. This is the well known “limits to arbitrage” explanation of
persistent anomalies. To test this formally, we introduce a new methodology based on modeling
                                                 2
the duration dynamics as a function of the state of the economy, the market return and the
scarcity of capital. If capital constraints limit arbitrage we would expect a measure of capital
scarcity to predict the duration of cycles. We find strong evidence supporting this explanation of
momentum cycles.
       We make use of our long times series of momentum profits to identify states in which the
hazard of loss is high. A simple measure of the scarcity of investment capital – the risk-free rate
– predicts the duration of momentum profit or loss cycles in both eras. We hypothesize that
markets always have noise traders who buy and sell for idiosyncratic liquidity reasons or are
subject to the biases in the literature. Profit opportunities from a simple momentum trading rule
should depend on the relative supply of capital available to sophisticated and noise traders. Noise
traders slow the adjustment of prices to new information and create opportunities for momentum
traders. Time periods where investment capital is plentiful are also periods where the market is
awash in sophisticated traders who find it easy to attract arbitrage capital and expand their
positions. Momentum profits are therefore most likely to persist in periods where capital
available to sophisticated momentum traders is in short supply relative to noise traders. This is
the familiar story of rational but capital constrained traders. When investment capital is plentiful,
the entry of sophisticated leveraged traders can quickly exhaust the profits from trading rules. As
profits are exhausted and sophisticated traders post losses with more regularity, sophisticated
traders exit and the profit opportunities return.
       Any duration based test of a trading strategy requires a large sample of observed cycles.
A test based on the availability of arbitrage capital is best evaluated with an evaluation of a long
time series rather than a cross-country comparison of momentum cycles. With increasing
globalization, arbitrageurs in one country can exploit with ease profitable trading opportunities in
other countries. That makes it difficult to form country specific measures of arbitrage capital
since capital can easily move across national borders and draws into question whether cross-
country cycles are independent observations. We therefore focus on the largest stock markets and
establish the robustness of our findings by examining long time series. We therefore use CRSP
era US stock market data and Victorian era London stock market returns to examine our
hypothesis.
       In the paragraphs to follow, we review the literature and document the facts about risk,
return and cyclicality of momentum portfolios during the CRSP and Victorian eras.
                                                    3
    A. Stock Price Momentum during CRSP and Victorian Age: Cyclicality with
        Market States
        We use a new hand-collected data set of the London Stock Exchange.1 The new data
set consists of the closing prices, dividends and shares outstanding of 1,808 stocks (equity)
listed in London between 1866 and 1907. These stocks represent virtually every stock
traded on the London Stock Exchange during this period. The fact that the London Stock
Exchange was the most important market at the time, and that the U.K. was riding high on
the waves of the second industrial revolution makes this a particularly interesting era to
study as we cover a period of prosperity, expansion and the harbinger of twentieth century
capitalism and financial markets.
        To the extent decision making biases are hardwired into the human psyche, we should
expect to find price momentum in stocks even during the second industrial revolution. The
London market during the Victorian age was, by today's standards, a primitive market with high
execution costs, limited liquidity and very elementary computational power to sustain complex
trading strategies. Even today's emerging markets may look quite advanced in comparison to 19th
century London, at least the know-how of trading and financial theory have made big leaps
forward compared to what was available more than 100 years ago. Hence, if we did not find
relative price momentum in stocks during the Victorian age, that would for instance cast doubt
upon the behavioral explanations that rely on the psychology of decision making.
        The existence of price momentum during the Victorian age will not by itself rule out
any one class of theories, but does eliminate the possibility that price momentum may be an
artifact of data mining. Furthermore, to the extent that existing theories place out of sample
restrictions on historical data, we can use our 19th century sample to evaluate competing
hypotheses. We find both statistically and economically significant momentum effects –
short run reversal, medium term continuation, and long run reversal in past winners minus
past losers portfolio returns – and the order of magnitude is quite similar to that of the

1
 Historical data have been used before to assess some of the salient empirical stylized facts of asset returns.
Most of these studies have focused on issues such as long term predictability, see e.g. for NYSE from 1815 to
1925, as discussed in Goetzmann (1993) and Goetzmann, Ibbotson and Peng (2001) or the Brussels stock
exchange as discussed in Annaert and Van Hyfte (2006).

                                                      4
widely documented end of 20th century evidence. However, we do not find a particularly
strong relationship between momentum profits and firm size and we do not find a distinct
January effect in our data.2
        An important defining characteristic of momentum profits we find is that
momentum profits are cyclical. Figure 1 plots the time series of the Fama-French momentum
factor returns from January 1946 to May 2008 and the return on a similarly constructed
momentum factor during the Victorian era – based on the aforementioned new hand-collected
data set described in detail later. When we compare the Post-War data with the Victorian era we
observe the same cyclical pattern as well as momentum profits with roughly the same range of
monthly gains/losses. The similarities are striking: Post-War momentum profits as measured by
the one year moving average of past Winners minus past Losers returns exhibited negative
episodes (i.e., vanished) once every 2 years with an average duration of 4.1 months per episode.
During the period January 1867 to December 1907, momentum returns exhibited negative
episodes once every 1.4 years with an average duration of 3.8 months per episode.3 The time-
series of CRSP and historical era momentum profits resembles other rule-based trading strategies
subject to the limits of arbitrage (see e.g. Shleifer and Vishny (1997)) – high average returns
with enough periodic declines to prevent sophisticated leveraged investors from capturing
profits without risk.4
        We are not the first to notice cyclicality in momentum returns. Cyclicality is
consistent with many behavioral explanations of momentum. One that makes testable
predictions about observable historical returns is Cooper, Gutierrez and Hameed (2004)
(hereafter CGH). CGH note that the theory of Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1997)
(henceforth DHS) can be extended to predict differences in momentum profits across states of the
market, like bull and bear markets, as aggregate overconfidence should be greater following


2
  Grinblatt and Moskowitz (2004) carefully document the importance of tax-loss selling in momentum
portfolios. The absence of a January effect in our Victorian data is not surprising as Victorians did not
tax capital gains and the Victorian tax year did not end in December.
3
  Griffin, Ji and Martin (2004) have documented similar periodic declines in other nations as well.
Figure 1 involves a one-year centered moving average. Hence, the moving average scheme produces some
induced temporal dependence. As will be discussed shortly, the temporal dependence in momentum profits
goes beyond that induced by smoothing.
4
  Gatev, Goetzmann and Rouwenhorst (2006) note that pairs trading - like momentum trading - features
periodic breaks as well. Hence, momentum trading; pairs trading; and the like - i.e. certain rules of forming
portfolios and liquidating portfolios - appear to work with random periodic breaks.
                                                        5
market gains. Hence, CGH test whether momentum profits depend on market states. They find
strong evidence that CRSP era momentum profits depend on the state of the market. We verify
these findings in the Victorian era – momentum profits are higher following high long run
(3-year) market returns and lower following low long run market returns – providing
support of CGH.
       Momentum cycles may reflect changing risk over the business cycle. Chordia and
Sivakumar (2002) [CS] show that macroeconomic instruments commonly used for measuring
macroeconomic conditions can explain a large portion of momentum profits. CS argue that
intertemporal variations in the macroeconomic risk factors are the main sources of momentum
profits. After examining the data in a different way, CGH disagree the findings of CS. We find
Victorian-era momentum profits are correlated with market state but unrelated to economic
expansion and contraction cycles – and so the high returns to momentum strategies are
difficult to reconcile as being compensation for macroeconomic risk.
       The historical fact that momentum cycles depend on past market returns and are
likely to continue when the cost of investment capital is high suggests that these are times
when “smart money,” i.e., the capital available to arbitrageurs, is in limited supply relative
to available investment opportunities created by “dumb money,” i.e., capital available to
investors whose behavior is subject to behavioral biases documented in the literature. It
would appear that the limits of arbitrage discussed in Shleifer and Vishny (1997) may be
particularly binding following up markets, an empirical regularity in the data spanning over
140 years.


   B. Rest of the paper
   Our main results – that momentum cycles are consistent across centuries and can be
explained by a proxy for the availability of arbitrage capital – are presented in Section 4.
Before we present our main findings, we first selectively review momentum literature in
Section 2 and document the similarities between the Victorian and CRSP era momentum in
Section 3. After establishing the similarities between eras, in Section 4 we formally test
whether the momentum profit cycles during the Victorian era and those of the CRSP era
share the same properties. Section 5 reports some measures of trading costs for the London
market and Section 6 concludes the paper. Technical Appendices provide details about the
                                              6
unique data set and the new statistical procedures we apply to momentum duration cycles.


                                      II. Related Literature


        In what follows we provide a selective survey of the literature, emphasizing only the
findings relevant for the analysis in the current paper.5
        Although several early empirical studies of the efficient market hypothesis examined
relative strength strategies, there was little consensus regarding the profitability of such
strategies. Levy (1967) claimed that buying stocks when their prices are substantially higher than
their 27 weeks moving average resulted in superior profits. Jensen and Bennington (1970)
challenged this claim by showing that Levy's trading rules did no better than buy and hold
strategies suggesting that Levy's findings could be subject to a data mining bias. In contrast,
Fisher Black (1973) found that Value Line rankings that relied, among other things, on relative
strength (of the stocks in the industry relative to the composite stock index) had value. Grinblatt
and Titman (1989) found that mutual fund managers exhibited a tendency to buy past winners –
their buy decisions appeared to rely on the existence of price momentum. Lehmann (1990) used
a clever portfolio strategy to exploit short run reversal and showed that it is an economically
interesting phenomenon. Lo and MacKinlay (1990) examined the sources of momentum profits
by analyzing Lehmann's (1990) portfolio strategy.6
        Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) designed a clever trading strategy that we follow in this
paper. Jegadeesh and Titman's (1993) strategy relied on relative price momentum that was
well defined and has been replicated by other researchers.7 A vast number of studies have
confirmed the Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) finding using data from markets in a number of
countries – United States, Europe, and emerging economies (see e.g. Rouwenhorst (1998)).8
Using a sample from 1973 until February 2008, Asness et al. (2008) study (value and)
momentum in five major asset classes: (i) stock selection within four major countries, (ii)
country equity index selection, (iii) government bond selection, (iv) currency selection, and

5
  For a recent comprehensive survey of the literature, see e.g. Jegadeesh and Titman (2005).
6
  See Jegadeesh and Titman (2005) for a comprehensive survey of the momentum literature.
7
  Jegadeesh (1990) showed short term reversal and medium term continuation in returns in the cross section
using regression methods.
8
  Chui, Titman, and Wei (2007) note that Korea, Japan, and Taiwan are exceptions.

                                                      7
(v) commodities. They provide ubiquitous evidence on the excess return to value and
momentum, extending the existing evidence to government bonds, currencies and
commodities. The consensus appears to be that there is reversal in the short run – i.e., past
Winners lose relative to past Losers during the first month following portfolio formation;
continuation during the intermediate term – i.e., past Winners continue to win relative to past
Losers during the 2 to 12 months following portfolio formation; and long run reversal – i.e.,
past Winners lose relative to past Losers over 36 to 60 months following portfolio formation.
The evidence is stronger for short term reversal and intermediate term continuation. Korajczyk
and Sadka (2004) show that momentum profits cannot be explained away by transactions costs.
Given their estimates of visible and invisible transactions costs, find that the abnormal returns
to some of the momentum strategies disappear only after about $5 billion of money chases
them.
        A variety of explanations are offered for these relations. They range from data issues,
such as microstructure and data snooping biases (Boudoukh et al. (1994), Conrad and Kaul
(1989), Lo and MacKinlay (1988), to rational risk-based explanations (Conrad and Kaul (1998)
Berk et al. (1999), Chordia and Shivakumar (2002), Bansal et al. (2002), to behavioral
explanations of irrational behavior on the part of investors (DeBondt and Thaler (1985, 1987),
Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), Daniel et al. (1998), Barberis et al. (1998), Hong and Stein (1999),
Hong et al. (2000), Lee and Swaminathan (2000), Grinblatt and Han (2002), among others).
Several theories have been advanced to explain this phenomenon. They can be put into two
classes: those that rely on investor psychology affecting stock prices and others that rely on the
changing nature of real investment options available to firms. Daniel, Hirshleifer, and
Subrahmanyam (1997) (henceforth DHS), Barberis, Shleifer and Vishny (1998) (henceforth BSV),
Hong and Stein (1999) (hereafter HS) and Grinblatt and Han (2005) (henceforth GH) are some of
the notable papers falling in the former class. DHS assume overconfidence and self attribution –
leads to momentum from overreaction that subsequently corrects resulting in reversal. BSV assume
conservatism and extrapolation on the part of investors and show that will lead to continuation in
the intermediate term and reversal in the long run. Hong and Stein assume slow information
diffusion and positive feedback trading and show it can lead to momentum and subsequent
reversal. GH argue that the tendency of some investors to hold on to their losing stocks, driven by
“prospect theory” of Kahneman and Tversky (1979) and “mental accounting” of Thaler (1980),
                                                  8
can lead to slower diffusion of information and price momentum in stocks. The
commonality among all these models is they all rely on biases in how investors process
information.
          Berk, Green and Naik (1999) (BGN), Carlson, Fisher and Giammarino (2004),
Johnson (2002), Chen and Zhang (2007), and Sagi and Seasholes (2007) fall in the latter
class. BGN pioneered the latter line of thinking by showing that when firms make optimal
investment choices, their assets and investment options change in a predictable way
affecting their life cycle risk characteristics and that can also cause price momentum in
stocks.



                    III. Momentum in the Victorian and CRSP Eras


          This study makes use of a new data set consisting of the closing prices, dividends and
shares outstanding of 1,808 stocks (equity) listed in London between 1866 and 1907, compiled
by the authors from late 19th and early 20th Century financial publications. As can be seen from
Figure 2, the number of stocks we use to form momentum portfolios varies from 126 in 1866 to
1074 in 1907. The number of stocks declines from 985 in 1903 to 544 in 1904, due to a number
of industries vanishing from the quotation list, only to reappear in 1905. In Appendix A, we
provide a detailed description of the unique and new hand-collected historical data.
          In this section, we document the similarities between momentum profits in the CRSP and
Victorian Eras. One of the salient features of momentum in modern markets is that the return to
momentum strategies varies with changes in formation and holding periods. We begin by
verifying the similarity of risk and return at the intermediate term before comparing the term
structure of CRSP and Victorian momentum profits.


   A. Intermediate Term Momentum in Stock Prices
   The structure of this section follows that of Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), henceforth referred
to as JT. It is worth recalling the trading strategies considered by JT. The main motivation is the
premise that if stock prices either overreact or underreact to information, then profitable trading
strategies that select stocks based on their past returns will exist. Therefore strategies examined

                                                  9
by JT, consider selecting stocks based on their returns over the past 1 through 4 quarters. To
increase the power of the tests, the strategies include portfolios with overlapping holding periods.
Therefore, in any given month t, the strategies hold a series of portfolios that are selected in the
current month as well as in the previous K - 1 months, where K is the holding period. 9
Specifically, a strategy that selects stocks on the basis of returns over the past J months and holds
them for K months is referred to as a J-month/K-month strategy. It is constructed as follows: At
the beginning of each month t the securities are ranked in ascending order on the basis of their
returns in the past J months. Based on these rankings, JT grouped stocks into deciles and formed
a value-weighted portfolio of stocks within each decile. Since the number of stocks available to
us during the Victorian age is smaller, we will work with a coarser grid, namely top, middle and
bottom thirds – or small, medium and large. The top portfolio is called the “losers” and the
bottom is called the “winners”. In each month t, the strategy buys the winner portfolio and sells
the loser portfolio, holding this position for K months.10
    Let us recall that JT used constructed momentum portfolio returns over the 1965 to 1989
period using data from the CRSP daily returns. All stocks with available returns data in the J
months preceding the portfolio formation date are included in the sample from which the buy
and sell portfolios are constructed. Table 1, similar to Table I in JT, reports the average returns of
the different buy and sell portfolios as well as the zero-cost, winners minus losers, portfolios
constructed using our data set. JT have a larger set of 32 strategies, while our selection strategy is
constrained by the smaller set of stocks and less frequent trading. JT find that the returns of all
the zero-cost portfolios are positive and statistically significant except for the 3-month/3-month
strategy. Our historical results reported in Table 1 are the same. The weakest case is the 3/3
strategy, which is not statistically significant.
    The most successful zero-cost strategy in JT is the J=12/K=3 months strategy which yields
1.31 % per month. Our most profitable strategies are also of the same type (J=13/K=3 and
J=9/K=6 being quite similar) although they yield only .5 % per month. Moreover, the 9-month
formation period produces returns of about .5 % per month regardless of the holding period. This

9
  As noted at the beginning of section 2, we considered 28-day periods as months in our calculations. Moreover,
when considering a year, i.e. K = 12 months in JT, we used 13 28-day periods.
10
   As mentioned earlier, if a stock, included in a momentum portfolio, vanishes from the database when the
portfolio is formed, but does not reappear at any future point in time, we remove it. When a stock does
reappear at a later time, we interpolate its price in computing the return on the momentum portfolio.

                                                      10
is to be expected since we use a coarser partition of stocks based on past returns (tercile instead
of decile as in JT). While the order of magnitude of monthly returns is less than half that reported
in the JT paper, the statistical significance is about the same.
     To assess whether momentum strategy profits are abnormally high, it is necessary to examine
their exposure to systematic risk. We follow the JT approach in focusing all our remaining
analysis on the 6-month/6-month strategy, and thus in the rest of this paper the length of a period
is 6 months. This has the advantage that we are dealing with equally spaced return observations,
which makes the analysis of factor models and temporal dependence easier.
     Table 2 reports estimates of the two most common indicators of systematic risk, the post-
ranking betas of the 6-month/6-month relative strength portfolios and the average capitalizations
of the stocks in these portfolios. The table is similar to Table 2 in JT, except for the fact that we
have less entries due to the smaller set of strategies considered. We find, (similar to JT) that the
beta of the zero-cost winners minus losers portfolio is negative (we find a beta of -0.02, whereas
JT have a beta of -0.08), since the beta of the portfolio of past losers is higher than that of the
portfolio of past winners. The average capitalizations of the stocks in the different portfolios
show that the highest and the lowest past returns portfolios consist of smaller than average
stocks, with the stocks in the losers portfolios being smaller than the stocks in the winners
portfolio. This evidence is consistent with JT, suggesting positive risk adjusted returns on
average for the momentum portfolio.
     Next, we examine the profitability of the 6-month/6-month strategy within subsamples
stratified on the basis of firm size. Size is sorted in lower, middle and highest thirds. Panel A and
B of Table 3 report average returns and Jensen's CAPM alphas, and Panel C reports CAPM
regressions augmented with a NBER Business Cycle dummy.11
     We note in Panel B of Table 3 that all the CAPM alphas are negative. A robustness
check reported in Table 4 shows that this is due to our treatment of missing data. Recall
that we set the last monthly return to -99.99 % whenever a firm vanishes from our sample

11
  Consensus U.K. business cycle dates are not available for this time period. Therefore, we use NBER
business cycle dates as proxies for the trans-Atlantic business cycle. However, there is considerable evidence
that the U.S. and U.K business cycle was correlated during the Victorian era. U.S. and U.K. industrial
production and per capita GDP had correlations of .22 and .25 respectively. Historical consumption data is
unavailable but average U.K. household earnings grew at a rate of 1.55 % in years without NBER contractions
and 1 % in years with an NBER contraction. See Officer (2008 a,b).

                                                     11
after portfolio formation. This grossly understates the actual returns. In Table 4, we
compute returns under the alternative assumption that firms leave the database at random
and do not set the last monthly return to -99.99%. This alternative method ignores the
survivorship issue, as is done in JT. Under the alternative treatment of missing data, half
the portfolios have positive alphas and half have negative alphas – as is found with modern
era data. Thus, we can be confident that the negative CAPM alphas are due to our treatment
of missing data.
   As JT note, measuring relative strength profits on size-based subsamples allows us to
examine whether the profitability of the strategy is confined to any particular subsample of
stocks. This analysis also provides additional evidence about the source of the observed
relative strength profits. Table 3 presents the average returns of the 6-month/6-month strategy
for each of the subsamples. The results we report are in line with JT. They indicate that the
observed abnormal returns are of approximately the same magnitude when the strategies are
implemented on the various subsamples of stocks as when they are implemented on the entire
sample. Unlike JT, we do not find a particularly strong relationship with firm size. For the
zero-cost, winners minus losers portfolio, JT find that the subsample with the largest firms
generates lower abnormal returns than the other two subsamples. In Table 3, we find a large
return for the medium-sized category, although the large firms in our sample still create the
lowest return for the zero-cost, winners minus losers portfolio. When we control for the
business cycle, we obtain similar findings, as discussed later. These findings indicate that the
relative strength profits are not primarily due to the cross-sectional differences in the
systematic risk of the stocks in the sample.
   Likewise, Table 5 reports the average returns of the zero-cost portfolio in January versus
the rest of the year. JT note that following Roll (1983), there are reasons to expect that the
relative strength strategies will not be successful in the month of January. They find that
relative strength strategy loses about 7% on average in each January but achieves positive
abnormal returns in each of the other months. We do not find such seasonal patterns, namely
the month of January does not yield negative returns in our sample. Moreover, according to
statistical tests reported in Table 5, there is, with a few minor exceptions, basically no
difference between January and the other months of the year. Our findings essentially confirm
the Roll (1983) story. With no capital gains taxes in our time period, we do not expect a January
                                               12
effect, as predicted by Roll (1983).
     To conclude, we examine again whether our choice of missing data treatment alter the results
of the paper. In Table 6, we report the results we obtain for size-sorted average monthly returns
and t-statistics for buy minus sell portfolios under our treatment of missing data and the results
we would obtain if we relaxed our assumptions by either ignoring the extinction (don't set the
last return to -99.99%) or ignoring all missing data by assuming it is missing completely at
random (MCAR) and computing results from observable data only. Setting extinct stocks to -
99.99% obviously lowers gross returns but the relative comparisons of portfolios sorted by size
or momentum are robust to the treatment of missing data. The t-stats are significant under all
treatments of missing data. The results in Table 6 show that our decision to replace missing with
-99.99% is in fact the most conservative. Moreover, the probability that a firm vanishes appears
to be largely independent of past returns. While the actual magnitude of winner and loser alphas
depends on the treatment of missing data, the alpha generated from a long winner short loser
portfolio is robust to assumptions about missing firm returns.


     B. Term structure of momentum returns
     Momentum profits can occur for a variety of reasons even from the perspective of someone
who subscribes to the behavioral point of view. For example, if momentum profits are entirely
due to slow diffusion of information, then the positive abnormal returns should decay over time
to zero. On the other hand, if momentum profits are due to delayed overreaction, momentum
profits will likely reverse in sign before decaying down to zero over time. We therefore examine
the term structure of the profits to the various momentum portfolios in this section.
     We report in Table 7 the average monthly excess return on the momentum portfolios during
each of the five years following portfolio formation, after skipping a month. 12 The loser
portfolios' returns almost double from year 1 to year 5. In contrast, the winner portfolios' returns
come down somewhat by year 5. Therefore the difference, i.e., the winner minus loser
momentum portfolio returns becomes negative in years 4 and 5, and marginally significant. As

12
  It is important to note that the results in Table 7 are computed from all available time periods. This means
the sample periods vary by column. For example the portfolio return in year 2 after formation is computed by
looking at the buy-sell portfolio 14-26 months after formation, so our first “year 2” observation is July 1867-
June 1868. Our first “year 5” observation doesn't begin until July 1871, however. Therefore the Year 2 column
has more observations than the Year 5 column. This is also why the various columns do not add up.

                                                      13
can be seen from Figure 4, a dollar invested in the 6 month Winner portfolio can be expected to
grow steadily over time to 1.15 dollars in 5 years; and a dollar invested in the 6 month Loser
portfolio can be expected to decline to 0.99 dollars after 19 months before rising to 1.08 dollars
at the end of 5 years. The difference between the value of a dollar invested in each of the Winner
and the Loser portfolios peaked at 7.7 cents on average by the end of the 3rd year before
narrowing down to 6.1 cents at the end of 5 years (see Figure 5). So, while the evidence of long
run reversal exists, it is not as dramatic as that reported in Jegadeesh and Titman (2001). We can
reject the hypothesis that momentum returns in years 2 to 5 are the same as that during year 1, in
favor of the alternative that they are smaller at conventional levels of significance.
     Since our historical data is sampled every 28-days, therefore one year is 13 “months”. We
wish to test the null hypothesis that the winner minus looser (WML) portfolio exhibits no
momentum or reversal. We begin by forming a                       matrix     where the           ;
element is equal to the month annual return on the WML portfolio formed                  years earlier. Let
     ,   be the holding period return from month               12 to month on the WML portfolio
formed        13 “months” earlier. Under the null hypothesis that WML returns are independent
of time since formation, each column of            should have the same expectation. We test this
hypothesis by subtracting the year 1 WML return from the year 2, 3, 4 and 5 returns to form a
new X matrix such that X ,                    ,     1           , 1 : Therefore X ,          measures the
difference between the holding period return from month                    12 to month t on the WML
portfolio formed          1 years earlier and the WML portfolio formed                   1   year earlier.
Under the null hypothesis of no momentum or reversal X ,                        should have expectation
zero. Table 8 reports the mean return of the WML portfolio 1 through 5 years after
formation. We test of the null that        X ,           0             via a Wald test. 13 The results in
Table 8 show strong rejections of the null that average monthly returns are equal in years 1
through 5. It is interesting to note the pattern of mean returns: 0.0034 after one year, 0.0016,
0.0006 after two and three years and finally -0.0006 and -0.0015 after years four and five. This
reaffirms the finding of short run reversal, medium term continuation, and long run reversal in
past winners minus past losers portfolio returns.

13
 More specifically, consider:     ∑ X , 1 / , … , ∑ X , 4 / ; then the test statistic is
           , where under the null ~     4 , asymptotically. Since the elements of X are serially correlated,
we use a HAC estimator for       using Newey-West with 13 lags.
                                                14
     The lower panel of the Table shows some pairwise test results and we note that year
1 is significantly different from all other years. The average monthly returns after 2 and 3 years
appear to have the same mean, and so do years 3 and 4 as well as 4 and 5.
     It should be noted that the above test may be biased by missing data. In particular, when an
asset vanishes from our data set we set its return to -99.9% at the time of extinction and replace
missing data with interpolated data when possible. However, we verified that the momentum in
years 1 and 2 and reversal in years 4 and 5 are robust to missing data treatment, and we find
indeed they are.14


     C. The State of the Market, the Economy and Momentum
     Recall that Cooper, Gutierrez and Hameed (2004) appeal to the theory of DHS to predict
differences in momentum profits across states of the market, like bull and bear markets, as
aggregate overconfidence should be greater following market gains (DHS and Gervais and
Odean (2001)). With overconfidence higher following market increases, overreactions will be
stronger following up markets, generating greater momentum in the short run. The HS model is
also based on initial underreaction to information and subsequent overreaction, which eventually
leads to stock price reversal in the long run.
     For each month, between 1929 and 1995, CGH denote the state of the market as Up (Down)
if the markets trailing three-year return is positive (negative) on that date. They compare the
returns of momentum portfolios formed during Up and Down markets and conclude that
momentum was largely an up market phenomenon during the CRSP era. The London market
index was seldom down in the 3-year windows during our historical sample period. We therefore
take a slightly different definition of up and down markets. By CGH’s definition, 85 % of their
observed market states were UP markets. We denote Victorian market states as follows Up =
market index return over the past 3 years in the top 85 % of sample returns, and Down = market

14
  We did this as follows. If survival rates differ across buy and sell portfolios this may bias our reversal tests.
We evaluate the effect of missing data on the results in two ways. First we simply compute the probability of
extinction. If the probability of extinction is independent of past return the momentum results should be robust
to our choice of missing data treatment. We find survival probabilities that a stock remains in the data set, n-
months after formation, for buy and sell portfolios. The difference between survival rates in buy and sell
portfolios is very small. We also computed the event time returns of WML portfolios under our treatment of
missing data and an alternative MCAR treatment that simply ignores securities that vanish. If survival depends
on past return the MCAR estimates should differ. Instead the MCAR results are statistically indistinguishable
from our treatment of missing data.
                                                         15
index return over the past 3 years in the bottom 15 % of sample returns. In Table 9 we report the
evidence of momentum and market states in our sample and compare our results to CRSP era
results computed with our sorting method. Recall that CGH sort stocks into deciles while we sort
into terciles. The choice of tercile sorts instead of deciles, weakens the relationship between
market state and momentum in the CRSP era but the difference between UP and DOWN market
states, remains.
   Average profits and risk adjusted returns by market state are computed by taking the profits
of each zero-cost momentum portfolio (winner minus loser terciles) for each formation date and
averaging across all formation dates that qualify for a particular market state. The average
monthly profit of the momentum portfolio formed at time is:
                                              ∑           /6                                (5.1)
where     is the return of the 6-6 winner minus loser momentum portfolio formed at time . We
follow CGH and also report the average CAPM alpha across market states. The CAPM alpha of
the momentum portfolio formed at time is:
                                   ∑                  ,        ,   /6                       (5.2)
where     is the OLS estimator of a CAPM regression, using data from      1 to     6.
        Table 9 reports the mean monthly profits and mean CAPM alphas by market state.
The Up market average monthly profit is computed by taking the average of all
for formation time t that corresponds to an Up market state. Down market results are
computed in the same manner. Since the average returns are computed from overlapping
holding periods, all t-stats are computed with the Newey and West (1987) HAC procedure
using 5
lags.
        CGH find that momentum profits depend on the state of the market, as predicted. From
1929 to 1995, the mean monthly momentum profit following positive market returns is 0.93 % in
their sample, whereas the mean profit following negative market returns is - 0.37 %. The up-
market momentum reverses in the long run.
        In Table 9 for the 6/6 winner minus loser portfolio, we find that the average monthly
return following an Up market is 40 bp per month in the CRSP sample, and 38 bp per month in
our sample. The corresponding numbers following a Down market are -28 bp per month and 15
bp per month respectively. Momentum profits are higher following Up markets than Down
                                               16
markets in our sample just like in the CRSP sample but while the difference is statistically
significant in the CRSP sample, it is not significant in our sample. We also find similar patterns
for Jensen's alpha.
        Next, we examine whether commonly used macroeconomic instruments for measuring
market conditions can explain a large portion of momentum profits, following the methods used in
CGH. Following Chordia and Sivakumar (2002), we construct a factor model for expected returns:
                                                                                                        (5.3)
where the return on the 6-6 momentum portfolio (i.e., Winner minus Loser monthly rate of
return) is projected onto              : lagged dividend yield on the market index,                 : lagged
term spread [yield on British consol - yield on 30-day bankbill], and                      : lagged default
spread [yield on risky bonds (portfolio of British RR bonds) - yield on British consol].15
        We use two methods to evaluate the ability of the factors to explain momentum
profits. In Panel A of Table 10, we report the slope coefficients, the test statistic for the
hypothesis that                        0 and the proportion of variation collectively explained by
the          ;         and              factors. The latter is obtained via the             of the CAPM
residuals regressed on             ;         and            : For most 6-6 momentum portfolios, we
can soundly reject the null that the betas on the macroeconomic factors are collectively equal
to zero. It should be noted that CS use a 3 factor model with no market index. We add the
market index for the regression that reports factor loadings and proportion of extra variation
explained by CS's 3 factors (panel A of Table 10). In Panel B of Table 10, we sort on CS's
three factors model (no market index). However, the proportion of variation explained by the
macro factors is extremely small. Collectively, the macro factors explain less than 3% of the time
series variation in portfolio returns and in the case of the largest stocks less than 0.3%.
        CGH employ a clever double sort methodology to illustrate the relative influence of
momentum and factor premium on portfolio returns. For each stock and time period, they
compute the factor loadings via an OLS regression over the trailing 60 months. With time beta
estimates in hand, they compute the expected return of each stock over the future 6 months given
current betas and actual future realizations of the factors. They then sort stocks into portfolios


15
  We computed the yields on the British consol and British railroad bonds from quotations in the Course of
the Exchange. The yield on 30-day bank bills was collected from The Economist.

                                                     17
based on momentum and factor model expected return. We form historical portfolios via this
method and report the results in Panel B of Table 10. Winner minus Loser portfolios within each
of the three predicted return categories earn positive returns on average; the average returns are
statistically (t-statistic of 3.75) and economically (54 bp per month) significant within the high
predicted returns group. Further, within the Loser and Middle groups, stocks with high predicted
returns earn lower returns than stocks with low expected returns, and they are jointly
significantly different from zero. Hence, the findings with Victorian era data support the results
of CGH, although our evidence appears somewhat weaker.


      D. Business Cycles and Momentum Profits
      During the Victorian age there were at least as many business cycles as in the current CRSP
data; and the depressions of those days have been characterized as more severe.16 We therefore
examine how momentum profits are related to business conditions (expansions and contractions;
as well as past stock market returns). To do so we turn our attention now to Tables 11 and 12. In
Table 11, we report the results of the regression:


where      is the return on buy portfolio minus the return on sell portfolio and                 is the
demeaned real per capita GDP growth. We examine this regression for small, medium and
large stocks. In none of the cases do we observe any significantly positive exposure of the
momentum profits to GDP growth rate risk; in fact the point estimates of the slope coefficient for
GDP growth rate is negative for all size classes.
         To complement this, we also report in Table 12 a correlation matrix for the following
variables: real per capita GDP growth, buy-sell portfolio annual returns for small, medium
and large stocks, the average cross-sectional monthly stock return standard deviation, market
excess returns and UK short and long-term rates obtained from Ordinary Funds. The
correlations are computed using annual data. The first column of Table 12 shows that the
annual returns of the buy-sell portfolio for small stocks features very negative correlations
with GDP growth (around 30%), as well as the excess market returns and the long term rate.
The medium-sized firms feature similar negative correlations except for the long rate which

 16
      There were 10 NBER recessions between 1866 and 1907 and 10 between 1946 and the present.

                                                    18
is positively correlated with buy-sell portfolio annual returns for medium firms (more than
35%). Finally, the Buy-sell portfolio annual returns for large firms also show negative
correlation with GDP growth, although the correlation monotonically declines with the size
of the firms.



                    IV. Momentum Cycles and Limits to Arbitrage


        So far we have established that the momentum strategy has generated abnormal returns
for over 140 years. When a strategy as simple as buying past winners and selling past losers
produces an almost free lunch, i.e., high returns on average with little or no systematic risk, we
are left with several possibilities.
        First, for the Victorian and much of the CRSP era, investors may not have been aware of
the existence of the almost free lunch. However, given the attention in the academic and trade
literature it has received, investors will likely arbitrage away any future momentum profits. This
does not appear to be the case. The average return on our WML portfolio since 1990 is actually
higher than the return before 1990.
        Second, the almost free lunch may not exist. That is, the apparent high returns may
be a spurious artifact of data mining that is unlikely to show up in future data. While a
number of studies document the existence of price momentum in stocks in the United
States and other countries, almost all of these studies use data from the same post World
War II period and hence their findings cannot be viewed as being entirely independent of
each other. Again, this is unlikely to be the case. Unlike cross-country comparisons, returns
in Victorian England are independent of modern returns. This paper has increased the time
series of available momentum returns by 50% without altering the abnormal returns.
        Third, the lunch may not be free. Momentum strategies may generate high returns on
average but expose investors to low returns during severe economic contractions. Such
business cycle risks may not be discernable by looking at the Post-War CRSP era data alone. If
momentum portfolios expose investors to occasional severe real risks at business cycle
frequencies we may need to observe returns in more than the handful of relatively benign Post-
War cycles before these risks become apparent. Historical Victorian age data helps us evaluate

                                               19
this hypothesis by observing momentum returns across several business cycles of varying
levels of severity. Recessions were both more frequent and more severe during our Victorian
era sample period. The NBER business cycle chronology includes 10 troughs during the 42
years between 1866 and 1907 compared to 10 troughs in the 63 years since World War II.17
The cycles were more severe as well. The standard deviation of annual per capita UK GDP
growth was 4.5% between 1866 and 1907 and 3% between 1946 and 2007 (see Johnston and
Williamson (2008)); yet the momentum profits persist.
        What then explains the persistence of momentum? We think the answer lies in the cycles
apparent in Figure 1. While momentum portfolios do generate high returns orthogonal to market
and business cycle risks, the momentum strategy also exposes investors to high variance and
frequent losses. Momentum trading involves active trading by relatively sophisticated investors.
If many well capitalized sophisticated investors followed momentum strategies at the same time
we would expect their collective action to squeeze the profit out of the strategy. The frequent
loses associated with our momentum strategy makes it difficult for investors who use other
people’s money or leverage to drive momentum profits out of the market.
        The WML momentum portfolio is self-financing but traders would have to post margin
against losses. The lag-6, hold-6 WML portfolio suffered drawdowns of 10% or more once every
3.4 years during the CRSP era. These drawdowns were quick – lasting only 4.5 months on
average – and sharp – the WML portfolio lost an average of 17.5% per drawdown. Most
professional money managers who rely on investors for financing cannot lose one third of their
capital in a few months time without being driven out of business by redemption requests. Given
the frequent drawdowns in the WML portfolio any money manager employing even 2:1 leverage
would be unlikely to last more than a handful of years. This is the well known “limits to
arbitrage” explanation of persistent anomalies. Momentum strategies look like winners for
unlevered investors, but without leverage the number of sophisticated investors must be large
relative to noise traders before the anomaly vanishes. In models such as Shleifer and Vishny
(1997) rational but capital constrained investors can generate cycles if losses in the WML
portfolio force momentum investors to unwind positions to meet liquidation requests. In
such a setting momentum profits depend on the relative supply of capital to noise and

17
  The NBER business cycle chronology is for the U.S. No NBER equivalent exists for the U.K. but the U.K.
and U.S. business activities were highly correlated during the Victorian Age.
                                                       20
arbitrage traders. Momentum profits will be high when times are good and plentiful noise
traders provide profit opportunities or when arbitrage capital is scarce and few sophisticated
traders compete.
    If volatility limits arbitrage, we should observe cycles in momentum and be able to predict
when momentum profits will vanish. In this section, we examine the cyclicality of the WML
returns and formally test whether momentum profit cycles from the Victorian and CRSP eras
share the same features and are predictable by the same variables.
    We test these hypotheses in two ways. First, we establish the fact that momentum portfolios
have been subject to similar cycles since the 1860s. We examine return distributions and the
duration spells of momentum profit and losses from both eras. We test the underlying null
hypothesis that the momentum portfolio returns and duration spells are drawn from the same
distributions across eras. Second, we model the duration dynamics as a function of the state of
the economy, the market return and a measure of scarcity of capital. If capital constraints limit
arbitrage, we would expect a measure of capital scarcity to predict the duration of cycles.
    We start with the momentum return distribution during both the Victorian and CRSP eras and
test whether the momentum return is white noise for both eras. Before we estimate AR
coefficients, we need to remind the difference in data structure between eras – four weeks for the
Victorian era and one month for the CRSP era. Thus, ρ             of the Victorian era should be
compared with ρ      of the CRSP era. So, we restrict our attention on ρ to k          1,2, … ,6 for
monthly data and to k         1,2, … ,4 for quarterly data. Table 13 shows the estimated
autocorrelations and t-stats. The Ljung-Box test in Table 14 shows the p-value for the null that
ρ    0 for all k. The Box-Pierce test in Table 14 shows the p-value for the null that ρV
ρCRSP for all k. For monthly data, we can reject that ρ     0 for all k for the CRSP era with 95%
confidence level. And, for quarterly data, we can reject that ρ      0 for all k for both eras with
95% confidence level. Furthermore, for both monthly and quarterly data, we cannot reject the
null that ρV          ρCRSP for all k. Hence, the momentum returns are different from white
noise and both eras share the same AR features.
    Next, we look at duration spells. We construct the sequence of duration spells for each era.
For example, if the monthly series of momentum profit is (0.01, -0.04, 0.01, 0.01, 0.01, -0.02, -
0.02), the sequence of duration up is (1,3) and the sequence of duration down is (1,2). We apply
this method for both eras and get 133 observations for the Victorian era and 224 observations of
                                                21
CRSP era. Table 15 summarizes the empirical distribution of duration spells for both periods.
We can see that empirical distributions are roughly similar.
    Suppose we call the sequence of duration up (down) duration spell D U D D and we want to
test the null hypothesis that: H : D X ~ F, for all i during the Victorian and CRSP eras for
X    U or D , where F is some duration distribution. We essentially adopt two strategies in
testing this null hypothesis. The first is a non-parametric approach, where we do not explicitly
specify a duration distribution. The second is parametric, and relies on a specific parametric
distribution. Both strategies have advantages and disadvantages. The non-parametric approach
has the obvious advantage that we do not have to select a distribution for the duration spells,
whereas the parametric approach not only tests the null hypothesis of equality across the two
eras, but also whether we actually selected a distribution that properly describes the duration
spells. Hence, the parametric approach tests a joint hypothesis, the null of identical duration
distributions and the null that the chosen duration distribution F is correctly specified. In
contrast, the non-parametric approach – while distribution-free – requires the duration spells to
be i.i.d. Since, we examine the sequence of up/down durations, this may not be an unreasonable
assumption. Moreover, the non-parametric tests typically are less powerful, as are many non-
parametric tests, each having particular power properties again violations of the null hypothesis.
For the non-parametric tests we consider four tests, they are (a) the Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon
test, (b) Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, (c) Cramer-von Mises test, and (d) Kuiper test. The Mann-
Whitney-Wilcoxon test is that the two samples are drawn from a single population, and therefore
that their probability distributions are equal – although it is sometimes referred to as a test of
equal medians. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) and Cramer-von Mises test statistics quantify a
distance between the empirical distribution functions of the two era samples. The null
distribution of these statistics is again calculated under the null hypothesis that the samples are
drawn from the same distribution. Finally, the Kuiper test is a variation of the K-S test that is
more sensitive to tail behavior. Details about the tests appear in Appendix B. In Table 16, we
report the results of the aforementioned tests. Entries to the table are p-values for the null
hypothesis that the duration spells during the Victorian and CRSP eras are drawn from the same
population.




                                                22
   The results are fairly easy to summarize. Overall we find overwhelming evidence in favor of
the null hypothesis that both eras feature duration spells that come from the same distribution.
The distribution of momentum cycles has remained similar since the 1860s.
   In our parametric tests, we have to select an explicit distribution for the durations. We
consider the following distributions: (a) the exponential, (b) Gamma, (c) Weibull. In Figure 6,
we plot the empirical duration up distribution against the three aforementioned functional forms
of duration distributions. In Figure 7, we plot the empirical duration down spell distribution
against the three aforementioned functional forms of duration distributions. Clearly, the
exponential distribution inadequately describes the data, whereas the other two are more
plausible. When we estimate the latter two, we find parameter estimates that are roughly the
same across the two eras. In Table 17, we report the Maximum Likelihood estimates and
standard errors. We also tested whether the parameters across the two eras are identical and
cannot reject the null that they are equal (details available upon request).
   We are confident that the momentum strategy generates similar return and duration
distributions in both eras. The question remains: can we explain momentum? We hypothesize
that the observed cycles are caused by changes in the relative supply of capital available to
sophisticated momentum traders and noise traders. We predict that a measure of the scarcity of
capital will affect the likelihood of duration spells. Specifically, we use the real risk-free rate as a
proxy for the scarcity of capital. When the risk-free rate is high we expect the capital available to
momentum traders to be in short supply and the cost of leverage to be high. With relatively few
sophisticated traders competing for momentum profits we expect profit (UP) cycles to last longer
and loss cycles (DOWN) to be shorter. Thus, we expect the real risk-free rate to effect the
duration of returns in different directions depending on whether we are in an UP or DOWN
cycle. This is one possible explanation on momentum cycle through the demand effect.
   One the other hand, we can think about naïve investors as liquidity providers. As the funds
from naïve investors increase, the sophisticated momentum traders may prolong momentum
profits. This is another explanation on momentum cycle through the supply effect. We use past
stock returns as a proxy of the size of naïve investors. Note that, in Table 9, we showed that the
momentum profits are significantly high after UP markets. There is also a demand effect, the
willingness of sophisticated investors to sustain momentum strategies. In line with the previous
empirical analyses, we estimate duration distributions with state variables. Specifically, we
                                                  23
model the parameters in the Weibull and Gamma distributions as                 exp
 ′
                      with the risk-free rate, and the stock market state as covariates. The details
of the procedure appear in Appendix B. Under both parametric assumptions, the expected
duration is inversely related to . Thus, the positive (negative) sign of   can be interpreted as the
positive (negative) relationship between state variables and durations.
     The results are reported in Table 18. As predicted the point estimate on the risk-free rate has
a positive effect on the duration of UP cycles and a negative effect on the duration of DOWN
cycles. Regardless of specification, the point estimates always have the predicted sign although
often insignificant from zero – particularly for impact of past market returns on momentum
durations. In Table 19 we formerly test the null hypothesis that the level of the risk-free rate
differs across UP and DOWN cycles. We test this hypothesis by pooling the UP and DOWN
cycles and allowing the all coefficients to vary with an interaction dummy equal to one if the
observation is a DOWN cycle. Regardless of era or specification, the effect of the risk-free rate is
always significantly lower in DOWN cycles. Hence, when capital is plentiful, the probability of
momentum traders suffering losses is significantly lower than when capital is scarce.


                                       V. Trading Costs


        In Tables 20 and 21, we turn our attention to transaction costs. It is indeed worth
investigating how costly it would be to sustain a momentum strategy. Korajczyk and Sadka
(2004) find that several momentum strategies may not implementable on a large scale when
transactions costs are taken into account. Lesmond, Schill and Zhou (2004) find that those
stocks that generate large momentum returns are precisely the stocks with high trading
costs. Both studies use data, such as intraday data, which is not available in our historical
period. We therefore use a simpler approach to gauge the importance of trading costs
associated with momentum portfolios.
        Table 21 provides data on average bid-ask spreads and average prices of stocks in
each of the portfolio categories, whereas Table 20 displays the transition probabilities
pertaining to portfolio turnover. Regarding the latter, each cell in the matrix contains the
proportion of times that a stock in a given portfolio at time t lands in a given portfolio at time
      1: With respect to trading costs we are most interested in the diagonal values which
                                                 24
tell us the proportion of times a stock remains in the same portfolio during a new formation. The
persistence of stock assignment is generally in the 30-35% range, which is fairly high compared
to current momentum strategies (see e.g. Conrad and Kaul (1998)).
       Table 21 also reports the value-weighted bid-ask spread as a percentage of the
midpoint for all stocks that are assigned to each portfolio at each date. For example, when
the Large Buy portfolio's spread is .02, it means that the value-weighted average bid-ask
spread of all stocks purchased or sold from the Large Buy portfolio was 2% of the midpoint
of their bid-ask price. To get an idea of transaction costs, it should be noted that the average
bid-ask spread of the Large Buy portfolio was .02. We know that only 1/6 of the portfolio is
replaced each period so dividing by 6 .02/6 = .0033. This is the average per period
transaction cost if one paid the full bid-ask spread and bought and sold every stock in the
new and old portfolios. However, some of the stocks in the new portfolio were also in the
portfolio we formed 6 months ago. From the transition matrix in Table 20, we see that on
average 32 % of the stocks in the Large Buy portfolio at any time are also in the same
portfolio 6 months later. We would therefore only have to turn over 68 % of the stocks.
Multiply .0033 by .68 to get the final back of the envelope estimate of bid-ask costs of
roughly 23 basis points per period. This turns out to be the lowest cost. For the other
portfolios the costs can be as high as 229 basis points (Small Loser). Hence, these rough
measures show that trading costs are high, at least as much as they are in recent history,
which makes the profits of momentum not realizable except to those who were making a
market in those stocks.


                                         VI. Conclusion


       Among financial market anomalies, price momentum in stocks is generally viewed as
posing the greatest challenge to rational asset pricing theories. Shleifer and Vishny (1997)
proposed that anomalies like momentum could persist due to the limits to arbitrage imposed by
slow movements of capital available to arbitrageurs. The limits to arbitrage arguments imply
that when arbitrage capital is in short supply profitable momentum cycles should last longer and
breaks in momentum cycles should be shorter. We provide empirical support for this hypothesis
by using the level of the interest rate as a proxy for the shortage of available arbitrage capital.
                                                  25
       With increasing globalization, arbitrageurs in one country can exploit with ease profitable
trading opportunities in other countries. That makes it difficult to measure shortage of arbitrage
capital, since capital can easily move across national borders. We therefore focus on the US
market, since the US is a much larger economy than other countries in the world and if the level
of the interest rate were to proxy for shortage of arbitrage capital, we should expect it to hold
better in the US. We therefore use US stock market data for the 1926 - 2008 period to examine
our hypothesis.
       Since the level of the interest rate is a poor proxy for the shortage of arbitrage capital, we
examine the robustness of our conclusions by checking the validity of our hypothesis using data
from an entirely different period of history. We use a new hand-collected data set of the London
Stock Exchange which consists of the closing prices, dividends and shares outstanding of 1,808
stocks (equity) listed between 1866 and 1907 (Victorian age). By today's standard, the market
was very primitive – and therefore presented an interesting case to examine price
momentum. We find strong support for our hypothesis in both the 1926-2008 US stock market
data as well as the Victorian age data. In addition, the histogram of the lengths of profitable
momentum cycles and breaks in momentum cycles in the two periods are about the same.
       When we replicate the trading strategy designed by Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) using
Victorian age data, we find compelling evidence for short term reversal, intermediate term
continuation and long run reversal in momentum profits. Momentum profits are low following
three year down markets and high following three year up markets; and they do not appear to be
compensation for economy wide systematic risk, captured by the standard CAPM or
macroeconomic factor models. They are higher during economic contractions, a pattern that is
different from the post World War II period. Our finding of price momentum during the
Victorian age eliminates the possibility that price momentum may be an artifact of data mining.
       That is the systematic pattern across data spanning several centuries and is consistent
with explanations based on overconfidence and an abundance of noise traders relative to
availability of arbitrage capital. The defining characteristics of momentum – its cyclicality – is
not related to GDP but is predictably linked to the level of the real risk-free rate. The theoretical
literature emphasizes the role of “dumb money” and “limits of arbitrage” in explaining price
momentum in stocks. Conventional wisdom is that relative abundance of dumb money is
typically associated with sustained periods of up markets and low interest rates leading to asset
                                                 26
bubbles that will be difficult to burst even for arbitrageurs with very deep pockets. Our findings
suggest that “dumb money” may be abundant relative to “smart money” even during periods
when the risk-free rate is high.




                                               27
                                     References


[1] Annaert, J. and W. Van Hyfte, 2006, Long-horizon mean reversion for the Brussels Stock
Exchange: evidence for the 19th century, Discussion Paper, Ghent University.

[2] Asness, C., T. Moskowitz and L. Pedersen, 2008, Value and Momentum Everywhere,
Discussion Paper, Chicago and NYU.

[3] Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, A Model of Investor
Sentiment, Journal of Financial Economics 49, 307 - 343.

[4] Berk, Jonathan, Richard Green and V. Naik, 1999, Optimal Investment, Growth Options
and Security Returns, Journal of Finance, 54, 1553 - 1608.

[5] Black, Fischer, 1973, Yest, Virgina, There is Hope: Tests of the Value Line Ranking
System, Financial Analyst Journal, 29, 10 - 14.

[6] Brav, A., and J. B. Heaton, 2002, Competing Theories of Financial Anomalies, Review of
Financial Studies 15, 575 - 606

[7] Carhart, M. M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance,
52, 57 - 82.

[8] Carlson, M., Fisher, A., Giammarino, R., 2004, Corporate investment and asset price
dynamics: implications for the cross-section of returns, Journal of Finance 59, 2577 - 2603.

[9] Chan, Louis K. C., Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Josef Lakonishok, 1996, Momentum
strategies, Journal of Finance 51, 1681 - 1713.

[10] Chen, Long and Lu Zhang, 2007, Neoclassical Factors, Working Paper, Ross School of
Business, University of Michigan.

[11] Chui, Andy C. W., Sheridan Titman, and K. C. John Wei, 2007, Individualism and
Momentum around the World, Working paper, University of Texas.

[12] Chordia, Tarun, and Lakshmanan Shivakumar, 2002, Momentum, business cycle, and
time-varying expected returns, Journal of Finance 57, 985 - 1019

[13] Conrad, Jennifer, and Gautam Kaul, 1998, An anatomy of trading strategies, Review of
Financial Studies 11, 489 - 519.

[14] Cooper, Michael. J., Roberto C. Gutierrez, and Allaudeen Hameed, 2004, Market states
and momentum, Journal of Finance 59, 1345 - 1365.

[15] Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, Investor
                                           28
psychology and security market under- and overreactions, Journal of Finance 53, 1839 -
1886.

[16] Daniel, Kent, M. Grinblatt, S. Titman, and R. Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual fund
performance with characteristic-based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1217 - 1218.

[17] Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1996, Multifactor explanations of asset
pricing anomalies, Journal of Financial Economics 51, 55 - 84.

[18] Frazzini, Andrea, 2006, The disposition effect and under-reaction to news, Journal of
Finance

[19] Gabaix, Xavier, 2009, Power Laws in Economics and Finance, forthcoming, Annual
Review of Economics.

[20] Gabaix, Xavier, Parameswaran Gopikrishnan, Vasiliki Plerou and H. Eugene Stanley
2006, Institutional Investors and Stock Market Volatility, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
121, 461-504.

[21] Gabaix, Xavier, and Rustam Ibragimov, 2009, Rank-1/2: A Simple Way to Improve the
OLS Estimation of Tail Exponents forthcoming, Journal of Business Economics and
Statistics.

[22] Gatev, Evan, William Goetzmann and Geert Rouwenhorst, 2006, Pairs Trading:
Performance of a Relative-Value Arbitrage Rule, Review of Financial Studies, 19, 797 - 827.

[23] Gervais, Simon, and Terrance Odean, 2001, Learning to be overconfident, Review of
Financial Studies 14, 1 - 27.

[24] Goetzmann, William, 1993, Patterns in Three Centuries of Stock Market Prices, Journal
of Business, 66, 249 - 270.

[25] Goetzmann, W., R.G. Ibbotson, and L. Peng, 2001, A New Historical Database for the
NYSE 1815 to 1925: Performance and Predictability, Journal of Financial Markets, 4, 1 - 32.

[26] Griffin, John, M., Xiuqing Ji, and J. Spencer Martin, 2005, Global momentum
strategies: A portfolio perspective, Journal of Portfolio Management, 31, 23 - 29

[27] Grinblatt, Mark, and Bing Han, 2005, Prospect Theory, Mential Accounting, and
Momentum, Journal of Financial Economics, 78, 311 - 149.

[28] Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2001, What makes investor trade? Journal of
Finance 56, 589 - 616.

[29] Grinblatt, Mark, and Tobias Moskowitz,             1999,    Do    industries   explain
momentum?, Journal of Finance 54, 1249 - 1290.
                                          29
[30] Grinblatt, Mark, and Tobias Moskowitz, 2004, Predicting stock price movements from
past returns: the role of consistency and tax-loss selling, Journal of Financial Economics, 71,
541 - 579.

[31] Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman, 1989, Mutual Fund Performance: An Analysis of
Quarterly Portfolio Holdings, Journal of Business 62, 393 - 416.

[32] Grundy, Bruce D., and J. Spencer Martin, 2001, Understanding the nature of the risks
and the source of the rewards to momentum investing, Review of Financial Studies 14, 29 -
78.

[33] Hong, Harrison, Terence Lim, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2000, Bad news travels slowly:
Size, analyst coverage, and the profitability of momentum strategies, Journal of Finance 55,
266 - 295.

[34] Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy C. Stein, 1999, A unified theory of underreaction,
momentum trading and overreaction in asset markets, Journal of Finance 54, 2143 - 2184.

[35] Hou, Kewei, 2001, Information diffusion and asymmetric cross-autocorrelations in
stock returns, Working Paper, The Ohio State University.

[36] Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, 1990, Evidence              of predictable   behavior of security
returns, Journal of Finance 45, 881 - 898.

[37] Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Sheridan Titman, 1991, Short horizon return reversals and
the bid-ask spread, Working paper UCLA.

[38] Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and
selling losers: Implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65 - 91.

[39] Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1995, Overreaction, delayed reaction, and
contrarian profits, Review of Financial Studies 8, 973 - 993.

[40] Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 2001, Profitability of momentum
strategies: An evaluation of alternative explanations, Journal of Finance 56, 699 - 720.

[41] Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 2002, Cross-sectional and time-series
determinants of momentum returns, Review of Financial Studies 15, 143 - 158.

[42] Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 2005, Momentum: A review, in Advances
in Behavioral Finance II, Ed. Richard Thaler, Princeton University Press, NJ.

[43] Jensen, Michael and George Bennington, 1970, Random walks and technical theories:
Some additional evidence, Journal of Finance 25, 469 - 482.


                                            30
[44] Johnston, Louis D. and Samuel H. Williamson, 2008, What Was the U.S. GDP
Then? Measuring Worth.

[45] Korajczyk, Robert A. and Ronnie Sadka, 2004, Are Momentum Profits Robust to
Trading Costs?, Journal of Finance 59, 1039 - 1082.

[46] Lakonishok, J., R. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1994, Contrarian investment, extrapolation,
and risk, Journal of Finance 49, 1541 - 1578.

[47] Lesmond, David, Michael Schill and Chungsheng Zhou, 2004, The Illusory Nature of
Momentum Profits, Journal of Financial Economics, 71, 349 - 380.

[48] Levy, Robert, 1967, Relative strength as a criterion for investment selection, Journal of
Finance, 22, 595 - 610.

[49] Lo, Andrew W., and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1990, When are contrarian profits due to
stock market-overreaction? Review of Financial Studies 3, 175 - 208.

[51] Newey, W., and K. West, 1987, A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity
and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix, Econometrica, 55, 703-708.

[52] Officer, Lawrence H., 2008a, What Was the U.K. GDP Then?” Measuring
Worth.

[53] Officer, Lawrence H., 2008b, Five Ways to Compute the Relative Value of a UK Pound
Amount, 1830 to Present, Measuring Worth.

[54] Rouwenhorst, K. Geert, 1998, International momentum strategies, Journal of Finance
53, 267 - 284.

[55] Roll, Richard, 1983, Vas first Das? Journal of Portfolio Management, 18 - 28.

[56] Sagi, Jacob S., and Mark S. Seasholes (2007), Firm-Specific Attributes and the Cross-
Section of Momentum, Journal of Financial Economics 84, 389 - 434.

[57] Shleifer, A. and Vishny, R.W. (1997), The Limits of Arbitrage, Journal of Finance, 52,
35 -56.

[58] Thomas and Hwang, The 52 week high and momentum investing, Journal of
Finance, 59, 2145-2176.




                                           31
                      Appendices
    A.    The London Stock Market Data: 1866-1907

     The closing bid and ask prices were collected from the quotation list of The Money Market Review, a weekly
financial paper published in London between 1860 and 1908. Published on Saturdays, The Money Market Review
reprinted H.H. Wetenhall's official quotation list of the previous Friday's closing prices. These were the official
prices published by the Committee of the Stock Exchange under the name “Course of the Exchange”. The data was
sampled every 28-days rather than the more traditional end of month observations, due to the newspaper’s weekly
publication schedule.

     The official list was organized by industry and asset type. The list begins with British government debt, then
lists foreign government debt, British, Commonwealth and foreign railroads and concludes with commercial
securities organized by industry (banks, breweries, canals & docks, insurance, iron coal & steel, gas, mining,
shipping, spinning, waterworks, tea, land, financial & investment trusts and miscellaneous securities). The Money
Market Review's list is not complete. Some industries do not appear on certain dates and within industries
individual stocks may have no price for one or more dates. When possible, we filled in the missing price data
with The Economist's “Stock Market Prices Current”. The Economist 's price list included only the largest and
most active securities listed in London. Since its coverage was sparse, we only employ the Economist to fill in
data that was missing from the The Money Market Review. If a section of the official list was omitted from a
given Money Market Review, we attempted to replace the missing data with quotes from the Economist.

    The data set contains 610,421 bid and ask prices. To minimize entry time and assure quality, the data was
double entered by undergraduate research assistants. As a consequence of our data entry strategy, a stock must
appear on the official list for at least one January before it is included in the data set.

     The official lists did not differentiate between equity and debt. Today, one would assume that an economist and
trained historian would have no problem distinguishing a stock from a bond, but in the 19th Century the difference
between debt and equity was seldom obvious. The 19th Century English publications generally referred to both debt
and equity claims as “stocks”. A careful examination of the claims each class of shareholder enjoyed, usually
allowed us to determine if a given security was a debt or equity claim. When selecting which securities to include in
our data set, we excluded all securities with fixed interest rates, a face value to be returned at a maturity date or other
obvious characteristics of bonds.

     In general, London securities were divided into the following types of asset classes: “stocks”, “shares”,
“ordinary”, “common”, “limited”, “deferred”, “preference”, “debenture” and “convertible” shares. Whether, the
name of the share corresponded to what a modern investor would consider equity depended upon the type of
company in question. We looked at each potential security and excluded every security with characteristics similar
to modern day debt. “Common”, “limited”, and “ordinary” shares were almost always the residual claimants and
therefore correspond to modern day equity. “Stock” on the other hand, was the name given to 19th Century bonds!
“Preference”, “debenture” and “convertible” shares were also excluded, while “deferred” shares generally referred
to debt offerings with one notable exception, the investment trusts. Many investment trusts issued only three types of
shares, “preference”, “debenture” and “deferred”. Debenture and preference shares had a fixed dividend rate and
often had a maturity date at which time the nominal amount (face value) of the share would be returned. Deferred
shares in investment trusts, on the other hand, were generally the residual claimant to all income in excess of the
debenture and preference obligations. We include the deferred shares of investment trusts in our data, provided the
trust has no ordinary shares and the deferred shares satisfy our conditions of no maturity date and no cap on
dividends.

     For each January, a list of all securities was compiled, meeting our definition of equity. This list of security
names and copies of the subsequent year's quotation lists, were distributed to research assistants. To eliminate typos
each date was double entered by different research assistants and then compared. Therefore, to appear in the data set,
a stock had to appear on the official quotation list for at least one January.




                                                            32
    In addition to the closing prices, we collected dividend payments and shares outstanding, for each security.
These allow us to compute market values and 28-day holding period returns that accurately reflect dividend
payments and stock splits. In total, the data set consists of 610,421 bid and ask prices and 39,090 dividend
payments. The dividend payments were collected from the security lists of The Investor's Monthly Manual18 . The
Investor's Monthly Manual (IMM) published the monthly closing price, shares outstanding and last four dividends
of each security, listed on the London Stock Exchange. We use the IMM to collect dividend and share histories for
each security that appears in our data set. Like The Money Market Review, certain securities vanish from the IMM
and reappear at a later date without explanation.


A1. Capital Calls and Returns
We use the price and dividend data to compute the 28-day holding period return for each consecutive price
observation. The 28-day holding period gross return is defined as                    / where         and are the
average of the bid and ask prices at time     1 and respectively, and is the net dividend payments and capital
calls (if any) that occurred between time and      1 . Capital calls are a form of reverse dividend common to 19th
Century stock exchanges.

Many 19th Century companies issued shares with a nominal value known as the “amount”. The company typically
did not require the shareholders to pay for the entire share at the time of issue. Instead, shares were issued with a
“par” or “paid” value that was less than the nominal amount of the share. Dividends were based on the par value of
the share and not the nominal amount. For example, if a company with a £100 share with £50 paid announced a 10%
declared dividend, this would amount to £5 rather than £10:

The shareholder was legally obligated to pay the remaining capital (the difference between the nominal and paid
amount) at the whim of the company. Thus the company could “call” upon its shareholders to pay for the remaining
value of their shares. This call was apparently binding, as the shares in many bankrupt companies with par values
less than nominal amounts traded at negative values when the implicit short put option embedded in the shares was
worth more than the company's equity. 19 To compute holding period returns, we treat capital calls as a negative
dividend paid at the beginning of the holding period.

A2. Data Limitations
         Historical data provides both a new laboratory to evaluate theories as well as a unique set of challenges. Missing
observations are far more common in historical data. There are three types of missing data. Firstly, there are securities that
vanish because the company goes out of business. Secondly, there are securities that are not quoted for a period and then
re-appear without explanation. Finally, there are dates when the newspapers omit an entire industry from the price lists.

         The first case is the well known problem of survivorship bias. Securities do not vanish from the price list
at random. Instead, the companies with poor returns and low stock prices are far more likely to go bankrupt and
vanish. Two characteristics of our data mitigate the potential survivorship bias. To begin with, very few securities
simply “vanish”. When a security disappears from our price list we generally observe its decline to zero (or
negative) price before it is removed from the list. When a security vanishes we make every attempt to discover
what happened to the company and compute the final holding period return. If the security vanished due to
reorganization, liquidation or merger, the IMM often lists the details and we correct the last return to reflect these
events.

        The second and third cases of missing data are more troublesome. These are cases of securities that do not
go out of business, but are merely omitted from the price list on a given day. If prices are missing completely at
random, the analysis that follows can easily be altered to accommodate the missing observations. If the probability


  18
       The IMM is available online at http://som.yale.edu/imm/html/index.shtml
  19
       We only include stocks with positive values in the analysis that follows.


                                                             33
of observing a given return is correlated with the value of that return, however, the missing values will bias our
estimates.

         In the computations to follow, we form our momentum portfolios using actual prices available to Victorian
era investors. We base all buy and sell decisions on actual price data. Once a portfolio is formed, however, we
compute its post-formation return from observable prices if possible and interpolate data if necessary.

          When necessary, we replace missing prices with interpolated data via the following algorithm. If a security
vanishes from the quotation list we look ahead to the next date that a quotation is available. If the security reappears
N-periods in the future, we compute the N-period gross return and convert it to a 1-period return by taking the gross
return to the (1/N)th power. We replace all missing 1-period returns with this interpolated return. For example, if a
security's price is last observed at time t and reappears 20% higher at time t+5 we replace the missing values at time
t+1 to t+5 with (1.2)(1/5) : When computing multiperiod returns we assume all dividends are paid at the end of the
period.

         If a stock vanishes and does not reappear for one year we set its return to -99.99 %. Setting all extinct
stocks to -99.99 % return surely understates the true return. However, the nature of the conclusions we obtain
do not change if we relax our assumptions by either ignoring the extinction (don't set the last return to -
99.99%) or ignoring all missing data by assuming it is missing at random and computing results from
observable data only. Setting extinct stocks to -99.99% obviously lowers gross returns but the relative
comparisons of portfolios sorted by size or momentum are robust to the treatment of missing data - as will be
discussed in detail later. Finally, it should be noted that we do not have enough industries during the Victorian age
to examining the importance of industry momentum identified by Grinblatt and Moskowitz (1999).



                                   B. Duration Analyses and Tests
B1. Nonparametric tests
          Duration spells of up and down momentum cycles are tested for equality across the Victorian and CRSP
eras in Table 16. The test statistics are: are (a) the Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon (MWW) test, (b) Kolmogorov-
Smirnov test, (c) Cramer-von Mises test, and (d) Kuiper test Entries to the table are p-values for the null hypothesis
that the duration spells during the Victorian and CRSP eras are drawn from the same population. We provide a short
description of the tests in this section.

          The MWW test is for chances of obtaining greater observations in one population versus the other. The null
hypothesis in the Mann–Whitney test is that the two samples are drawn from a single population, and therefore that
their probability distributions are equal. The alternative hypothesis is that one sample is stochastically greater. It
requires the two samples to be independent. In a most general formulation, the test may be thought of as testing the
null hypothesis that the probability of an observation from one population        exceeding an observation from the
second population        is 0.5:             0.5 versus              0.5,              0.5,                 0.5 in an
alternative hypothesis. The test involves the calculation of a statistic, usually called U (U-statistic is due to
Hoeffding (1948)) whose distribution under the null hypothesis is known – in samples of moderate size it is
normally distributed.

         While the MWW is based on ranks, the next statistic, the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test (K–S test) is a form of
minimum distance estimation used in our case to compare two samples (two-sample K–S test). The Kolmogorov–
Smirnov statistic quantifies a distance between the empirical distribution functions of two samples – in our case
duration spells across two eras. It has a non-standard asymptotic distribution based on a Brownian bridge. The
Cramer-von Mises test is also based on distance measures between empirical (duration) distributions, yet it involves
a different metric – namely a rather than Sup norm in the case of the K-S test. Finally the Kuiper test is also
closely related to the K-S test but distinguishes the maximum deviation above from the one below of the two
cumulative distributions being compared.



                                                          34
B2. Parametric Analysis
         We explain how the estimates and the tests reported in Tables 17 through 19 are computed. Let denote a
random variable of duration for positive or negative momentum profits. For Table 17, let    , denote the
probability density function of with the parameter (vector) . For the exponential distribution,   ,         .
For the Gamma distribution,         , ,                           . And, for the Weibull distribution,
                                                      Г
   , ,                            . We can use the maximum likelihood estimation of parameters of interest.

          Given a sample of duration of         , we compute the log likelihood of sample as
  θ      ∑     log      ,   . Then, the ML estimates of are computed from
                                                                   θ .
          Let denote the dimension of . For the exponential distribution,       1, for the Gamma and the Weibull
distributaion,     2. Standard errors of    are obtained from the diagonal elements of        . The (i,j) element of
      is

                                                  ,                           log   ,       | ,
which is numerically approximated as:

                              ι       ι                       ι      ι                  ι       ι               ι   ι
                1                         2                                                             2               ,
                                                                          2

where is set as 10 and ι is a -dimensional vector of zero except i-th component of 1. After approximating the
  -by- matrix of       as the above, we take the diagonal elements of the inverse matrix of           to get the
standard errors of  . For Table 18, we first apply a 3 month MA filter to all the data, including momentum profits
and calculate momentum durations and the corresponding state variables.

          Next, we keep duration data above 3 months and we estimate parameters and standard errors of an
accelerated failure time (AFT) model which takes the form
                                                        exp      ,
where is the duration, is the baseline failure time which follows the baseline distribution, is a vector of
explanatory variables, and is the parameter vector. We assume follows the Gamma distribution or the Weibull
distribution with =1. Let     , , denote the density of duration with the state variable of . Under the Gamma
distribution, the density of with explanatory variables of is
                                                          , , ,                         .
                                                                               Г
And, under the Weibull distribution, that is
                                                      , , ,                                 .

        Here, we set         exp                      . Note that the dimension of is        4 with our baseline
model and the specification of AFT. Given a sample of duration of          and state variables of        , we
compute the log likelihood of sample as θ      ∑    log        , ,      . We use again ML to estimate the models.

          From the estimates of for Victorian era with a Gamma distribution, we can infer that a 1% increase in
the level of will induce 40% increase of the average duration time. Table 19 shows the difference of the effects of
state variables across UP and DOWN cycles. To test this formally, we pool the duration data as     ,       for
each era.       is a down dummy variable which is 1 if the cycle is down and 0 otherwise. Under the Gamma
distribution, the density of with explanatory variables of and the down dummy          is

                                              ,   , , , ,            ,                              .
                                                                                    Г
         And, under the Weibull distribution, that is
                                     , , , , ,        ,                                                     .


                                                                         35
          Here, we set         exp                                 ,        ,           ,         ,                and
                  . Note that the dimension of is        4 under given parametric assumptions and the specification
of AFT. We use the same method as in table 18 for estimating parameters and the standard errors of those. The
results of Table 19 show that we can reject the null that the effect of risk free rate is the same across UP and DOWN
cycles.




                                                         36
         Table 1: Returns of Relative Strength Portfolios - Short horizons
                        London Stock Exchange 1866-1907

The relative strength portfolios are formed on J-month lagged returns and held for K months. The values of J and K for the
different strategies are indicated in the first column and row respectively. The stocks are ranked in ascending order on the basis of
J-month lagged returns. A value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the lowest 33rd percentile past return is the sell portfolio. A
value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the highest 67th percentile past return is the buy portfolio. t-statistics are between
parentheses. As noted at the beginning of section 2, we considered 28-day periods as months in our calculations. Moreover, when
considering a year, i.e. K = 12 in Jegadeesh and Titman, we used 13 28-day periods.



                                                 skip                                  K
                       J
                                                month
                                                                 3             6              9            13
                                               -0.0046        0.0001        0.0016          0.0019      0.0023
                       3           Buy
                                              (-2.6500)      (0.0020)      (1.4428)        (1.8167)     (2.4009)
                                                0.0020        0.0000        -0.0003         0.0000      0.0001
                       3           Sell
                                               (1.4300)      (0.0001)      (-0.2643)       (0.0389)     (0.1415)
                                               -0.0066        0.0001        0.0019          0.0018      0.0022
                       3         Buy-Sell
                                              (-3.3800)      (0.0019)      (1.8938)        (2.1452)     (3.0538)
                                               -0.0017        0.0018        0.0026          0.0030      0.0032
                       6           Buy
                                              (-1.1800)      (1.5419)      (2.3060)        (2.8644)     (3.2670)
                                                0.0009       -0.0008        -0.0008        -0.0007      0.0000
                       6           Sell
                                               (0.6000)      (-0.6585)     (-0.6817)       (-0.6093)   (-0.0161)
                                               -0.0026        0.0027        0.0034          0.0038      0.0032
                       6         Buy-Sell
                                              (-1.4800)      (2.0877)      (2.9693)        (3.6612)     (3.6469)
                                               -0.0004        0.0026        0.0035          0.0034      0.0034
                       9           Buy
                                              (-0.3100)      (2.1190)      (3.0610)        (3.2159)     (3.4521)
                                                0.0000       -0.0023        -0.0019        -0.0013      -0.0006
                       9           Sell
                                              (-0.0200)      (-1.3453)     (-1.2881)       (-0.983)    (-0.4663)
                                               -0.0004        0.0049        0.0054          0.0048      0.0040
                       9         Buy-Sell
                                              (-0.2500)      (2.8105)      (3.7652)        (3.7538)     (3.7212)
                                                0.0022        0.0032        0.0034          0.0034      0.0033
                      13           Buy
                                               (1.7800)      (2.8363)      (3.1544)        (3.2221)     (3.3945)
                                               -0.0016       -0.0023        -0.0014        -0.0007      -0.0001
                      13           Sell
                                              (-0.9600)      (-1.3502)     (-0.9738)       (-0.4948)   (-0.0540)
                                                0.0038        0.0055        0.0048          0.0040      0.0034
                      13         Buy-Sell
                                               (2.2100)      (3.3047)      (3.4207)        (3.2261)     (3.0743)




                                                                37
  Table 2: Betas and Market Capitalization of Relative Strength Portfolios
                     London Stock Exchange 1866-1907
The relative strength portfolios are formed on a 6-month lagged returns and held for 6 months. The stocks are ranked in
ascending order on the basis of 6-month lagged returns. A value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the lowest 33rd percentile past
return is the sell portfolio. A value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the highest 67th percentile past return is the buy portfolio. The
remaining are assigned in the middle portfolio.


                                                                                 Average Market Cap
                                                     CAPM Beta
                                                                                   (million pounds)


                           Buy                           1.171                          13.369
                           Middle 1/3                    0.735                          19.409
                           Sell                          1.195                          12.437


                           Buy-Sell                     -0.024




                                                                 38
               Table 3: Monthly Returns of Size-based and Beta-based Relative Strength Portfolios
                                           London Stock Exchange 1866-1907
The relative strength portfolios are formed on a 6-month lagged returns and held for 6 months. The stocks are ranked in ascending order on the basis of 6-month lagged returns. A
value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the lowest 33rd percentile past return is the sell portfolio and A value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the highest 67th percentile past return
is the buy portfolio. The remaining are assigned in the middle portfolio. Average monthly returns and excess returns of these portfolios and the returns of the relative strength
portfolios formed using size-based and beta-based subsamples of securities are reported here. Size is sorted in lower, middle and highest thirds. Panel A reports average returns.
Panel B reports Jensen's CAPM alphas. And, Panel C reports CAPM regressions augmented with a NBER Business Cycle dummy.



                                                   Past Returns              All              Small      Medium         Large
                                                                  Panel A: Size-sorted Average returns and t-stats
                                                                           0.0026         0.0014         0.0034         0.0024
                                                   Buy
                                                                          (2.3060)       (0.7968)       (2.7908)       (2.0136)
                                                                           0.0020        -0.0018         0.0006         0.0021
                                                   Middle
                                                                          (3.0078)       (-1.042)       (0.4981)       (3.1300)
                                                                          -0.0008        -0.0019         -0.0019        -0.0007
                                                   Sell
                                                                         (-0.6817)      (-1.0100)       (-1.4414)      (-0.5188)
                                                                           0.0034         0.0033         0.0053         0.0031
                                                   Buy-Sell
                                                                          (2.9693)       (2.7130)       (6.0779)       (2.4098)


                                                                  Panel B: Excess returns (Jensen's CAPM alphas)
                                                                          -0.0040        -0.0028         -0.0013        -0.0044
                                                   Buy
                                                                         (-5.0428)        (-1.5862)     (-1.1498)    (-4.9347)
                                                                          -0.0029        -0.0052         -0.0032        -0.0029
                                                   Middle
                                                                         (-6.6399)      (-2.8756)       (-2.6764)      (-6.6667)
                                                                          -0.0075        -0.0071         -0.0074        -0.0075
                                                   Sell
                                                                         (-8.1057)      (-3.7656)       (-6.241)        (-7.486)
                                                                           0.0035         0.0043         0.0061         0.0031
                                                   Buy-Sell
                                                                          (2.9840)       (3.4295)       (6.8496)       (2.3639)



Table continued on next page ...


                                                                                         39
Table 3 Continued




                                        Panel C: Jensen Alphas with Market and NBER Business Cycle Dummy
                    Past Returns     All        Small      Medium       Large           All       Small      Medium       Large
                                                                                         Beta on NBER Business Cycle Dummy
                                                  Jensen Alphas
                                                                                                (Dummy=1 if recession)
                                   -0.0041      -0.001     -0.0002     -0.0046        0.0002     -0.0036     -0.0023      0.0004
                    Buy
                                   (-3.6934)   (-0.3983)   (-0.1022)   (-3.6858)     (0.1573)    (-1.0369)   (-1.0167)   (0.2553)
                                   -0.0028     -0.0037     -0.0019     -0.0028        -0.0003    -0.0029     -0.0025     -0.0002
                    Middle
                                   (-4.4469)   (-1.4656)   (-1.1618)   (-4.5684)     (-0.3852)   (-0.8222)   (-1.0538)   (-0.2391)
                                   -0.0074     -0.0058     -0.0048     -0.0077        -0.0004    -0.0025     -0.0052      0.0003
                    Sell
                                   (-5.6204)   (-2.2076)   (-2.8974)   (-5.4264)     (-0.1968)   (-0.6662)   (-2.2123)   (0.1533)
                                    0.0032      0.0048      0.0047      0.0031       6.08E-04    -0.0011      0.0028     1.44E-04
                    Buy-Sell
                                   (1.9362)    (2.7614)    (3.7368)    (1.6406)      (0.2613)    (-0.4610)   (1.6222)    (0.0551)




                                                                       40
          Table 4: Sensitivity to treatment of exit firms - CAPM Alphas
In this table we relax the assumption that extinct stocks have -99.99 % return. The relative strength portfolios are formed on a 6-
month lagged returns and held for 6 months. The stocks are ranked in ascending order on the basis of 6-month lagged returns. A
value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the lowest 33rd percentile past return is the sell portfolio and A value-weighted portfolio of
stocks in the highest 67th percentile past return is the buy portfolio. The remaining are assigned in the middle portfolio. Average
monthly returns and excess returns of these portfolios and the returns of the relative strength portfolios formed using size-based
and beta-based subsamples of securities are reported here. Size is sorted in lower, middle and highest thirds.

                                                   Small             Medium              Large
                                                Panel A: Exit firms set at -99.99%
                                                  -0.0028           -0.0013             -0.0044
                                 Buy
                                                 (-1.5862)         (-1.1498)           (-4.9347)
                                                  -0.0052           -0.0032             -0.0029
                                 Middle
                                                 (-2.8756)         (-2.6764)           (-6.6667)
                                                  -0.0071           -0.0074             -0.0075
                                 Sell
                                                 (-3.7656)          (-6.241)            (-7.486)
                                                   0.0043            0.0061              0.0031
                                 Buy-Sell
                                                  (3.4295)          (6.8496)            (2.3639)

                                              Panel B: Exit firms not set at -99.99%
                                                  0.0024            0.0025              -0.0011
                                 Buy
                                                 (2.4802)          (4.6837)            (-2.3061)
                                                  0.0012             0.0008              -0.001
                                 Middle
                                                 (2.1281)          (2.1064)            (-3.8416)
                                                  -0.0014           -0.0034             -0.0048
                                 Sell
                                                 (-1.3781)           (-5.0422)         (-8.3276)
                                                   0.0038              0.0059            0.0037
                                 Buy-Sell
                                                  (3.7387)            (8.2087)          (4.2804)




                                                                41
    Table 5: Monthly Returns on Size-based Relative Strength Portfolio by
             Calendar Months. London Stock Exchange 1866-1907
The relative strength portfolios are formed on a 6-month lagged returns and held for 6 months. The stocks are ranked in
ascending order on the basis of 6-month lagged returns. A value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the lowest 33rd percentile past
return is the sell portfolio. A value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the highest 67th percentile past return is the buy portfolio.
Returns are 28-day, not monthly. January returns are coded as the first 28-day return entirely in the new year. P-value shows that
the result of t-test on the null of equality with Jan.

                            Month                       All         Small          Med        Large
                                    Panel A: Return on Loser, Middle, and Winner Portfolio
                                                         Return on 6-6 portfolios: Losers
                            Jan                    0.0020      0.0080       0.0039        0.0017
                            Feb-Dec                -0.0010     -0.0027     -0.0022       -0.0008
                            p-value                0.5300      0.1400       0.2200        0.6100

                                                          Return on 6-6 portfolios: Middle
                            Jan                      0.0103      0.0096      0.0094      0.0105
                            Feb-Dec                  0.0014     -0.0029     -0.0001      0.0015
                            p-value                  0.0000      0.0700      0.0400      0.0000

                                                          Return   on 6-6 portfolios: Winners
                            Jan                      0.0082        0.0087      0.0132      0.0076
                            Feb-Dec                  0.0024        0.0008      0.0027      0.0023
                            p-value                  0.1700        0.2500      0.0300      0.2400


                                           Panel B: Return on Winner - Loser Portfolio
                                                     0.0063      0.0005       0.0095         0.0060
                            Jan
                                                    (2.3922)    (0.1770)     (4.3477)       (2.0312)
                                                     0.0032      0.0035       0.0050         0.0029
                            Feb-Dec
                                                    (2.5891)    (2.7262)     (5.3517)       (2.0833)
                            p-value                  0.4694      0.5089       0.1700         0.5130




                                                               42
         Table 6: Sensitivity to treatment of exit firms - Average returns
We relaxed our assumptions by either ignoring the extinction (don't set the last return to -99.99%) or ignoring all missing data by
assuming it is missing completely at random (MCAR) and computing results from observable data only. The relative strength
portfolios are formed on a 6-month lagged returns and held for 6 months. The stocks are ranked in ascending order on the basis of
6-month lagged returns. A value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the lowest 33rd percentile past return is the sell portfolio and A
value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the highest 67th percentile past return is the buy portfolio. The remaining are assigned in
the middle portfolio. Average monthly returns and excess returns of these portfolios and the returns of the relative strength
portfolios formed using size-based and beta-based subsamples of securities are reported here. Size is sorted in lower, middle and
highest thirds.

                      Size                MCAR               Not set at -99.99%      Set at -99.99%
                                        Panel A: Size-sorted Average monthly returns
                                          0.0031                   0.0028                0.0033
                      Small
                                         (3.0173)                 (2.8179)              (2.7130)
                                          0.0049                   0.0049                0.0053
                      Medium
                                         (6.6676)                 (6.8329)              (6.0779)
                                          0.0034                   0.0034                0.0031
                      Large
                                         (3.9647)                 (4.0896)              (2.4098)
                                       Panel B: Excess returns (Jensen's CAPM alphas)
                                          0.0040                   0.0037                0.0043
                      Small
                                         (4.0116)                 (3.7387)              (3.4295)
                                          0.0058                   0.0059                0.0061
                      Medium
                                         (8.1034)                 (8.2087)              (6.8496)
                                          0.0037                   0.0037                0.0031
                      Large
                                         (4.0850)                 (4.2804)              (2.3639)




                                                               43
 Table 7: Monthly Returns of Relative Strength Portfolios - Long horizons
                   London Stock Exchange 1866-1907
The relative strength portfolios are formed on J-month lagged returns and held for K months. The values of J and K for the
different strategies are indicated in the first column and row respectively. The stocks are ranked in ascending order on the basis of
J-month lagged returns. A value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the lowest 33rd percentile past return is the sell portfolio. A
value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the highest 67th percentile past return is the buy portfolio. t-statistics are between
parentheses. As noted at the beginning of section 2, we considered 28-day periods as months in our calculations. Moreover, when
considering a year, i.e. K = 12 in Jegadeesh and Titman, we used 13 28-day periods. It is important to note that the results are
computed from all available time periods. This means the sample periods vary by column. For example the portfolio return in
year 2 after formation is computed by looking at the buy-sell portfolio 14-26 months after formation, so our first “year 2”
observation is July 1867-June 1868. Our first “year 5” observation doesn't begin until July 1871, however. Therefore the Year 2
column has more observations then the Year 5 column. This is also why the various columns do not add up.


                                                                               K
            J
                                     Year 2         Year 3           Year 4         Year 5        Year 2-5        Year 3-5
                                     0.0028          0.0028          0.0026         0.0019          0.0025         0.0024
            3        Buy
                                    (3.4085)        (3.4459)       (3.2127)        (1.8392)        (3.1330)       (2.9863)
                                     0.0018          0.0024          0.0028         0.0031          0.0022         0.0027
            3        Sell
                                    (1.9838)        (2.6039)       (3.1467)        (3.5481)        (2.4413)       (3.1020)
                                      0.001          0.0004          -0.0002       -0.0013          0.0004         -0.0003
            3        Buy-sell
                                    (2.2551)        (0.8765)       (-0.4505)       (-1.6807)       (1.1792)       (-1.0119)

                                     0.0032          0.0032          0.0026          0.002          0.0028         0.0027
            6        Buy
                                    (3.9071)        (4.1021)       (3.0710)        (2.2091)        (3.4553)       (3.3621)
                                     0.0015          0.0022          0.0033         0.0034          0.0022         0.0029
            6        Sell
                                    (1.4816)        (2.1186)       (3.3508)        (3.4622)        (2.2689)       (2.9919)
                                     0.0017          0.001           -0.0006       -0.0014          0.0006         -0.0002
            6        Buy-sell
                                    (2.6502)        (1.4971)       (-1.0493)       (-2.1428)       (1.1576)       (-0.3828)

                                     0.0033          0.003           0.0022         0.0021          0.0026         0.0025
            9        Buy
                                    (3.8523)        (3.5455)       (2.4311)        (2.2850)        (3.1731)       (2.9911)
                                     0.0016          0.0027          0.0035         0.0034          0.0025         0.0032
            9        Sell
                                    (1.6110)        (2.5483)       (3.4945)        (3.1871)        (2.5406)       (3.3295)
                                     0.0016          0.0003          -0.0014       -0.0013          0.0001         -0.0008
            9        Buy-sell
                                    (2.1863)        (0.3738)       (-1.8331)       (-1.6262)       (0.1324)       (-1.4513)

                                     0.0035          0.0029          0.0018         0.0022          0.0026         0.0023
           13        Buy
                                    (4.0243)        (3.4390)       (1.8966)        (2.2931)        (3.1640)       (2.6976)
                                     0.0019          0.0027          0.004          0.0033          0.0029         0.0035
           13        Sell
                                    (1.7501)        (2.5532)       (3.7176)        (2.8022)        (2.7927)       (3.4251)
                                     0.0016          0.0002          -0.0022       -0.0012         -0.0002         -0.0012
           13        Buy-sell
                                    (1.9642)        (0.2816)       (-2.4996)       (-1.1253)      (-0.3999)       (-1.9273)




                                                                44
                                       Table 8: Reversal Equality Tests
We form a             matrix       where     ,    is the holding period return from month            12 to month on the
winner minus loser portfolio formed        13 “months” earlier. Let X ,              ,    1         , 1 . The entries to the table
report the mean return of the winner minus loser portfolios 1 through 5 years after formation. We test of the null that
   X ,         0             via a Wald test                     with        ∑ X , 1 / , … , ∑ X , 4 / and                     is
estimated using the Newey-West procedure with 13 lags. The test statistic is under the null ~         4 , asymptotically.


                                   Panel A: Average monthly return in year N after formation
                        1                   2                    3                   4                     5
                    0.0034               0.0016               0.0006              -0.0006              -0.0015
                        Panel B: Wald test that average monthly return is equal in years 1 through 5
                                       W-stat                                 p-value
                                         35.14                                      0.00

                 Panel C: P-values for Wald test that average monthly return in N years after formation =
                                average monthly return J years after formation for any N, J


                                                                        N
                    J
                                   1                2                    3                   4                 5
                    1              -
                    2              0                -
                    3              0               0.16                   -
                    4              0               0.02                 0.12                 -
                    5              0                0                   0.01                0.22               -




                                                                45
                         Table 9: Momentum Profits and Market States
The Table reports evidence on market states and momentum pro t similar to CGH (2004). At the beginning of each month t, all
stocks are allocated into deciles based on their lagged six-month returns (from 5 to    1; skipping month ). Down, Avg and
Up markets were defined as follows Up = market index return over past 3 years in top 1/3 of sample Avg = market index return
over past 3 years in middle 1/3 of sample Down = market index return over past 3 years in Bottom 1/3 of sample. Profits of the
momentum portfolios (winner minus loser deciles) are cumulated across holding period months t + 1 to t + 6: Reported below are
the mean monthly profits and CAPM alphas.




                                               CRSP Data 1929-1995                London Data 1869-1907
                  Panel A: Monthly returns following 36 month UP-Markets (85 % of observed states)

                                                        0.0040                             0.0038
               Mean Ret
                                                       (3.8000)                           (4.4555)
                                                        0.0053                             0.0039
               CAPM alpha
                                                       (4.8913)                           (4.5414)

                 Panel B: Monthly returns following 36 month Down-Markets (15 % of observed states)

                                                       -0.0028                             0.0015
               Mean Ret
                                                      (-1.1061)                           (0.7713)
                                                       -0.0002                             0.0016
               CAPM alpha
                                                      (-0.0971)                           (0.8158)

                                           Panel C: Test for equality Up = Down

               t-stat: Mean Ret                         2.5055                             1.0474
               t-stat: CAPM alpha                       2.0031                             1.0403




                                                             46
                            Table 10: Factor-Model Predicted Monthly Returns and Momentum
                                              London Stock Exchange 1866-1907
 All stocks are first sorted each month t into quintiles based on their six-month (t-5 to t) predicted returns from the four-factor model:




where excess return on market portfolio, Divyld: lagged dividend yield on market index, Term: lagged term spread (yield on British consol - yield on 30day bankbill),
and Default: lagged default yield (yield on risky bonds (brit RR) - yield on British consol). This table employs the nonoverlapping-return method used by CS (2002). In
Panel A, F-stat shows f-statistic on the null that                0 and     is for the regression of CAPM residuals on          ,       , and          . Panel B reports
sorts based on predicted returns of the four factor model.


                                                                      Panel A: Regression Results
                                            Sell                                         Mid                                         Buy
                              Small         Med          Large            Small         Med          Large             Small          Med         Large
                              0.2964      -0.1459        0.174           0.0688         0.1374      -0.0584            0.018         0.0676       0.0562
                             (0.8799)     (-0.6828)    (0.9542)         (0.2115)      (0.6439)     (-0.7423)         (0.0568)       (0.3213)     (0.3479)
                              0.3009       0.1767       -0.2143          0.4298         0.1904      0.1913            0.1549         0.3812      -0.0572
                             (0.6824)     (0.6315)     (-0.8977)        (1.0088)      (0.6817)      (1.8565)         (0.3722)       (1.3838)     (-0.2707)
                              0.5088       0.3196       0.0919           0.2999         0.3726      0.0705            0.4165         0.2669      -0.0412
                             (3.0051)     (2.9753)     (1.0031)         (1.8330)      (3.4753)      (1.7812)         (2.6067)       (2.5231)     (-0.5078)
              F-stat          4.3343       3.7500       0.5343           2.1365         5.1524      2.9292            2.6002         4.0728       0.1689
              p-value         0.0050       0.0110       0.6590           0.0947         0.0016      0.0332            0.0515         0.0071       0.9174
                              0.0241       0.0209       0.0030           0.0120         0.0285      0.0164            0.0146         0.0227       0.0010




Table continued on next page...

                                                                                   47
Table 10 Continued




                                     Panel B: Chordia and Shivakumar (2002) predicted returns sort
                     Momentum Sorts:                                     Sell        Med         Buy      Buy-Sell
                                                                        0.001       0.0028     0.0031     0.0021
                                             E[R] low
                                                                       (0.6279)    (3.4371)    (2.1358)   (1.2509)
                     Factor sorts:                                      0.001       0.0026      0.002      0.001
                                             E[R] med
                                                                       (1.0013)    (3.9661)    (1.9003)   (0.9976)
                                                                       -0.0015      0.0013     0.0039     0.0054
                                             E[R] high
                                                                       (-0.9799)   (1.4754)    (3.0703)   (3.7516)
                                                                       -0.0025     -0.0015     0.0008
                                             high-low
                                                                       (-1.6382)   (-1.7748)   (0.5686)




                                                                  48
                         Table 11: Momentum Profits and the Economy
                                 London Stock Exchange 1866-1907
 The Table reports evidence on momentum profits and the state of the economy, in particular the results of the regression:



where r is annual the return on the 6-6 buy portfolio minus the return on the 6-6 sell portfolio and GDP is the demeaned real per
capita GDP growth. Note that in this table we examine annual returns - not monthly - as GDP is only available at an annual
frequency.


                            Size                                                              .
                                            0.0610         -0.3510         -0.8704
                            Small                                                            0.1
                                           (3.4017)        (-1.6974)      (-1.2196)
                                             0.078         -0.1771         -0.4754
                            Med                                                             0.03
                                           (5.9050)        (-1.1626)      (-0.9044)
                                            0.0321          0.1554          -0.803
                            Large                                                           0.01
                                           (2.3458)        (0.9833)       (-1.4718)




                                                               49
                                                      Table 12: Correlations among series
The table displays full sample estimates of the correlations computed at an annual frequency between (1) returns on buy-sell small stock portfolio, (2) buy-sell medium portfolio,
(3) buy-sell large stock portfolio, (4) average cross-sectional monthly standard deviation, (5) excess returns          , (6) growth of real GDP per capita, (7) short term rate
(Ordinary funds), and (8) long term rate.


                                                                                                    Avg.                                     Short
                                                          Buy-Sell     Buy-Sell     Buy-Sell     cross-sect     Excess        Growth       Term rate       Long
                                                            small        med          large        monthly      Return        rgdp/pc       Ordinary       term
                                                                                                     s.d.                                    funds          rate
               Buy-Sell small                                 1
               Buy-Sell med                                 0.02           1
               Buy-Sell large                               0.14          0.1           1
               Avg. cross-sect monthly s.d.                 0.17         0.12          0.15           1
               Excess Return                                -0.33        -0.24         0.08          0.09           1
               Growth rgdp/pc                               -0.28        -0.21        -0.19         -0.15         0.33           1
               Short term rate Ordinary funds               0.16           0           0.13         -0.23         -0.41        -0.03           1
               Long term rate                               -0.35        0.36          0.1          -0.05         0.02         -0.06          0.33           1




                                                                                       50
                                   Table 13: Autocorrelation Estimates

We estimate the autocorrelations of momentum profits for the Victorian and CRSP eras. The T-stat column represents the t-
statistics of the estimate under the null that all autocorrelations are zero.



                                            Victorian Era                                     CRSP Era
                                 Estimate                    t-stat              Estimate                  t-stat
                                                       Panel A : Monthly Data
                                  -0.0534                   -1.2410                 0.0755                2.3697
                                  -0.1217                   -2.8282               -0.0919                 -2.8832
                                  -0.0477                   -1.1081               -0.1019                 -3.1959
                                  -0.0429                   -0.9970               -0.0174                 -0.5453
                                   0.0092                   0.2133                -0.0191                 -0.5991
                                   0.0095                   0.2218                  0.0944                2.9619
                                                      Panel B : Quarterly Data
                                  -0.1715                   -2.3004               -0.1119                 -2.0264
                                   0.1550                   2.0791                  0.0805                1.4576
                                  -0.0733                   -1.0373               -0.0892                 -1.6163
                                   0.1140                   1.5293                  0.0410                0.7424




                         Table 14: Tests on the Autocorrelation Feature

Each entry is p-value. Ljung-Box test is the test on the null that all autocorrelations are zero. We can reject the null except for the
monthly data of the Victorian era. Box-Pierce test is the test on the null that autocorrelations are same for both Victorian and
CRSP eras. P-values show that we cannot reject the null for both monthly and quarterly data.



                                                         Victorian Era                   CRSP Era
                                                       Panel A : Monthly Data
                             Ljung-Box test                  0.0526                          0.0000
                            Box-Pierce test                                0.1142
                                                      Panel B : Quarterly Data
                             Ljung-Box test                  0.0099                          0.0462
                            Box-Pierce test                                0.8017




                                                                      51
   Table 15: Empirical Distribution of Duration Up and Down Momentum
                                   Cycles

Entries feature a comparison of up and down momentum duration cycles for the CRSP and Victorian eras. Entries feature a
comparison of up and down momentum duration cycles for the CRSP and Victorian eras. All cycles are computed from the
returns of the Lag-6, Hold-6 WML momentum portfolio. A duration spell is a period of consecutive gains or losses. An Up cycle
begins when a positive return follows a negative return and continues until the next negative return. A down cycle begins when a
negative return follows a positive return and continues until the next positive return.




                                                       Panel A : Up Cycles
                                    Duration Spells            Victorian Era         CRSP Era
                                           1                        0.35               0.33
                                           2                        0.26               0.22
                                           3                        0.16               0.19
                                           4                        0.09               0.10
                                           5                        0.08               0.08
                                      6 and more                    0.06                0.08
                                                      Panel B : Down Cycles
                                    Duration Spells            Victorian Era         CRSP Era
                                           1                        0.61               0.58
                                           2                        0.27               0.26
                                           3                        0.05               0.07
                                           4                        0.05               0.06
                                           5                        0.02               0.02
                                      6 and more                    0.00                0.00




                                                               52
                     Table 16: Nonparametric Tests of Duration Spells
Duration spells of up and down momentum cycles are tested for equality across the Victorian and CRSP eras. The test statistics
are: are (a) the Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon test, (b) Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, (c) Cramer-von Mises test, and (d) Kuiper test
Entries to the table are p-values for the null hypothesis that the duration spells during the Victorian and CRSP eras are drawn
from the same population.



                                                     Panel A : Up Cycles
                       Duration Spells                    1           2             3            4           6
           Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon                         0.30         0.19        0.05         0.13         0.00
           Kolmogorov-Smirnov                            0.90         0.79        0.31         0.34         0.08
           Cramer-von Mises                              0.16         0.19        0.41         0.13         0.94
           Kuiper                                        0.99         0.99        0.86         0.64         0.32
                                                    Panel B : Down Cycles
                       Duration Spells                    1          2              3            4           6
           Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon                         0.30         0.08        0.09         0.12         0.57
           Kolmogorov-Smirnov                            0.70         0.48        0.14         0.87         0.92
           Cramer-von Mises                              0.23         0.49        0.16         0.18         0.10
           Kuiper                                        0.82         0.94        0.41         0.94         0.92




                                                                53
                      Table 17: Duration Spells – Parametric Estimates

We estimate parameters of Exponential distribution, Gamma distribution and Weibull distributions using Maximum Likelihood.
The density function of the exponential distribution is                 , the Gamma distribution is                 , and that of
                                                                                                                Г
the Weibull distribution is                          .


                                                                  Victorian Era                CRSP Era
                     Distributional
                                           Parameters
                     Assumption                                 MLE           t-stat       MLE         t-stat

                                                          Panel A : Up Cycles
                     Exponential                λ              0.4030       11.5143       0.3696      14.9636


                                                λ              1.0985        7.8241       0.9352      10.1652
                     Gamma
                                                κ              2.7255        8.5870       2.5301      11.2349


                                                λ              0.3571       18.2194       0.3290      22.3810
                     Weibull
                                                p              1.6730       15.3768       1.5860      20.3856
                                                         Panel B : Down Cycles
                     Exponential                λ              0.6346       11.4964       0.5958      14.9698


                                                λ              2.7447        7.9441       2.2371      10.3522
                     Gamma
                                                κ              4.3250        8.4275       3.7551      11.0737


                                                λ              0.5583       20.6778       0.5247      25.2260
                     Weibull
                                                p              1.9140       16.4433       1.7985      21.3345




                                                                  54
                                     Table 18: The Effect of State Variables on the Duration Spells

We test the effect of state variables on the duration spells. First, we apply 3 month moving average filter to all variables first. Then, remove durations which are less than or equal
to 3. With those filtered data, we test the effect of state variables on the duration spells. We set      exp                            . We use as the average risk free rate minus
the inflation rate of the last year of the beginning of the duration, assuming the inflation rate of last year is the expected inflation rate.     is the average stock market return for
the last three years. As predicted the point estimate on the risk-free rate has a positive effect on the duration of up cycles and a negative effect on the duration of down cycles.
Regardless of specification the point estimates are always the predicted sign but often insignificant from zero.


                        Distributional                                        Victorian Era                                          CRSP Era
                                           Parameters
                        Assumption                               MLE               s.e.            t-stat              MLE             s.e.             t-stat
                                                                                  Panel A : Up Cycles
                                                                 0.2923          0.3252          0.8988               0.2004          0.1878          1.0671
                                                               40.2349          47.1920          0.8526             36.2294          17.6612          2.0514
                           Gamma
                                                                -0.2851          0.6823          -0.4179             -0.0419          0.1499         -0.2795
                                               κ                 5.6320          1.3275          4.2426               6.0021          1.0096          5.9450


                                                                 2.1146          0.2337          9.0484               2.1174          0.0926        22.8661
                                                               75.7509          43.3978          1.7455             34.1785          20.0536          1.7044
                           Weibull
                                                                -0.4543          0.7842          -0.5793             -0.0427          0.1692         -0.2524
                                               p                 2.3417          0.2946          7.9487               2.3697          0.2059        11.5090
                                                                                Panel B : Down Cycles
                                                                -0.4157          0.5012          -0.8294             -0.4929          0.2688         -1.8337
                                                             -101.0582          59.7824          -1.6904           -19.1313          21.7347         -0.8802
                           Gamma
                                                                -1.3545          0.6565          -2.0632              0.0322          0.1378          0.2337
                                               κ               16.1790           6.3200          2.5600               9.2884          2.3967          3.8755


                                                                 2.7569          0.3105          8.8789               1.8576          0.0811        22.9051
                                                             -145.4752          55.6524          -2.6140           -33.0879          24.6850         -1.3404
                           Weibull
                                                                -1.9172          0.6154          -3.1154              0.0320          0.1478          0.2165
                                               p                 4.4620          0.9786          4.5596               2.9876          0.4095          7.2957



                                                                                           55
 Table 19: The Difference of the Effect of State Variables on the Duration Spells across up/down Cycles


We use the same smoothing as in Table 18. The null hypothesis is that the level of the risk-free rate differs across UP and DOWN cycles. We test this hypothesis by pooling the
UP and Down cycles and estimating allowing the all coefficients to vary with an interaction dummy equal to one if the observation is a down cycle. Formally, we set
exp                                                   ,        ,          ,           where                   is 1 if the cycle is down or 0 otherwise. In the same way, κ and p are
adjusted. Regardless of era or specification, the effect of the risk-free rate is always significantly lower in DOWN cycles.


                       Distributional                                       Victorian Era                                         CRSP Era
                                         Parameters
                       Assumption                               MLE               s.e.           t-stat              MLE            s.e.             t-stat
                                                               0.2923          0.3208           0.9112              0.2004          0.1878         1.0671
                                              ,               -0.7079          0.5815          -1.2174             -0.6933          0.3278        -2.1150
                                                              40.2349         41.2217           0.9761            36.2294         18.7357          1.9337
                                              ,              -141.293         63.6805          -2.2188           -55.3607         28.1399         -1.9673
                           Gamma
                                                              -0.2851          0.6822          -0.4179             -0.0419          0.1499        -0.2795
                                              ,               -1.0694          0.9387          -1.1392              0.0741          0.2035         0.3641
                                              κ                 5.632          1.3274           4.2429              6.0021          1.0096         5.9450
                                            κ_dd               10.547          6.3601           1.6583              3.2862          2.5999         1.2640


                                                               2.1146            0.234          9.0368              2.1174          0.0926        22.8661
                                              ,                0.6423          0.3771           1.7033             -0.2598          0.1231        -2.1105
                                                               75.751         43.5596           1.7390            34.1784         20.6532          1.6549
                                              ,             -221.2262         67.9522          -3.2556           -67.2663           31.596        -2.1289
                          Weibull
                                                              -0.4543          0.7839          -0.5795             -0.0427          0.1692        -0.2524
                                              ,               -1.4629          0.9843          -1.4862              0.0747          0.2245         0.3327
                                              p                2.3417          0.2946           7.9487              2.3697          0.2059        11.5090
                                            p_dd               2.1203          1.0187           2.0814               0.618           0.458         1.3493




                                                                                         56
                            Table 20: Momentum Portfolio Turnover: Transition Probability Matrix
The turnover of the relative strength portfolios is measured via a transition probability matrix for the K=6/J=6 strategy. The diagonal elements are of most interest as they reveal
what fraction of stocks remain in the portfolio.




                                                                                               Portfolio at time t



                                                   Size                       Small     Med      Large    Small      Med     Large     Small     Med      Large

                                                             Momentum          Sell     Sell      Sell     Med      Med       Med       Buy      Buy       Buy
                                                   Small Sell                 0.345    0.051     0.000    0.282     0.023    0.000     0.322     0.033    0.000
                    Probability of being in
                    Portfolio at time t+6          Med    Sell                0.008    0.296     0.032    0.008     0.207    0.014     0.010     0.232    0.019
                                                   Large Sell                 0.000    0.009     0.306    0.001     0.007    0.211     0.000     0.008    0.243
                                                   Small Med                  0.202    0.008     0.000    0.281     0.009    0.000     0.212     0.009    0.000
                                                   Med    Med                 0.011    0.224     0.009    0.018     0.354    0.012     0.013     0.276    0.012
                                                   Large Med                  0.000    0.017     0.310    0.000     0.026    0.452     0.000     0.014    0.336
                                                   Small Buy                  0.282    0.006     0.000    0.256     0.005    0.000     0.301     0.005    0.000
                                                   Med    Buy                 0.039    0.279     0.005    0.036     0.263    0.005     0.045     0.308    0.006
                                                   Large Buy                  0.000    0.031     0.279    0.000     0.027    0.246     0.000     0.035    0.321
                                                   No Price at t+6            0.113    0.079     0.058    0.119     0.079    0.059     0.096     0.078    0.062




                                                                                         57
                                                         Table 21: Bid-Ask Spread Statistics
The relative strength portfolios are formed on a 6-month lagged returns and held for 6 months. The stocks are ranked in ascending order on the basis of 6-month lagged returns. A
value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the lowest 33rd percentile past return is the sell portfolio. A value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the highest 67th percentile past return is
the buy portfolio. Value weighted average of the Bid-Ask spread of each security that is added or removed from the portfolio at time t, where Bid-Ask Spread = (Ask-
Bid)/[average(bid,ask)]




                                           Sell                                         Mid                                          Buy
                             Small         Med          Large             Small         Med          Large             Small         Med          Large
                                                                          Prob of remaining in portfolio
                             0.345         0.296        0.306             0.281         0.354        0.452             0.301         0.308        0.321
                                                                          Bid-ask spread of those traded
                              0.21         0.09          0.03              0.14         0.06          0.02              0.15         0.07          0.02
                                                                  Percentage of “new” stocks in new portfolio
                             0.655         0.704        0.694             0.719         0.646        0.548             0.699         0.692        0.679
                                                                      Per period Bid-Ask cost trading cost
                            0.0229        0.0106        0.0035           0.0168        0.0065        0.0018           0.0175        0.0081        0.0023
                                                                         Per period costs in basis points
                              229           106           35               168           65            18               175           81            23




                                                                                         58
                                                       Figure 1: Momentum Profit Cycles
The figure displays the time series of the Fama-French momentum factor returns from 1946 to 2008 and the momentum factor returns during the Victorian era.




                                                                                    59
                                                 Figure 2: Number of Stocks in Portfolios
This study makes use of a new data set of 1,808 stocks (equity) listed in London between 1866 and 1907. The plots display the number of stocks, which decline to 985 in 1903
and 544 in 1904 - due to a number of industries vanishing from the quotation list, only to reappear in 1905.




                                                                                    60
    Figure 3: Five-Year Rolling Average Returns on Size-based Relative Strength Portfolios
We report the average monthly excess return on the momentum portfolios during each of the five years following portfolio formation, after skipping a month. The
relative strength portfolios are formed on a 6-month lagged return and held for 6 months. The stocks are ranked in ascending order on the basis of 6-month lagged
returns. A value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the lowest 33rd percentile past return is the sell portfolio. A value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the highest 67th
percentile past return is the buy portfolio.




                                                                                      61
Figure 4: Winner and Looser Portfolio Investment




                         62
Figure 5: Winner Minus Looser Investment




                     63
Figure 6: Empirical and Parametric distribution of duration up




                                64
Figure 7: Empirical and Parametric distribution of duration down




                               65
