                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  COMPOSITION OF INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL FLOWS:
                                    A SURVEY

                                          Koralai Kirabaeva
                                            Assaf Razin

                                        Working Paper 15599
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15599


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2009




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Koralai Kirabaeva and Assaf Razin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Composition of International Capital Flows: A Survey
Koralai Kirabaeva and Assaf Razin
NBER Working Paper No. 15599
December 2009
JEL No. F3

                                                ABSTRACT

In an integrated world capital market with perfect information, all forms of capital flows are indistinguishable.
Information frictions and incomplete risk sharing are important elements that needed to differentiate
between equity and debt flows, and between different types of equities. This survey put together models
of debt, FDI, Fpi flows to help explain the composition of capital flows.

With information asymmetry between foreign and domestic investors, a country which finances its
domestic investment through foreign debt or foreign equity portfolio issue, will inadequately augment
its capital stock. Foreign direct investment flows, however, have the potential of generating an efficient
level of domestic investment.

In the presence of asymmetric information between sellers and buyers in the capital market, foreign
direct investment is associated with higher liquidation costs due to the adverse selection. Thus, the
exposure to liquidity shocks determines the volume of foreign direct investment flows relative to portfolio
investment flows. In particular, the information-liquidity trade-off helps explain the composition of
equity flows between developed and emerging countries, as well as the patterns of FDI flows during
financial crises.

The asymmetric information between domestic investors (as borrowers) and foreign investors (as lenders)
with respect to investment allocation leads to moral hazard and thus generate an inadequate amount
of borrowings. The moral hazard problem, coupled with limited enforcement, can explain why countries
experience debt outflows in low income periods; in contrast to the predictions of the complete-market
paradigm.

Finally, we analyze a risk-diversification model, where bond holdings hedge real exchange rate risks,
while equities hedge non-financial income fluctuations. An equity home bias emerges as a calibratable
equilibrium outcome.

Koralai Kirabaeva
Bank of Canada
Ottawa
Canada
kk329@cornell.edu

Assaf Razin
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Uris 422
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
ar256@cornell.edu
         Composition of International Capital Flows: A Survey

                             Koralai Kirabaeva and Assaf Raziny

                                       December 14, 2009




1        Introduction

The purpose of the survey is to elucidate some key mechanisms to explain the composition of
capital ‡ows among three major types: Foreign Direct Investments (FDI), Foreign Portfolio
Investments (FPI) and debt. Flows that have equity-like features (that is, FDI and FPI)
are presumed to be more stable and less prone to reversals. FDI yields more bene…ts than
other types of …nancial ‡ows because it comes with more direct control of management.1
Debt ‡ows, consisting of bank loans and bonds, are regarded as more volatile than equities.
        The models selected for the survey are evidently only a small subset of a wide range of
models in the literature. Those surveyed capture, however, some unique and empirically-
relevant features of key mechanisms through which …nancial and liquidity shocks drive major
types of international capital ‡ows. We choose to focus on only a few stylized models in
order to o¤er the reader self-contained presentations.
      Bank of Canada
    y
      Cornell University and Tel Aviv University
    1
      FDI is de…ned as investment with an equity stake of 10% or more, according to the international
accounting standards.




                                                  1
2    Pecking order of capital ‡ows: Information Asymmetry
     between Domestic and Foreign Investors

There is strong evidence about home-court advantage in international portfolio investment.
One explanation is an information asymmetry between domestic and foreign investors about
the performance of domestic …rms. The information asymmetry can cause an aggregate
production ine¢ ciency and lead to the foreign underinvestment and domestic oversaving.
As a result, the marginal productivity of capital at home is high relative to the home country
marginal cost of importing capital.
    Empirical studies by Portes, Rey and Oh [34], and Loungani, Mody and Razin [30]
suggests that informational asymmetries signi…cantly contribute to the negative relationship
between asset trade and distance. The gravity models predict that bilateral international
transactions are positively related to the size of two economies and negatively to the distance
between them. Distance is measured as a proxy for informational frictions, transaction and
transportation costs.
    In Froot and Stein [18], Klein and Rosengren [25], Klein, Peek, and Rosengren [24],
the hypothesis is that FDI is information intensive, and thus FDI investors, who know
more about their investments than outsiders, face a problem in raising resources for their
investments. Gordon and Bovenberg [21] assume asymmetric information between domestic
investors and foreign investors to explain the home bias phenomenon. Razin and Sadka [35]
analyze the gains from FDI when foreign direct investors have superior information on the
fundamentals of their investment, relative to foreign portfolio investors.
    Razin, Sadka and Yuen [36] explored the pecking order among the three types of capital
‡ows: debt, equity, and FDI in the context of a model in which domestic savers and FDI
investors are endowed with better information than the portfolio foreign investors. The
ranking of capital in‡ows is somewhat similar to the pecking order’ of corporate capital
structure. Recall that in corporate …nance the hypothesis maintains that the …rms prefer
internal …nance (retained earnings, the analogue of FDI in the case of international ‡ows)
to external …nance. If the latter is required, then …rms will issue the safest security (the
analogue of debt ‡ows), and they will issue new equity (the analogue of equity portfolio



                                              2
‡ows) only as a last resort.


2.1     Razin, Sadka, and Yuen (1999) model

Consider a small, capital-importing country referred as a home country. There are N ex-
ante risk-neutral identical domestic …rms. There are two time periods. Each …rm chooses
capital input K in the …rst period. In the second period, the output is equal to F (K)(1+"),
where F ( ) is a production function exhibiting diminishing marginal productivity of capital
and " is a random productivity factor. The productivity factor " is independent across
…rms, it has zero mean and bounded below by             1. The cumulative distribution function of
the productivity shock " is         ( ). The domestic interest rate is denoted by r and foreign by
r .


2.1.1     Foreign Debt Investment

Investment decisions are made by …rms before " is observed. Then they issue debt.
      Given its investment decision (K), a …rm may choose to default on its debt if F (K)(1+")
is smaller than K(1 + r). Therefore, …rms with productivity " > "0 will fully repay their
non-recourse loans, where "0 is a threshold level of ", such that F (K)(1 + "0 ) = K(1 + r).
So, the fraction of solvent …rms is N (1          ("0 )).
      The domestic …rms are better informed than the foreign lenders, they are able to observe
productivity " before making their loan decisions. Domestic lenders will extend loans only
to …rms with productivity " > "0 . The foreign lenders will advance loans to all …rms since
they don’t observe ". Denote the fraction of solvent …rms …nanced by foreign lenders by
 . Therefore, the expected payo¤ of foreign lenders is given by

                   Payo¤          N (1    ("0 )) K(1 + r) + N ("0 )F (K) (1 + e );             (1)

      where e          E ["j"   "0 ]. The amount of loans given by foreign lenders is given by
Loan      ( N (1         ("0 )) + N ("0 )) K.
      The expected value of the representative …rm

                   V      F (K)      (1    ("0 )) K(1 + r) + ("0 )F (K) (1 + e ) :             (2)



                                                   3
   The value maximizing level of K is such that

                                          (1       ("0 )) K(1 + r)
                              F 0 (K) =                            ;                       (3)
                                           1        ("0 )(1 + e )

which implies that due to the possibility of default,

                                       F 0 (K) < 1 + r:                                    (4)

   This inequality represents the oversaving ine¢ ciency: domestic stock of capital is larger
than what domestic savers are willing to pay for in terms of foregone present consumption.
   The expected payo¤ of foreign lender should be equal to the capital income on Loan,
which implies that r < r and


                                      F 0 (K) > 1 + r :                                    (5)

   This means that aggregate production is ine¢ cient and the country can gain from the
debt-…nanced increase in the stock of domestic capital. Although debt instruments specify
that the issuer of these instruments must pay a …xed value, in the case of default the lender
becomes an equity holder. Thus ine¢ cient foreign …nancing also applies to foreign portfolio
investment, as illustrated in the next subsection.


2.1.2   Foreign Portfolio Investment

As before, all …rms choose investment level K in the …rst period before the random produc-
tivity factor " is observed. All …rms are originally owned by domestic investors who equity
…nance their capital investment. Foreign investors do not observe the productivity " when
they purchase shares in existing …rms. Therefore, they o¤er the same price for all …rms,
re‡ecting the average productivity. As a result, there is a threshold level of productivity "0
such that …rms with productivity above "0 will not be willing to sell at that price.
   The value of the representative …rm is equal to F (K)(1 + "). Thus the threshold pro-
ductivity "0 is de…ned by

                              F (K)(1 + e )   F (K)(1 + "0 )
                                            =                ;                             (6)
                                 (1 + r )        (1 + r)

   where r < r so that foreigners have a positive holdings in domestic …rms.

                                               4
   Then, the amount of foreign portfolio investment is given by

                                              N ("0 )F (K)(1 + e )
                                     FPI =                         :                         (7)
                                                    (1 + r )

   The …rm’s expected market value net of the original capital investment is

                                  F (K)(1 + e )                      F (K)(1 + e+ )
                V =       ("0 )                 + (1        ("0 ))                    K:     (8)
                                     (1 + r )                           (1 + r)

   Maximizing this expression with respect to K yields the following condition:

                          F 0 (K)(1 + e )                       F 0 (K)(1 + e+ )
                  ("0 )                   + (1         ("0 ))                      1 = 0:    (9)
                               (1 + r )                              (1 + r)

Because the …rm knows, when making its capital investment decision, that it will be sold
at a premium if faced with low-productivity events, it tends to overinvest relative to the
rate of return to domestic investors and underinvest relative to the rate of return to foreign
investors,
                                      (1 + r ) < F 0 (K) < (1 + r) :                        (10)

   As in the case with debt ‡ows, the information asymmetry between domestic and foreign
investors creates ine¢ ciencies, such as oversaving by domestic investors and underinvest-
ment by foreigners, that reduce the gains from international capital ‡ows.


2.1.3   Foreign Direct Investment

The foreign direct investor buy a domestic …rm before investment decision is made. So,
the foreign investors and direct investors are equally informed. The capital K is imported
from the foreign country, and the output is F (K )(1 + "): J is a number of …rms bought
by foreign investors. The market value of the …rm sold to foreign direct investors is

                                                 F (K )
                                          V =                   K :                         (11)
                                                (1 + r )

   Therefore, the amount of foreign direct investment is given by

                                          F DI = J(K + V ):                                 (12)

   In an equilibrium with positive number of …rms owned by both domestic and foreign
                                      F (K)
investors, V = V , where V =          (1+r)   K:

                                                    5
    The optimal level of capital investment K and K should satisfy

                                    F 0 (K ) = 1 + r ;                                  (13)

                                     F 0 (K) = 1 + r:

    When FDI investors have access to the domestic debt market: r = r , then we get
F 0 (K ) = (1 + r ) = F 0 (K) = 1 + r. That is, global capital markets are e¢ cient. In case
of FDI, the asymmetric information problems are alleviated due to the actual exercise of
management and control.




3    Composition of Equity Flows: Asymmetric Information
     and Liquidity

An empirical regularity is that the share of FDI in total foreign equity ‡ows is larger
for developing countries than for developed countries. Regarding the second moments of
foreign equity ‡ows, it is known that the volatility of FDI net in‡ows is, in general, much
smaller than that of FPI net in‡ows. Moreover, empirical analysis has established that
the di¤erences in volatility between FPI and FDI ‡ows are much smaller for developed
economies than for developing economies.
    Rossi and Volpin [38] …nd that the volume of M&A activity is signi…cantly larger in
countries with better corporate governance standards and stronger investor protection.
Albuquerque [3] argues that …nancially constrained countries borrow more through FDI
because FDI is harder to expropriate. Albuquerque, Loayza, and Serven [4] analyze the
dynamic of FDI in response to increase integration of capital markets. They …nd that …-
nancial integration increases the relative importance of global factors as drivers of foreign
investment. Furthermore, developing countries’ exposure to global factors has increased
faster than that of developed countries.
    Goldstein and Razin [19] focus on information-liquidity trade-o¤ of FDI relative to FPI.
FDI investors are in e¤ect the managers of the …rms under their control; whereas FPI in-
vestors e¤ectively delegate decisions to managers. Consequently, direct investors are more



                                             6
informed than portfolio investors regarding the prospects of their projects. This informa-
tion enables direct investors to manage their projects more e¢ ciently.2 This informational
advantage, however, comes at a cost. If investors need to sell their investments before ma-
turity because of liquidity shocks, the price they can get will be typically lower when buyers
know that they have more information on the fundamentals of the investment project. A
key implication of the model is that the choice between FDI and FPI will be linked to the
likelihood with which investors expect to get a liquidity shock.


3.1       Goldstein and Razin (2006) model

Consider a small economy is faced by a continuum [0; 1] of foreign investors. Each foreign
investor has an opportunity to invest in one investment project. Foreign investment can
occur in one of two forms: either as a direct investment or as a portfolio investment. A
direct investor e¤ectively acts like a manager, whereas in case of a portfolio investment, the
project is managed by an outsider.
       There are three periods of time: 0, 1, and 2. In period 0, each investor decides whether
to make a direct investment or a portfolio investment. In period 2, the project matures.
The net cash ‡ow from the project is given by

                                                                  1
                                       R(K; ") = (1 + ")K           AK 2 ;                                (14)
                                                                  2

where " is an idiosyncratic random productivity factor, which is independently realized
for each project in period 1, and K is the level of capital input invested in the project
in period 1, after the realization of ". The parameter A re‡ects production costs. The
productivity shock " is distributed between                 1 and 1 with mean 0 with the cumulative
distribution function         ( ), and the density function is f ( ) =          0(   ). Investors choose the
form of investment that maximizes (ex-ante) expected payo¤.
       In period 1, after the realization of the productivity shock, the manager of the project
observes ". Thus, if the investor owns the project as a direct investment, she observes ",
                                                                              1+"
and chooses K, so as to maximize the net cash ‡ow: K d (") =                   A .
   2
       The idea that control increases e¢ ciency and value of the …rm is supported empirically by recent papers
in the international …nance literature (Perez-Gonzalez (2005) and Chari, et al. (2005) ).



                                                        7
    Therefore, the ex-ante expected net cash ‡ow from a direct investment, if held until
maturity, is:
                                                         E (1 + ")2
                                             EVD =                    :                                   (15)
                                                               2A
    In case of a portfolio investment, the owner is at arms length relationships with the
manager, and thus she cannot observe ". In this case, the owner maximizes the expected
return absent any information on the realization of ", and is based on the ex-ante 0 mean.
                                                                                    1
Thus, the manager will be instructed to choose K p = K d (0) =                      A.   Then, the ex-ante
expected payo¤ from a portfolio investment, if held until maturity, is:

                                                                1
                                                     EVP =        :                                       (16)
                                                               2A

    Comparing (15) with (16), we see that if the project is held until maturity, it yields
a higher payo¤ as a direct investment than as a portfolio investment. This re‡ects the
e¢ ciency that results from a hands-on management style in the case of a direct investment.
    There are also costs for FDI investment, however. First, an FDI investor has to incur a
…xed cost in order to acquire the expertise to manage the project directly. We denote this
cost, which is exogenously given in the model, by C. Second, there is an endogenous cost
arising from the possibility of liquidity shocks occurring in period 1. There is a discount
when selling a project managed as direct investment due to information asymmetries, as
demonstrated below.
    In period 1, before the value of " is observed, the owner of the project might get a
liquidity shock. With the realization of a liquidity shock, the investor is forced to sell the
project in period 1. This feature of the model is similar to the preference-shock assumption
made by Diamond and Dybvig [14]: an investor who is subject to a liquidity shock derives
her utility only from period-one consumption. If, however, she is not subject to a liquidity
shock, she derives her utility from period-two consumption. We denote by                    the probability
of a liquidity shock. We assume that there are two types of foreign investors. In particular,
half of the investors will need to sell with probability              H   and half with probability   L   such
                    1
that 1 >    H   >   2   >     L   > 0, and   H   +   L   = 1. Investors know ex ante whether they are of
a   H   type or a       L   type and this is their private information. In addition to liquidity-based
sales, there is a possibility that an investor will liquidate a project in period 1 if she observes

                                                           8
a low realization of ". Then the price that buyers are willing to pay for a direct investment
that is being sold in period 1 is:
                                              R "D
                              1 (1       D)     1    (1 + ")2 f (")d" +   D
                        PD =                                                  :               (17)
                             2A          (1         D ) ("D ) +    D

   Here, "D is a threshold level of ", set by the direct investor; below which the direct
investor is selling the project without being forced to do so by a liquidity shock;           D   is
the probability, as perceived by the market, that an FDI investor gets a liquidity shock.
In (17), it is assumed that if the project is sold due to a liquidity shock, that is, before
the initial owner observes ", the value of " is not recorded in the …rms before the sale.
Therefore, the buyer does not know the value of ". However, if the project is sold for low-
pro…tability reasons, the owner will know the value of " after the sale. The threshold "D is
determined in equilibrium. The initial owner sets the threshold level "D , such that given
PD , when observing "D , an investor is indi¤erent between selling and not selling the project
in absence of a liquidity shock. Thus:

                                               (1 + "D )2
                                      PD =                :                                   (18)
                                                  2A

Equations (17) and (18) together determine PD and "D as functions of the market-perceived
probability of sale due to the liquidity shock (      D ).   We denote these functions as: "D (   D)

and PD (   D ).

   A portfolio investor sells the projects in period 1, everybody knows she does it because
of a liquidity shock. Thus, the price of the project is given by

                                                      1
                                          PP =          :                                     (19)
                                                     2A

   Comparing the price of FDI, which is determined by (17) and (18), with the price of
FPI, which is determined by (19), we see that the resale price of a direct investment in
period 1 is always lower than the resale price of a portfolio investment in that period. The
intuition is that if a direct investor prematurely sells the investment project, the market
price must re‡ect the possibility that the sale originates from inside information on low
prospects of this investment project. This constitutes the second (liquidity) cost of FDI.




                                                 9
      Based on this analysis, we can write the ex-ante expected net cash ‡ow from FDI:
                           2         0                            1                     3
                                       (1+"D ( D ))2                                  2
                                                      ("   (   ))
     EVD ( i ; D ; A; C) = 4(1    i) @   R1
                                           2A            D   D
                                                                  A + i (1 + "D ( D )) 5 C:
                                                   (1+")2                     2A
                                       + " ( D ) 2A f (")d"
                                           D
                                                                                          (20)
The ex-ante expected net cash ‡ow from FPI is simply:

                                                                 1
                                                   EVP (A) =       :                                              (21)
                                                                2A

Then, the di¤erence between the expected value of FDI and the expected value of FPI is:

                       Dif f ( i ;    D ; A; C)       EVD ( i ;     D ; A; C)         EVP (A):                    (22)

Clearly, investor will choose FDI (FPI) when Dif f ( i ;                D ; A; C)      > 0 (< 0) and will be indif-
ferent between the two (that is, may choose either FDI or FPI) when Dif f ( i ;                         D ; A; C)   =
0.
      To complete the description of equilibrium, it remains to specify how                        D,   the market
perceived probability that an FDI investor will get a liquidity shock. Assuming that rational
expectations hold in equilibrium,           D   has to be consistent with the equilibrium choice of the
two types of investors between FDI and FPI, such that


                                                   H H;F DI    +   L L;F DI
                                       D   =                                  ;                                   (23)
                                                      H;F DI   +   L;F DI

where     H;F DI   is the proportion of        H   investors who choose FDI in equilibrium and                 L;F DI

is the proportion of        L   investors who choose FDI in equilibrium.
      There are …ve possible cases that can potentially be observed in equilibrium. Case 1:
All investors choose FDI. Case 2:           L      investors choose FDI;          H   investors split between FDI
and FPI. Case 3:        L   investors choose FDI;         H    investors choose FPI. Case 4:            L   investors
split between FDI and FPI;            H    investors choose FPI. Case 5: All investors choose FPI.
Equilibrium outcomes depend on production cost A, and liquidity preferences (                                L;   H ).

As the production cost A increases, we are more likely to observe FPI and less likely to
observe FDI in equilibrium. As the di¤erence in liquidity needs between the two types of
investors increase, we are more likely to see a separating equilibrium, where di¤erent types
of investors choose di¤erent forms of investment.

                                                         10
    Suppose now that an aggregate liquidity shock occurs in period one with probability q.
Conditional on the realization of the aggregate liquidity shock, individual investors have to
sell their investment at period one with probabilities    L   and   H.   This implies that as the
probability of an aggregate liquidity shock q increases, there will be more FPI and less FDI
in equilibrium. Thus, the ratio of FPI to FDI will increase. The intuition is that as the
probability of an aggregate liquidity shock increases, agents know that they are more likely
to sell the investment early, in which case they will get a low price since buyers do not know
whether they sell because of an individual liquidity need or because of adverse information
on the productivity of the investment. As a result, the attractiveness of FDI decreases.
    The empirical prediction is that countries with a higher tendency for liquidity problems
will be source of a higher ratio of FPI to FDI. Goldstein, Razin, and Tong [20] …nd empirical
evidence that a higher probability of a liquidity crisis in the source country has a signi…cant
positive e¤ect on the ratio between FPI and FDI.




4    Equity Flows and Financial Crises: Asymmetric Informa-
     tion and Liquidity

Emerging economies have counter-cyclical current accounts, they experience large capital
out‡ows during crises. The theoretical literature argues that …nancial crises lead to an
exit of foreign investors even if there are no shocks to fundamentals. The following papers
link …nancial crises and liquidity through models of self-ful…lling investors’run. Chang and
Velasco [10] place international illiquidity at the center of …nancial crises. They argue that
a small shock may result in …nancial distress, leading to costly asset liquidation, liquidity
crunch, and large drop in asset prices. Caballero and Krishnamurthy [9] argue that during
a crisis self-ful…lling fears of insu¢ cient collateral may trigger a capital out‡ow.
    However, …nancial crises may be associated with an out‡ow of FPI and a simultaneous
in‡ow of FDI. This behavior re‡ects the …re-sale FDI phenomenon when domestic com-
panies and assets are acquired by foreign investors at …re-sale prices. Krugman [27] notes
that the Asian …nancial crisis has been accompanied by a wave of inward direct investment.
Furthermore, Aguiar and Gopinath [2] analyze data on mergers and acquisitions in East

                                               11
Asia between 1996 and 1998 and …nd that the liquidity crisis is associated with an in‡ow of
FDI. Moreover, Acharya, Shin, and Yorulmazer [1] observe that FDI in‡ows during …nancial
crises are associated with acquisitions of controlling stakes. Baker, Foley, and Wurgler [7]
argue that FDI ‡ows may also re‡ect arbitrage activity by multinationals as well as the
purchase of undervalued host country assets.
       Kirabaeva [23] analyzes the composition of investment (direct vs portfolio) across two
countries in the presence of heterogeneity in liquidity risk and asymmetric information about
the investment productivity. During liquidity crises (increase in liquidity preferences) level
of FDI may increase or decrease depending on the equilibrium. The dual e¤ect of an increase
in the liquidity risk on the capital ‡ows corresponds to the empirically observed pattern
of FDI during liquidity crises.3 The model o¤ers an alternative explanation of the …re-sale
FDI phenomenon based on the adverse selection. At the same time, it provides a possibility
of a decrease in FDI through self-ful…lling expectations.


4.1       Kirabaeva (2009) model

There is a continuum of agents with an aggregate Lebesgue measure of unity. There are
3 time periods: t = 0; 1; 2: There is only one good in the economy, and in period zero,
all agents are endowed with one unit of good that can be consumed and invested. Agents
consume in period 1 or 2, depending on whether they receive a liquidity shock in period
1. The probability of receiving a liquidity shock in period one is country-speci…c: investors
in each country k 2 fA; Bg have the same probability                  k.   This probability (     k)   captures
the investor’s exposure to the liquidity risk in a given country4 . Investors who receive a
   3
       Financial crises may be associated with an out‡ow of FPI and a simultaneous in‡ow of FDI, e.g., the 1994
crisis in Mexico and the late 1990s crisis in South Korea. However, there is also evidence that some crises
have been accompanied by an out‡ow foreign investment, including FDI, e.g., the 2001 crisis in Argentina
and 1990s crisis in Indonesia.
   4
     There are two possible interpretations of the liquidity risk. One is the probability of a liquidity crisis
that is unrelated to fundamentals of the economy. In fact, recent …nancial crises exhibit a large liquidity
run component while the underlying macro fundamentals are not necessarily weak. Another interpretation
is a measure of …nancial market development. In more developed …nancial (credit) markets it is easier for
agents to borrow in case of liquidity needs, and therefore the probability of investment liquidation is smaller,
whereas in developing and emerging countries access to the world capital markets is limited. So a country



                                                       12
liquidity shock have to liquidate their risky long-term asset holdings and consume all their
wealth in period one. So they are e¤ectively early consumers who value consumption only
at date t = 1. The rest are the late consumers who value the consumption only at date
t = 2. Since there is no aggregate uncertainty,                     k    is also a fraction of investors hit by a
liquidity shock in country k.
        Investors from country k have Diamond-Dybvig type of preferences:

                                    Uk (c1 ; c2 ) =    k u(c1 )   + (1       k )u(c2 )                       (24)

where ct is the consumption at dates t = 1; 2. In each period, investors have mean-variance
utility
                                        E [u(ct )] = E [ct ]             Var [ct ]                           (25)
                                                                    2
with        representing the degree of risk aversion.
        There are two types of constant returns technology. One is a storage technology (safe
asset), which has zero net return. The safe asset is the same in both countries. The other
type of technology is a long-term risky investment project (risky asset). In period two,
                                              e per unit of investment which repre-
a risky investment project has a random payo¤ R
sents idiosyncratic investment productivity. It yields nothing at date t = 1. There is a
continuum of investment projects available in each country. The investment productivity
realizations are independent across projects and across countries. The investment produc-
                       ei in country k 2 fA; Bg is a independent realization of normal
tivity of each project R k

distribution N (Rk ;        2)   with mean Rk and variance                 2 .5   The productivity mean Rk is a
                            k                                              k

random variable that takes two values: a low value Rkl with probability                            k   and a high
value Rkh with probability (1                  6
                                             k) .     For each investment project in country k; nature
picks the mean Rk where Rk 2 fRkl ; Rkh g.7 The expected productivity mean is denoted by
with a low liquidity risk can be viewed as a developed economy, and a country with a high liquidity risk can
be viewed as a developing or emerging economy.
   5
     More precisely, all portfolio investments have the same productivity mean Rpk , and all direct investments
have the same productivity mean Rdk > Rpk .
   6
     In addition, the probability k of investment project to be less productive depends on the type of
ownership: the direct investment is less likely to have low mean productivity than the portfolio investment,
i.e.,    dk < pk .
    7
        Direct investors are able to observe the true distribution, portfolio investors use the unconditional


                                                          13
Rk =       k Rkl   + (1   k ) Rkh   with Rk > 1. All parameters of the productivity distribution
are country-speci…c, with Rk representing the expected pro…tability of investment project
and    2
       k   capturing the investment risk in country k.8
    The characteristic features of direct investment are higher pro…tability and access to
private information about investment productivity (Rk ). Portfolio investment represents
holdings of assets which allow for risk diversi…cation (investing into multiple projects) and
greater liquidity. Taking advantage of the inside information, direct investors may sell low-
productive investments and keep the high-productive ones under their ownership. This
generates a "lemons"9 problem: the buyers do not know whether the investment is sold
because of its low productivity or due to an exogenous liquidity shock. Therefore, due to
this information asymmetry, there is a discount on the prematurely sold direct investment
(relative to the prematurely sold portfolio investment).
    In period zero, investors choose how much to invest into risky long-term projects in each
of the two countries, as well as the ownership type for each project (direct or portfolio). In
period one, idiosyncratic liquidity shocks are realized and, subsequently, risky investments
are traded in the …nancial market. The late consumers are the buyers in the …nancial
market. All investment projects pay o¤ in the second period. This "cash-in-the-market"
framework10 allows one to capture the e¤ect of market liquidity (demand for risky invest-
ments in the interim period) on the investment choice. The equilibrium prices of direct
and portfolio investments depend not only on their expected payo¤s but also on investors’
liquidity preferences and uncertainty about the investment productivity. If market is more
liquid then expected gains from trading on private information are larger, since it is easier
for informed traders to hide behind the liquidity traders. Therefore, in a more liquid market
direct investors have higher pro…ts from selling on private information. On the other hand,
a larger fraction of direct investors leads to a less liquid market.
    There are two types of equilibria. In the …rst type, only investors from the country with
distribution which the mixture of two normal distributions.
   8
     In addition to a lower liquidity risk, a developed country can be characterized by a higher expected
pro…tability (adjusted for risk) and less asymmetric information about the productivity.
   9
     Akerlof (1970)
  10
     Allen and Gale [5]




                                                    14
a lower liquidity risk choose to hold direct investment. In the second type, investors from
both countries hold direct investments. In this case, there are strategic complementarities
in choosing direct investment. This generates a possibility of multiple equilibria through
the self-ful…lling expectations. If countries have the same fundamentals, the country with
a higher liquidity risk attracts less inward foreign investment, but a larger share of it is in
the form of FDI. Also, the country with a higher level of asymmetric information about
investment productivity attracts more FDI relative to FPI since the marginal bene…ts from
private information are larger.
    These results are consistent with the empirical …ndings that countries that are less
…nancially developed and have weaker …nancial institutions tend to attract more capital in
the form of FDI. Furthermore, it can explain the phenomenon of bilateral FDI ‡ows among
developed countries, and one-way FDI ‡ows from developed to emerging countries.
    Consider the e¤ect of an increase in the liquidity risk (   k)   on the composition of foreign
investment. Such an increase results in the drying up of market liquidity as more investors
have to sell their risky asset holdings. At the same time, it becomes more likely that if a
direct investment is sold before maturity, it is sold due to exogenous liquidity needs rather
than an adverse signal about investment productivity. This reduces the adverse selection
problem and therefore results in a smaller information discount on prematurely sold direct
investments. This e¤ect captures the phenomenon of …re-sale FDI during liquidity crises.
If economy is in the unique equilibrium then higher liquidity risk leads to a higher level of
FDI. However, if there are multiple equilibria then FDI may decline as the liquidity risk
becomes higher. In this case, an out‡ow of FDI is induced by self-ful…lling expectations.




5     International Lending: Moral Hazard and Limited En-
      forcement

5.1    Debt Flows

Debt ‡ows remain the dominant form of ‡ows to developing economies, although their rel-
ative importance has declined over time. The empirical literature on …nancial globalization


                                              15
documents a systematic empirical link between exposure to debt ‡ows and the likelihood
and severity of …nancial crises. Rodrik and Velasco [37] …nd that countries with a larger
short-term debt stock than reserves are more likely to experience a …nancial ‡ows reversal.
Tong and Wei [39] …nd that a large pre-crisis exposure to non-FDI capital in‡ows tends to
be associated with a more severe credit crunch during the crisis. However, debt ‡ows can be
bene…cial in certain circumstances. A country that has no access to equity or FDI in‡ows,
might still be able to bene…t from debt in‡ows to …nance illiquid investments (Diamond
and Rajan [15]).11
      Wei [42] argues that sudden reversals of capital ‡ows are more likely to occur among
countries that rely relatively more on portfolio debt ‡ows, including bank loans, and less
on FDI. Moreover, short-term bank loans to developing countries tend to increase during
booms and rapidly decrease during economic slowdowns. Claessens, Dooley and Warner [11]
…nd that long-term debt ‡ows are often as volatile as short-term ‡ows. The procyclicality
and high volatility of debt ‡ows can lead to ine¢ cient capital allocation and generate moral
hazard. McKinnon and Pill [31] show …nancial liberalization without adequate supervision
can result in overborrowing by banks. Furthermore, banks may expose their balance sheets
to currency risk if taking speculative open positions in foreign exchange are permitted.


5.2      Lending with Moral Hazard and Limited Enforcement

With access to complete international credit markets, the economy would be able to borrow
to …nance a stable level of consumption and investment. However, empirical …ndings suggest
that countries often experience capital out‡ows in the very low income periods.
      Eaton and Gersovitz [16] analyze a model with incomplete international credit market
and risk of repudiation. The level of debt is the minimum of the credit demands of the
economy and the credit constraints by lenders. Borrowing occurs in period or relatively
low income and must be fully repaid in the succeeding period. Failure to repay prevents
borrowing in the subsequent period. Atkeson [6] studies a model of lending that contains
both a moral hazard problem and an enforcement problem. The introduction of moral
 11
      See Kose, Prasad, Rogo¤, and Wei [26] for a survey of the literature on the volatility and risk of debt
‡ows.



                                                      16
hazard due to asymmetric information between borrower and lender, allows to explain why
the occurrence of especially low output realizations prompt international lenders to ask
these countries for repayments. Tsyrennikov [40] shows that the capital out‡ows in the
lowest output state in a model with only moral hazard can be quantitatively signi…cant and
larger than in a model which also includes limited enforcement.


5.2.1      Atkeson (1991) model

A risk-averse borrower lives for t = 0; 1; 2; ::. At period 0, he is endowed with Qo units of
good, and in each period the borrower has access to the investment technology: Yt+1 =
f (It ; "t+1 ) where It are units of goods invested and "t+1 is i.i.d. random variable. The
probability density of Yt+1 conditioned on It is g(Yt+1 ; It ).12 The borrowers preferences are
represented by
                                                           1
                                                           X
                                                                 t
                                           (1        )Eo             u(ct )                     (26)
                                                           t=0

.where      2 (0; 1); u0 (c) > 0; u00 (c) < 0.
      In the autarky environment with no access to the international credit market, the opti-
mal value function Vaut (Q) satis…es the following Bellman equation:
                                  8                                        9
                                  <                    X                   =
                                                                 0    0
              Vaut (Q) = max (1         )u(Q I) +         Vaut (Q )g(Q ; I) :                   (27)
                          I2[0;Q] :                     0
                                                                           ;
                                                                         Q


Complete credit market The risk-neutral lender can observe the borrower’s investment
choice, and there is complete enforcement. The borrower can issue Arrow securities that
pay out di in state i and q(Yi ; I) is the price of such security given last period investment I.
Since lender is risk-neutral, the Arrow securities are priced such that q(Yi ; I) = g(Yi ; I).
      The optimal value function Vcompl (Q) satis…es the Bellman equation:
                                   8                         X                            9
                                   >
                                   > (1          )u(c) +              d(Y 0 ))g(Y 0 ; I ) >
                                                                     VAD (Y 0             >
                                   >
                                   <                                                      >
                                                                                          =
             Vcompl (Q) = max
                                                         Y0                    !            ;   (28)
                            I2[0;Q] >
                                                        X                                 >
                                   >>                        0        0                   >
                                                                                          >
                                   : +           Q   c+   q(Y ; I )d(Y ) I                ;
                                                            Y0
 12
      Several assumptions are imposed on g(Y,I) to make the model tractable.




                                                       17
   where I is the optimal investment level such that it maximizes the project present value
evaluated at the Arrow securities prices
                                   (                                           )
                                                              X
                                                                    0    0
                                     max           I+              Y g(Y ; I) :                                           (29)
                                      I 0
                                                              Y0
                                                               X
   The borrower borrows a constant amount                           q(Y 0 ; I )d(Y 0 ) and invests I each period,
                                                               Y0
                                              0                                                       0
and makes high repayment when Y is high and low repayment when Y is low. This is a
full-insurance solution.


Moral Hazard and Limited Enforcement Next consider the environment with moral
hazard : the lender cannot observe the investment choice It which a¤ects the probability dis-
tribution of returns Y ; and limited enforcement: the borrower can default on the promised
repayment.
   The risk-neutral lender lives for two-periods and is endowed with M units of good in
each period. He is willing to lend or borrow at the risk-free rate 1= . The lender observes
Q but does not observe I or c. The optimal recursive contract takes the following form:

                                                   dt+1 = d(Yt+1 ; Qt )                                                   (30)

                                                  Qt+1 = Yt+1                dt+1

                                                      bt = b(Qt+1 )

                                       ct + It        bt = Qt :

  The value function VAtk (Q) satisfy the following Bellman equation:
                      (                                                    )
                                        X
 VAtk (Q) =     maxA (1       )u(c) +       VAtk (Y 0 d(Y 0 ; Q))g(Y 0 ; I)
                                                        Y0
 s:t         (i)    c+I     b        Q; b         M; d(Y 0 ; Q)         M; c          0; I      0
                           X
             (ii)   b             d(Y 0 ; Q)g(Y 0 ; I)
                             Y0
             (iii) VAtk    [Y 0    d(Y 0 )]        U (Y 0 )
                                     (                                                                                    )
                                                                             X
             (iv)   I = arg max (1                 )u(Q + b          I) +             VAtk (Y   0   d(Y   0 ; Q))g(Y 0 ; I)

                                                                              Y   0

                                                                                                                          (31)


                                                              18
         The optimal contract can be constructed by iterating to convergence on constraint con-
ditions.
         The capital out‡ow in states with low output is characterized by the following conditions:
the optimality condition
                                        (                                                         )
                                                            X
               VAtk (Q) =     max       u(Q + b    I) +          VAtk (Y 0     d(Y 0 ; Q))g(Y 0 ; I) ;    (32)
                            I2[0;Q+b]
                                                            Y0

and the participation constraint


                                            VAtk (Q)   Vaut (Q + b):                                      (33)

Therefore, in the states with low output Yi , we have b                      d(Yi ), i.e., there are no capital
in‡ows for these states.
         Capital out‡ows in bad times provide good incentives because they occur only at output
realizations so low that they are more likely to occur when borrower has undertaken too
little investment. Their role is to provide incentives for the borrower is to invest enough to
make it unlikely that those low-output states will occur.


6         Home Bias through Portfolio Diversi…cation

With no information asymmetry, the home bias in equity portfolio depends crucially on the
degree of market completeness.13 Despite of the increased cross-border …nancial transac-
tions, international portfolios remain heavily tilted toward domestic assets.14 The literature
on international portfolio emphasizes the link between home equity bias and home consump-
tion bias (Obstfeld and Rogo¤ [33], Coeurdacier [12], Obstfeld [32], Engel and Matsumoto
[17]).
         Coeurdacier [12] characterizes the constant equity portfolio that reproduces the locally
complete market allocation through trades in claims to domestic and foreign equities. The
structure of these optimal portfolios re‡ects the hedging properties of relative equity re-
turns against real exchange rate ‡uctuations. With CRRA preferences, the optimal equity
    13
         The benchmark model without home bias in equity portfolio is in Helpman and Razin (1978).
    14
         See French and Poterba (1991), Tesar and Werner (1995), and Ahearne, Griever and Warnock (2004).



                                                       19
position is related to the covariance between the excess return on domestic equity (relative
to foreign equity), and the rate of change of the real exchange rate. When the CRRA
coe¢ cient exceeds unity, home equity bias arises when excess domestic equity returns are
positively correlated with an appreciation of the real exchange rate. In that case, e¢ cient
risk sharing requires that domestic consumption expenditures increase as the real exchange
rate appreciates. If domestic equity returns are high precisely at that time, domestic equity
provides the appropriate hedge against real exchange rate risk, and investors will tilt their
portfolio towards domestic equity.
    Coeurdacier and Gourinchas [13] introduce an additional source of risk, so that optimal
portfolio allocation will typically require simultaneous holdings of equities and bonds. As
relative bond returns are strongly positively correlated with the real exchange rate, it is
optimal for investors to use bond positions to hedge real exchange rate risks while equities
are left to hedge the impact of additional sources of risk on investors’total wealth. This is
consistent the empirical …nding that correlation between excess equity returns and the real
exchange rate is too low to explain observed equity home bias (van Wincoop and Warnock
[41]).
    Furthermore, they show that home equity bias arises if the correlation between the return
on non-…nancial wealth and the return on equity, conditional on bond returns, is negative (a
generalization of both Baxter and Jermann [8], and Heathcote and Perri [22]).The reason
is that an increase in domestic equity holdings increases its implicit domestic currency
exposure. Investors optimally undo this exposure by shorting the domestic currency bond.
The overall domestic bond position re‡ects the balance of these two e¤ects, so it is possible
for a country to have short or long domestic currency debt positions. This is in line with
recent empirical evidence (Lane and Shambaugh [28] and Lane and Shambaugh [29]) that
suggests large heterogeneity across countries in the currency denomination of external bond
holdings. On average, advanced countries hold long (but small) domestic currency debt
positions but some large countries, most notably the US, are short in their own currency
debt.




                                             20
6.1   Coeurdacier and Gourinchas (2009) model

Consider a two-period endowment economy model. There are two symmetric countries,
Home (H) and Foreign (F ), each with a representative household. Each country specializes
in the production of one tradable good. Agents consume both goods with a preference
towards the local good. In period zero, no output is produced and no consumption takes
place, but agents trade …nancial claims. In period one, country i receives an exogenous
endowment yi of good i. Countries are symmetric and E0 (yi ) = 1 for both countries, where
E0 is the conditional expectations’operator, given date t = 0 information. Once stochastic
endowments are realized at period 1, households consume using the revenues from their
portfolio chosen in period 0 and their endowment received in period 1. Country i household
has the standard CRRA preferences.
   The Home terms of trade, the relative price of the Home tradable good in terms of the
Foreign tradable good, is denoted by q           pH =pF . Trade in stocks and bonds occurs in
period 0. In each country there is one Lucas-style stock, a share           of the endowment in
country i is distributed to stockholders as dividend, while a share (1       ) is not capitalizable
(labor income) and is distributed to households of country i. The supply of each type of
share is normalized at unity. Agents can trade a bond in each country denominated in the
composite good of country i. Buying one unit of the Home (Foreign) bond in period 0 gives
one unit of the Home composite (Foreign) good at t = 1. Both bonds are in zero net supply.
Initially, each household fully owns the local stock equity, and has zero initial foreign assets.
   Denote a country’s holdings of local stock by S, and its holdings of bonds denominated
in its local composite good by b. The vector (S; b) thus describes international portfolios.
Symmetry of preferences and distributions of shocks implies that equilibrium portfolios are
symmetric. S > 1=2 means that there is equity home bias on stocks, while b < 0 means that
a country issues bonds denominated in its local good, and simultaneously lends in units of
the foreign good. The equilibrium equity portfolio position (in the symmetric steady-state
where y = 1 and b = 0) is given by

                                   1   2   1       (1    1= ) (2a   1)
                             S =               +                                              (34)
                                   2                      (1    )

   where           1   (2a    1)2 + (2a        1)2 =    represents the equilibrium terms of trade


                                                 21
elasticity of relative output.
   When      < 1, the optimal equity portfolio has two components. The …rst term inside
the brackets represents the position of a log-investor (               = 1). The domestic investor is
already endowed with an implicit equity position equal to (1                    )= through non-…nancial
income. O¤setting this implicit equity holding and diversifying optimally implies a position
S = (2     1)=2 < 1=2 for         < 1. The second component of the optimal equity portfolio
represents a hedge against real exchange rate ‡uctuations. It only applies when                6= 1, i.e.,
when total consumption expenditures ‡uctuate with the real exchange rate. This hedging
demand is a complex and non-linear function of the structure of preferences summarized
by the parameters ;         and a. For reasonable parameter values, this hedging demand can
contribute to home equity bias only when           < 1, i.e. when the terms of trade impact of
relative supply shocks is large. Also, this hedge component can be rewritten as a function
of the covariance-variance ratio between excess equity returns and the real exchange rate.
   Now consider the set-up with bonds and additional independent risk factor b
                                                                             ". The model
can be summarized by the (log-linearized) intertemporal allocation across goods and budget
                                         be , non-…nancial wealth R
constraint. Relative returns on equities R                        bn and bonds R
                                                                               bb

are represented by

                                   be = qb + yb +      0
                                   R                   eb";                                         (35)
                                   bb = (2a       1) qb + yb +        0
                                   R                                  bb";
                                   bn = qb + yb +
                                   R                   0
                                                       nb":

   The solution for optimal portfolio is given by

                                  1       1                (1    1= )
                       S      =       1          n;e   +                     RER;b                  (36)
                                  2
                                  1       1                (1    1= )
                        b     =       1          n;e   +                     RER;b   ;
                                  2

   where     ;   are asset returns loadings on the real exchange rate and on non-…nancial
income such that

                                  [ =
                                  RER         RER;b Rb
                                                       b +      RER;e Re
                                                                         b                          (37)
                                   cn =
                                   R             b +
                                              n;b Rb
                                                                b
                                                           n;e Re :


                                                 22
    The intuition is that the equilibrium bond and equity positions will hedge optimally the
components of real exchange rate and non-…nancial income ‡uctuations with which they are
correlated. Because bond returns o¤er a better hedge against real exchange rate risk than
equities, holdings of equities take care of the exposure to other sources of risk, conditional
on bond returns. Home equity bias will arise when Cov(Re ; Rn =Rb ) < 0.


7    Conclusion

In an integrated world capital market with perfect information, all forms of capital ‡ows are
indistinguishable. Information frictions and incomplete risk sharing are important elements
that needed to di¤erentiate between equity and debt ‡ows, and between di¤erent types of
equities.
    With information asymmetry between foreign and domestic investors, a country which
…nances its domestic investment through foreign debt or foreign equity portfolio issue, will
inadequately augment its capital stock. Foreign direct investment ‡ows, however, have the
potential of generating an e¢ cient level of domestic investment.
    In the presence of asymmetric information between sellers and buyers in the capital
market, foreign direct investment is associated with higher liquidation costs due to the
adverse selection. Thus, the exposure to liquidity shocks determines the volume of foreign
direct investment ‡ows relative to portfolio investment ‡ows. In particular, the information-
liquidity trade-o¤ helps explain the composition of equity ‡ows between developed and
emerging countries, as well as the patterns of FDI ‡ows during …nancial crises.
    The asymmetric information between domestic investors (as borrowers) and foreign
investors (as lenders) with respect to investment allocation leads to moral hazard and thus
generate an inadequate amount of borrowings. The moral hazard problem, coupled with
limited enforcement, can explain why countries experience debt out‡ows in low income
periods; in contrast to the predictions of the complete-market paradigm.
    Finally, we analyze a risk-diversi…cation model, where bond holdings hedge real exchange
rate risks, while equities hedge non-…nancial income ‡uctuations. An equity home bias
emerges as a calibratable equilibrium outcome.



                                             23
References

 [1] V. Acharya, H. Shin, and T. Yorulmazer. Fire-sale FDI. Working Paper (2007).

 [2] M. Aguiar and G. Gopinath. Fire-Sale Foreign Direct Investment and Liquidity
    Crises. The Review of Economics and Statistics 87(3), 439–52 (2005).

 [3] R. Albuquerque. The composition of international capital ‡ows: risk sharing through
    foreign direct investment. Journal of International Economics 61(2), 353–383 (2003).

 [4] R. Albuquerque, N. Loayza, and L. Serven. World market integration through
    the lens of foreign direct investors. Journal of International Economics 66(2), 267–295
    (2005).

 [5] F. Allen and D. Gale. Limited Market Participation and Volatility of Asset Prices.
    The American Economic Review 84(4), 933–955 (1994).

 [6] A. Atkeson. International lending with moral hazard and risk of repudiation. Econo-
    metrica 59(4), 1069–1089 (1991).

 [7] M. Baker, C. Foley, and J. Wurgler. Multinationals as arbitrageurs: The e¤ect
    of stock market valuations on foreign direct investment. Review of Financial Studies
    (2008).

 [8] M. Baxter and U. Jermann. The international diversi…cation puzzle is worse than
    you think. The American Economic Review 87(1), 170–180 (1997).

 [9] R. Caballero and A. Krishnamurthy. International and domestic collateral con-
    straints in a model of emerging market crises. Journal of Monetary Economics 48(3)
    (2001).

[10] R. Chang and A. Velasco. A Model of Financial Crises in Emerging Markets.
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(2) (2001).

[11] S. Claessens, M. Dooley, and A. Warner. Portfolio capital ‡ows: hot or cold?
    The World Bank Economic Review 9(1), 153 (1995).


                                           24
[12] N. Coeurdacier. Do trade costs in goods market lead to home bias in equities?
    Journal of International Economics 77(1), 86–100 (2009).

[13] N. Coeurdacier and P. Gourinchas. When Bonds Matter: Home Bias in Goods
    and Assets. NBER working paper (2009).

[14] D. Diamond and P. Dybvig. Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity. The
    Journal of Political Economy 91(3), 401–419 (1983).

[15] D. Diamond and R. Rajan. Banks, short-term debt and …nancial crises: theory,
    policy implications and applications. Carnegie-Rochester Confer. Series on Public
    Policy 54(1), 37–71 (2001).

[16] J. Eaton and M. Gersovitz. Debt with potential repudiation: Theoretical and
    empirical analysis. The Review of Economic Studies 48(2), 289–309 (1981).

[17] C. Engel and A. Matsumoto. International Risk Sharing: Through Equities or
    Bonds? NBER working paper (2008).

[18] K. Froot and J. Stein. Exchange rates and foreign direct investment: an imperfect
    capital markets approach. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(4), 1191–1217
    (1991).

[19] I. Goldstein and A. Razin. An information-based trade o¤ between foreign direct
    investment and foreign portfolio investment. Journal of International Economics 70(1),
    271–295 (2006).

[20] I. Goldstein, A. Razin, and H. Tong. Liquidity, Institutional Quality and the
    Composition of International Equity Out‡ows. NBER Working Paper (2008).

[21] R. Gordon and A. Bovenberg. Why is capital so immobile internationally? Possi-
    ble explanations and implications for capital income taxation. The American Economic
    Review 86(5), 1057–1075 (1996).

[22] J. Heathcote and F. Perri. The International Diversi…cation Puzzle Is Not As
    Bad As You Think. NBER working paper (2007).


                                           25
[23] K. Kirabaeva. International Capital Flows and Liquidity Crises. Working Paper
    (2009).

[24] M. Klein, J. Peek, and E. Rosengren. Troubled banks, impaired foreign direct
    investment: the role of relative access to credit. American Economic Review 92(3),
    664–682 (2002).

[25] M. Klein and E. Rosengren. The real exchange rate and foreign direct investment
    in the United States: relative wealth vs. relative wage e¤ects. Journal of International
    Economics 36(3-4), 373–389 (1994).

[26] M. Kose, E. Prasad, K. Rogoff, and S. Wei. Financial Globalization: A Reap-
    praisal. NBER working paper (2006).

[27] P. Krugman. Fire-Sale FDI. Capital Flows and the Emerging Economies: Theory,
    Evidence and Controversies, Chicago pp. 43–60 (2000).

[28] P. Lane and J. Shambaugh. Financial Exchange Rates and International Currency
    Exposures. NBER Working Paper (2007).

[29] P. Lane and J. Shambaugh. The Long or Short of it: Determinants of Foreign
    Currency Exposure in External Balance Sheets. NBER Working Paper (2009).

[30] P. Loungani, A. Mody, and A. Razin. The global disconnect: the role of transac-
    tional distance and scale economies in gravity equations. Scottish Journal of Political
    Economy 49, 526–543 (2002).

[31] R. McKinnon and H. Pill. Credible liberalizations and international capital ‡ows:
    the overborrowing syndrome. Financial deregulation and integration in East Asia 7,
    42 (1996).

[32] M. Obstfeld. International Risk Sharing and the Costs of Trade. NBER working
    paper (2009).

[33] M. Obstfeld and K. Rogoff. The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeco-
    nomics: Is There a Common Cause? NBER Working Paper (2000).


                                            26
[34] R. Portes, H. Rey, and Y. Oh. Information and capital ‡ows: The determinants of
    transactions in …nancial assets. European Economic Review 45(4-6), 783–796 (2001).

[35] A. Razin and E. Sadka. Gains from FDI in‡ows with incomplete information.
    Economics Letters 78(1), 71–77 (2003).

[36] A. Razin, E. Sadka, and C. Yuen. Implications of the home bias: a pecking
    order of capital in‡ows and corrective taxation. The economics of globalization: policy
    perspectives from public economics p. 85 (1999).

[37] D. Rodrik and A. Velasco. Short-term capital ‡ows. NBER working paper (1999).

[38] S. Rossi and P. Volpin. Cross-country determinants of mergers and acquisitions.
    Journal of Financial Economics 74(2), 277–304 (2004).

[39] H. Tong and S. Wei. The Composition Matters: Capital In‡ows and Liquidity
    Crunch during a Global Economic Crisis. NBER working paper (2009).

[40] V. Tsyrennikov. Capital Out‡ows And Moral Hazard. Working Papers (2007).

[41] E. van Wincoop and F. Warnock. Is Home Bias in Assets Related to Home Bias
    in Goods? NBER Working Papers (2006).

[42] S. Wei.    Connecting two views on …nancial globalization: Can we make further
    progress?    Journal of The Japanese and International Economies 20(4), 459–481
    (2006).




                                           27
