NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PAIN AT THE PUMP:
THE DIFFERENTIAL EFFECT OF GASOLINE PRICES ON NEW AND USED AUTOMOBILE MARKETS
Meghan R. Busse
Christopher R. Knittel
Florian Zettelmeyer
Working Paper 15590
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15590

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2009

We are grateful for helpful comments from Severin Borenstein, Igal Hendel, Ryan Kellogg, Jorge
Silva-Risso, Scott Stern and seminar participants at the ASSA, Iowa State, Ohio State, UC Berkeley,
Yale, MIT, University of British Columbia, University of Toronto, Cornell, Northwestern University,
Chicago Federal Reserve Bank, University of Chicago, Texas A&M, and the University of Rochester.
We also thank participants at the NBER 2008 Winter IO conference. We thank the University of California
Energy Institute (UCEI) for financial help in acquiring data. Busse and Zettelmeyer gratefully acknowledge
the support of NSF grants SES-0550508 and SES-0550911. Knittel thanks the Institute of Transportation
Studies at UC Davis for support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Meghan R. Busse, Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Pain at the Pump: The Differential Effect of Gasoline Prices on New and Used Automobile
Markets
Meghan R. Busse, Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer
NBER Working Paper No. 15590
December 2009
JEL No. L10,L50,L62
ABSTRACT
The dramatic increase in gasoline prices from close to $1 in 1999 to $4 at their peak in 2008 made
it much more expensive for consumers to operate an automobile. In this paper we investigate whether
consumers have adjusted to gasoline price changes by altering what automobiles they purchase and
what prices they pay. We investigate these effects in both new and used car markets. We find that
a $1 increase in gasoline price changes the market shares of the most and least fuel-efficient quartiles
of new cars by +20% and -24%, respectively. In contrast, the same gasoline price increase changes
the market shares of the most and least fuel-efficient quartiles of used cars by only +3% and -7%, respectively.
We find that changes in gasoline prices also change the relative prices of cars in the most fuel-efficient
quartile and cars in the least fuel-efficient quartile: for new cars the relative price increase for fuel-efficient
cars is $363 for a $1 increase in gas prices; for used cars it is $2839. Hence the adjustment of equilibrium
market shares and prices in response to changes in usage cost varies dramatically between new and
used markets. In the new car market, the adjustment is primarily in market shares, while in the used
car market, the adjustment is primarily in prices. We argue that the difference in how gasoline costs
affect new and used automobile markets can be explained by differences in the supply characteristics
of new and used cars.

Meghan R. Busse
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Management & Strategy, Sixth Floor
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
m-busse@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Christopher R. Knittel
University of California, Davis
Department of Economics
One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
crknittel@ucdavis.edu

Florian Zettelmeyer
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Marketing Department, Fourth Floor
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
f-zettelmeyer@kellogg.northwestern.edu

1

Introduction

Fuel costs make up a large and increasing share of the total cost of using an automobile. The
dramatic increase in gasoline prices from below $1 in early 1999 to $4 at their peak in 2008 made it
much more expensive for consumers to operate an automobile. For example, an average driver of a
full-size SUV spent as little at $758 per year on gasoline at early-1999 gasoline prices; at mid-2008
prices this driver would have had to spend up to $2968 to travel the same distance in the same
car.1
Paying more for using a car when gasoline prices increase, however, is not inevitable. Consumers
can adjust to these usage cost changes by taking advantage of the variety in fuel efficiency of
available automobiles. For example, a full-size SUV owner who would have spent $2968 for gasoline
at mid-2008 prices could have reduced that amount to $2148 by replacing her full-size SUV with a
smaller SUV, or to $1470 by switching from her SUV to a small car.2
In this paper we investigate whether the change in gasoline prices did, in fact, alter which
automobiles consumers purchased and what prices they paid. We investigate both new and used
car markets; while average transaction prices in the used market are lower, there are about twice as
many used cars as new cars sold each year in the U.S.3 To analyze these two markets we combine
data on local gasoline prices and data on model-specific fuel efficiency with transaction data from
a 20% sample of U.S. new car dealers from 1999 to 2008. These dealers sell both new and used
vehicles.
We find that a $1 increase in gasoline price changes the market shares of the most and least
fuel-efficient quartiles of new cars by +20% and -24%, respectively. In contrast, the same gasoline
price increase changes the market shares of the most and least fuel-efficient quartiles of used cars
by only +3% and -7%, respectively. We find that changes in gasoline prices also change the relative
prices of cars in the most fuel-efficient and least fuel-efficient quartiles: for new cars the relative
price increase for fuel-efficient cars is $363 for a $1 increase in gas prices; for used cars it is $2839.
Hence, the adjustment of equilibrium market shares and prices in response to changes in usage
cost varies dramatically between new and used markets. In the new car market, the adjustment is
primarily in market shares, while in the used car market, the adjustment is primarily in prices.
The size of this difference seems surprising because the cars, the consumers, and the retailers
1

This uses the standard assumption that consumers drive 12,000 miles per year. The average fuel-efficiency of
full-size SUVs is 15.2 miles per gallon. The average national gasoline price during the first quarter of 1999 was $0.96
and during the second quarter of 2008 was $3.76.
2
This uses the average fuel-efficiencies for full-size SUVs (15.2 MPG), entry SUVs (21 MPG), and entry compact
cars (30.7 MPG). See Table 8 for average fuel efficiency by car segment.
3
There are 10-16 million new and 20-35 million used cars sold in the U.S. per year.

1

are fairly similar in the two markets measured in our sample. All the transaction data in our
sample come from new car dealers. The used cars sold at these dealerships are a positive selection
of used cars, making them not incomparable to new cars. For example, on average, a used car in
our sample sells for $15,582 compared to $25,515 for a new car. The consumers in our sample who
buy used cars are also not dissimilar to those who buy new cars. For example, on average, a used
car buyer comes from a census block group with a median household income of $50,826 instead
of a median income of $58,130 for new car buyers. Finally, new and used cars are sold at exactly
same retailers in our data; at many of these dealerships, the same salesperson sells both new and
used cars.
We argue that the dramatic difference in how usage cost affects new and used automobile
markets can be explained by differences in the supply of new and used cars. New cars are supplied
by auto manufacturers while the supply of used cars arises ultimately from used car owners. This
means that the outside options of new and used car suppliers, in the event that either decides
not to sell a car, differ very fundamentally. For manufacturers, there is no value to the car other
than the profit opportunity of selling it. The manufacturer’s reservation price—and thereby its
decision to sell—will be unaffected by gasoline prices. For used car owners, however, the outside
option is to keep the car and drive it themselves. A used car owner’s decision to sell, therefore, will
depend on a comparison of the usage costs and prices of his or her current car and of the candidate
replacement car. Rising gasoline prices will increase the usage cost disadvantage of fuel-inefficient
cars, increasing the incentives of their owners to sell them (and vice versa for fuel-efficient cars).
This means that while rising gasoline prices should shift the demand in new and used car markets
similarly, the effect on supply should differ between new and used car markets. The supply of new
cars should be largely unaffected by changing gasoline prices while the supply of used cars should
shift when gasoline prices change.
The empirical results we find in this paper are consistent with what we would expect given
these supply differences in the two markets. We find that in new car markets, changes in usage
costs result in larger market share changes than price changes, which is what we would expect, we
argue below, if changes in the market equilibrium are driven primarily by changes in demand. In
contrast, we find that prices in used car markets adjust by more than they do in new car markets.
This is because demand and supply are both shifting in the used car market in a way that amplifies
price effects and dampens quantity effects.
In this paper, we estimate short-run equilibrium effects. For the car industry, the short-run
horizon is measured in months, a time frame during which a manufacturer’s offering of models is
fixed, its model-specific production capacity is largely fixed, as are a number of input arrangements

2

(labor contracts, in particular). Over a longer horizon, say a year or two, some of these aspects
become more flexible (models can be tweaked, some capacity can be altered). Only over a longrun horizon (several years), can a manufacturer introduce fundamentally different models into its
product offering.
Our paper makes two primary contributions. First, our paper provides rare empirical evidence
on how usage costs affect equilibrium outcomes in durable goods markets. Furthermore, since we
observe outcomes in both new and used markets, we can investigate these effects—and potential
differences in these effects—in new versus used markets. In particular, our paper shows that the
effect of usage cost changes can differ dramatically for goods that have identical usage cost, similar retail outlets, and similar demand structures, based only on the inherent differences in supply
between new and used markets. Second, our paper speaks to the difficulty of car manufacturers
to adapt to volatile gasoline prices. Since consumers are sensitive to gasoline prices in choosing
between types of automobiles, rapid changes in gasoline prices dramatically complicate car development and production planning. The scale of this problem during 2008 has been substantial
enough to make top auto executives give up their historic opposition to gasoline price taxes: some
executives have suggested that Congress should consider a variable gasoline tax that would create
a $4 floor for retail gasoline prices.4
This paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we describe the intuition for how a change
in gasoline prices might affect the new and used markets for cars. In Section 3, we describe the data
used in the paper. Section 4 is the main body of the paper. It describes the empirical specifications
used to investigate the effect of gasoline price on the prices and market shares in the new and used
car markets, and reports the results of those estimations. Section 5 investigates the robustness of
our base results. Section 6 provides supporting evidence for our findings in Section 4, and Section 7
concludes.

2

Gasoline prices and new and used car markets

In this section, we discuss the intuition for what effect gasoline prices would be likely to have on
the demand and the supply of both new and used cars.
4

“General Motors Corp. Chief Executive Officer Rick Wagoner said Tuesday that increasing the federal gasoline
tax to guarantee a minimum price of $4 a gallon is an idea ‘worthy of consideration.’ ” (Washington Times, March 19,
2009). “ ‘We need more expensive gasoline to change consumer behavior,’ Mr. [Mike] Jackson [CEO of Autonation,
the largest U.S. dealership chain] said. Otherwise, Americans will continue to favor big vehicles, not matter what
kind of fuel-economy standards the government imposes on auto makers. Four dollars a gallon, he added, ‘is a good
start.’ ” (Wall Street Journal, March 5, 2009)

3

2.1

Gasoline price and car demand

Because cars are durable goods, potential customers must consider in their purchase decision not
only the initial cost of acquiring a car, but also the ongoing costs of operating the car. An increase in
the price of gasoline will increase the usage cost for all (gasoline-powered) automobiles. Exactly how
much the cost-per-mile increases for a particular model, however, depends on the characteristics
of the model; the larger and heavier a vehicle, and the greater its horsepower, the greater effect a
given gasoline price increase will have on its costs of usage.
If there were sufficiently attractive substitutes for cars as a whole, we might expect across-theboard increases in usage costs to decrease demand for all car models. For what is probably the
vast majority of car owners, however, abandoning car ownership entirely is unlikely to be a realistic
option.5 If this is the case, the demand for cars as a whole will be fairly insensitive to changes
in gasoline prices, although demand for particular models might not be. Specifically, in both the
new car and used car markets, we would expect to see demand increase for fuel-efficient cars and
decrease for fuel-inefficient cars when gasoline prices increase.
Although we have just argued that the effect of gasoline prices on demand should be very similar
for new and used cars, we find—as described in the introduction—very different equilibrium effects
in the two markets. Since the equilibrium outcomes are the result of the interaction between supply
and demand, this suggest that there are important supply-side differences between new and used
cars. We turn now to considering how gasoline prices affect new car supply.

2.2

Gasoline price and new car supply

As described in the introduction, in this paper we find that changes in gasoline prices affect the
market shares of new cars more than they affect the prices of new cars. In this subsection, we
consider the role of new car supply in determining these equilibrium outcomes.6
We would not expect gasoline prices to have a large direct effect on new car production or
production costs because gasoline is not an important input in the production of automobiles.
(For example, one direct effect gasoline prices could have is on the costs of transporting cars from
production plants to dealerships. In addition, gasoline prices are closely linked with oil prices, which
could affect the costs of some of the petroleum-based inputs to cars, such as plastics. However,
5

There are, of course, exceptions: customers in dense urban areas, who have access to public transportation or
car-sharing arrangements such as ZipCar.
6
New cars are supplied by auto manufacturers via a network of legally separate but captive retail dealerships. The
equilibrium effects of a gasoline price on new car sales and prices depend on the combined response in this supply
chain. In other words, the observed equilibrium effects at the retail level represent the net effect of the manufacturer
and dealer responses together.

4

gasoline- or petroleum-related costs make up a fairly small fraction of the total costs of producing
a car.) In light of this, the equilibrium effects of a gasoline price change will be determined by
how a shifting demand curve interacts with a supply side that is little affected by a gasoline price
change.
As gasoline prices change, this interaction will sweep out a locus of equilibrium price and market
share combinations.7 The shape of this locus will be determined by three primary factors: first, the
shape of the manufacturer’s marginal cost curve; second, the nature of competition in the market
for new automobiles; third, the shape of the marginal revenue curve the manufacturer faces. In
this subsection, we discuss these three attributes, paying particular attention to how they would
affect the shape of the “equilibrium locus.” Since our empirical results find a fairly flat equilibrium
locus—prices change by much less than market shares when gasoline prices change—we will focus
in this subsection on how these three attributes can lead to such an outcome.
2.2.1

Marginal costs of new car production

The simplest supply relationship that would generate a flat “equilibrium locus” would be a perfectly
competitive market with constant (or nearly constant) marginal cost and any one of a variety of
well-behaved demand curves. Indeed, in the simplest “textbook” case of perfect competition, the
equilibrium price always equals a constant marginal cost, and the entire effect of a change in
demand is expressed in a changed equilibrium quantity.
How closely does new car supply match this very simple model? Many of the costs of producing
cars are fixed. Assembly plants and their required capital equipment are fixed costs. Union labor
contracts make labor largely a fixed cost as well, since manufacturers must pay nearly their full
wage bill whether or not workers are assembling cars. The fixed nature of many of the costs
of production suggest that, for volumes below the maximum capacities of the assembly plants,
marginal costs are likely to be small relative to the average total costs of production, and also
fairly flat since the remaining incremental costs are likely to be true per-unit costs. Under many
models of competition the flatter the marginal cost curve is, the flatter the equilibrium locus will
be.8
Another characteristic of new car production that would lead to flat marginal cost curves would
be flexibility in the output capacity of automobile production plants. There are two reasons to
7
In a perfectly competitive market where demand was shifting as supply was fixed, this equilibrium locus would
be the supply curve. Under other models of competition, the supply curve does not exist as such, and the equilibrium
locus is a different object.
8
A cost structure with large fixed costs and constant marginal costs is not consistent, strictly speaking, with
a perfectly competitive market. However, an oligopoly model of competition, such as Cournot, or a differentiated
goods or contestable market model would give this outcome.

5

believe that output capacities have some flexibility. First, vehicle manufacturers have historically
responded to increases in vehicle demand by running plants for more weeks or for additional shifts
(Bresnahan and Ramey 1994). While they may have to pay higher labor rates, marginal costs
are likely to remain low nevertheless. Second, there have been recent advances in assembly line
technology which allows manufacturers to quickly change the mix of vehicles that are produced on
any given assembly line. Vehicles built on the same assembly line can vary considerably in terms
of fuel efficiency, and thus vary in terms of whether demand increases or decreases with changes
in gas prices. For example, BMW builds their large X5 SUV, and their small Z4 roadster on the
same assembly line in Spartanburg, SC.9 In another example, Honda can build the compact Civic
on the same assembly line that builds the Ridgeline pickup and the Acura MDX SUV. In 2008,
the last year in our sample, the Civic was in highest fuel-efficiency quartile of cars while the Acura
MDX was in the lowest fuel-efficiency quartile. This means that in response to changes in gasoline
prices, Honda can quickly shift production from a vehicle in the lowest quartile in terms of fuel
efficiency to one in the top quartile.10
Overall, we conclude that new car production should probably not be modeled with strictly constant marginal costs, or with complete flexibility. However, fairly flat marginal cost and somewhat
flexible capacity limits are probably the best characterization for considering most incremental
changes in production. To the extent that this is true, this attribute would contribute to our
finding a larger effect of gasoline prices on new car market shares than on new car prices.
2.2.2

Competition in new car market

The nature of competition in the market for new cars will also affect how equilibrium prices and
quantities change in response to gasoline-price-induced changes in demand. Generally speaking,
the more competitive a market is, the flatter the equilibrium locus will be. By this we mean that
a change in demand will affect equilibrium quantities more relative to equilibrium prices the more
competitive the market is.11
The market for new cars is probably best described as an oligopoly. There are about 12 car
9

“BMW subtracts to add flexibility in S.C.” (Automotive News, June 5, 2006)
“Adaptability helps Honda weather industry changes” (Automotive News, June 8, 2009)
11
One way to think of this would be to compare three markets with the same demand curve and the same industry
marginal cost curve. Suppose one market is a perfectly competitive market; in this market the industry marginal
cost curve would be the supply curve. Suppose one market is a monopoly; in this market, the industry marginal cost
curve would be the monopolist’s marginal cost curve. Suppose the last market is a Cournot oligopoly; in this market,
the industry marginal cost curve would be the aggregation of the individual oligopolists’ marginal cost curves. For
well-behaved demand and marginal cost curves, as the demand curve shifts, the “equilibrium locus” will be flattest
for the perfectly competitive market, will get steeper as the number of Cournot oligopolists decrease, and will be
steepest for the monopoly market.
10

6

manufacturers in the world who produce mass market cars.12 To almost all consumers, cars are
differentiated products, but they are products that can substitute for each other, at least within
categories. One argument in support of their substitutability is that most new car buyers start
out with a consideration set that includes several cars, often from multiple manufacturers. Since
automobile manufacturers set prices model-by-model, the intensity of price competition will be
determined not at the firm level, but at the model level, depending on how substitutable customers
find the offerings in the category of car they are considering.
Overall, since oligopolistic interaction yields the middle outcome for the flatness of the equilibrium locus (namely, steeper than perfect competition would yield, flatter than monopoly would
yield), the larger the number of meaningful competitors for a particular model, the more competitive price setting will be for that model, and the more this attribute will contribute to our empirical
finding that the response to gasoline price changes in the new car market is primarily in market
shares rather than prices.
2.2.3

Marginal revenue for new cars

In section 2.1, we discussed how the demand for new cars is affect by gasoline prices. In this
subsection, we discuss the shape of the demand curve for new cars, since—for a firm with market
power—this will determine the marginal revenue and thereby factor into the firm’s supply decision.
While economists often, for convenience, think in terms of linear or constant elasticity demand
curves, this will almost always be an approximation of what demand is in an actual market. When
demand decreases for a firm with market power, the firm has to decide what the optimal response
is to that change in demand. Should the firm lower its price in an attempt to keep sales quantities
at or near their former levels? Or should it keep its price high in order to preserve its profit margin,
even if that means losing incremental unit sales? (A firm whose demand increases faces a mirror
image set of questions. Namely, what is the best way to exploit this opportunity for increased
profits: by raising prices, and thereby increasing profit margins, or by keeping prices the same,
and reaping the rewards as increased sales?) With a particular demand curve specified, one can
answer this question precisely. In general terms, what the firm should consider is the size and
elasticity of its marginal consumers compared to those of its inframarginal consumers. Suppose,
for example, that the demand for a particular car model is made up of a large number of buyers
who are price insensitive (e.g. people who are quite likely to buy a Mustang or an Escalade or a
12

Into such a category, we would place General Motors, Ford, Chrysler, Honda, Toyota, Nissan, Mazda, Hyundai,
Kia, Volkswagen, Mitsubishi, and Subaru. Many of these companies own multiple nameplates; e.g. Lexus is owned
by Toyota; Volvo is owned by Ford; etc.

7

Prius whether or not the price goes up or down by a few hundred dollars) and a small number of
people who are price sensitive buyers. If this is the case, then the manufacturer should consider
carefully whether it is worthwhile to trade inframarginal profit for incremental unit sales or vice
versa. For example, if gasoline prices increase, demand may fall for a (low-MPG) Escalade, but
this may be primarily among price sensitive incremental customers. GM may decide that lowering
the price of the Escalade in order to keep the incremental customers may not be worth the sacrifice
of inframarginal profit that would require. This is the kind of example that would contribute to
our finding of a larger effect of gasoline prices on new car market shares than on new car prices.
Overall, it is difficult for us to make a general conclusion about how important this is in
contributing to the flatness of the equilibrium locus for new cars. This is because we don’t observe
demand directly, and because this attribute is likely to vary across individual car models. However,
we find it very plausible that new car manufacturers consider this tradeoff, and that at least some
vehicles could have demand curves that would lead manufacturers to prefer to maintain prices
rather than preserve market share.

2.3

Gasoline price and used car supply

Supply in the used car market is very different from supply in the new car market because the
fundamental source of used cars is individual drivers, not firms. In order for a car to make its way
into the used car market, that car’s current owner has to decide to sell it, trade it in, or return
it rather than keeping it at the end of a lease. In most cases, the current owner replaces his or
her current car with another car, either from the new or used market. As a consequence, the used
car supply decision depends in part on how sensitive individual drivers are to the price of gasoline,
and on how that affects their relative valuations of the cars they currently own and cars that they
might buy instead. In considering the effect of gasoline prices on the equilibrium in the used car
market, we therefore have to consider the effects on both potential suppliers and potential buyers
of used cars.
Consider a potential seller and a potential buyer of a particular fuel-inefficient used car. If
the gasoline price increases by some amount, then the per-mile cost of driving that particular car
increases by the same amount for both drivers.13 If the two drivers have approximately the same
driving habits, then one might expect the effect of the gasoline price increase on the buyer and
the seller to be symmetric: for both the current owner and the potential buyer, the increased cost
of usage for the current owner of that car will exactly equal the increased cost of usage for the
13
Technically, fuel consumption per mile can be affected by how aggressively a driver drives a car, but we abstract
from such differences here.

8

potential buyer if she buys the car. Taking this logic one step further, if most drivers have similar
driving habits (or if a large enough number of marginal buyers and sellers have similar driving
habits), then the demand curve for a used car should shift inward by roughly the same amount
that the supply curve for that car shifts outward (at least in the area of the demand and supply
curves where equilibrium occurs).14 If this were the case, then the prices of a particular used car
should adjust to reflect the value of the fuel expenditure disadvantage (or advantage) that car
has, given the new gasoline prices. This suggests that we should see large effects of gasoline price
changes on the prices of used cars, but small changes in market shares.
What would we expect to see if drivers instead are very heterogeneous in their usage intensities?
It would still be the case that an increase in gasoline prices would increase the per-mile driving
costs of any given car by the same amount for all drivers. However, the valuation of a particular car
would change by different amounts for different drivers. For a driver with a long daily commute, the
costs of owning a large, fuel-inefficient SUV would rise by much more than the costs of owning that
same vehicle would rise for a non-commuter. Similarly, the advantage of owning a smaller, more
fuel-efficient car relative to the large SUV would increase by more for that same long-commuting
driver than for the non-commuter. If there is enough such heterogeneity, and if the usage cost
changes are large enough relative to the transactions costs of a used car transaction, then an
increase in gasoline prices might cause a substantial increase in used car transactions, especially at
the extremes of the fuel price distribution where the gains to trade are the largest.
A second difference between the supply of new cars and the supply of used cars is that a
large fraction of wholesale transactions in used cars go through independent auctions, unaffiliated
with the car manufacturers who are the upstream suppliers (and price-setters) in the new car
market. Auctions are a major clearinghouse for wholesale used cars and are ubiquitously available
throughout the country. (For example, Manheim, which is the largest operator of used car auctions
in the U.S., has about 100 sites throughout the U.S.) Auctions are generally held every week, and
1,000-3,000 cars might be transacted in a typical week. This means that for car dealers, used cars
are convertible into cash, and vice versa, at auction-determined prices on a weekly basis. One might
expect that such a mechanism would reflect changes in equilibrium market conditions quite quickly,
and would thereby help move the prices of used cars sold at car dealerships fairly quickly to a new,
market-clearing equilibrium price that reflected changes in gasoline prices. While this adjustment
in the transaction prices of used cars may not happen as quickly in sales between private parties,
14

This discussion abstracts from changes in scrappage rates due to changes in gasoline prices. Li, Timmins, and
von Haefen (forthcoming) find that scrappage rates for fuel inefficient vehicles increase as gasoline prices rise. This
would imply that the change in prices is a lower bound on the shift in demand as a result of changes in gasoline
prices.

9

the data used in this paper are from used car sales at car dealerships, making that the relevant
distribution channel here.
Overall, our finding that, in used car markets, the equilibrium prices are more affected by
gasoline price changes than are the equilibrium market shares is consistent with relatively homogeneous driving behavior (at least among marginal buyers and sellers) and a wholesale market that
effectively propagates price adjustments.

2.4

Literature review

There is a long-standing literature investigating the determinants of automobile sales. (The earliest
papers we have found pre-date World War II.) There is also a large literature, dating from the
first energy crisis that investigates the relationship between fuel efficiency and gasoline prices.
Our paper is also related to more recent literatures on automobile demand estimation, and on
the role of gasoline prices in car choices. Our results with respect to market shares are closely
related to estimation of demand for automobiles. A number of discrete choice demand models
exist for which mileage, or an estimate of dollars per mile, is a characteristic in the indirect utility
function.15 Typically, the influence of gasoline prices is not the focus of these papers. Exceptions
are papers by Klier and Linn (2008), Sawhill (2008), and Langer and Miller (2008). Klier and
Linn (2008) estimate an aggregate data logit model using monthly sales data for new cars from
1970 to 2007. Consistent with our results, they find that fuel economy increases by 1.08 MPG
for a dollar increase in gasoline prices. Sawhill (2008) estimates the implicit discount rate that
consumers use when trading off upfront costs with future fuel costs. Using aggregate market share
data, he finds significant heterogeneity in this utility parameter; however it is uncertain whether the
heterogeneity is also measuring the variation in miles driven across consumers.16 Langer and Miller
(2008) capture one component that is related to our price results. They look at how automobile
incentives respond to gasoline prices. They have data on listed rebates and incentives, but do not
observe the extent to which consumers take advantage of these incentives or how they are shared
between consumers and dealers.
15

For example, see such seminal papers as Goldberg (1995) and Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995).
Sawhill (2008) has data on the distribution of miles driven across the population which allows him to match
a population moment, however he is not able to match correlations between a consumer’s discount rate and miles
driven.
16

10

Figure 1: Average MPG of available cars by model year
23
Average MPG

22.5
22
21.5
21
20.5

20
08

20
07

20
06

20
05

20
04

20
03

20
02

20
01

20
00

19
99

19
98

19
97

20

Model Year

3

Data

We combine several types of data for this analysis. Our main data contain automobile transactions
from a sample of 20% of all dealerships in the U.S. from September 1, 1999 to June 30, 2008.
The data were collected by a major market research firm, and include every new car and used car
transaction within the time period for the dealers in the sample. For each transaction we observe
the exact vehicle purchased, the price paid for the car, the dealer’s cost of obtaining the car from
the manufacturer, information on any vehicle that was traded in, and (census-based) demographic
information on the customer. We discuss the variables used in each specification later in the paper.
We supplement these transaction data with data on car models’ fuel consumption and data on
gasoline prices. The fuel consumption data are from the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
As the fuel consumption measure for each car model we use the “EPA Combined Fuel Economy”
which is a weighted average of the EPA Highway (45%) and City (55%) Vehicle Mileage. As shown
in Figure 1, the average MPG of models available for sale in the United States shows a pattern of
slow decline in the first part of our sample period, and some increase in the latter part.17 Overall,
however, the average MPG of available models (not sales-weighted) stays between 21.5 and 22.5
miles per gallon for the entire decade.18
We also use gasoline price data from OPIS (Oil Price Information Service) which cover January
1997 to June 2008. OPIS obtains gasoline price information from credit card and fleet fuel card
“swipes” at a station level. We purchased monthly station level data for stations in 15,000 ZIP
codes. Ninety-eight percent of all new car purchases in our transaction data are made by buyers
17

The sharp decline in MPG observed in 2008 coincides with a change in how the EPA calculates MPG.
While vehicles changed fairly little in terms of average fuel efficiency over this period, this does not mean that
there was no improvement in technology to make engines more fuel-efficient. The average horsepower of available
models increased substantially over the sample years, a trend that pushed toward higher fuel consumption, working
against any improvements in fuel efficiency technology. See Knittel (2009) for a discussion of these issues and
estimates of the rate of technological progress over this time period.
18

11

Figure 2: Monthly average gasoline prices (national and by DMA)
National Average Gasoline Prices

Average Gasoline Prices
4.5

4

Average gasoline price, $/gal.

Average gasoline price, $/gal.

4.5

3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
.5
0

4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
.5

Ja
n
1
J u 99
l 9
J a 199
n 9
2
J u 00
l 0
J a 200
n 0
2
J u 00
l 1
J a 200
n 1
2
J u 00
l 2
J a 200
n 2
2
J u 00
l 3
J a 20
n 03
2
J u 00
l 4
J a 200
n 4
2
J u 00
l 5
J a 200
n 5
2
J u 00
l 6
J a 200
n 6
2
J u 00
l 7
J a 200
n 7
2
J u 00
l2 8
00
8

Ja
n
1
J u 999
l
J a 199
n 9
2
J u 000
l
J a 200
n 0
2
J u 00
l 1
J a 200
n 1
2
J u 00
l 2
J a 200
n 2
2
J u 00
l 3
J a 200
n 3
2
J u 00
l 4
J a 200
n 4
2
J u 005
l
J a 200
n 5
2
J u 006
l2
J a 00
n 6
2
J u 007
l
J a 200
n 7
2
J u 00
l2 8
00
8

0

Month

Month
Corpus Christi, TX

Columbus, OH

San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose, CA

who reside in one of these ZIP codes.
Since our aim is to estimate the effect of gasoline prices on transactions, we need to match
the gasoline price (which we observe at station level) to the location of a car buyer (which we
observe at ZIP-code level). Althought we could aggregate station-level data to ZIP-codes, this may
not be a good approach for two reasons. First, we only observe a small number of stations per
ZIP-code, which may lead to measurement error.19 Second, consumers are likely to react not only
to the gasoline prices in their own ZIP-code but also to gasoline prices outside their immediate
neighborhood. This is especially true if price changes that are specific to individual ZIP-codes
are transitory in nature. As a result, we measure gasoline price by averaging the prices for basic
grade over all stations in each local market (as defined by Nielsen Designated Market Areas, or
“DMAs” for short). There are 210 DMAs. Examples are “San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose, CA,”
“Charlotte, NC,” and “Ft. Myers-Naples, FL.” Later we investigate the sensitivity of our results
to different ways of aggregating gasoline prices (see section 5.3).
To get a sense of the variability of gasoline prices, we graph monthly national average gasoline
prices. As shown in Figure 2 (left panel), there is substantial variation in gasoline prices within our
sample period. Between 1999 and 2008, average national gasoline prices were as low as $1 and as
high as $4. While gasoline prices were generally trending up during this period there are certainly
months where gasoline prices fall.
There is also substantial regional variation in gasoline prices. The right panel of Figure 2
illustrates this by comparing three DMAs: Corpus Christi, TX; Columbus, OH; and San Francisco19
In our data, the median ZIP code reports data from 3 stations on average over the months of the year. More
than 25% of ZIP-codes have only one station reporting.

12

Oakland-San Jose, CA. California gasoline prices are substantially higher than prices in Ohio (which
are close to the median) and Texas (which are low). While the three series generally track each
other, in some months the series are closer together and in other months they are farther apart,
reflecting the cross-sectional variation in the data.
To create our final dataset, we draw a 10% random sample of all transactions. After combining
the three datasets this leaves us with a new car dataset of 1,866,366 observations and a used car
dataset of 1,264,092 observations. Table 6 presents summary statistics for the two datasets.

4

Main results

In this section, we estimate the effect of gasoline prices on the market shares of cars of different
levels of fuel efficiency and the associated equilibrium price effects. We estimate these effects first
for the new car market and then for the used car market.

4.1

New car market shares

We first investigate the effect of gasoline prices on new car market shares.
4.1.1

Specification and variables

At the most basic level, our approach is to model the effect of covariates on equilibrium price and
quantity outcomes. We do this using a reduced form approach. In completely generic terms, this
would mean regressing observed quantities (Q), or some function of Q, on demand covariates (X D )
and supply covariates (X S ):
Q = α0 + α1 X D + α2 X S + ν

(1)

In this case, the estimated α̂s would neither estimate parameters of the demand curve nor of the
supply curve, but would instead estimate the effect of each covariate on the equilibrium Q, once
demand and supply responses were both taken into account.
What we estimate in practice is a variant of this. First, we choose to focus on market share
as an outcome variable rather than unit sales because this controls for the substantial aggregate
fluctuation in car sales over the year. Our demand covariates are gasoline prices (the chief variable
of interest), customer demographics, and variables describing the timing of the purchase, all described in greater detail below. We also include region-specific year fixed effects and region-specific
month-of-year fixed effects. Supply covariates should presumably reflect costs of production of new
cars (raw materials, labor, energy, etc.). We expect that these vary little within the region-specific
year and within the region-specific month-of-year fixed effects that are already included in the
13

specification. Furthermore, short- to medium-run manufacturing and pricing decisions for automobiles are not made on the basis of small changes to manufacturing costs. While we realize that
almost any model of profit maximization an economist would write down would have pricing and
production depend on costs, our interactions with executives responsible for these decisions at car
manufacturers indicate that this is not the way short- to medium-run pricing and manufacturing
decisions are made in practice.
This leaves us with the following specification. We estimate the effect of gasoline prices on
market shares of models of different fuel efficiencies using a series of linear probability models that
can be written as:
Iirt (j ∈ K) = γ0 + γ1 GasolinePriceit + γ2 Demogit + γ3 PurchaseTimingjt + τrt + µrt + ijt

(2)

Iirt (j ∈ K) is an indicator that equals 1 if transaction i in region r on date t for car type j was for
a car in class K. A “car type” in our sample is the interaction of make, model, model year, trim
level, doors, body type, displacement, cylinders, and transmission (for example, one “car type” in
our data is a 2003 Honda Accord EX 4-door sedan with a 4-cylinder 2.4-liter engine and automatic
transmission). We consider two different classes in this section, namely fuel efficiency quartiles and
segments (e.g., midsize, SUV, compact).20,21 The variable of primary interest is GasolinePrice,
which is specific to the month in which the vehicle was purchased and to the DMA of the buyer.22
We use an extensive set of controls. First, we control for a wide range of demographic variables
(Demogit ), namely the income, house value and ownership, household size, vehicles per household,
education, occupation, average travel time to work, English proficiency, and race of buyers by using
census data at the level of “block groups,” which, on average, contain about 1100 people.23 We also
control for a series of variables that describe purchase timing (PurchaseTimingjt ). These variables
include: a dummy variable, EndOfYear, that equals 1 if the car was sold within the last 5 days of
the year; a dummy variable, EndOfMonth, that equals 1 if the car was sold within the last 5 days
20

In previous versions we have considered subsegments (e.g., entry compact, premium compact, mini SUV, compact
SUV). These results are available from the authors.
21
Our results do not depend on the linear probability specification; we obtain nearly identical results with a
multinomial logit model (see section 5.5).
22
Another potential approach is to use a variable that represents gasoline price expectations, perhaps based on
futures prices for crude oil. One might argue on theoretical grounds that this is the price customers should use in
calculating the usage cost of a durable good. In practice, however, during the time period of our sample futures
prices for crude oil are quite highly correlated with current gasoline prices, reducing the statistical power from such
an exercise. As a result, we have not undertaken this approach.
23
One might argue that our specification should not hold the demographics of buyers constant for the following
reason: Any change in market shares of fuel-efficient vs. fuel-inefficient cars due to changes in demographics associated
with fuel price changes can legitimately be considered to be part of the short-run equilibrium market share effect of
changing gasoline prices. We have estimated all of our sales specifications without demographic covariates and find
that our qualitative results are robust to the exclusion of the demographic variables.

14

of the month and a dummy variable, WeekEnd, that specifies whether the car was purchased on a
Saturday or Sunday. If there are volume targets or sales on weekends or near the end of the month
or the year, we will absorb their effects with these variables. PurchaseTimingjt also includes fixed
effects for the difference between the model year of the car and the year in which the transaction
occurs. This distinguishes between whether a car of the 2000 model year, for example, was sold
in calendar 2000 or in calendar 2001. Finally, we include year, τrt , and month-of-the-year, µrt ,
fixed effects corresponding to when the purchase was made. Both year and month-of-the-year fixed
effects are allowed to vary by the geographic region (29 throughout the U.S.) in which the car was
sold. This takes into account that year-over-year and seasonal preferences for specific car classes
may vary by region of the country. To examine the robustness of our results to which components
of variation in the data are used to identify the effect of gasoline prices, we repeat our estimation
with a series of different fixed effect specifications in Section 5.1.
Finally, note that our estimates should be interpreted as estimates of the short-run effects of
gasoline prices. By “short-run” we mean effects on market shares and prices over the time horizon in
which manufacturers would be unable to change the configurations of cars they offer in response to
gasoline price changes. Defined this way, the short-run horizon is several years at least. Persistently
higher gasoline prices would presumably cause manufacturers to change the kinds of vehicles they
choose to produce, as U.S. manufacturers did in the 1970s at the time of the first oil price shock.24
The nature of our data, its time span, and our empirical approach are all unsuited to estimating
what the long-run effects of gasoline price would be on market shares and prices. The short-run
estimates are nevertheless useful, we believe, both because short-run effects are important in the
short-to-medium term (especially if financial solvency is an issue) and because they yield some
insight into the size of the pressures to which manufacturers are responding as they move towards
the long run.
4.1.2

Market share results

We first consider the effect of gasoline prices on the market shares of different classes of fuel
efficiency. Specifically, we classify all transactions in our sample by the fuel efficiency quartile
(based on the EPA Combined Fuel Economy MPG rating for each model) into which the purchased
car type falls. Quartiles are re-defined each year based on the distribution of all models offered
(as opposed to the distributions of vehicles sold) in that year. Table 7 reports the quartile cutoffs
and mean MPG within quartile for all years of the sample. (Note that the effect of a change in
24

As gasoline prices began to fall in the early 1980s, CAFE standards also affected manufacturer offerings.

15

the EPA rating system can be seen in the abrupt change between 2007 and 2008. Our estimates
include fixed year effects which capture level shifts in the EPA rating system.)
In order to estimate Equation 2 with car class defined by MPG quartile, we define four different
dependent variables. The dependent variable in the first estimation is “1” if the purchased car is
in fuel efficiency quartile 1, “0” otherwise. The dependent variable in the second estimation is
“1” if the purchased car is in fuel efficiency quartile 2, “0” otherwise, and so on. To account for
correlation in the errors due to either supply or demand factors, we cluster the standard errors at
the DMA level.
The full estimation results are reported in Table A-1. The gasoline price coefficients (γ1 ) for
each specification are presented below.25 We also report the standard errors of the estimates, and
the average market share of each MPG quartile in the sample period. (Note that the quartiles are
based on the distribution of available models while the market share is sales-weighted, which is why
market shares need not be 25% for each quartile.) Combining information in the first and third
column, we report in the last column the percentage change in market share that the estimated
coefficient implies would result from a $1 increase in gasoline prices.
Fuel Efficiency
MPG Quartile 1 (least fuel-efficient)
MPG Quartile 2
MPG Quartile 3
MPG Quartile 4 (most fuel-efficient)

Coefficient
-0.05**
-0.014**
-0.0065*
0.07**

SE
(0.0049)
(0.004)
(0.0029)
(0.005)

Mean market share
20.90%
21.20%
23.70%
34.20%

% Change in share
-23.9%
-6.60%
-2.74%
20.5%

These results suggest that a $1 increase in gasoline price decreases the market share of cars
in the least fuel-efficient quartile by 5 percentage points, or 23.9%. Conversely, we find that a $1
increase in gasoline price increases the market share of cars in the most fuel-efficient quartile by 7
percentage points, or 20.5%. This provides evidence that higher gasoline prices are associated with
the purchase of more fuel-efficient cars. Notice that these estimates do not simply reflect an overall
trend of increasing gasoline prices and increasing fuel efficiency; since we control for region-specific
year fixed effects, all estimates rely on within-year, within-region variation in gasoline prices and
associated purchases.26
Next we consider the effect of gasoline prices on the market shares of different car classes
as defined by industry segments. The industry uses a standard classification of eight segments:
“Compact Car” (e.g., Toyota Corolla), “Midsize Car” (e.g., Honda Accord), “Luxury Car” (e.g.,
Lexus LS430), “Sporty Car” (e.g., Mitsubishi Eclipse), “Sport Utility Vehicle (SUV)” (e.g., Jeep
25

Two asterisks (**) signifies significance at the .01 level, * signifies significance at the .05 level and + at the .10
level. We do not restrict the γs to sum to zero; the sum equals -0.0001.
26
Nor are the results due to seasonal correlations between gasoline prices and the types of cars purchased at
different times of year, since the regressions control for region-specific month-of-year fixed effects.

16

Grand Cherokee), “Pickup” (e.g., Ford F150), “Van” (e.g., Toyota Sienna), and “Fullsize Car” (e.g.,
Ford Crown Victoria). We estimate the specification in Equation 2 for each of seven segments (we
exclude full-size cars since very few of them are sold). The dependent variable in the first estimation
is “1” if the purchased car is a “Compact Car,” “0” otherwise. We proceed similarly for the other
segments.
The full estimation results are reported in Table A-2. The relevant estimates of the fuel price
coefficient from these specifications are presented below. In addition to the coefficient estimates,
the table reports the standard errors (clustered again at the DMA level) and the average market
shares of each segment over the sample period. The last column of the table presents the percent
change in market share of each segment implied by a $1 increase in gasoline prices.
Segment

Coefficient

SE

Mean Market Share

% Change in Share

Compact Car
Midsize Car
Luxury Car
Sporty Car
SUV
Pickup
Van

0.042**
0.016**
-0.0016
0.0052**
-0.039**
-0.016**
-0.0069**

(0.0041)
(0.0028)
(0.0026)
(0.0015)
(0.0035)
(0.0032)
(0.0018)

17.40%
20.30%
4.00%
9.40%
28.00%
14.30%
6.70%

24.14%
7.88%
-4.00%
5.53%
-13.93%
-11.19%
-10.30%

These results show an outflow of consumers from SUVs, pickups, and vans (which are the
lowest fuel-efficiency segments; see Table 8). These segments lose 3.9, 1.6, and 0.7 percentage
points of market share, respectively, which corresponds to 13.9%, 11.2%, and 10.3% reductions
of the respective market shares. The largest segment market share change is the gain of 4.2
percentage points, a 24.1% increase, for compact cars, the most fuel-efficient segment. Midsize cars
also increase their market share by 1.6 percentage points, a 7.9% gain. The market share of sporty
cars also increases. While this might seem surprising, this category contains many small 2-door
coupes, some with fuel efficiency close to that of compact cars. We find no statistically significant
effect for luxury cars. One possible reason for this is that luxury cars both gain and lose as a result
of gasoline price changes. For example, one could imagine that some buyers opt for a luxury sedan
instead of a luxury SUV if gasoline prices increase, while others substitute from a luxury sedan
to a more economical midsize car in response to the same gasoline price increase. An alternative
explanation is that fuel efficiency is simply not a decision criterion for the purchase of luxury cars,
or that buyers who buy such cars are fairly insensitive to the price of gasoline, perhaps because
they are wealthier than the average car buyer.

17

Summary
Overall, we find both statistically and economically significant effects of gasoline prices on new car
market shares as measured either by fuel efficiency quartiles or by segments. This is particularly
true for the “extremes,” measured as the most fuel-efficient and least fuel-efficient quartiles, where
market share shifts by more than 20% in response to a $1 increase in gasoline prices.

4.2

New car prices

While market share is one important piece of the impact of gasoline prices on automobile manufacturers, the effect on price is necessary to complete the picture. The previous subsection showed, for
example, that market shares of SUVs fall substantially when gas prices increased. We would like
to know whether this happened despite manufacturers offering large price discounts, or whether
manufacturers offered little price response. In this section, we investigate the effect of gasoline
prices on the transaction prices paid by buyers for new cars of varying fuel efficiencies.
4.2.1

Specification and variables

As in section 4.1.1 our approach is to estimate the reduced form effect of gasoline prices on the
equilibrium prices of new cars of different fuel efficiencies. The reduced form analog of Equation 1
for price is:
P = β0 + β1 X D + β2 X S + η

(3)

As with Equation 1, the β̂s will measure neither parameters of the demand curve, nor parameters
of the supply curve, but instead the estimated short run effects of the covariates on equilibrium
prices. In practice, we estimate the following equation, which contains the same controls, with one
addition, as we used in Equation 2:
Pirjt = λ0 + λ1 (GasolinePriceit · MPG Quartilej ) + λ2 Demogit +

(4)

λ3 PurchaseTimingjt + δj + τrt + µrt + ijt
The price variable recorded in our dataset is the pre-sales tax price that the customer pays for
the vehicle, including factory installed accessories and options, and including any dealer-installed
accessories contracted for at the time of sale that contribute to the resale value of the car.27
Conceptually, our price variable should measure the customer’s total wealth outlay for the car. In
27

Dealer-installed accessories that contribute to the resale value include items such as upgraded tires or a sound
system, but would exclude options such as undercoating or waxing.

18

order to capture this, we make two modifications to the price variable from our dataset. First, we
subtract off the manufacturer-supplied cash rebate to the customer if the car is purchased under
a such a rebate, since the manufacturer pays that amount on the customer’s behalf. Second, we
subtract from the purchase price any profit the customer made on his or her trade-in (or add to
the purchase price any loss made on the trade-in). The price the dealer pays for the trade-in
vehicle minus the estimated wholesale value of the vehicle (as booked by the dealer) is called the
TradeInOverAllowance. Dealers are willing to trade off profits made on the new vehicle transaction
and profits made on the trade-in transaction, which is why the TradeInOverAllowance can be either
positive or negative. When a customer loses money on the trade-in transaction, part of his or her
payment for the new vehicle is an in-kind payment with the trade-in vehicle. By subtracting the
TradeInOverAllowance we adjust the negotiated (cash) price to include this payment.
In Equation 4, Pirjt is the above-defined price for transaction i in region r on date t for car j,
and the control variables are as described in section 4.1.1 (page 14). For the price specification,
we also control for detailed characteristics of the vehicle purchased by including “car type” fixed
effects (δj ).28
We estimate how gasoline prices affect the transaction prices paid for cars of different fuel
efficiencies. One might think that since higher gasoline prices make car ownership more expensive,
higher gasoline prices will lead to lower negotiated prices for all cars. However, this would ignore
the results of the previous subsection, which show that as gasoline prices increase, some cars
experience sales increases and others decreases. It would thus not be surprising if the transaction
prices of the most fuel-efficient cars were to increase as a result of a gasoline price increase. To
capture this, we estimate separate coefficients for the GasolinePrice variable, depending on the fuel
economy quartile into which car j falls; the quartiles are redefined each model year, as described
in section 4.1.2.29
4.2.2

New car price results

The full results from estimating Equation 4 are presented in Table A-3. The gasoline price coefficients are as follows:
Variable
GasolinePrice*MPG
GasolinePrice*MPG
GasolinePrice*MPG
GasolinePrice*MPG

Quart
Quart
Quart
Quart

1 (least fuel-efficient)
2
3
4 (most fuel-efficient)

28

Coefficient

SE

-236**
-74+
6.9
127**

(74)
(40)
(30)
(43)

For a definition of “car type” see page 14.
We obtain similar results if we estimate four separate regressions, thereby relaxing the constraint that the
parameters associated with the other covariates are equal across fuel efficiency quartiles.
29

19

These estimates indicate that a $1 increase in gasoline price is associated with a lower negotiated
price of cars in the least fuel-efficient quartile (by $236) but a higher price of cars in the most fuelefficient quartile by ($127). Overall, the change in negotiated prices appears to be monotonically
related to fuel efficiency. Note that this is an equilibrium price effect; it is the net effect of the
manufacturer price response, any change in consumers’ willingness to pay, and the change in the
dealers’ reservation price for the car.
One way to think about the magnitude of the estimated effect is as follows. The estimated
coefficients imply that when gasoline prices increase by $1, the difference between the average
prices for the most and least fuel-efficient quartiles grows by $363 ($127 + $236) . The average
MPG in the least fuel-efficient quartile during the sample period is 16.2, while the average MPG in
the most fuel-efficient quartile is 27.9. In 12,000 miles of driving (an oft-used measure for annual
mileage), a car with MPG of 16.2 would require 741 gallons of gasoline, while a car with MPG of
27.9 would consume 430 gallons, a difference of 311 gallons. Thus the estimated price difference
between the two quartiles arising from a $1 increase in gasoline prices equals the difference in fuel
expenditures between average vehicles in the two quartiles for approximately 1.2 years of driving.
We also estimate Equation 4 separately for each segment. To estimate the effect of gasoline
prices for cars of different fuel efficiencies, we interact gasoline price with segment-specific MPG
quartiles for each model year (rather than quartiles defined over the entire set of cars available in
the U.S. in a particular model year). The full results of this approach are reported in Table A-4.
One might expect to find the same pattern segment-by-segment as we found in Table A-3, namely
that new car prices decrease the most for the least fuel-efficient quartile (Quartile 1), and less for
more fuel-efficient cars, with the most fuel-efficient cars’ prices perhaps rising. This is roughly the
pattern we see for most of the segments, especially if we confine ourselves to comparing by aboveand below-median fuel efficiency.30
30

For compact cars, prices increase in the most fuel-efficient segment of compact cars by $225 when gasoline prices
go up by $1, and fall or only rise little for other quartiles. The prices of luxury cars, SUVs, and pickups all fall for
vehicles in the bottom half of the fuel efficiency distribution for their respective segments, by as much as $764 per
$1 increase in gasoline prices (Quartile 1 luxury cars). The most fuel-efficient luxury cars and SUVs see their prices
rise by $370 and $235, respectively, in response to a $1 price increase, while pickups have no statistically significant
effect for above-median fuel efficiency pickups.
Midsize and sporty cars do not match this pattern. Prices for midsize cars in the most fuel-efficient quartile fall by
$160 when gasoline prices increase by $1, and fall by $470 and $198 in the two above-median fuel efficiency quartiles
for sporty cars. The results for the midsize segment may due to the fact that this segment sees both inflows and
outflows when gasoline prices rise, gaining from SUVs and pickups when gasoline prices rise, and losing to compact
cars. This would make the net effects in the different quartiles of the segment hard to predict. We do not have an
explanation why sporty cars show such opposite results to what we expected. Finally, vans behave as expected in
three out of four quartiles (prices are unaffected in the most fuel-efficient quartiles, and fall by $393 in quartile 2).
However, prices show some weak signs of being higher in the least fuel-efficient quartile when gasoline prices increase
by $1 (an increase of $243, albeit not significant at a 10% level). This may be due to increased usage of carpooling
vans in response to increased gasoline prices.

20

Summary
Overall, we find that prices for fuel-efficient new cars rise when gasoline prices increase and that
prices for fuel-inefficient cars fall. The difference in the average change in new car price between the
most and least fuel-efficient quartiles when gasoline price increases by $1 is $363. This difference
is equal to 1.2 year’s worth of the difference between the fuel expenditure increases implied by a
$1 gasoline price increase for the most and least fuel-efficient quartiles.

4.3

Used car market shares

In this subsection, we begin by considering the effect of gasoline prices on used car market shares. In
the next subsection, we consider the effect on used car prices. We estimate the same specifications
as we used to estimate the new car results, namely Equation 2 in this subsection and Equation 4
in the next, but using data from used car transactions at the same dealerships at which we observe
new car transactions. As in Section 4, we look at the market share effects of gasoline prices first
by MPG quartiles and then by segments.
The full results of market share effects of gasoline prices by MPG quartiles are reported in
Table A-5. The gasoline price coefficients are as follows:
Fuel Efficiency
MPG Quartile 1 (least fuel-efficient)
MPG Quartile 2
MPG Quartile 3
MPG Quartile 4 (most fuel-efficient)

Coefficient
-0.016*
-0.019**
0.026*
0.01

SE
(0.0074)
(0.006)
(0.012)
(0.009)

Mean share
24.10%
21.00%
25.90%
28.90%

% Change in share
-6.64%
-9.05%
10.04%
3.46%

The results at the extremes of the fuel-efficiency distribution are both smaller in magnitude
and weaker in statistical significance than the analogous results for new cars. For new cars, market
share changes were quite consistently related to gasoline price, with the most fuel-efficient quartile
showing the largest increase (7 percentage points) and the least fuel-efficient quartile showing the
largest decrease (5 percentage points) in conjunction with gasoline price increases. For used cars,
the most fuel-efficient quartile shows no statistically significant effect of gasoline price changes while
the least fuel-efficient quartile shows a much smaller (1.6 percentage point) decline than for new
cars.
If we look at market share effects by segment, we also find smaller (and statistically weaker)
results for used cars than we found for new cars. The full estimation results are reported in
Table A-6. The fuel price coefficients from the segment-based regressions are as follows.

21

Segment

Coefficient

SE

Mean Mkt Share

% Change in Share

Compact Car
Midsize Car
Luxury Car
Sporty Car
SUV
Pickup
Van

0.0028
0.035**
-0.0069+
-0.0038**
-0.013+
-0.016**
0.0021

(0.0048)
(0.0096)
(0.0038)
(0.0014)
(0.0074)
(0.0043)
(0.0047)

13.98%
25.59%
10.31%
4.71%
24.53%
14.07%
6.81%

2.00%
13.68%
-6.69%
-8.07%
-5.30%
-11.37%
3.08%

In the used car results, compact cars and SUVs—which had the largest market share effects
for new cars—show no statistically significant effect of gasoline prices on market shares (at the 5%
level). Nor do vans and luxury cars. There are three segments that do show statistically significant
effects. Midsize cars show an increase of 3.5 percentage points in response to an increase in gasoline
price of $1, a 13.7% increase in market share. This is substantially larger than the effect estimated
for new midsize cars. Sporty cars are estimated to lose 0.38 percentage points of market share,
a 8.1% loss. This is an effect of comparable magnitude to the effect for new sporty cars, but of
opposite sign. Finally, pickups are estimated to lose 1.6 percentage points, or 11.4% of their market
share, when gasoline prices rise by $1. This is the only segment whose new and used results are
quite close.
Summary
Overall, we find much less evidence among used cars than among new cars of an adjustment in
market shares of cars of different fuel efficiencies in response to fuel prices. A particularly striking
aspect of the contrast is the much smaller effect at the extremes of fuel efficiency—for the first and
fourth quartiles when the data are categorized by quartile, and for compact cars and SUVs when
the data are categorized by segment. These were the classes in which the results were largest for
new cars. In Section 2, we speculated that we might see little market share response to gasoline
prices because a large volume of used cars passes through a wholesale auction. If this auction is
effective at assigning market-clearing prices to cars, then the resulting price adjustments would
counteract any gain customers might hope to make by trading cars of different fuel efficiencies in
order to reduce fuel expenditures.
If our hypothesis of the market clearing effects of wholesale auctions is true, then we also ought
to see much greater adjustment in price in the used car market than in the new car market. It is
to this we turn next.

22

4.4

Used car prices

In this section, we estimate the effect of gasoline prices on the transaction prices of used cars. We
do so by estimating the same specification we used for new car prices, namely Equation 4, using
instead our used car transaction data. All the control variables are the same; in particular, we
observe all the same car characteristics for used cars that we do for new cars, so the “car type”
definition is the same. The definition of the dependent variable is almost the same as that used
for new cars. A customer who is buying a used car can use a trade-in in the transaction, just as
a buyer of a new car can, so the price definition subtracts the TradeInOverAllowance just as it
does for new cars. However, used cars never have customer rebates offered, so there is no need to
subtract that amount from the reported transaction price.
As we did for new cars, we begin by estimating the effect of gasoline prices on used car prices
separately by the MPG quartile of the used car being purchased. The full results are reported in
Table A-7. The gasoline price coefficients are as follows:
Variable
GasolinePrice*MPG
GasolinePrice*MPG
GasolinePrice*MPG
GasolinePrice*MPG

Quart
Quart
Quart
Quart

1 (least fuel-efficient)
2
3
4 (most fuel-efficient)

Coefficient

SE

-1073**
-900**
118*
1766**

(40)
(58)
(53)
(51)

The estimated coefficients imply that when gasoline prices increase by $1, the transaction prices
of the least fuel-efficient quartile of used cars falls by $1073. This is 4.5 times the size of the $236
effect estimated for the least fuel-efficient quartile of new cars. Prices in the next least fuel-efficient
segment are estimated to fall by nearly as much, namely $900. On the other end of the fuel
efficiency distribution, the prices of the most fuel-efficient quartile of used cars is estimated to
increase by $1766 for each $1 increase in gasoline prices, an effect that is fourteen times the size of
the effect estimated for new cars ($127).
The fact that the magnitude of the effects of gasoline price on car prices is so much larger for
used cars than for new cars provides evidence for the final piece of our supposition in Section 2;
namely that we would see a response to gasoline prices primarily in market shares for new cars
(and less in prices) and primarily in prices for used cars (and less in market shares). The reasons
we anticipated that we might see a large response in prices for used cars were twofold. First, used
cars can be easily traded at high-volume, widely-available auction markets, promoting rapid price
adjustment. Second, the change in the willingness-to-accept of the sellers of used cars (who are
themselves the current drivers of those used cars) is likely to be similar to the change in willingnessto-pay of the buyers of used cars (who will become the drivers of those used cars), as long as the
marginal buyer and seller have similar driving habits.
23

Next we look within segments. The full results are reported in Table A-8. Here we see the same
results within segment as we saw for used cars as a whole. Namely, for most of the segments, used
car prices fall by the most for the least fuel-efficient cars in the segment, and rise by the most for
the most fuel-efficient cars in the segment.31
Summary
Overall, we see a very large effect of gasoline price changes on used car prices. The pattern that
prices fall the most for the least fuel-efficient cars and rise the most for the most fuel-efficient
cars appears quite strongly whether we look at all used cars together, or look within segments.
Furthermore, the effects are much larger than the effects for new car prices, from 4.5 to 14 times
as large, depending on which results are compared.32

4.5

Discount rates and energy efficiency: an aside

Our investiation of the link between usage cost and prices of durable goods is related to an earlier
literature that investigates consumers’ willingness-to-pay for energy efficient durable goods. For
example, the seminal work of Hausman (1979) investigates consumers’ choices among air conditioners of different energy efficiencies. Hausman estimates consumer discount rates in excess of 20%
when considering the upfront price of the appliance versus ongoing electricity savings. Related
studies have also found high discount rates for consumers making such choices.
Although this issue is not the focus of our paper, the estimates we have presented so far allow
us to make a rough calculation of the implied discount rate for consumers making the “upfront
durable price” vs. “on-going energy cost” trade-off for automobiles.
31

This is true for the compact segment; for the luxury car segment (where the results show the greatest contrast
between quartiles: prices for the least fuel-efficient luxury cars fall by $3560 and rise by $1319 for the most fuelefficient cars); for the sporty cars; for SUVs (which show the second largest contrast of all the segments, with prices
for the least fuel-efficient SUVs falling by $1681, prices in the third quartile rising by $808, and prices in the most
fuel-efficient quartile rising by $1639 for every $1 increase in gasoline prices); and finally, for pickups. The only
exception to this pattern is vans, where prices actually rise for cars of below median fuel efficiency. We speculate
that part of this result is do to increased demand for commercial vans for the purpose of carpooling.
32
Our estimates suggest that changes in gasoline prices are associated with changes in the relative price of new
vs. used cars. Specifically, we find that the price of a fuel-efficient new car falls relative to the price of a used
car of the same fuel-efficiency when gasoline prices increase. In these circumstances we might expect, therefore, to
see an increase in the share of purchases of fuel-efficient cars that are purchases of a new car. Conversely, we find
that the price of a new fuel-inefficient car increases relative to the price of a fuel-inefficient used car as gasoline
prices increase, suggesting a decrease in the share of purchases of fuel-inefficient cars that are new car purchases. In
unreported results (available from the authors) we find that a $1 increase in gasoline prices is associated with an
increase of 3.5 percentage points in the share of compact car transactions that are for new cars (a 5.4% change),
2.6 percentage points for sporty cars (a 4.7% change), and 1 percentage point for luxury cars (a 1.7% change).
Conversely, the new car share falls by 2.1 percentage points for SUVs (a 3.3% change), and 2.7 percentage points
for vans (a 4.5% change). (The results are not statistically significant for midsize cars or pickups). These effects are
consistent with what we would expect given the predicted relative price change.

24

In Section 4.2.2, we calculated that the increase in the price difference between the most and
least fuel-efficient quartiles of cars associated with a $1 increase in gasoline prices was very close
to the difference in increased fuel expenditure between the most and least fuel-efficient quartiles of
cars for a single year of driving. If we perform the same calculation for the estimated price effects
for used car, the $2839 increase in the difference between the most and the least fuel-efficient
quartile of cars reflects fuel expenditure savings associated with driving the average car in the
most fuel-efficient quartile instead of the average car in the least fuel-efficient quartile for 9 years.
To better understand this, we perform a number of similar back-of-the-envelope calculations.
If we continue to use 12,000 miles driven as the baseline and a real interest rate of 3 percent, it
takes nearly 10 years of fuel savings to recuperate the increase in upfront costs. Increasing the
number of miles driven to 15,000 per year implies an “undiscounted” time frame of over 7 years
and roughly 8 years if we discount. How many annual miles are needed for the change in relative
prices to reflect a “three year payback” period? Nearly 29,000 per year.33
Alternatively, we can ask at what discount rate does the price difference reflect the savings in fuel
costs given typical survival and driving patterns of used cars? For this we use the National Highway
and Transportation Safety Associations’s estimates of survival rates and miles driven for cars and
trucks as reported in Lu (2006). The median age of used cars in our data is 3 years. We use the
median age of used cars in our sample (three) and the average of the survival rates and miles driven
across cars and trucks, weighted by the proportion of trucks in our sample, to calculate expected
miles driven over the lifespan of the typical used car. Under these assumptions, the $2839 change
in relative prices imply a real discount rate of below 1.1 percent. While a thorough understanding
of this is beyond the scope of this paper, these simple back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest an
over -reaction to changes in fuel costs when consumer trade-off upfront costs with usage costs. This
contrasts with the results of work which has suggested that consumers have high discount rates
when choosing energy efficiency levels.34

5

Robustness

In this section we explore the robustness of our results. First, we analyze whether our results are
robust to changing the component of variation in the data that is used to identify the effect of
gasoline prices. Second, we allow the response to gasoline price to differ by the level and prior
direction of gasoline prices to see whether we are ignoring important response heterogeneity in
33

Three year payback periods are often used in policy analyses as a way to capture high consumer discount rates.
An over-reaction is consistent with recent work by Gicheva, Hastings, and Villas-Boas (2007) which finds consumers over-react relative to the predictions of a permanent income hypothesis model to changes in gasoline prices.
34

25

our estimates. Third, we analyze the robustness of our findings to the aggregation of gasoline
prices. Fourth we analyze whether we should treat gasoline prices as being endogenous. Fifth, we
examine whether our results depend on our use of a linear probability model to estimate market
share changes in response to gasoline prices.

5.1

Source of variation

We now re-estimate the original specifications in this paper with a series of different fixed effects.
Recall that all specifications so far control for region-specific year and region-specific month-of-year
fixed effects. This means that the estimated gasoline price effects are identified by within-year,
region-specific market share or price changes which deviate from region-specific seasonal effects.
In order to investigate the robustness of theses estimates, we estimate a specification without
any year or month-of-year (seasonal) fixed effects. (In our original specification (Equation 2) we
captured regional effects by the fact that seasonal dummies were region-specific. To continue to
account regional variation we include region fixed effects for the 29 regions.) Next, we estimate a
specification with region-specific seasonal effects but without year fixed effects. The results from
these two more parsimonious specifications show whether we are missing an important source of
variation due to the extensive set of fixed effects used in our base specification. Finally, we estimate
a specification with more detailed time fixed effects, by replacing the region-specific year fixed
effects with region-specific quarter fixed effects. These results allow us to increase our confidence
that our estimated effects are not driven by the generally upward-trending gasoline prices in our
sample period.
Table 1 shows the results of these three specification for new and used cars. For comparison,
the table repeats the estimates of the original specification in Equation 2.
The coefficients on the gasoline price variable are remarkably robust to which fixed effects are
included. Consider first the new car estimates in the upper panel of Table 1. In our original
specification we found that a $1 increase in gasoline prices decreased the market share of the least
fuel-efficient cars (MPG Quartile 1) by 5 percentage points. Omitting time and and then both
time and seasonal fixed effects changes this estimate by only little, to 4.6 and then 4.8 percentage
points, respectively. Similarly, we originally found that a $1 increase in gasoline prices increased
the market share of the most fuel-efficient cars (MPG Quartile 4) by 7 percentage points. Omitting
time and/or seasonal fixed effects decreases our estimate to no lower than 5.4 percentage points.
Including more granular time fixed effects than in our original specification by using region-specific
quarter fixed effects also has a modest effect; we find a market share decrease of 6.5 percentage
points for the least fuel-efficient cars and a market share increase of 8 percentage points for the most
26

Table 1: Effect of time and seasonal fixed effects in market share specification†

Specification
Most Parsimonious
(Region FE only)
More Parsimonious
Base (original)
Richer

Most Parsimonious
(Region FE only)
More Parsimonious
Base (original)
Richer
*

MPG
Quartile 2

MPG
Quartile 3

MPG
Quartile 4

Year ×
Region
Quarter ×
Region

New Cars
-.048**
(.0043)
Month-of-year ×
-0.046**
Region
(0.0042)
Month-of-year ×
-0.05**
Region
(0.0049)
Month-of-year ×
-0.065**
Region
(0.0067)

-0.0035
(0.0046)
-0.0022
(0.0042)
-0.014**
(0.004)
-0.024**
(0.0063)

-0.0078**
(0.003)
-0.0062*
(0.0028)
-0.0065*
(0.0029)
0.0093*
(0.0042)

0.059**
(0.0061)
0.054**
(0.0055))
0.07**
(0.005)
0.08**
(0.0067)

–

–

Used Cars
-0.02**
(0.0057)
Month-of-year ×
-0.02**
Region
(0.0048)
Month-of-year ×
-0.016*
Region
(0.0074)
Month-of-year ×
-0.022*
Region
(0.0095)

-0.009+
(0.0046)
-0.0077*
(0.0038)
-0.019**
(0.006)
-0.022*
(0.01)

0.014*
(0.0066)
0.012*
(0.0053)
0.026*
(0.012)
0.035
(0.024)

0.015*
(0.0059)
0.016**
(0.0048)
0.01
(0.009)
0.0092
(0.023)

Time FE

Seasonal FE

–

–

–

–
Year ×
Region
Quarter ×
Region

MPG
Quartile 1

significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and clustered at the DMA
level) in parentheses.

fuel-efficient cars. The market share estimates for used cars, reported in the lower panel of Table 1,
are similarly consistent across changes in the included fixed effects. Overall, we conclude that
the results from our original specification seem robust to which component of time and seasonal
variation in the data is used to identify the effect of gasoline prices on the market shares of cars of
different fuel efficiency. In all reported fixed effect specifications, we find that the market shares of
new cars react more to gasoline price changes than do the market shares of used cars.
We investigate the robustness of our price results by estimating a comparable set of specifications. First, we eliminate all time and seasonal fixed effects from our original price specification
(Equation 4), while retaining regional fixed effects. Next, we include region-specific seasonal effects but no year fixed effects. Finally, we include region-specific quarter effects in addition to
region-specific seasonal effects. The estimation results are reported in Table 2.
The results in Table 2 show that our price estimates are also robust to changing how much
variation in the data is absorbed by fixed effects versus used to identify the effect of gasoline price
changes. This is especially true if what we compare across specifications is the estimated change in
relative prices of the first and fourth quartile cars implied by a $1 increase in gasoline prices. This
estimate is reported in the last column of Table 2. Although the individual quartile coefficients are
affected by changes in which fixed effects are used, if we focus on the last column, the estimated
relative price effects are very similar across specifications. For new cars, a $1 increase in gasoline

27

Table 2: Effect of time and seasonal fixed effects in price specification†

Specification
Most Parsimonious
(Region FE only)
More Parsimonious
Base (original)
Richer

Most Parsimonious
(Region FE only)
More Parsimonious
Base (original)
Richer
*

Time FE

Seasonal FE

–

–

–
Year ×
Region
Quarter ×
Region

Month-of-year ×
Region
Month-of-year ×
Region
Month-of-year ×
Region

–

–

–

Month-of-year ×
Region
Month-of-year ×
Region
Month-of-year ×
Region

Year ×
Region
Quarter ×
Region

MPG
Quartile 1
New Cars
-513**
(82)
-245**
(74)
-236**
(74)
-124
(79)
Used Cars
-1117**
(38)
-778**
(41)
-1073**
(40)
-1208**
(59)

MPG
Quartile 2

MPG
Quartile 3

MPG
Quartile 4

Price change
Quar 1 to 4

-359**
(43)
-86*
(41)
-74+
(40)
30
(55)

-275**
(33)
-14
(36)
6.9
(30)
108*
(46)

-147**
(38)
103*
(46)
127**
(43)
218**
(58)

$366

-969**
(58)
-639**
(62)
-900**
(58)
-1040**
(73)

28
(51)
365**
(58)
118*
(53)
-25
(70)

1649**
(55)
1995**
(60)
1766**
(51)
1646**
(65)

$2766

$348
$363
$342

$2773
$2839
$2854

significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and clustered at the DMA level) in
parentheses.

price increases the price of the most fuel-efficient cars (Quartile 4) relative to the most fuel-inefficient
cars (Quartile 1) by $342 to $366 across all specifications. For used cars, the equivalent numbers
are $2766 to $2854 across all specifications. Hence, used cars are estimated to experience much
larger price adjustments than new cars when gasoline prices change, whichever set of fixed effects
we use.
In summary, these estimates show that our findings are robust to which component of the
variation in the data is used to estimate the effect of gasoline prices.

5.2

Heterogeneity in gasoline price response

So far we have used the gasoline price for the month of the transaction in the buyer’s DMA as our
measure of GasolinePrice. In doing so we are disallowing heterogeneity in the response to gasoline
prices. In this subsection, we investigate two types of heterogeneity that might exist. First, we
investigate whether the response to gasoline prices differs by the absolute price of gasoline. For
example, does a $1 increase in gasoline prices have a different effect on market shares and car
prices when gasoline currently costs $1.50 per gallon from when it costs $3.50 per gallon? Second,
we investigate whether the response to gasoline price differs by whether gasoline prices have been
consistently rising or falling in prior periods. For example, is the effect of a $1 gasoline price
increase larger if gasoline prices have been increasing over the previous three months than if they

28

have been flat or declining?
To answer the first question we repeat all of the main results in Section 4 using GasolinePrice
interacted with indicators for whether the gasoline price falls in the range “<$1.50,” “$1.50-$2.50,”
“$2.50-$3.50,” or “>$3.50.” The purpose is to see whether there is an inflection point of gasoline
prices at which the effects suddenly kick in, or at which they grow much larger. News reports have
posited that there is a gasoline price “threshold” above which consumers change their behavior more
dramatically.35 Summarizing over many results, we find that gasoline prices do have somewhat
different effects at different price levels, but there is little evidence of a sudden inflection. See
Tables A-12 and A-13 for a summary of these results; full results are available from the authors.
To answer the second question we also repeat the main results of this section interacting GasolinePrice with an indicator variable that records whether gasoline prices went up monotonically in
the previous three months, went down monotonically in the previous three months, or had some
kind of mixed pattern. These results also show some heterogeneity in the gasoline price response
but do not have a consistent enough pattern to draw conclusions about systematic differences in
effects under the three conditions. See Tables A-14 and A-15 for a summary of these results; full
results are available from the authors.

5.3

Gasoline price aggregation

Next, we investigate the robustness of our findings to the aggregation of gasoline prices. Recall
that, although we know the ZIP-code of each buyer, we chose to aggregate gasoline prices at the
level of local markets (defined by DMAs). The advantage of using the higher level of aggregation
is that we reduce the possibility of measurement error that could arise from our observing only
a small number of stations per ZIP-code. The higher level of aggregation also allows consumers
to react not only to the gasoline prices in their local ZIP-code but also to gasoline prices in a
broader area. At the same time, however, we eliminate some of the cross-sectional variation that
less aggregate data would allow us to use.
One could also make the argument that we should use a more aggregate measure of gasoline
prices than the DMA-level prices we have used so far. This is because consumers may be more
likely to notice gasoline price changes once the gasoline price changes have affected a large area
and are thus reported in the media; alternatively, local price variation may contain more transitory
price shocks that do not enter into the long run forecasts of gasoline prices over the life of the car.
35

For example, an article in Automotive News on 5/22/08 entitled “Ford: $3.50 gasoline was tipping point for
sales shift” states: “The segment shifts [away from SUVs and Pickups] ‘really started to move’ when gasoline prices
hit $3.50 a gallon, [Ford CEO Alan] Mulally said. ‘It seemed to us that we reached a tipping point where customers
began shifting away from these vehicles at an accelerated rate,’....”

29

To investigate whether our conclusions depend of the level of aggregation of gasoline prices, we
re-estimate our original MPG quartile specifications (Equations 2 and 4) using a less aggregated
and a more aggregated measure of gasoline prices. We use 4-digit ZIP-code level gasoline price
as our less aggregated measure. We use this instead of 5-digit ZIP-code level price because too
many 5-digit ZIP-codes have too few gas stations to calculate a reliable average.36 For our more
aggregated measure, we average the prices for basic grade over all stations in each “Petroleum
Administration for Defense District” (PADD). PADDs are the standard geographical classification
used by the Energy Information Administration. A PADD’s boundaries are defined such that they
delineate a region in which supply is homogenous. There are five PADDs: East Coast, Midwest,
Gulf Coast, Rockies, and West Coast. There remains substantial variation in gasoline prices across
PADDs: not only are prices in some PADDs higher than in other PADDs, there is also variation
in the magnitude of the difference (not reported).
The full results are reported in Tables A-9 and A-10. We find that the coefficients on gasoline
prices in the 4-digit ZIP code aggregation are similar to those in our (original) DMA aggregation
but somewhat smaller in magnitude. This is consistent with some measurement error occurring
in the 4-digit ZIP code aggregation. If we aggregate gasoline prices at the PADD level, most
coefficient estimates in the market share regression are unchanged. In the price regression we find
some increases in magnitude for new cars.
Overall, we would reach exactly the same conclusion about the difference between the reaction
of new and used markets to gasoline price changes if we aggregated gasoline prices within 4-digit
ZIP code or within PADD instead of within DMAs.

5.4

Endogeneity

So far we have assumed that gasoline prices are uncorrelated with the error term in the market
share and price specifications. In this subsection, we relax that assumption.
It seems unlikely that such a correlation would arise due to reverse causality; this is because
U.S. gasoline prices depend on world oil prices and refinery margins and these are unlikely to be
influenced by the yearly sales of cars in the U.S. However, there are other potential sources of
endogeneity which may taint our coefficient estimates. First, there could be local variations in
economic conditions that are correlated with local variations in gasoline prices. If the changes in
economic conditions change what cars people buy or how much they are willing to spend on them,
then our gasoline price coefficients will capture (in part) cyclical effects on car sales and prices.
36

In our data, the median 4-digit ZIP code reports data from 11.5 stations on average over the months of the year,
up from 3 for 5-digit ZIP codes.

30

Second, gasoline tax changes might be endogenous to economic conditions which also affect car
sales and prices. Third, changes in gasoline prices could cause income shocks in local areas (say,
areas with refineries or with car plants) and these income shocks may drive car sales and prices.
One way to address the potential endogeneity of gasoline prices would be to use a more aggregate
measure of gasoline price; this would make it less likely that local shocks leads to correlation between
gasoline prices and the error term in the market share and price specifications. The specification
using PADD-level gasoline prices (described in the previous section and reported in Tables A-9
and A-10) does exactly this.
A second approach we take is to use world oil price as an instrument for gasoline prices at the
PADD level. Clearly, world oil prices are correlated with regional fuel prices. At the same time, it
seems highly unlikely that local or regional variation in economic conditions, gasoline tax changes,
or income shocks would have a meaningful effect on world oil prices. To allow for some variation
by PADD in the correlation with world oil prices, we use as instruments world oil prices interacted
with PADD dummies.
The results of these two approaches are reported in Tables 3 and 4. For easier comparison we
also report our original DMA-level specification (which uses OLS).
Table 3: OLS and IV results in market share specification†
MPG Quartile 1
DMA-level gas prices
OLS (original)
PADD-level gas prices
OLS
PADD-level gas prices
IV

-.05**
(.0049)
-.05**
(.0048)
-.054**
(.0063)

DMA-level gas prices
OLS (original)
PADD-level gas prices
OLS
PADD-level gas prices
IV

-.016*
(.0074)
-.018*
(.0078)
-.0089
(.015)

*

MPG Quartile 2
New Cars
-.014**
(.004)
-.014**
(.0049)
.0027
(.0088)
Used Cars
-.019**
(.006)
-.022**
(.0063)
-.027**
(.0099)

MPG Quartile 3

MPG Quartile 4

-.0065*
(.0029)
-.0078*
(.0032)
-.012*
(.0048)

.07**
(.005)
.072**
(.0051)
.063**
(.0098)

.026*
(.012)
.03*
(.013)
.055**
(.02)

.01
(.009)
.0099
(.0093)
-.019
(.015)

significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and clustered at the
DMA level) in parentheses.

We have already concluded that the OLS regression with PADD-level gasoline prices yields
similar market share estimates but somewhat larger price estimates compared to the original OLS
regression with DMA-level gasoline prices. The PADD-level IV estimates of the effect of gasoline
prices on market share are similar to the PADD-level OLS estimates. We find, however, that the
estimates of the effect of gasoline prices on car prices are generally larger in the PADD-level IV

31

specification than in the PADD-level OLS specification. This can be seen in Table 4.
Table 4: OLS and IV results in price specification†
MPG Quartile 1
DMA-level gas prices
OLS (original specif.)
PADD-level gas prices
OLS
PADD-level gas prices
IV

-236**
(74)
-352**
(74)
-466**
(24)

DMA-level gas prices
OLS (original specif.)
PADD-level gas prices
OLS
PADD-level gas prices
IV

-1073**
(40)
-1108**
(40)
-1302**
(22)

*

MPG Quartile 2
New Cars
-74+
(40)
-70+
(37)
-49*
(23)
Used Cars
-900**
(58)
-936**
(58)
-1084**
(23)

MPG Quartile 3

MPG Quartile 4

6.9
(30)
45
(30)
57*
(23)

127**
(43)
163**
(34)
250**
(20)

118*
(53)
124*
(49)
97**
(22)

1766**
(51)
1830**
(48)
1995**
(22)

significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and clustered at the
DMA level) in parentheses.

Overall, a potential endogeneity between gasoline prices and the error terms of the market
share and price regressions does not change our basic finding that new and used markets react very
differently to changes in gasoline prices. Controlling for endogeneity does suggest, however, that
our original specification may have underestimated the magnitude of the gasoline price effect on car
prices. The effect of gasoline prices on market shares is largely unaffected by our two approaches
to control for endogeneity.

5.5

Alternative market share specification

As our last robustness check we address potential limitations of the linear probability model we
have used to estimate the effect of gasoline prices on markets shares. One might be concerned that
the linear probability model does not constrain the estimates in the market share regressions to
add up to 1.37 To address this we reestimate our basic MPG quartile specification (Equation 2)
with a multinomial logit (“mlogit” in Stata) which estimates the probability that, conditional on
purchase, a car falls into MPG Quartile 1, 2, 3, or 4 (all variables and controls are the same as
those specified in Equation 2). In Table 5 we compare the gasoline price coefficients estimated for
the linear probability model with the marginal effects in probability associated with a $1 increase
in gasoline prices as estimated by the multinomial logit. Full estimation results are reported in
Table A-11.
37

In fact, the market shares predicted by the linear probability results in section 4 come very close to summing to
1, despite no constraint to do so.

32

Table 5: mlogit marginal effects in market share specification†
MPG Quartile 1
LPM
mlogit

LPM
mlogit
*

MPG Quartile 2

-.05**
(.0049)
-.053**
(.0047)
-.016*
(.0074)
-.017*
(0.007)

New Cars
-.014**
(.004)
-.012**
(.0038)
Used Cars
-.019**
(.006)
-.020**
(0.006)

MPG Quartile 3

MPG Quartile 4

-.0065*
(.0029)
-.004
(.0027)

.07**
(.005)
.069**
(.005)

.026*
(.012)
.025*
(0.012)

.01
(.009)
.012
(0.0085)

significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs in parentheses.
The SEs in the LPM are robust and clustered at the DMA level. The SE of the
marginal effects in mlogit are derived using the Delta-method in Stata’s “margins”
command.

The table shows that the estimated marginal effects for the multinomial logit are nearly identical
to those estimated in the linear probability model. We conclude that our quartile results do not
depend on our use of the linear probability model.

6

Supplementary Evidence

In Section 4 of the paper we established the main result of the market share and price effects
of gasoline price changes in both the new and used car markets. In this section, we explore
supplementary evidence that sheds some additional light on what is happening in each of these
markets. The supplementary evidence comes from looking at dealer inventories and trade-ins.

6.1

Inventories

In Section 4, we found that when gasoline prices increase, new car transactions shift toward fuelefficient cars and away from fuel-inefficient cars, while used car transactions exhibit little of this
effect. What does this change in fuel-efficiency mix mean for upstream supply, particularly of new
cars? If new car production is extremely flexible, then manufacturers will be able to respond by
changing their production mix to match the transaction mix. If production is not very flexible,
however, we would expect to see increased inventories of fuel-inefficient new cars and declining
inventories of fuel-efficient new cars.
In our data, we can observe one inventory-related measure, called “days to turn.” Days to turn
counts the number of days that a specific vehicle was on a dealer’s lot before it sold. Higher average
days to turn for a particular class of cars indicates that the dealer is carrying higher inventory levels
of that car.
33

In order to investigate inventory effects, we estimate the effect of gasoline prices on days to
turn by MPG quartiles (the specification and results are reported in Table A-16). We find much
larger changes in days to turn in response to gasoline price changes for new than for used cars.
For new cars, the estimated coefficients imply that a $1 increase in gasoline price is associated
with a 12-day increase in days to turn for cars in the least fuel-efficient quartile, a 17.6% increase
from the sample mean of 68.3 days. Conversely, we find that the same gasoline price increase
reduces by 5.4 days the time that a car in the most fuel-efficient quartile remains on the lot, a
10.8% decrease relative to an average of 50.2 days. In contrast, for used cars, higher gasoline prices
have no statistically significant effect on days to turn for either the least or the most fuel-efficient
quartile. The only statistically significant change in days to turn occurs for used cars in the second
most fuel-inefficient MPG quartile; days to turn increases by 1.5 days, or 3.2%.
These results are consistent with our description in Section 2 of the operation of new and used
car markets and thus complements our earlier market share and price results.

6.2

Comparison of purchased cars and trade-in MPG

One of the unique features of our data, among papers addressing similar topics, is that we observe
transactions for individual cars, including what car—if any—was traded in as part of the transaction. This means that for the approximately 40% of new and used transactions that involve a
trade-in, we can see what a customer purchases compared to what that same customer purchased
at some point in the past. This allows us to perform analysis that is in the spirit of a within
customer analysis.38
In regressions described and reported in Table A-17, we estimate the effect of gasoline prices
on the MPG of the newly purchased car, conditioning on the trade-in car used in the transaction.
(It is this last element that makes this a “quasi-within-customer” analysis.) We find that higher
gasoline prices are associated with greater fuel efficiency of the new car relative to the trade-in.
The estimated coefficient implies that a $1 increase in the gasoline price leads customers to increase
the fuel efficiency of their new car relative to their trade-in by 0.94 miles per gallon.39 For used
cars, we find that a $1 gasoline price increase increases the fuel efficiency of the newly purchased
used car relative to the trade-in by 0.48 miles per gallon.
38
We cannot do an exact within customer model because we do not observe multiple new car purchases by the same
customer. We also do not know when a trade-in was purchased because a given model year is usually available for
long over a year (as long as 18 months is not uncommon). Furthermore, we cannot tell if the trade-in was originally
purchased new or used.
39
Because of the included year fixed effects, this coefficient does not measure merely changes in consumers’ MPG
tastes over time.

34

In terms of the previous results, this tells us, we believe, something about the demand for new
and used cars. In Section 4.1 we showed that the market share of new cars shifted generally away
from fuel-inefficient cars and towards fuel-efficient cars. The results of this subsection suggest that
part of the reason for this is that, when gasoline prices increase, customers choose to purchase more
fuel-efficient new cars relative to cars they have purchased in the past.40
Similarly, while we did not observe very consistent market share changes for used cars, we did
observe in Section 4.4 that prices for used cars shifted quite reliably to higher prices for fuel-efficient
cars and lower prices for fuel-inefficient cars when gasoline prices increased. These results suggest
that part of the reason for this is that used car buyers are choosing more fuel-efficient used cars
when gasoline prices increase relative to cars they have purchased before.

6.3

Actual cash value of trade-ins

A final piece of supplementary evidence we can examine are the amounts that dealers book as
the “actual cash value” of trade-ins they receive. While a dealer might wish to manipulate the
price paid to the customer for his or her trade in, the “actual cash value” is the dealer’s internal
assessment of the value of the vehicle. In this number, the dealer is trying to approximate the price
for which he could have purchased—or could sell—the car at auction. We are interested in how
the “actual cash value” of cars of different fuel efficiencies varies with gasoline prices.
In regressions described and reported in Table A-18, we estimate the effect of gasoline prices on
the “actual cash value” of trade-ins of different fuel efficiencies. The estimated effects of gasoline
prices on actual cash values are similar to the results obtained for the gasoline price effect on used
car prices, reported on page 23. The first three quartiles of the actual cash value results are in
almost all cases within $100-300 of the used car price results.41 This result is consistent with our
argument that prices adjust fairly rapidly in the used car market, thanks to a well-functioning
wholesale market, and that used car buyers and sellers may well adjust their values of particular
used cars quite similarly since both care about the change in usage costs. In the results we have
40

This presumes that the sample of cars with trade-ins are comparable to the overall sample. In unreported
specifications, we have separately estimated our main price and market share specifications from Section 4 for
transactions with and without trade-ins. The results are qualitatively similar and often not statistically significantly
different. When they are different, market shares are slightly more responsive to gasoline prices when the consumer
is trading in a vehicle.
41
There is one interesting exception to actual cash values and used transaction car prices showing very similar
adjustment, which is the most fuel-efficient quartile of trade-in cars. There the estimated effects of gasoline price
on actual cash values are $1275 (for trade-ins used to buy new cars) and $778 (for trade-ins used to buy used cars)
which are $500-$1000 less that the $1766 estimated effect of a $1 gasoline price increase on the price of the most
fuel-efficient used car. One story that would explain this would be that when gasoline prices rise, customers are
particularly interested in buying a good, fuel-efficient used car from dealers, and that dealers are able to mark up
such cars in their retail transactions above what the actual market (auction) price is for such cars.

35

reported, we have seen that prices for used car retail transactions and for dealer’s estimated cost of
traded-in cars adjust similarly to gasoline prices. If we had access to data on auction transactions,
we would expect to see similar adjustments in those prices.

7

Concluding remarks

In this paper we have investigated the effect of gasoline prices on market shares and prices of cars
of different fuel efficiencies in both the used and new car markets. We have found statistically and
economically significant effects in both markets. In new car markets, we find the largest effects
in market shares. We estimate the market share of the most fuel-efficient quartile to increase by
20% when gasoline prices increase by $1, and the market share of the most fuel-inefficient quartile
to decrease by 24%. Furthermore, we estimate market shares of very fuel-efficient or very fuelinefficient segments to adjust by 10-24% when gasoline prices increase by $1. Transaction prices
for new cars also change in response to gasoline prices, typically on the order of several hundred
dollars, generally increasing for fuel-efficient cars while decreasing for fuel-inefficient cars. In one
benchmarking calculation, we showed that the predicted difference in transaction prices arising
from a gasoline price increase was approximately the size of 1.2 year’s worth of fuel expenditure
savings from buying a more fuel-efficient car.
In used car markets, we also estimate that market shares and prices of used cars respond to
changes in gasoline prices, but the relative magnitude of these two effects is very different. In used
car markets, our estimates of the effect of gasoline prices on market shares is much less consistently
statistically significant. Notably, the most extreme quartiles and segments in terms of fuel efficiency
usually show no statistically significant effect of gasoline prices on market shares; even for segments
and quartiles that are statistically significant, the effects are in most cases smaller than 10% changes
in market share. Used car prices, on the other hand, show much larger effects of gasoline price
changes than do new car prices; in many cases, by an order of magnitude. When looking at all
used cars together, the transactions prices of the least fuel-efficient used cars are estimated to
fall by $1073 when gasoline prices rise by $1, while the prices of the most fuel-efficient used cars
are estimated to rise by $1766, a difference of more than $2800. This difference is equivalent to
more than nine years’ worth of fuel expenditure savings from driving the average car in the most
fuel-efficient rather than least fuel-efficient quartile. If we look within segment, this same pattern
holds across almost all the segments, in some cases with even larger price effects.
We believe that there are several things we learn from these results. First, these results help us
understand at least part of what has happened in the U.S. auto industry over the past several years

36

to bring it into its current state of difficulty. One might argue that the auto industry has experienced
a “perfect storm” that included a credit crunch and a major recession as well as historically large
increases in gasoline prices. While this paper cannot address all of these contributing factors, we
believe we have learned something about the role of gasoline prices. We have shown that the
industry has responded with fairly small price adjustments, which has meant that market shares
have fallen, especially for the large SUVs and pickups that have recently been the most profitable
vehicles for manufacturers. More generally, since consumers are sensitive to gasoline prices in
choosing between types of automobiles, rapid changes in gasoline prices dramatically complicate
car development and production planning. For example, the time period covered in this study
ended with a steep rise in gasoline prices from $2 to $4 per gallon between early-2005 and mid2008. This coincided with the Ford F-150 pickup truck losing its decades-long position as the
best-selling vehicle in the U.S. to the Honda Civic. In response U.S. auto firms scrambled to
develop plans for competitive, smaller cars. And then suddenly over the second half of 2008, gas
prices tumbled back down towards $2 per gallon. That auto industry executives would, in light of
this, argue gasoline prices to be fixed at $4, giving up long-standing opposition to gasoline taxes,
suggests just how costly such turbulence must be for production and planning.
Second, our results show a contrast between how markets for new and for used durable goods
respond to differences in the ongoing usage costs of the good. We argue that the dramatic difference
in how usage cost affects new and used automobile markets can be explained by differences in the
supply of new and used cars. For the auto manufacturers who supply new cars, a new car has no
value other than the profit opportunity of selling it. The new car manufacturer must decide what
is the most profitable price at which to offer the car, which will depend on how gasoline prices
have affect the demand for the car. In contrast, the outside option for a used car owner who is
considering selling a car is to keep the car and continue driving it. This means that the outside
option of new and used car suppliers differs fundamentally. A used car seller must consider how
gasoline prices have affected not only the usage costs of his or her current car, but also of the car
he or she is considering as a replacement. Most importantly, used car sellers are facing buyers
who have exactly the same usage cost considerations, reducing the potential gains from trading
vehicles in the used car market in response to fuel price changes. This—combined with an efficient
wholesale market for used cars—appears to lead to rapid price adjustment for used cars, while new
car manufacturers choose not to change prices, and experience market share changes instead.
We believe that these results yield both specific insights into car markets and important general
insights into the functioning of new and used markets for durable goods when there is a change in
ongoing usage costs.

37

References
Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995): “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,”
Econometrica, 63(4), 841–890.
Bresnahan, T. F., and V. A. Ramey (1994): “Output Fluctuations at the Plant Level,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(3), 593–624.
Gicheva, D., J. Hastings, and S. Villas-Boas (2007): “Revisiting the Income Effect: Gasoline
Prices and Grocery Purchases,” Working Paper 13614, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Goldberg, P. K. (1995): “Product Differentiation and Oligopoly in International Markets: The
Case of the U.S. Automobile Industry,” Econometrica, 63(4), 891–951.
Hausman, J. A. (1979): “Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of EnergyUsing Durables,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 10(1), 33–54.
Klier, T., and J. Linn (2008): “The Price of Gasoline and the Demand for Fuel Efficiency:
Evidence from Monthly New Vehicles Sales Data,” University of Illinois at Chicago.
Knittel, C. R. (2009): “Automobiles on Steroids: Product Attribute Trade-offs and Technological Progress in the Automobile Sector,” Working Paper 15162, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Langer, A., and N. Miller (2008): “The Effect of Retail Gasoline Prices on Automobile Price
Incentives,” University of California, Berkeley.
Li, S., C. Timmins, and R. von Haefen (forthcoming): “How Do Gas Prices Affect Fleet Fuel
Economy?,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Lu, S. (2006): “Vehicle Survivability and Travel Mileage Schedules,” Working Paper DOT HS 809
952, NHTSA Technical Report.
Sawhill, J. W. (2008): “Are Capital and Operating Costs Weighted Equally in Durable Goods
Purchases? Evidence from the US Automobile Market,” University of California, Berkeley.

38

39

GasolinePrice
MPG
Price
DaysToTurn
ModelYear
CarAge
TradeValue
PctWhite
PctBlack
PctAsian
PctHispanic
PctLessHighSchool
PctCollege
PctManagment
PctProfessional
PctHeath
PctProtective
PctFood
PctMaintenance
PctHousework
PctSales
PctAdmin
PctConstruction
PctRepaitn
PctProduction
PctTransportation
Income
MedianHHSize
MedianHouseValue
VehPerHousehold
PctOwned
PctVacant
TravelTime
PctUnemployed
PctBadEnglish
PctPoverty
Weekend
EndOfMonth
EndOfYear
TradeOdometer

Variable
1866366
1866366
1866366
1801528
1866366
1866366
796759
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
1866366
632689

N
2
23
25515
58
2004
0.79
8619
0.72
0.082
0.05
0.12
0.15
0.38
0.16
0.22
0.016
0.02
0.041
0.028
0.027
0.12
0.15
0.049
0.036
0.063
0.051
58130
2.7
178431
1.8
0.72
0.062
27
0.047
0.044
0.084
0.25
0.25
0.022
71181

Mean
1.8
22
23295
27
2004
1
6800
0.82
0.024
0.02
0.053
0.12
0.36
0.15
0.22
0.012
0.016
0.035
0.021
0.024
0.12
0.15
0.042
0.033
0.049
0.044
53199
2.7
144800
1.9
0.8
0.042
27
0.037
0.016
0.057
0
0
0
64224

0.67
5.7
10876
78
2.5
0.46
8107
0.26
0.16
0.087
0.18
0.13
0.19
0.082
0.097
0.018
0.021
0.031
0.029
0.021
0.046
0.053
0.039
0.027
0.053
0.038
26246
0.52
131866
0.38
0.23
0.076
6.7
0.043
0.078
0.085
0.44
0.43
0.15
44632

New Cars
Median
SD
0.77
10
2576
1
1997
0
-5350
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.91
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

Min
4.8
65
195935
3859
2008
3
198000
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
200001
9.4
1000001
7
1
1
200
1
1
1
1
1
1
250000

Max
1264092
1264092
1264092
1211535
1264092
1264092
495083
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
1264092
385625

N

Table 6: Summary Statistics

2.1
22
15582
47
2001
4
5295
0.7
0.11
0.038
0.13
0.18
0.33
0.14
0.2
0.019
0.021
0.046
0.032
0.028
0.12
0.16
0.056
0.04
0.075
0.059
50826
2.7
145079
1.8
0.7
0.067
27
0.053
0.045
0.1
0.26
0.21
0.017
93150

Mean
1.9
22
14468
25
2001
4
3000
0.81
0.028
0.013
0.051
0.14
0.3
0.13
0.19
0.014
0.017
0.04
0.025
0.025
0.11
0.16
0.049
0.037
0.061
0.053
46580
2.7
121674
1.8
0.77
0.047
26
0.041
0.014
0.072
0
0
0
89903

0.69
4.8
8504
74
3.5
2.6
6081
0.28
0.2
0.07
0.19
0.13
0.18
0.075
0.092
0.02
0.021
0.033
0.031
0.022
0.045
0.054
0.041
0.027
0.059
0.039
22231
0.51
102666
0.39
0.24
0.075
6.8
0.046
0.08
0.095
0.44
0.41
0.13
48514

Used Cars
Median
SD
0.77
9.9
1
1
1985
0
-3402
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

Min
4.7
65
181000
6055
2008
24
150000
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
200001
8.5
1000001
7
1
1
200
1
1
1
1
1
1
250000

Max

Table 7: New car fuel economy quartile cutoffs
Modelyear

MPG Q1
Mean

25th
Pctile

MPG Q2
Mean

50th
Pctile

MPG Q3
Mean

75th
Pctile

MPG Q4
Mean

16.0
16.2
16.0
15.9
15.8
16.3
16.2
16.4
17.1
15.6

18.3
18.3
17.7
17.4
17.4
17.8
18.3
17.8
18.7
17.3

20.1
19.9
19.3
19.1
19.3
19.4
19.8
19.3
20.4
18.5

22.2
21.8
21.2
21.2
21.3
21.2
21.6
21.2
21.8
20.1

23.3
23.1
22.7
22.5
22.6
22.7
22.8
22.5
23.4
21.5

24.7
24.3
24.2
24.1
24.1
24.5
24.5
24.3
25.3
23.2

27.7
27.6
27.7
27.6
27.7
28.4
28.3
28.2
29.4
26.6

1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008

Table 8: Examples of cars in segments and subsegments
Segment
Compact Car

Avg. MPG
29.1

Midsize Car

24.4

Luxury Car

21.4

Sporty Car

23.4

SUV

18.6

Pickup

17.6

Van

19.2

Subsegment
Entry Compact Car
Premium Compact Car
Entry Midsize Car
Premium Midsize Car
Entry Luxury Car
Mid Luxury Car
Premium Luxury Car
Sporty Car
Premium Sports Car
Luxury Sports Car
Entry SUV
Midsize SUV
Fullsize SUV
Luxury SUV
Compact Pickup
Light Duty Fullsize Pickup
Compact Van
Fullsize Van

40

Avg. MPG
30.7
28.8
25.0
24.1
22.4
21.3
18.7
24.2
21.2
18.8
21.0
18.1
15.2
16.8
18.9
16.2
20.2
15.5

Example
Hyundai Accent, Toyota Yaris
Honda Civic, Ford Focus
Pontiac G6, VW Jetta
Honda Accord, Ford Fusion, Nissan Altima
BMW 3-Series, Acura TSX
BMW 5-Series, Volvo V70
BMW 7 Series, Lexus LS Series
VW Golf GTI, Ford Mustang
Chevrolet Corvette, Porsche 911
BMW 6 Series, Mercedes SL-Class
Honda CRV, Ford Escape
Toyota 4Runner, Dodge Durango
GMC Yukon, Toyota Sequoia
Acura MDX, Cadillac Escalade
Ford Ranger, Dodge Dakota
Ford F150, Chevrolet Silverado 1500
Honda Odyssey, Dodge Grand Caravan
Dodge Ram Van 2500, Ford Club Waron E-150

Table Appendix
Table A-1: New Cars: Market share results, fuel efficiency quartiles†

FuelPrice
PctLessHighSchool
PctCollege
Income
MedianHHSize
MedianHouseValue
VehiclePerHH
TravelTime
Weekend
EndOfMonth
EndOfYear
Observations
R-squared
*

MPG Quartile 1

MPG Quartile 2

MPG Quartile 3

MPG Quartile 4

-.05**
(.0049)
.034*
(.015)
-.056**
(.012)
2.8e-08
(9.0e-08)
.016**
(.0032)
7.3e-08*
(3.0e-08)
.049**
(.014)
-.000048
(.0002)
-.019**
(.0018)
.0057**
(.001)
-.0037
(.0026)
1866008
0.033

-.014**
(.004)
.025*
(.01)
.018
(.011)
3.5e-07**
(9.4e-08)
.0061*
(.0026)
3.1e-08+
(1.6e-08)
.0033
(.0036)
-.00029**
(.000098)
-.0036*
(.0015)
.004**
(.0011)
-.0056*
(.0023)
1866008
0.010

-.0065*
(.0029)
-.023+
(.012)
.017
(.011)
2.4e-07*
(1.0e-07)
-.006
(.0047)
1.2e-08
(9.3e-09)
-.029**
(.0057)
-.00027*
(.00013)
-.0012
(.0016)
.0035**
(.001)
-.0016
(.0027)
1866008
0.009

.07**
(.005)
-.036*
(.017)
.021
(.017)
-6.1e-07**
(1.1e-07)
-.016**
(.006)
-1.2e-07**
(4.1e-08)
-.023
(.018)
.00061*
(.00025)
.024**
(.0021)
-.013**
(.0013)
.011**
(.0037)
1866008
0.039

significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and clustered at
the DMA level) in parentheses.
Not reported: Region × year, region × month-of-year, and car age fixed effects. We also don’t
report house ownership, occupation, english proficiency, and race of buyers.

Table Appendix-1

Table A-2: New Cars: Market share results, segments†

FuelPrice
PctLessHighSchool
PctCollege
Income
MedianHHSize
MedianHouseValue
VehiclePerHH
TravelTime
Weekend
EndOfMonth
EndOfYear
Observations
R-squared
*

Compact

Midsize

Luxury

Sporty

SUV

Pickup

Van

.042**
(.0041)
-.029
(.022)
.011
(.017)
-3.0e-07**
(1.0e-07)
-.0084+
(.0047)
-5.6e-08+
(2.9e-08)
-.0059
(.012)
.00037
(.00023)
.012**
(.0015)
-.014**
(.0014)
.0041
(.0025)
1866008
0.026

.016**
(.0028)
-.026
(.017)
-.034*
(.013)
-3.8e-07**
(8.6e-08)
-.0042
(.0041)
-1.1e-07**
(1.4e-08)
-.024**
(.0068)
.00031
(.0002)
.011**
(.0019)
-.00059
(.0017)
.013**
(.0031)
1866008
0.017

-.0016
(.0026)
.063**
(.01)
.055**
(.0099)
8.7e-07**
(1.2e-07)
-.033**
(.0024)
2.0e-07**
(2.1e-08)
-.022**
(.0052)
-.0008**
(.00016)
-.013**
(.0019)
.0086**
(.0013)
-.013**
(.0023)
1866008
0.053

.0052**
(.0015)
-.019**
(.0045)
-.0044
(.0036)
7.2e-08*
(2.8e-08)
-.00043
(.0012)
-7.2e-09
(4.9e-09)
.0053**
(.0015)
.000015
(.000092)
-.002*
(.00082)
-.0024
(.0016)
-.0058**
(.0019)
1866008
0.007

-.039**
(.0035)
-.016
(.013)
.07**
(.017)
2.9e-07**
(9.8e-08)
.013**
(.0035)
4.4e-08
(3.1e-08)
.0061
(.0081)
.00012
(.00018)
.004**
(.0013)
.0046*
(.0019)
.0017
(.0032)
1866008
0.018

-.016**
(.0032)
.041**
(.014)
-.11**
(.016)
-4.4e-07**
(1.2e-07)
.013**
(.0035)
-5.2e-08**
(1.2e-08)
.047**
(.0065)
.000095
(.00017)
-.01**
(.0019)
.00087
(.00092)
.001
(.0023)
1866008
0.061

-.0069**
(.0018)
-.014*
(.0056)
.0086
(.0054)
-1.1e-07**
(2.6e-08)
.02**
(.0036)
-2.0e-08**
(6.3e-09)
-.0064+
(.0034)
-.00011+
(.000065)
-.0021**
(.0006)
.0025**
(.00064)
-.00019
(.0015)
1866008
0.009

significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and clustered at the DMA
level) in parentheses.
Not reported: Region × year, region × month-of-year, and car age fixed effects. We also don’t report house
ownership, occupation, english proficiency, and race of buyers.

Table Appendix-2

Table A-3: New Cars: Price results,
fuel efficiency quartiles†
Variable
FuelPrice*MGP Quart 1

Coefficient/SE
-236**
(74)
FuelPrice*MGP Quart 2
-74+
(40)
FuelPrice*MGP Quart 3
6.9
(30)
FuelPrice*MGP Quart 4
127**
(43)
PctLessHighSchool
196**
(75)
PctCollege
46
(53)
Income
0.0011**
(0.00035)
MedianHHSize
25*
(11)
MedianHouseValue
0.00017*
(0.000078)
VehiclePerHH
-121**
(37)
TravelTime
-0.27
(0.9)
Weekend
-12+
(6)
EndOfMonth
-135**
(4.4)
EndOfYear
-79**
(17)
Observations
1866008
R-squared
0.054
*
significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; +
significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and
clustered at the DMA level) in parentheses.
Not reported: Region × year, region ×
month-of-year fixed effects, car type, and
car age fixed effects. We also don’t report
house ownership, occupation, english proficiency, and race of buyers.

Table Appendix-3

Table A-4: New Cars: Price results, fuel efficiency quartiles by segment†
Compact
Midsize
Luxury
Sporty
SUV
Pickup
Van
13
70
-764**
256+
-242**
-378**
243
(68)
(80)
(242)
(142)
(73)
(95)
(180)
FuelPrice*MGP Quart 2
87*
78*
-147
249*
-336**
-238**
-393**
(42)
(39)
(109)
(125)
(50)
(72)
(123)
FuelPrice*MGP Quart 3
-57+
41
65
-470**
66
83
-92
(30)
(35)
(86)
(115)
(59)
(66)
(73)
FuelPrice*MGP Quart 4
225**
-160**
370**
-198**
283**
-63
-14
(45)
(42)
(83)
(76)
(43)
(88)
(68)
PctLessHighSchool
332**
94
-197
-31
101
385**
21
(97)
(98)
(202)
(276)
(129)
(120)
(166)
PctCollege
-175**
-5
-43
-376*
235**
-39
-131
(46)
(57)
(163)
(158)
(90)
(134)
(122)
Income
0.00066
-0.00084*
0.0011
0.0019
0.0016**
0.0019**
0.001
(0.00042) (0.00039) (0.00095)
(0.0017)
(0.0005)
(0.00073) (0.0011)
MedianHHSize
-9.6
67**
-72+
-61
41+
61**
42+
(11)
(16)
(37)
(48)
(23)
(20)
(23)
MedianHouseValue
0.00017
-0.000082
0.00029*
0.00058**
0.00016
-0.00013
0.0003
(0.0001)
(0.0001)
(0.00013) (0.00017) (0.00013) (0.00013) (0.0002)
VehiclePerHH
-99**
-134**
22
-40
-163**
-171**
-98*
(23)
(45)
(84)
(62)
(56)
(36)
(50)
TravelTime
0.18
0.027
-3.9*
0.22
0.85
2.6*
2.5
(0.66)
(1)
(1.9)
(2)
(1.1)
(1.3)
(1.8)
Weekend
-17*
11
-12
-12
-23**
6.2
-32*
(8)
(8.9)
(18)
(23)
(7.8)
(15)
(16)
EndOfMonth
-85**
-112**
-219**
-122**
-138**
-152**
-157**
(7.9)
(8.6)
(16)
(36)
(9.4)
(11)
(14)
EndOfYear
-53*
-92**
-42
-47
-116**
-59
-49
(24)
(25)
(49)
(82)
(38)
(46)
(51)
Observations
324017
377978
174572
73681
522717
267296
125747
R-squared
0.046
0.061
0.090
0.070
0.067
0.061
0.086
*
significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and clustered at the DMA level)
in parentheses.
Not reported: Region × year, region × month-of-year fixed effects, car type, and car age fixed effects. We also
don’t report house ownership, occupation, english proficiency, and race of buyers.
FuelPrice*MGP Quart 1

Table Appendix-4

Table A-5: Used Cars: Market share results, fuel efficiency quartiles†

FuelPrice
PctLessHighSchool
PctCollege
Income
MedianHHSize
MedianHouseValue
VehiclePerHH
TravelTime
Weekend
EndOfMonth
EndOfYear
Observations
R-squared
*

MPG Quartile 1

MPG Quartile 2

MPG Quartile 3

MPG Quartile 4

-0.016*
(0.0074)
0.011
(0.015)
-0.041*
(0.017)
-5.2e-07**
(1.3e-07)
0.014**
(0.004)
4.5e-08*
(1.9e-08)
0.048**
(0.01)
0.00014
(0.00024)
-0.0053*
(0.0021)
0.0036
(0.0024)
-0.012**
(0.0039)
1263940
0.030

-0.019**
(0.006)
0.039**
(0.012)
0.0096
(0.016)
3.7e-07**
(7.2e-08)
-0.002
(0.0031)
9.8e-08**
(1.1e-08)
-0.0089+
(0.0052)
-0.0003*
(0.00014)
-0.0086**
(0.0025)
-0.00073
(0.0013)
0.004
(0.0041)
1263940
0.013

0.026*
(0.012)
-0.029
(0.027)
-0.012
(0.021)
6.0e-07**
(1.5e-07)
-0.0057+
(0.0031)
-4.2e-08*
(1.7e-08)
-0.037**
(0.0061)
-0.00036+
(0.00021)
0.0045
(0.0028)
0.00088
(0.0023)
0.004
(0.0042)
1263940
0.015

0.01
(0.009)
-0.021
(0.024)
0.044*
(0.022)
-4.5e-07**
(1.4e-07)
-0.0066
(0.004)
-1.0e-07**
(2.9e-08)
-0.0027
(0.014)
0.00052
(0.00033)
0.0095**
(0.0028)
-0.0037+
(0.0022)
0.0045
(0.0045)
1263940
0.023

significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and clustered at
the DMA level) in parentheses.
Not reported: Region × year, region × month-of-year, and car age fixed effects. We also don’t
report house ownership, occupation, english proficiency, and race of buyers.

Table Appendix-5

Table A-6: Used Cars: Market share results, segments†

FuelPrice
PctLessHighSchool
PctCollege
Income
MedianHHSize
MedianHouseValue
VehiclePerHH
TravelTime
Weekend
EndOfMonth
EndOfYear
Observations
R-squared
*

Compact

Midsize

Luxury

Sporty

SUV

Pickup

Van

0.0028
(0.0048)
-0.02
(0.016)
0.021
(0.013)
-2.0e-07
(1.2e-07)
-0.0022
(0.0029)
-8.8e-08**
(1.9e-08)
0.0062
(0.0088)
0.00054*
(0.00024)
0.0043*
(0.0021)
-0.0016
(0.0026)
-0.0027
(0.0048)
1263940
0.017

0.035**
(0.0096)
-0.0016
(0.017)
-0.028
(0.019)
-2.7e-07+
(1.5e-07)
0.0018
(0.0036)
-1.3e-07**
(1.7e-08)
-0.022**
(0.0076)
-0.00021
(0.0002)
0.0052
(0.0033)
-0.0036
(0.0032)
0.0082+
(0.0047)
1263940
0.031

-0.0069+
(0.0038)
0.059**
(0.016)
0.085**
(0.017)
1.1e-06**
(9.6e-08)
-0.035**
(0.0029)
2.3e-07**
(2.0e-08)
-0.036**
(0.0044)
-0.00066**
(0.00012)
-0.011**
(0.0022)
0.0056**
(0.001)
0.00049
(0.0029)
1263940
0.049

-0.0038**
(0.0014)
-0.014**
(0.004)
-0.0076
(0.0049)
1.4e-07**
(3.8e-08)
0.0011
(0.00098)
-5.3e-09
(4.4e-09)
0.0042+
(0.0023)
0.000071
(0.000058)
0.00087+
(0.00048)
-0.00072
(0.00047)
-0.0039*
(0.0017)
1263940
0.008

-0.013+
(0.0074)
-0.021
(0.017)
0.048**
(0.015)
-5.7e-08
(1.2e-07)
0.011**
(0.0028)
7.1e-08**
(2.1e-08)
0.0052
(0.0076)
0.00008
(0.0002)
0.0013
(0.0021)
0.0033
(0.002)
0.0018
(0.0044)
1263940
0.027

-0.016**
(0.0043)
0.023
(0.016)
-0.093**
(0.015)
-5.8e-07**
(7.5e-08)
0.0069*
(0.0029)
-5.3e-08**
(1.2e-08)
0.051**
(0.0051)
0.0002
(0.00014)
-0.00046
(0.0025)
-0.002
(0.0016)
-0.0081**
(0.0028)
1263940
0.044

0.0021
(0.0047)
-0.026**
(0.0088)
-0.025**
(0.0079)
-1.1e-07
(6.9e-08)
0.016**
(0.0025)
-2.8e-08*
(1.1e-08)
-0.0082
(0.0052)
-0.000025
(0.0001)
-0.00058
(0.0016)
-0.00098
(0.00077)
0.0041+
(0.0021)
1263940
0.016

significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and clustered at the DMA level)
in parentheses.
Not reported: Region × year, region × month-of-year, and car age fixed effects. We also don’t report house
ownership, occupation, english proficiency, and race of buyers.

Table Appendix-6

Table A-7: Used Cars: Price results,
fuel efficiency quartiles†
Variable
FuelPrice*MGP Quart 1

Coefficient/SE
-1073**
(40)
FuelPrice*MGP Quart 2
-900**
(58)
FuelPrice*MGP Quart 3
118*
(53)
FuelPrice*MGP Quart 4
1766**
(51)
PctLessHighSchool
120
(95)
PctCollege
89
(80)
Income
.0026**
(.00074)
MedianHHSize
-38
(25)
MedianHouseValue
.00065**
(.00016)
VehiclePerHH
-178**
(28)
TravelTime
-1.8+
(1.1)
Weekend
122**
(11)
EndOfMonth
-106**
(7.1)
EndOfYear
-23
(23)
Observations
1263857
R-squared
0.631
*
significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; +
significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and
clustered at the DMA level) in parentheses.
Not reported: Region × year, region ×
month-of-year fixed effects, car type, and
car age fixed effects. We also don’t report
house ownership, occupation, english proficiency, and race of buyers.

Table Appendix-7

Table A-8: Used Cars: Price results, fuel efficiency quartiles by segment†
Compact
Midsize
Luxury
Sporty
SUV
Pickup
-792**
-317**
-3560**
-859**
-1681**
-983**
(57)
(47)
(238)
(182)
(69)
(55)
2
270**
88**
19
440**
206**
-453**
(37)
(31)
(111)
(95)
(51)
(52)
3
303**
207**
643**
742**
808**
284**
(33)
(26)
(107)
(75)
(67)
(45)
4
346**
460**
1319**
703**
1639**
1510**
(29)
(40)
(95)
(98)
(63)
(53)
247**
25
95
-282
206+
-24
(91)
(105)
(237)
(323)
(116)
(131)
95
75
83
41
192
37
(70)
(80)
(191)
(222)
(132)
(123)
-.002**
-.00091
.0029**
.0026
.0031**
.000028
(.00071)
(.00065)
(.00097)
(.002)
(.00087)
(.0011)
28
20
-175**
-11
8.3
-3.6
(25)
(22)
(37)
(48)
(37)
(43)
.00021
.000092
.00089** .00089**
.00019
-.000013
(.00014)
(.00012)
(.00014)
(.00025)
(.0002)
(.0002)
-122**
-173**
-189**
-276**
-158**
-85+
(29)
(28)
(59)
(69)
(41)
(44)
1.3
1.7+
-8.1**
-2
-.25
-.075
(1.1)
(.94)
(2.4)
(2.5)
(1.3)
(1.4)
84**
1.0e+02**
166**
73*
145**
143**
(9.7)
(12)
(31)
(30)
(17)
(18)
-63**
-85**
-197**
-50
-144**
-107**
(7.8)
(11)
(29)
(34)
(15)
(15)
-33
-25
-132
-79
16
79
(38)
(30)
(88)
(104)
(41)
(50)
176614
323461
130296
59577
310026
177855
0.609
0.692
0.729
0.570
0.711
0.619
significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and clustered at

FuelPrice*MGP Quart 1
FuelPrice*MGP Quart
FuelPrice*MGP Quart
FuelPrice*MGP Quart
PctLessHighSchool
PctCollege
Income
MedianHHSize
MedianHouseValue
VehiclePerHH
TravelTime
Weekend
EndOfMonth
EndOfYear

Van
1104**
(119)
671**
(77)
-9
(63)
122*
(56)
432*
(204)
130
(161)
.00091
(.0013)
58
(47)
.00021
(.00022)
-140**
(53)
-1.2
(1.7)
104**
(25)
-79**
(21)
-87
(68)
86028
0.734
the DMA

Observations
R-squared
*
significant at 5%; **
level) in parentheses.
Not reported: Region × year, region × month-of-year fixed effects, car type, and car age fixed effects. We
also don’t report house ownership, occupation, english proficiency, and race of buyers.

Table Appendix-8

Table A-9: Effect of gasoline price aggregation in market share regression†

Gas Price Aggregation

MPG Quartile 1

4-digit ZIP

-.038**
(.0081)
-.05**
(.0049)
-.05**
(.0048)

DMA
(original specification)
PADD

Gas Price Aggregation
4-digit ZIP
DMA
(original specification)
PADD
*

New Cars
MPG Quartile 2

-.016**
(.0039)
-.014**
(.004)
-.014**
(.0049)
Used Cars
MPG Quartile 1 MPG Quartile 2
-.011
(.007)
-.016*
(.0074)
-.018*
(.0078)

-.016*
(.0062)
-.019**
(.006)
-.022**
(.0063)

MPG Quartile 3

MPG Quartile 4

-.0041
(.0035)
-.0065*
(.0029)
-.0078*
(.0032)

.058**
(.0084)
.07**
(.005)
.072**
(.0051)

MPG Quartile 3

MPG Quartile 4

.025*
(.012)
.026*
(.012)
.03*
(.013)

.0018
(.008)
.01
(.009)
.0099
(.0093)

significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and clustered at the
DMA level) in parentheses.

Table A-10: Effect of gasoline price aggregation in price regression†

Gas Price Aggregation

MPG Quartile 1

4-digit ZIP

-219**
(69)
-236**
(74)
-352**
(74)

DMA
(Base Case)
PADD

Gas Price Aggregation
4-digit ZIP
DMA
(Base Case)
PADD
*

New Cars
MPG Quartile 2

-71*
(33)
-74+
(40)
-70+
(37)
Used Cars
MPG Quartile 1 MPG Quartile 2
-1080**
(39)
-1073**
(40)
-1108**
(40)

-921**
(59)
-900**
(58)
-936**
(58)

MPG Quartile 3

MPG Quartile 4

5
(30)
6.9
(30)
45
(30)

137**
(43)
127**
(43)
163**
(34)

MPG Quartile 3

MPG Quartile 4

83
(74)
118*
(53)
124*
(49)

1615**
(59)
1766**
(51)
1830**
(48)

significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and clustered at the
DMA level) in parentheses.

Table Appendix-9

Table A-11: mlogit estimates (baseline is MPG Quartile 4)

†

New Cars
MPG Quartile 1 MPG Quartile 2 MPG Quartile 3
FuelPrice
-.48**
-.27**
-.23**
(.036)
(.029)
(.018)
PctLessHighSchool
.25*
.23**
-.036
(.11)
(.084)
(.076)
PctCollege
-.38**
-.0079
-.046
(.11)
(.1)
(.062)
Income
3.1e-06**
4.2e-06**
3.7e-06**
(7.9e-07)
(6.6e-07)
(5.4e-07)
MedianHHSize
.13**
.071**
.015
(.029)
(.024)
(.034)
MedianHouseValue
7.6e-07*
5.4e-07*
4.2e-07*
(3.1e-07)
(2.1e-07)
(1.7e-07)
VehiclePerHH
.32**
.089
-.054
(.12)
(.065)
(.068)
TravelTime
-.0029+
-.0031**
-.0027**
(.0017)
(.001)
(.00098)
Weekend
-.17**
-.089**
-.076**
(.014)
(.012)
(.0096)
EndOfMonth
.069**
.059**
.055**
(.0077)
(.008)
(.0064)
EndOfYear
-.052*
-.061**
-.041*
(.021)
(.02)
(.019)
Observations
1866008
Log pseudolikelihood
-2482493.4
Used Cars
MPG Quartile 1 MPG Quartile 2 MPG Quartile 3
FuelPrice
-.12**
-.14**
.056
(.044)
(.039)
(.072)
PctLessHighSchool
.12
.26*
-.047
(.11)
(.11)
(.17)
PctCollege
-.34**
-.12
-.21
(.12)
(.11)
(.14)
Income
2.3e-08
3.5e-06**
4.3e-06**
(9.6e-07)
(6.0e-07)
(9.3e-07)
MedianHHSize
.092**
.014
-.003
(.023)
(.025)
(.021)
MedianHouseValue
5.6e-07**
8.0e-07**
2.1e-07
(1.9e-07)
(1.4e-07)
(1.5e-07)
VehiclePerHH
.2*
-.026
-.14*
(.086)
(.072)
(.058)
TravelTime
-.0016
-.0028+
-.003+
(.002)
(.0015)
(.0017)
Weekend
-.059**
-.075**
-.016
(.014)
(.017)
(.018)
EndOfMonth
.027+
.0093
.017
(.015)
(.0095)
(.014)
EndOfYear
-.066*
.0025
-.00083
(.028)
(.028)
(.026)
Observations
1263940
Log pseudolikelihood
-1706051
*
significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs (clustered
at the DMA level) in parentheses.

Table Appendix-10

Table A-12: New and Used Cars: Market share (quartile) results by gasoline price levels†

GasolinePrice (<1.5 dollar)
GasolinePrice (1.5-2.5 dollars)
GasolinePrice (2.5-3.5 dollars)
GasolinePrice (>3.5 dollars)

GasolinePrice (<1.5 dollar)
GasolinePrice (1.5-2.5 dollars)
GasolinePrice (2.5-3.5 dollars)
GasolinePrice (>3.5 dollars)
*

MPG Quartile 1
-.049**
(.0067)
-.05**
(.0062)
-.05**
(.0055)
-.051**
(.0059)

New Cars
MPG Quartile 2 MPG Quartile 3
-.012*
-.011*
(.0056)
(.0046)
-.0092+
-.0087*
(.0049)
(.0041)
-.011*
-.0067+
(.0043)
(.0034)
-.013*
-.014**
(.0058)
(.0035)

MPG Quartile 4
.071**
(.0058)
.068**
(.0054)
.067**
(.0047)
.078**
(.0075)

MPG Quartile 1
-.025**
(.0089)
-.023**
(.0083)
-.022**
(.0072)
-.017
(.012)

Used Cars
MPG Quartile 2 MPG Quartile 3
-.0079
.015
(.0077)
(.017)
-.008
.013
(.0069)
(.016)
-.0091
.011
(.0056)
(.014)
-.023**
.042*
(.0087)
(.017)

MPG Quartile 4
.017
(.015)
.018
(.015)
.02
(.012)
-.0023
(.012)

significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and clustered at the DMA
level) in parentheses.
This table only reports the coefficients on gasoline prices.

Table Appendix-11

Table A-13: New and Used Cars: Price results by gasoline price levels†
New Cars, MPG Quartiles Used Cars, MPG Quartiles
-266**
-1366**
(88)
(75)
GasolinePrice(1.5-2.5)*MPG Quart 1
-223*
-1201**
(100)
(62)
GasolinePrice(2.5-3.5)*MPG Quart 1
-225**
-1112**
(82)
(52)
GasolinePrice(> 3.5)*MPG Quart 1
-384**
-1350**
(75)
(65)
GasolinePrice(< 1.5)*MPG Quart 2
-130+
-1237**
(66)
(107)
GasolinePrice(1.5-2.5)*MPG Quart 2
-110+
-1156**
(64)
(85)
GasolinePrice(2.5-3.5)*MPG Quart 2
-110*
-1009**
(53)
(78)
GasolinePrice(> 3.5)*MPG Quart 2
-81
-954**
(49)
(89)
GasolinePrice(< 1.5)*MPG Quart 3
-42
476**
(41)
(92)
GasolinePrice(1.5-2.5)*MPG Quart 3
-57
417**
(41)
(87)
GasolinePrice(2.5-3.5)*MPG Quart 3
-36
315**
(34)
(74)
GasolinePrice(> 3.5)*MPG Quart 3
.22
227*
(33)
(91)
GasolinePrice(< 1.5)*MPG Quart 4
82
2654**
(64)
(167)
GasolinePrice(1.5-2.5)*MPG Quart 4
28
2454**
(70)
(158)
GasolinePrice(2.5-3.5)*MPG Quart 4
58
2217**
(56)
(109)
GasolinePrice(> 3.5)*MPG Quart 4
136**
1903**
(47)
(88)
*
significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and clustered at
the DMA level) in parentheses.
This table only reports the coefficients on gasoline prices.
GasolinePrice(< 1.5)*MPG Quart 1

Table A-14: New and Used Cars: Market share (quartile) results by gasoline price trends†
New Cars Results
GasolinePrice (3 months up)
GasolinePrice (3 months mixed)
GasolinePrice (3 months down)
Used Cars Results
GasolinePrice (3 months up)
GasolinePrice (3 months mixed)
GasolinePrice (3 months down)
*

MPG Quartile 1
-.052**
(.0046)
-.051**
(.005)
-.054**
(.0054)

MPG Quartile 2
-.016**
(.0039)
-.016**
(.0042)
-.019**
(.0047)

MPG Quartile 3
-.0015
(.0028)
.00048
(.003)
.004
(.0034)

MPG Quartile 4
.07**
(.0046)
.067**
(.0049)
.069**
(.0053)

MPG Quartile 1
-.013+
(.0069)
-.01+
(.0062)
-.0087
(.0068)

MPG Quartile 2
-.018**
(.0059)
-.015*
(.0058)
-.016*
(.0063)

MPG Quartile 3
.019+
(.011)
.012
(.0087)
.012
(.0091)

MPG Quartile 4
.011
(.0081)
.012+
(.0069)
.012
(.0076)

significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and clustered at the DMA level)
in parentheses.
This table only reports the coefficients on gasoline prices.

Table Appendix-12

Table A-15: New and Used Cars: Price results by gasoline price trends†
New Cars, MPG Quartiles Used Cars, MPG Quartiles
-290**
-1025**
(80)
(42)
GasolinePrice(3 mo mixed)*MPG Quart 1
-312**
-1094**
(90)
(44)
GasolinePrice(3 mo down)*MPG Quart 1
-365**
-1202**
(99)
(51)
GasolinePrice(3 mo up)*MPG Quart 2
-110*
-855**
(46)
(61)
GasolinePrice(3 mo mixed)*MPG Quart 2
-135**
-920**
(51)
(63)
GasolinePrice(3 mo down)*MPG Quart 2
-143*
-1003**
(56)
(70)
GasolinePrice(3 mo up)*MPG Quart 3
-34
146**
(37)
(56)
GasolinePrice(3 mo mixed)*MPG Quart 3
-50
161**
(41)
(59)
GasolinePrice(3 mo down)*MPG Quart 3
-77+
168**
(46)
(60)
GasolinePrice(3 mo up)*MPG Quart 4
98+
1768**
(52)
(52)
GasolinePrice(3 mo mixed)*MPG Quart 4
86
1945**
(60)
(60)
GasolinePrice(3 mo down)*MPG Quart 4
82
2081**
(64)
(64)
*
significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and clustered at the
DMA level) in parentheses.
This table only reports the coefficients on gasoline prices.
GasolinePrice(3 mo up)*MPG Quart 1

Table A-16: New and Used Cars: Inventory results†

Variable
GasolinePrice * Quart. 1
(least fuel-efficient)
GasolinePrice * Quart. 2
GasolinePrice * Quart. 3
GasolinePrice * Quart. 4
(most fuel-efficient)
†

Coefficient
(SE)
12**
(2.3)
2.3**
(.89)
.56
(.9)
-5.4**
(.88)

New Cars
DTT sample
mean

% Change
in DTT

Coefficient
(SE)

68.3

17.57%

61.4

3.75%

57.2

0.98%

50.2

-10.76%

.71
(.63)
1.5**
(.57)
.12
(.63)
-.9
(.6)

Used Cars
DTT sample
mean

% Change
in DTT

47.8

1.49%

47.3

3.17%

49.1

0.24%

45.4

-1.98%

This table only reports the coefficients on gasoline prices. The full specification for both new and used cars is:
DT Tirdjt = ω0 + ω1 (GasolinePriceit · MPG Quartilej ) + ω2 Demogit + ω3 PurchaseTimingjt + δdj + τrt + µrt + νijt

*

where DTT irdjt measures days to turn for transaction i in region r at dealer d on date t for car j. We use the
same extensive set of controls we have used in the market share specification (see page 14) with one addition. To
control for the fact that different dealerships may have different inventory policies we include car type × dealer
fixed effects (δdj ).
significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and clustered at the DMA level)
in parentheses.

Table Appendix-13

Table A-17: New and Used Cars: Trade-in results†
New Cars
Used Cars
MPG
MPG
GasolinePrice
.94**
.48**
(.052)
(.051)
†
This table only reports the coefficients on gasoline prices. The full specification for both new and
used cars is:
MPGirjt = β0 + β1 GasolinePriceit + β2 Demogit + β3 PurchaseTimingjt + δl + τrt + µrt + ξijkt

*

where MPGirjt is the MPG of the car of car type j sold in transaction i in region r on date t for
which car l was traded in during that transaction. δl is a “car type” fixed effect for the trade-in. In
addition to conditioning on the MPG of a previously purchased car, including trade-in fixed effects
controls for unobservable characteristics of the buyer that are not accounted for by demographics,
but which might be correlated not just with a car the buyer has purchased in the past, but with the
car purchased in the current transaction.
significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and clustered at the
DMA level) in parentheses.

Table A-18: New and Used Cars: Actual cash value of trade-in†

†

New Car Trade-in
Used Car Trade-in
Used Car
Actual Cash Value Actual Cash Value
Transaction Prices
GasolinePrice*MPG Quart 1
-1177**
-995**
-1073**
(56)
(27)
(40)
GasolinePrice*MPG Quart 2
-887**
-588**
-900**
(39)
(45)
(58)
GasolinePrice*MPG Quart 3
174**
205**
118*
(46)
(43)
(53)
GasolinePrice*MPG Quart 4
1275**
778**
1766**
(37)
(39)
(51)
This table only report the coefficients on gasoline prices. The full specification for both new and used cars in
columns 1 and 2 is:
ACVilrt = β0 +β1 GasolinePriceit ·MPG Quartilel +β2 Odometerilt +β3 Demogit +β4 PurchaseTimingjt +δl +τrt +µrt +ξilrt

*

where ACVilrt is the actual cash value booked in transaction i for trade-in car l in region r on date t. We add
a new control variable to this specification, which is the odometer reading of the trade-in car; cars with higher
odometer readings have experienced greater depreciation and should be booked at lower actual cash values,
all else equal. In the specification, we include the demographic characteristics of the buyer; these should not
have a direct effect on the average cash value, but may be correlated with unobservable quality characteristics
(“wear and tear”) of the trade-in car. We also include the purchase timing of the transaction, in case cars are
assigned different actual cash values on, for example, weekend days, when there is typically higher transaction
volume. Finally, we include detailed “car type” fixed effects for the trade-in, as well as our region-specific year
and region-specific month-of-year fixed effects.
significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. SEs (robust and clustered at the DMA level)
in parentheses.

Table Appendix-14

