                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                MONITORING COSTS AND OCCUPATIONAL
                       SEGREGATION BY SEX:
                      AN HISTORICAL ANALYSIS


                          Claudia Goldin




                      Working Paper No. 1560




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          February 1985




This research has benefited from the comments of Stanley Engerman
and Robert Margo. The paper took form during informal discussions
with Beth Hayes and would have been substantially improved had it
not been for her untimely death. An early version of the paper was
written when the author was a member of the Institute for Advanced
Study; a grant from the National Science Foundation has provided
support for a large project on historical aspects of women's work,
of which this is a part. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research programs in Development of the American Econon and
Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper 111560
                                        February 1985




               Monitoring Costs and Occupational
                      Segregation by Sex:
                    An Historical Analysis

                             ABSTRACT



Supervisory and monitoring costs are explored to understand aspects
of occupational segregation by sex. Around the turn of this century
47 percent of all female manufacturing operatives were paid by the
piece, but only 13 percent of the males were. There were very few
males and females employed by the same firm in the same occupation,
and when they were, they were invariably paid by the piece. The
group of industries that hired two—thirds of all male operatives,
hired virtually no females. Males, but not females, were employed in
teams across a variety of industries, and there was segregation by
sex across various jobs requiring similar training and ability.
Occupations in the clerical sector were rapidly "feminized" from 1900
to 1920 and an organization of work was employed resembling that used
earl ler In manufacturing. These findings can be understood by
considering a model of occupational segregation In which monitoring
is costly and males and females have different turnover rates.

Employers adopt one of two solutions to avoid shirking ——    piece rates
and deferred payment. Because females are only employed In one
period, piece rates are used for them; males, however, might prefer
deferred payment which causes their earnings profile to be steeper
than otherwise. Occupational segregation by sex results even if
workers are homogeneous with regard to ability and there are no
costs of job Investment. Males can also receive higher average
wages per period than females. Under a reasonable set of
assumptions, females would want to be employed in the male sector,
but would be barred from doing so.

Establ ishment—level and more aggregated data for manufacturing
around 1890 are examined with regard to the costs of supervising and
monitoring male and female workers In time and piece—rate positions.
The findings tend to support the assumptions of the model concerning
the relative costs of monitoring workers of different sexes paid by
different methods.




                                           Claudia Gold in
                                           Department of Economics
                                           3718 Locust Walk/CR
                                           University of Pennsylvania
                                           Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                           21 5—898—7733
 1. Introduction

      An index of sex segregation across about 300 occupations in the United

 States has remained roughly constant from the beginning of this century at a

 value of 66, implying that two—thirds of either the male or the female labor

 force would have to change occupations to achieve occupational equal ity (Gross.

 1968; Blau and Hendricks 1979; BelIer and Han 1982 note a decline in the index

 during the 1970s). The origins and persistence of occupational segregation by

 sex have been explained within two general frameworks, one comprising a set of

market forces and another a set of norms and ideologies circumscribing female

roles. Neither paradigm, however, has yielded a universal ly accepted framework.

 It is the contention of this paper that both fail to explain certain aspects of

male and female Jobs, such as various differences in manufacturing occupations

for males and females around the turn of this century and the swift emergence

of females in the clerical sector somewhat later. Aspects of supervisory and

monitoring costs are explored to understand long—term trends in occupational

segregation.

     According to the human capital model (Mincer and Polachek 1974; Polachek

1979, 1981; Zalokar 1982; although see England 1982), individuals choose occupations

consistent with their life—cycle labor force participation. Because of their

more abbreviated and discontinuous labor force activity women opt for occupations

with lower investment costs and less depreciation with time away from the job

than do men. This framework can explain a substantial portion of observed

differences in occupations by sex across broadly defined categories, such a

professionals and personal service workers. But it does less well in explaining

occupational choice within groupings.

     In terms of long—term trends, the fol lowing questions seem to remain

only partly answered by the human capital model. Why was there segregation
                                                                               2

by sex across certain jobs within manufacturing which required similar training

and ability? Why were 47 percent of all female operatives in manufacturing

paid by the piece (or some variant of incentive pay), while only 13 percent

of all male operatives were in 1890? Why were males and females invariably

paid by the piece and rarely by time when both worked at the same job in the

same firm? Why were males, but rarely females, employed in teams within

manufacturing? And of related interest, why do females frequently complain

that they are exluded from certain occupations when there are no obvious entry

barriers? Finally, if, as will be demonstrated below, the returns to specific

human capital in clerical work were approximately equal for females and males,

what accounted for the swift feminization of the clerical sector in the first three

decades of this century?

    The model that will be employed to explain these questions is a variant

of a shirking model of the Salop and Salop (1976) and Lazear (1979, 1981)

variety, although an incentive pay model of the Lazear and Rosen (1981) type is

complementary to the analysis. Workers differ only by the amount of time they

intend to stay on the job; males remain for two or more periods, but females

only for one.   In all other respects, with the possible exception of reservation

wages, these workers are identical. The high cost of supervising the output of

workers leads employers to adopt one of two solutions to avoid shirking ——

piece rates and deferred payment. Because females are not employed in period
2, only piece rates can be used for them; males, however, could prefer deferred

payment which causes their earnings profile to be steeper than otherwise.

     Occupational segregation by sex results even if workers are homogeneous

with regard to their ability and there are no costs of job investment. Because

the monitoring of piece rates may be costlier to use in comparison with deferred

payment, but may be cheaper than ordinary time rates, males can receive higher
                                                                               3

wages in equilibrium than females.1 Life—cycle labor force participation

differences between males and females dictate the final result, but individual

choice of occupations does not.2 Under a reasonable set of assumptions, females

would want to be employed in the male sector but would be barred from doing

so. The exclusion of females from this sector would be efficient.

     Establishment—level, as well as more highly aggregated data, for manufacturing

around the turn of 1-his century are examined with regard to the costs of supervising

and monitoring male and female workers in time and piece—rate positions.

Evidence on piece—rate workers across industries are presented to explore the

predictions of the model.

     Even though the entire occupational distribution has been widely segregated

by sex, certain occupations have "changed sex" over time, and their study

can reveal factors fostering segregation. Occupations in the clerical sector

underwent -I-his transformation in the early part of this century. The clerical

sector was "routinized," as had occurred earlier in manufacturing enabling

employers to hire females. Qual itative and empirical evidence are presented

indicating thai- the cost of supervising workers was reduced, but not the firm—level

specificity of human capital, as has been claimed. General training, acquired

off the job, substituted for on—the—job training and enabled employers to


     1 Added production costs might result from using piece rates. The production
process would have to be altered to divide the good into component parts that
could be easily counted and checked for quality. The model below will assume
that these costs (or benefits in the case of economies from division of labor)
are zero.
     2
       Turnover, and not life—cycle labor force participation, is the actual
variable of importance. Women could have discontinuous and abbreviated I ife—cycle
labor force participation but have lower turnover than men; that is their
length of time with firms could be longer. Most empirical evidence indicates,
however, i-hal- women have considerably higher turnover and lower lengths of stay
with firms. Higher turnover was evident in the 1920s (see, for example, Rogers
1929), and lower lengths of stay with firms are observed in 1980s data from
the Current Population Surveys.
                                                                                4

homogenize their labor forces based on various pre—employment tests. Secretarial

services were thus supervised without the use of more costly piece rates.

2. A Monitoring Model of Occupational Segregation

     Assume that good Q is the only good produced in the manufacturing sector

and that It can be produced by one of two processes. (I) 9 can be divided

into (n—i) parts and put together in an nth operation. Each of the parts

is made separately, and a piece—rate system of payment can be used to pay

labor when output quantity is easily monitored and output quality is not an

important variable. (II) Alternatively, 9 can be made in one process, possibly

using a time—rate system of payment particularly when input quantity can be

easily monitored and output quality cannot be ascertained cheaply. Thus there

will be (n+1) occupations if both processes coexist. Examples of goods which

have been made by both types of processes simultaneously are coats and cigars,

but it Is generally the case that when both processes coexist the goods vary

by quality with the higher quality good made on time. It will be assumed

at present but considered in more detail later, that the nature of the good is

independent of the production process.

     Also assume that there are two types of labor Lf (female) and Lm (male),

homogeneous and identical except that Lf is in the labor force for only 1

period and Lm is in for more than 1 period. They can also differ in their

labor supply functions to this Industry.   It is critical, however, that both

types of labor will shirk if their inputs and/or outputs go unsupervised.

     Three combinations of payment and supervision can be used: (1) time—rate

with supervision of input; (2) piece—rate with supervision of output; and

(3) time—rate with an incentive pay structure having a rising pay scale with

time on the job (Salop and Salop 1976; Lazear 1979, 1981; Guasch and Weiss
                                                                                          5

 1981). Method (3) Involves the supervision of input and a monitoring of

 output.    It will be assumed now, and explored empirically later, that the

 monitoring costs of method (3) are less costly than those in (2), and that

the monitoring costs of method (1) are the most expensive. In the model below

 it is impi icity assumed that there are neither costs nor benefits to dividing

the good into component parts; that is, it is costless to invent piece rates

and there are no gains from such further division of labor.

       The first production process (I) for good 9 can be represented by:

                      fi(L1, R1, S)               I =   1,   .   . . , fl—i
where L =   labor,   R = raw materials, and S =   supervision.         Assume, as well,

that this production process is constant returns to scale in L, R, and S,

fixed proportions, and identical across all i. Each q1 is part of 9 such

that the joining of the component parts of 9 is defined as the nth process,

nQ =   q.

       Each laborer on piece rates gets paid the following for each unit of

output, under zero profit conditions

                   = p — s —   r,
where s =   per   unit costs of supervision, and r = per unit costs of raw materials.


      3 The models in each of these articles differ from that presented below because
each assumes that workers are heterogeneous in some factor relating to work
effort or quitting and that the firm cannot determine this difference prior to
hiring. The workers in the model below are homogeneous in their productivity
and all will shirk if not monitored or given some incentive. But they differ
 in their turnover, which can be easily determined by the firm. Salop and Salop
(1976) assume that workers differ by turnover and that firms cannot distinguish
between slow and fast quitters before hiring. Their incentive compatible
scheme is to withhold a fraction of earnings from workers in one period which
are returned in the next. Guasch and Weiss (1981) assume that workers differ
in ability and that, for risk—neutral workers, there always exists a self—selection
mechanism in which workers pay for a test which, if passed, gives workers a
known return. Lazear (1979) considers the impact of these types of impI icit
contracts on the date of voluntary retirement and generates a model of optimal
mandatory retirement. Note that there is a close relationship between the
results of these models and those of internal labor markets, although the
motivation for each of the constructs might differ.
                                                                                               6

The price of each piece, p, Is the price of Q, P, divided by n, p =                P/n.
It wIll be assumed that the price of Q, F, Is fixed exogenously.

     Assume that the supply of labor function for Lf, defined in terms of

the number of pieces produced at each piece rate, is:

                q =
                      h(w)                             h' >   0,
and gives the number of pieces produced per period. As shown in Figure 1,

when P =   P   and the equilibrium piece rate is                   production will be q* per

worker or kq* for all piece workers, if each has an identical piece supply

                                        = kQ* unIts of the good wIll be produced. There
function. That IS,        (q*in)k
will be n occupations and (k/n) persons per occupation. Each worker receives

an income of y =       q*w*    per period worked.

     Alternatively, or in conjunction with process (I), the industry can use

process (II),

                Q =   g(L,   R, S),

also assumed to be constant returns to scale and fixed proportions. In order

to compare this production process with that given by (I), we must know the

output per period produced by time workers. One assumptIon is that k time

workers, given an amount of monitoring derived below, produce on average exactly

what k piece workers do at a wage equivalent to a piece rate of wp*. In this

case each time worker would have an accepted output standard of Q*n =                 q*   units

per time period.

     The zero profit condition implies that each time worker will receive:

                      = (P —   nr   —
                                        s')(q/n)   —

where s is the per unit output supervision cost and -I- is the per time period

input supervision cost. The first term in parentheses is the per unit (short—run)

profit and the second is the amount of final output produced. The last term, t,
                                                                                                       7

is the cost per -1-Ime      period of supervising a time worker.4 The standardization
of the two methods implies that at the existing price of the output, P, there

Is an s' and a t such that q* per worker is elicited per period. At that 5

and t, firms would be indifferent between hiring time and piece—rate workers.

     In general, therefore,

                   =        + (sq    —
                                         [s'q/nl           —   t),
and the difference in the earnings of time and piece workers, denoted as m,

depends on the degree to which supervisory costs differ between the two methods.

WhHe i-f- seems reasonable that sq >                   s'q/n,        or that the monitoring of output is

cheaper for time workers because there are fewer pieces, it is not clear that the

magnitude of t wili not swamp this difference. Furthermore, it is not clear

whether the costs of monitoring a unit of the piece—rate good are less than the

costs of monitoring a unit of the time—rate good, that is the relationship

between s and s'.

     Consider only the first two types of payment and supervision. The costs of

monitoring for type (1), time rate with only input supervision, could be

sufficiently high that all workers would opt for piece—rate work. That is, s

per unit and t per person as supervision costs to elicit q*, might be high

enough so that ''t <             and then all workers would prefer to work on piece. An
                           Y,
alternative to piece rates, however, is to hire only the Lm workers, all of

whom will be in the iabor force for at least two periods, and pay them:

                       =            +    m    —   e)   <        ÷ m        for period 1, and
                           (wp*q*
              't2 =                 + m +         e)   >        ÷ m        for period 2,
                           (wp*q*
where m =   q*(s   —   [s'/nJ)   —   t       =         —             e = an optimal deferred payment, and


       Note that while one could use the time workers to produce using the
piece—rate technology, it would general ly be more expensive to do so because of
the added number of pieces to monitor. That is, if S' = s, supervision costs
would be higher employing time workers on the piece—rate technology.
                                                                                   8

there are zero rates of interest and time preference.

     The incentive scheme of facing workers with an upward sloping wage profile

works because employers can easily screen individuals who will not remain

in the labor force for two periods, and there is sufficient monitoring of

output that shirking can be detected prior to period 2.      If time workers do not

produce the required output level, they are dismissed after the first time

period and can only be hired in the piece—rate sector in the second period.

Because workers value only income, they would rather work in the time rate

sector for both periods when m >   0.    The firm promises the workers to pay

    in the second period, giving the workers an incentive to produce the required

level of output in the first period.

     The time—rate experience profile rises with time on the job even though

productivity does not. When m >    e,   the Lfs would want to enter the first

period time—rate job, but are prevented from doing so because the threat of

firing them would be of no consequence. The size of e can be determined in a

more comprehensive model by two sets of factors, the stability and reputation

of the firms and the cost of effort to the workers. (See Lazear 1979, 1981 for

the determinants of the optimal profile.)       Note that when m >   0. theJ.

receive higher lifetime average income than do the Lfs, when all n+1 occupations

exist. This result holds even though all labor is intrinsically of equal

productivity and even if when m <   e,   or the deferred payment is greater than

the difference in supervision costs.

     A final issue concerns the conditions under which both types of workers,

and thus both processes (comprising the n+1 occupations), will coexist, and

 if so, which workers use which processes. The answer depends on the supply

of labor.   In the piece work case, i-i- was assumed that all labor was identical

and thus that h(w) as drawn in Figure 1, was an aggregate of the individual
      (I)                                     (II)




wp                           Y
                       h




                q/perlod                             Ldperiod




     Figure 1: Piece   and Time Supply   Functions
                                                                                          9

functions, all identical. For time work, however, the simplest case would

be one in which the opportunity cost for each worker differs, and thus the

supply function gives the number of laborers supplied per time period at each

Y.' Because only the LmS will never be chosen to work on the time—rate jobs

if m >   0, time—rate workers will be called Lms.    In the case drawn in Figure

1, the supply function S'Lm happens to lead to an equal number of Lm and Lf

workers; StL leads to more Lm workers; and S*Lm results in no Lm workers.

Thus the ratio (Lf/Lm) depends upon the position of the male labor supply

function and the level of m, given the piece—rate supply function.

     When both processes are used and m >     0, the following results will obtain:
     (1) Complete occupational segregation by sex;

     (2) Females will all be paid by the piece and males by time;

     (3) The ratio of female to males earnings will be [YI(Y + m)J         <   1,
on average, although for first period employees It could be >     1   if m <   e;   and

     (4) If m <   e,   females would want to enter the entry—level Lm occupation

but will be prevented from doing so.

3. MonItoring and Supervision In Manufacturing, circa 1890

     Only one type of good existed in the monitoring model, and the method

of payment for labor was solely determined by the costs of monitoring and

differences in life—cycle employment across workers.      In the real world, however,

there are other reasons for using different methods of payment that determiNe

the types of goods made by piece and time and the types of workers that will

be employed in each process.

     Three additional cases must be added. Certain types of goods might be

divided into pieces more easily than others, and in these the division of

labor itself might reduce per unit costs.      In these cases the piece—rate technology

might dominate even in the absence of monitoring costs. Alternatively or in
                                                                               10

conjunction, goods may differ by quality. It is generally presumed that one

can monitor output qual i-t-y more cheaply in low quality goods than in high

qual ity goods (Pencavel 1977). In the latter, one may want to screen workers

and hire only those who will produce goods of uniformly high quality output and

i-hen supervise only by input. Such was the case in 1-he manufacture of clothing

at the turn of this century; high qual ity coats, for example, were made by

skilled tailors working on time, while lower quality coats were made by less

skilled operatives working by the piece; (see the study of men's ready—made

clothing, Volume 87, U.S. Senate 1910/11).

     The last reason for the method of payment concerns the variance in skill

level across the various pieces or stages in the production process. When

i-he variation in the necessary skill is high, one may want to use the lower

skilled operations to screen workers for i-he higher skilled operations. The

method of screening might be more complex than merely monitoring the output

of workers, 1-he only observable aspect of piece—rate work. It may, instead,

entail judging the inventiveness of workers, their ability to give orders

and respond In a variety of situations. Ranking individuals in an ordinal

sense may be far cheaper than grading them absolutely. It has been shown

that when workers are risk—neutral a rank—order system of prizes can elicit

the same effort as a piece—rate system (Lazear and Rosen 1981). Both this

variant of the model and that elaborated on above Imply that males will have

a higher variance in earnings than will females, holding productivity constant,

and thus it would be true even if males and females were equally productive

in a deterministic or expected value sense.

     The relative use of piece work across Industries and among firms within

an industry can be determined by factors that complement those in the simple

supervisory cost model. The question is whether the division of workers between
                                                                               11


the two types of payment is determined primarily by differences in supervising

workers that arise from differences in life—cycle labor force participation.

Within the context of the formal model above, one might observe females producing

goods that are cheaper to divide Into pieces while males produce other goods

by time. Similarly, males might produce the higher quality good, and males

might also be employed on time—rate pay In industries that screen workers

at one level of production for jobs at another.5 How male and female workers

are sorted across industries might be related to the costs of supervision

given these complementary factors. What are the facts concerning the employment

of males and females in industries around the turn of this century?

     The data in Table 1 demonstrate -I-hat 51 percent of all adult male employees

in manufacturing In 1890 were in industries In which adult males were over

94 percent of the labor force. (Adult males were 79 percent of the total

manufacturing labor force.) Because virtually all of the remaining 6 percent

who were not adult males were boys, 51 percent of all adult male employees in

manufacturing could not possibly have been in an occupational—industrial

classification In which there were women.

     At the same time, 74 percent of all female employees were in the industries

classified In Table 1 as female Intensive, those in which adult women were

over 30 percent of all employees. (Adult women were 18 percent of the total

manufacturing labor force and children were 3 percent.) It is primarily in

the mixed industries, such as tobacco and printing, and some of the female—intensive

Industries, such as cotton textiles, 1-hat one finds substantial overlap in male


       01-her factors 1-hal- might influence the cost effectiveness of using
piece—rates, as opposed to time—rates, have been suggested in Pencavel (1977),
Lazear (1981), and Roummaset and Uy (1980). Piece—rate payment might also
dominate when technical change is not very rapid, when there is a large luck
component in production or sales, and when there Is low variability in the
efficiency of complementary Inputs.
                                       Table 1
            Sex Segregation and Piece Work Among 46 Large Industries, 1890

"Male—Intensive" Industriesa

                               % Total Mfg.   % Adult Males         % Adult Workers
                               Labor Force    In Labor Forceb       on Piece Ratesc

Agricultural Implements             0.93           98                       20.59
Blacksmithing & Wheelwr'tlng        1.08          100                        2.65
Boots & Shoes, custom work          0.75           98                       36.34
Brick, Tile, Clay, & Pottery        2.75           94                        3.80
Carpentering                        2.97          100                        1.62
Carriages, Wagons, and Cars         3.07           99                       10.81
Cooperage                           0.52           98                       41.26
Flouring & Grist MIII               1.35           99                        2.13
Foundry & Machine Shop              5.26           99                       10.01
Furniture, factory                  1.36           95                       12.79
 iron and Steel                     3.24           99                         0
Leather, includes morocco           0.90           98                       10.89
Liquors, malt                       0.74           98                        1.27
Lumber & Other Mill Products        6.07           98                        3.47
Masonry, Brick, & Stone             2.30          100                        1.76
Painting & Paper Hanging            1.19          100                        4.94
Plumbing & Gas Fitting              0.90           98                        0.74
Saddlery and Harness                0.64           95                       21.59
Shipbuilding                        0.55          100                        4.58
Slaughtering & Meat Packing         0.86           96                        3.53
Timber Products                     0.98           99                       21.51
Tin & Coppersmlthing                0.82           94                        6.38


Iotal % Manuf acturing Labor Force,   in These 22 industries . .   38.0
%   Adult Males Across All Industries                              79
%   Total Adult Male Workers In These 22 Industries                51.2
%   Adult Male Workers on Piece Rates Across All industries •      129d

"Female— Intensive" I ndustriesa

                               % Total Mfg.   % Adult Females        on Piece Ratesc
                               Labor Force    in Labor Force       Females Males

Boots & Shoes, factory              3.00           29              60.0             53.5
Boxes                               0.40           65              58.0             23.0
Carpets                             0.60           45              (17.8)       (14.9)
Clothing, men's                     3.32           49               68.1            49.3
Clothing, women's                   0.09           63              46.8             43.2
Confectionery                       0.06           39              16.7              5.8
Corsets                             0.02           81              (63.5)       (53.4)
Cotton Goods                        4.70           51              73.4             31.7
Dressmaking                         1.43           97                   *             *
Fruits & Vegs., canning             1.08           48              49.7             19.8
Furnishing Goods, men's             0.05           74              65.7             51.7
Gloves & Mittens                    0.02           59              (78.0)       (39.7)
Hats & Caps                         0.06           34              (70.2)       (55.3)
Hosiery & Knit Goods                 1.30          67             63.0         21.3
Millinery & Lace Goods               0.03          73             (41.4)       (29.7)
Mi Ilery, custom                     0.05           93                  *        *
Shirts                               0.07           79            69.4         52.6
Silk                                 1.08           57                75.6     39.8
Woolen Goods                         1.68           38                76.6     26.3
Worsted Goods                        0.09           46                  *        *
"Mixed"     Industries

Clothing, men's custom               1.83           23            (54.0)       (56.1)
Paper                                0.63           23            (31.4)       ( 0.5)
Printing, book & job                 1.23           17            (15.0)       ( 9.3)
Tobacco                              2.75           27            (64.1)       (65.5)


Total %     Manufacturing Labor Force, in These 24 Industries . . .     25.5
%   Adult
        Females Across All Industries                                   18
  Total Adult Female Workers In These 24 industries                      1.2
% Adult Female Workers on Piece Rates Across All Industries •


* Indicates     that the figure for the percentage on piece rates is vastly understated.

a Male—intensive, female—intensive, and mixed refer to the actual percentage of
males or females in each industry and not to an inherent characteristic of the
industries.

b Male and female children comprise a separate category, not included here, and
the figures for percent adult males and females do not exhaust the entire labor
force.

c The percent of workers on piece rates includes only operatives and nets out
clerical workers and other nonoperatives.
d  Adjusted for the undercount of pieceworkers in various industries in the 1890
Census of Manufacturing.

Notes:
Male piecework percentages for female—intensive industries exclude clerical
and supervisory personnel. The data for cotton goods, silk, and woolens are
adjusted for the undercount of pieceworkers in these industries using Department
of Labor (1897). Tobacco includes cigars and cigarettes; leather includes
morocco; boots and shoes, factory includes rubber. Adult females are > 15
years old and adult males are > 16 years old.

Source: United States Census Office (1895).
                                                                                 12

and female occupations within late—nineteen-I-h century industries.   In what ways

did these industries differ from others?

     In looking at the industries in Table 1 that were exclusively male domains,

several factors seem apparent in limiting the presence of females. Many of

these industries required substantial apprenticeships (cooperage, masonry,

plumbing, shipbuilding, custom boot and shoemaking). Still others were physically

demanding (slaughtering, iron and steel, milling). Yet these considerations

alone might not explain the almost complete exclusion of females from the

list. The method of work organization may also have contributed to the exclusivity

of these industries.   I-i- should also be pointed out that male earnings were

not higher in the male—intensive industries, even adjusting for the more rural

location of the male—intensive industries.

     It was the method of payment and not the absolute level of wages that

differed for males across the three groups of industries. All laborers in

the female—intensive industries were more frequently paid by the piece. Females

were overwhelmingly paid by the piece in comparison with male manufacturing

laborers in both the female—intensive and mixed industries.

     Firms were surveyed by the 1890 Census of Manufacturing (U.S. Census

Office 1895) concerning the number of full—time equivalent workers by sex, age

group (adult and child), as well as type of position (clerical, ski I led operative,

unskilled operative, piece rate worker). It is not until 1960 that we again

have comparable data for the entire manufacturing sector. The data in the 1890

Census of Manufacturing indicate that 37 percent of all adult female manufacturing

workers (> 15 years) were paid by the piece but that only 13 percent of all

adult males (>16 years) were.

     But the procedure used in the 1890 census to categorize piece—rate workers

severely understates their number. Because so many occupations in the cotton
                                                                               13

goods, silk, and woolens Industries, among others, were piece—rate Jobs, the

census did not record -them as such, but instead grouped these employees in the

operative category. Only 10.1 percent of female employees were listed as being

employed on piece—rates in cot-I-on goods. The true figure Is considerably

higher.6

     Corrected incentive pay figures across all Industries indicate that 47

percent of all female operatives were paid by the piece while only 13 percent

of males were. Females were therefore 3.5 tImes as likely to be employed

on piece rates than were males. Furthermore piece—rate payment almost always

prevai led when males and females occupied the same position in the same firm.

Examples from the textile industry are Instructive.   In only one out of the

six predominantly male occupations in cotton textiles was payment generally

made by the piece, but among four in which both men and women were found only

one was paid by time.

     Female workers predominated in those industries in which piece—rate work

was common for all workers. The piece—rate percentages In Table 1 are generally

low for all of the male—intensive industries, but the piece—rate percentages

are relatively high for males in the female—intensive industries. Females

were also employed on piece—rate work with greater frequency than were males

within the same industry, and they were Invariably employed on piece—rates

when males also occupied the same job title.

     Certain institutional mechanisms, such as teams and inside contracting,


     6  Stanley Lebergott's chapter in Davis, Easterlin, et al. (1972) also cites
the 1890 Census of Manufacturing figures on piecework without corrections.
Pencavel (1979), in turn, uses the Lebergott figures, although with reservations.
On the undercount in the census, see U.S. Census Office, ManufacturinQ lndustrle-a,
Part I, (1895, p. 173) which states that "an arbitrary rule was adopted that
all pieceworkers whose earnings are limited by the speed of machinery were
to be included with those paid a specific amount by the week, the day, or
the hour."
                                                                               14

also distinguish male—intensive industries from female—intensive ones.   It

appears thai- the length of stay In the labor force and on the job may have

been critical in limiting the employment of women in those industries in which

such institutions reduced supervisory costs. Teams were groups of workers

organized by a contractor who dealt directly with the firm's management or

owners and who was contracted to produce a certain amount of output or paid

by the final piece. The agent in turn hired workers, who were frequently

well known to the contractor and to the other members of the team. The type

of work performed fell somewhere in between an intricate division of labor

and a single production process for the good. Teams conserved on supervision

costs for management because the contractors had knowledge of the productivity

of individual workers and were able to increase effort through personal friendships

and kin ties. Teams were general ly found only in the male—intensive industries

or among male workers in other industries. (See Buttrick (1952) who notes

that contractors were frequently paid by the piece; Montgomery (1979) who

discusses teams among molders, tailors, and miners; and Volume 87 of U.S. Senate,

1910/11, on male teams within men's ready—made clothing.)

     In certain Industries, in which virtually no women were employed, various

aspects of the process could have been done by unskilled workers, and indeed

were done by women during periods of labor shortage, such as World War I.     In


railroad foundries, for example, women were employed during the war in the

production of cores and as machinists. The railroad union protested such

employment after the war claiming that such tasks were an integral part of the

apprenticeship program, and that while women could be effectively employed in

these areas, they undermined the training and screening of skilled workers

(Greenwald 1981, pp. 116—17).

    The division of workers into piece and time—rate work, in the formal
                                                                               15

model of Section 2, was a function of the costs of supervision and monitoring.

Do supervision costs differ in the manner predicted by the observed differences

in the form of payment by sex? That is, are supervision costs lower for piece—rate

than time—rate workers In female—intensive industries but higher in male—intensive

industries where other methods of monitoring and supervising were available?

     Two sets of data having information on the form of payment and the costs

of supervision are used to explore this issue. One set, from the 1895/96

Report of the Commissioner of Labor (U.S. Department of Labor 1897), contains

firm—level data on female—intensive industries.7 Another, from the 1890 Census

of Manufactures (U.S. Census Office 1897, Part II), contains city—level observations

across all Industries, The first set of data has been used for the female—intensive

industries and the second for the male—intensive ones, of which only foundries

had a large enough number of observations to be usable.

     Six industries —— boxes, cigars, clothing, cotton, food, and shoes ——

have been selected from the 1895/96 Report for the female—intensive industries.

These industries differed considerably in the degree to which female workers

advanced in jobs over the course of their employment and in the variance in

female wages across occupations. Clothing and cotton textiles had the highest

variance in wages and, it appears from the qual itative evidence, the greatest

degree of occupational shift. Because of these differences, industry

form—of—payment dummies have been added 1-o the female—intensive industry regression

equation explaining supervisory inputs.

    The equation in Table 2 explaining supervisory inputs across firms in


       The 1895/96 Report includes information on approximately 68,000 male and
80,000 female employees, and of the 364 industries listed in the 1890 Census of
Manufacturing, 57 percent were included in the report. The industries represented
in the survey included, on a national scale, 40 percent of all male operatives
but 96 percent of all female operatives, not a surprising finding given that the
directive was "to investigate . . . the conditions attending the employment
of women and children" (p. 11).
                                                                                   16

female—intensive industries indicates that supervisory costs were lowest for

male and female piece—rate workers among the industries excluding clothing

and cotton textiles. Male time workers and female time workers were next

in order of lowest supervisory cost. A female time worker, on the margin,

required almost eight times the supervisory input as did a female piece—rate

worker. A male time worker required just one—third the supervisory input

of a female time worker, but almost three times that of a male or female piece—rate

worker.

                              ?_S_S ?.LL            l._t___ t VT 1flt [flUUi.
                                      WiThILTfl CUEICIUSIOEIS
           iiiiuiiiys     CUEISISTF1T

Female—intensive industries used piece—rate workers to conserve on supervisory

costs. The absolute costs of supervision were nontrivial. The average weekly

wage of a male supervisor was about $25.00. The marginal female time—rate

worker required 0.0440 *   ($25.00)   =   $1.10 worth of supervision per week or
somewhere between 15 to 20 percent of her weekly earnings. The marginal female

piece—rate worker required 0.00578 *       ($25.00) = $0.145 or only 2 to 3 percent
of her weekly earnings.

     Consider now the two special female—intensive Industries, cotton textiles

and clothing. The coefficients on these two industries differ from those

of the other four industries in two important ways: Female time workers were

relatively inexpensive to supervise but male time workers were considerably

more expensive to supervise. Cotton textiles and              factory—made clothing,

like the male—intensive industries, utilized screening on the job. Here,

however, screening appears to have taken place within the piece—rate positions.

These industries, however, did not offer much job advancement for their male

workers, and the supervisory input, therefore, was high for male time—rate jobs.8


     8 The male workers in these industries may very well have been less able
or had high turnover and may have been sorted out of the male—intensive industries
and those in the female—intensive sector which allowed advancement in wages and
                                        Table 2
                       Supervisory Costs and the Form of Payment,
                                Manufacturing circa 1890

Dependent Variable: Number of supervisory personnel per firm

                              Female—Intensive           Male—Intensive
                                 Industries           Industry, Foundries

Constant                           0.6538                   1.277
                                   (1.67)                 (10.98)
Number of Workers per firm:
 Male piece—rate            0.00506                         0.0115
                                   (0.92)                  (2.40)
 Male time                         0.0142
                                   (1.76)
     Skill                                                  0.00679
                                                           (2.81)
     Unskill                                                0.00697
                                                           (2.02)
 Female piece—rate                 0.00578
                                   (1.95)
 Female time                       0.0440
                                   (3.28)
Industry Dummies:
 Boxes                             0.313    (0.54)
 Clothing                          0.070    (0.11)
 Food                             —1.261    (1.78)
 Shoes                             0.517    (0.70)
 Cigars                            0.019    (0.03)

Industry—Worker I nteractions
 Cotton Male piece          —0.0019          (1.75)
 Cotton Male time             0.0425         (1.08)
 Cotton Female piece          0.0047         (0.69)
 Cotton Female time         —0.0508          (2.81)

 Clothing      Male piece          0.0021    (0.28)
 Clothing      Male time           0.0441    (3.91)
 Clothing      Female piece        0.0028    (0.54)
 Clothing      Female time        —0.0537    (3.38)

R2                                 0.936                     0.203

Number of Observations             289                        152

Sources and Notes: Male—Intensive Industry, from U.S. Census Office (1895),
Part II: City Totals. The observations are city—Industry cells and have been
weighted by n, where n=the number of firms in the city. Female—Intensive
Industries are from U.S. Department of Labor (1897), where the observation
is a firm. t—statistics are in parentheses.
                                                                                17

     The results from the male—intensive Industry are different from those

for most of the female—Intensive industries. Supervisory costs were greatest,

a-I- the margin, for the piece—rate workers and were only slightly higher for

the unskilled than for the skilled workers.   In the male—intensive industry

an additional male piece—rate worker added about the same number of supervisors

as did a male time—rate worker in the four female—intensive Industries. A

male time—rate worker In the male—intensive Industries added about the same

number of supervisors as did a female or male piece—rate worker In the four

female—Intensive industries. This reversal of the costs of supervision suggests

that the formal model may have captured some of the intrinsic differences

between the nature of production and work supervision in the two sets of

industries. Male time workers in-I-he male—Intensive industries may have been

supervised less expensively than were time workers In other industries because

they were offered an incentive compatible contract or worked in teams or were given

prizes at certain intervals.

     It might also be asked whether the supervisors were male or female and

whether the costs of obtaining able supervisors varied across industries. The

first question can be easily addressed, but the second will have to await the

collection of additional data on the earnings of both the supervisors and the

workers. Both female and male supervisors were used in the female—intensive

industries, but, as might be expected, the female supervisors were used almost

exclusively to supervise female workers, although they were also used for male

piece—rate workers. Female supervisors, however, did not oversee the male time—rate

workers, a position, it appears, that was reserved for 1-he male supervisors.

     The impl icat Ions of the formal model also concerned the shape of the


position. I-I- should be noted that the firms in the 1895/96 Report were generally
larger firms and therefore did not include the outside contracting shops in
men's clothing which hired skilled tailors organized into teams.
                                                                              18

female and male earnings functions. The male earnings function would be expected

to rise over the two periods while that for females is defined only over one

period.   In actuality, females stay in the labor force for a number of periods,

some perhaps for as long as 1-he average male. These females may be grouped

with other females in terms of occupations and therefore have flatter earnings

profiles than otherwise. Because piece work involves a degree of on—the—job

learning, but not necessarily what is usually termed investment, the profile

might be expected to rise initially and not be as flat as assumed in the model.

     Empirical work substantiates the claim that male earnings rose more

continuously with time on the job but that female earnings functions rose

more steeply during the early period of employment. In a study of native—born

male manufacturing workers in Michigan around 1890 (Hannon 1977), earnings

rose for almost 30 years with time on the job. Studies of female earnings

around 1-hat period (Goidin 1980; Eichengreen 1984) indicate that earnings

rose more steeply for females than for males but peaked considerably earlier.

While these findings are consistent with the monitoring model, they are also

consistent with a human capital model of occupational segregation. Males

may accumulate human capital over a longer period of time than do females,

with their wages following their rising productivity. Females, on the other

hand, could learn considerably In their early working lives, but decide not

to invest in human capital having a longer gestation period. The true test

between the two hypotheses, that of human capital and that of monitoring,

is whether male productivity advances with their earnings. This test cannot

be accomplished for the historical period being studied, but there is evidence

for the current period that wages do not necessarily follow marginal products

(Medoff and Abraham 1981; Lazear and Rosen 1981).
                                                                                  19

3. The "Feminization" of the Clerical Sector

        The clerical sec-f-or was rapidly feminized and ranks today as one of the

major employers of women.     In 1870 fewer than 3 percent of all clerical employees

were women, but as early as 1900 30 percent were, and by 1930 over 50 percent

were women. It has been frequently claimed that this "feminization" was the

result of technological changes, such as the mechanization of the office.

A direct extension of this view Is that the firm—specific component of clerical

skills declined, particularly with the adoption of the typewriter (Rotella

1981). Nineteen-I-h century clerks were managers in training, but twentieth

century office typists had very limited occupational advancement.      It seems

clear that the new techniques and machinery changed the nature of the job

and opened the way for the employment of females.

        But was the "feminization" of the office a function of the reduced level

of skill required with the division of office work into tasks or was It a

function of a reduced level of supervision needed to elicit some level of

output? Here again, the human capital model and the monitoring model have

similar implications and could provide complementary explanations. But several

impi ications of each are distinct. One is to be found in the history of typing

and the attempts by managers to avoid expensive piece rate payments. The

second concerns the returns to specific human capital. If the human capital

model of office "feminization" is correct, one should find that females accumulated

less firm—specific human capital than did males. Data from a 1940 survey of

clerical workers indicate approximately equal returns to time spent with the current

firm.

        In the early history of the modern office various tasks were paid by

1-he piece. Typewriters in the Graton and Knight Manufacturing Company, for

example, were equipped with cyciometers, "240 depressions of the typewriter
                                                                                     20

keys or space bar [was] equivalent 1-o one point .      .   . 600   points [were] considered

base production and each point produced in excess [was] al lowed for at the

rate of one and one—half cents a point" (Coyle 1928, pp. 23—24). The use of

these cyclometers increased the cost of labor, and other cost—saving methods

were examined. Piece rates did not prevail, and their decline was a tribute to

1-he ability of employers to pre—test employees whose training in commercial and

high school courses was completed before job entry.9

     Monitoring in the office became simpler and cheaper than in the factory,

despite the general expectation in the 1920s that the office would develop

along factory lines. Employers divided workers into homogeneous groups and

paid each a set day rate. Standardization enabled employers to screen workers

prior -l-o employment. Commonwealth Edison Company, for example, claimed that

its stenographers, typists, and dictaphone operators were "classed by temperament

and ability. A dictator when he needs a girl telephones to the central bureau

and one is sent who is adapted to his kind of work" (Coyle 1928, p. 23).

At the same time, however, managers were aware that the benefits of easily

supervised tasks cost them the ability to screen workers for higher level

positions and cost them the accumulated human capital necessary to produce

such workers. "The modern clerk knows one operation . . . He is, therefore,

less prepared for larger responsibi il-y . .   . The   stenographer from a central ized

bureau has no . .   . continuous   and responsible relationship to any one person"

(Coyle 1928, p. 27).

     Data from the original surveys of a 1940                Bureau Bulletin of male

and female clerical workers are used 1-0 analyze the returns to training and


       Various studies published in the 1920s, utilizing Taylor's scientific
methods, indicated in which clerical jobs managers could effectively screen workers
prior to employment and in which they could not. See the discussion in Davies
(1982), Chapter 6.
                                                                                  21

education in the context of the earnings func-tion.1° The findings in Table

3 indIcate that the earnings function for females is similar to that thought

typical today (Mincer and Polachek 1974). Earnings rise gradually with experience

without peaking in the relevant range, education measured in years increases

earnings, and "home time" decreases earnings by about 1.5 percent per year.

      The comparisons with the male earnings function reveal that returns to total

experience in clerical work were far greater for men, while returns to experience

with the present firm were lower. Years of education were less valuable for

men, although an advanced or special degree was worth more. That is, men

accumulated relatively more general human capital on the job than did women,

and women accumulated a relatively larger amount of specific human capital.

Consider a man and a woman with five continuous years with their first employer,

thus only five years of experience. The woman's earnings would increase by

13.4 percent because of an Increase in general skIlls and she would receive an

additional 6.6 percent because of skills specific 1-o her current firm. The man

would receive a 24.5 percent increase because of augmented general skills, but

a 5.8 percent increase because of skills specific to his current firm.

     Analyses of the occupations of clerical workers in 1940 and at the time

of their first clerical job reinforce the findings on earnings. Men typically

began as clerks and rose through the ranks with experience.     If they had college

degrees, they began and remained in ski I   led positions. Women, however, were

initially placed in jobs by years of education, far more so than were males,


     10 These data were retrieved from the National Archives. For a discussIon
of the Women's Bureau Bulletin and the survey from which these data were obtained,
see Goldin (1984).

        Note that these results are the most generous to the alternative
hypothesis. Those using the regressions that exclude the schooling dummies
indicate a barely significant and smaller coefficient on the tenure variable
for men.
                                                TAE 3
            Earnings Functions    for   Female and Male Clerical Workers, 1940

Dependent Variable: Log Full-time Salary
                        Females                               Males

Constant       6.078*              6.085*           6.474*             6.518*
              (0.069)             (0.083)          (0.095)            (0.085)

Totexp         0.0290*             0.0290*          0.0518*            0.0535*
              (0.0033)            (0.0033)         (0.0042)           (0.0041)

Totexp2       _0.000453*          _0.000447*      _0.000848*          _0.000889*
              (0.000078)          (0.000078)      (0.000083)          (0.000081)

ExpFirm        0.0135*             0.0133*          0.0081**           0.0115*
              (0.0024)            (0.0024)         (0.0042)           (0.0027)

Contin.        0.142*              0.139*         -0.0576             -0.0781
              (0.030)             (0.030)         (0.0615)            (0.0599)

Furlough      _0.0224*            ....0.0234*     _0.0413*            -0.0471 *
              (0.0097)            (0.0098)        (0.0189)            (0.0186)

Married        0.0131              0.0149          0.131*              0.119*
              (0.0213)            (0.0214)        (0.030)             (0.030)

YrsEduc        0.0380*             0.0371*         0.0260*             0.0171*
              (0.0049)            (0.0075)        (0.0052)            (0.00472)
cLDum                              0.031                              -0.014
                                  (0.026)                             (0.046)

VocGrad                            0.046                               0.149*
                                  (0.034)                             (0.063)

CoIlDum                            0.054                              0.165*
                                  (0.046)                             (0.037)

HSDum                             -0.007                              0.067*
                                  (0.028)                             (0.030)
Homelime     _0.0147*             _JQ5*
             (0.0051)             (0.0051)

R2            0.464               0.468             0.643             0.665
Number
of   Obs.       724                 724              481               481
Sources: See Goldin (1984). These data are a sample of original schedules from
WomersBureau Bulletin No. 188—5, "Office Work in Philadelphia, 1940," (1942),
housed in the National Archives, Record Group #86, Boxes 472—486.

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses; * indicates significant at least at
1-he 0.05 level; ** indicates significant at least at the 0.10 level.

Variable Definitions:

Totexp            Years since individual began first clerical job
Expfirm           Years since individual began work with current employer
Contin.           = 1 if years workers with current employer has been
continuous.
Furlough         Number (or percent) of years individual had been furloughed
Married            1 if married
CCDum            = 1 if has a commercial course degree
VocGrad          = 1 if graduated from a vocational school
Cot IDum         = 1 if graduated from college
HSDum            = 1 if graduated from high school
Homelime         Number of years unaccounted for, presumably spent out of the
                 labor force; variable is defined as : Totexp — Expfirm —
                 years spent at other clerical jobs.
                                                                               22

and generally remained In their first positions or ones very similar, independent

of experience. For example, 70 percent of all females who began as stenographers

and dictaphone operators remained so to 1940; 57 percent who began as machine

operators also stayed in that position. Both findings are invariant to years

of office experience. One important exception to the absence of job advancement

is secretaries, who frequently rose through the ranks beginning first as general

office clerks. Among males, the situation seems much 1-he reverse. Fully

one—third of all the men In 1940 were classed in skilled positions (only 6

percent of the females were). One—third of these began in skilled positions,

typically those with college educations men, but another 40 percent rose through

the ranks beginning as general office clerks.

     Thus It appears 1-hat women began to be employed in the clerical sector

when its jobs could be more finely divided and its output more cheaply monitored.

The presence of machinery and more task oriented jobs did not eliminate the

accumulation of specific human capital among clerical workers, female or male,

but did allow for a finer division of labor.

4. Concluding Remarks

     The literature on occupational segregation by sex has focused on differences

in 1-he   types of jobs held by males and females, particularly on 1-hose in different
sectors of the economy and with emphasis on the degree and nature of the human

capital required. But within various Industries and even within certain

occupations, male and female jobs have differed by the method of payment and

the nature of the supervisory and monitoring input necessary to elicit output.

The model that was offered in Section 2 explored the implications of various

types of supervisory and monitoring methods, for which expected time on the

job was an important determinant. These Implications were explored with data

from 1890 to 1940 regarding manufacturing and clerical work.
                                                                              23

     During this period the majority of female workers did have rather abbreviated

labor force experiences. The labor force participation rate for white married

women was low for all age groups until the 1950s. Most women entered the labor

force sometime before they married but at the time of marriage exited the labor

force permanently. Thus it appears that the assumption of the model concerning

the relative length of stay with firms for the majority of males and females was

reasonable.

     Because so many women exited from the labor force a-i- the time of marriage

in the 1920s and 1930s various firms instituted prohibitions against their female

employees marrying and had stated policies against hiring married women. One

interpretation of such prohibitions is that they served a screening function.

Firms wanted to attract women who would remain in the labor force for some

period of time, and these prohibitions led to the self—selection of those who

planned on marrying late or not at all. These prohibitions emerged at the time

the clerical sector was expanding and were used to a great extent in the insurance

and banking segments of this industry, a finding consistent with the notion

that there were large fixed hiring costs in 1-his sector.

     But sometime after 1950 an expanding portion of the female population

had rather continuous and lengthy stays in the labor force even after marriage

(Goldin 1983; Smith and Ward 1984). The female labor force began to be populated

by a more heterogeneous group with regard to life—cycle labor force participation,

and an extension of the work of this paper would involve exploring the screening

or reveal ing mechanisms 1-hal- have been used to ascertain this aspect of employment

where there are hiring costs, shirking, or specific human capital paid, in

part, by the employer.
                                       REFERENCES

Belier,    Andrea and Kee—ok Kim Han. "Trends in Occupational Segregation by

 Sex: 1960—1990," University of Illinois, Urbana—Champaign, Working Papers in

 Population Studies, PS #8203.

Blau, Francine and Wallace Hendricks. "Occupational Segregation by Sex: Trends

 and Prospects." 14 Journal of Human Resources (1979): 197—210.

Buttrick, John "The Inside Contract System." Journal of Economic History 12

 (Summer 1952): 205—21.

Coyle, Grace. Present Trends    in   the Clerical Occoations. New York, The Woman's

 Press. 1928.

Davies, Margery W. Woman's Place is at the Typewriter: Office Work and Office

 Workers, 1870—1930. Philadelphia, 1982.

Davis, Lance, William Parker, et al. American Economic Growth. New York, 1972.

Eichengreen, Barry. "Experience and the Male—Female Earning Gar in the

 189Os," Journal of Economic History 46 (September 1984): 822—34.

England, Paula. "The Failure of Human Capital Theory to Explain Occupational

 Sex Segregation." 17 Journal of Human Resources (1982): 358—70.

Goldin, Claudia. "The Work and Wages of Single Women, 1870 to 1920." Journal of

 Economic History 60 (March 1980): 81—89.

     .    "Life—Cycle Labor Force Participation of Married Women." National Bureau
 of Economic Research Working Paper. December 1983.

     .    "The Historical Evolution of Female Earnings Functions and Occupations."

 21 Explorations in Economic History (January 1984): 1—27.

Greenwald, Maurine Weiner Women. Warand Work: The Impact of World War I on

 Women Workers in the United States. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1981.

Gross, Edward. "Plus ca Change .      . . The   Sexual Structure of Occupations Over

 Time." 16 Social Problems (Fall 1968): 198—208.
Guasch, J. Luis and Andrew Weiss. "Self—Selection in the Labor Market."

 American Economic Review 71 (June 1981): 275—84.

Hannon, Joan. "The Immigrant In the Promised Land: Human Capital and Ethnic

 Discrimination in the Michigan Labor Market." Unpubl ished Ph.D. Dissertation,

 University of Wisconsin, 1977.

Lazear, Edward P. "Why is There Mandatory Retirement?" 87 Journal of Political

 Economy (December 1979): 1261—84.

      .   "Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity, and Hours Restrictions." Paper
 presented to the Sioan/CSO1 Conference on information and Transaction Cost

Economics, University of Pennsylvania, May 1981.

      .   and Sherwin Rosen. "Rank—Order Tournaments as Optimum Labor Contracts."

 Journal of Political Economy 89 (October 1981): 841—64.

Medoff, J.L. and K.G. Abraham. "Are Those Paid More Real ly More Productive?"

 Journal of Human Resources 16 (1981): 186—216.

Mincer, Jacob and Solomon Polachek. "Family Investments in Human Capital:

 Earnings of Women." 82 Journal of Political Economy (March/April 1974):

 S76—S 108.

Montgomery, David. Workers' Control of America: Studies in the History of Work.

 Technology, and Labor Struggles. Cambridge University Press: CambrIdge, 1979.

Pencavel, John "Work Effort, On—The—Job Screening, and Alternative Methods of

 Renumeraj-fon." Research In Labor Economics 1 (1977): 225—258.

Polachek, Solomon. "Occupational Segregation Among Women: Theory, Evidence, and

 a Prognosis." In Women in the Labor Market edited by C. Lloyd et al. New

 York: Columbia University Press, 1979.

     .    "Occupational Self—Selection: A Human Capital Approach to Sex
Differences in Occupational Structure." Review of Economics and Sta-i-istics 63

 (February 1981): 60—69.
Rogers, Thomas Wesley. "A Comparison of Labor Turnover Among Men and Women in

 Two Large Chicago Companies." Monthly Labor Review 28 (January 1929): 39—41.

Rotella, Elyce. From Home to Office: U.S. Women at Work. 1871—1930. Ann Arbor,

 Michigan: UMI Research Press, 1981.

Rournmaset, James A. and Marl lou Uy. "Piece Rates, Time Rates, and

Teams: Explaining Patterns in the Employment Relation," Journal of Economic

 Behavior and Organization 1 (December 1980): 343—60.

Salop, J. and S. Salop. "Self—Selection and Turnover in the Labor Market." 90

 Quarterly Journal of Economics (1976): 619—27.

Smith, James P., and Michael P. Ward. "Women's Wages and Work in the Twentieth

 Century." Rand Corporation Report. October 1984.

United States Department of Labor. Eleventh Annual Report of the Commissioner

 of Labor. 1895—96. Work and Wages of Men Women. and Children. Washington,

 D.C.: G.P.O., 1897.

United States Census Office. Report on Manufacturing Industries at the Eleventh

 Census: 1890. Part I. Totals for States and Industries. Part II. Statistics of

 Cities. Washington, D.C.: G.P.O., 1895.

United States Senate. Report on the Condition of Child and Woman Wage—Earners

 in the United States in Nineteen Volumes. Senate Documents, VoIs. 86—104.

 Washington, D.C.: G.P.O., 1910/1911.

Zalokar, Catherine Nadja. "A Human Capital Model of Sex Differences in

 Occupational Distribution and Wages." Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation,

 Princeton University, 1982.
