                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE EFFECTS OF PRODUCT LIABILITY EXEMPTION IN THE PRESENCE OF
                                THE FDA

                                        Tomas J. Philipson
                                           Eric C. Sun
                                         Dana Goldman

                                       Working Paper 15603
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15603


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2009




Prepared for the NBER conference “Regulation and Litigation”, Sep 11-12, 2009, Arizona. We are
indebted to Yang Lu for excellent research assistance, the conference participants at the NBER Law
and Economics conference, and two anonymous referees for comments and suggestions. Sun gratefully
acknowledges funding from the Medical Scientist Training Program at the University of Chicago (NIGMS
Grant number 5 T32 GM07281). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Tomas J. Philipson, Eric C. Sun, and Dana Goldman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Product Liability Exemption in the Presence of the FDA
Tomas J. Philipson, Eric C. Sun, and Dana Goldman
NBER Working Paper No. 15603
December 2009, Revised February 2010
JEL No. I1,I18,K32

                                             ABSTRACT

In the United States, drugs are jointly regulated by the US Food and Drug Administration, which oversees
premarket clinical trials designed to ensure drug safety and efficacy, and the liability system, which
allows patients to sue manufacturers for unsafe drugs. In this paper, we examine the potential welfare
effects of this dual system aimed at ensuring the safety of medical products, and conclude that product
liability exemptions for FDA regulated activities could raise economic efficiency. We show that while
reductions in liability, such those associated with pre-emption, may lower welfare in the absence of
the FDA, they may raise welfare in its presence. In the presence of the FDA, product liability may
reduce efficiency by raising prices without pushing firms, who are already bound by the agency’s
requirements, to invest further in product safety. We consider as a case study the National Vaccine
Injury Compensation Program, which sharply reduced vaccine manufacturer’s liability in 1988. We
find evidence that the program reduced prices without affecting vaccine safety, suggesting that liability
reductions can enhance economic efficiency in the presence of the FDA.


Tomas J. Philipson                                  Dana Goldman
Irving B. Harris Graduate School                    School of Policy, Planning and Development
of Public Policy Studies                            University of Southern California
The University of Chicago                           650 Childs Way, RGL 214
1155 E 60th Street                                  Los Angeles, CA 90089-0626
Chicago, IL 60637                                   and NBER
and NBER                                            dpgoldma@usc.edu
t-philipson@uchicago.edu

Eric C. Sun
University of Chiacago and RAND
1776 Main St
Santa Monica, CA 90401
ericsun@uchicago.edu
Section 1: Introduction

         In the United States, the safety and efficacy of drugs and medical devices are primarily

regulated by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) through pre-market

activities, such as mandatory clinical testing, and post-market activities, such as the use of the

Adverse Event Reporting System to monitor the incidence of adverse events. However, while

the FDA is the primary and most visible regulator of drug safety, the presence of legal liability

after a product has entered the market gives firms large incentives to provide safe drugs.

         The overlap between the FDA and product liability in regulating drug safety has received

substantial attention from policymakers, particularly in light of several high profile lawsuits

against drug manufacturers, such as those involving the drug Vioxx (rofecoxib).2 Of particular

interest has been the issue of pre-emption, which states that FDA approval of a drug’s label,

which lists the indications that the drug is approved to treat as well as warnings about any side

effects, gives the manufacturer immunity against lawsuits based on state law. In 2006, this

doctrine was formally adopted by the FDA through a modification in the Federal Register. The

FDA’s adoption of the pre-emption doctrine has been controversial in legal circles, with lower

federal courts offering conflicting views on the doctrine. Recently, in Riegel v. Medtronic, the

Supreme Court of the United States upheld the pre-emption doctrine for medical devices,

although in a 5-4 decision in Wyeth v. Levine, the Court ruled the doctrine did not apply to drugs.

         Supporters of pre-emption argue that it frees pharmaceutical firms from the chaos of

having 50 separate States regulate drug safety, thereby reducing the potential that pharmaceutical

firms will “over-warn” patients about the risks of drugs (Calfee 2008; Calfee et al., 2008).


2
  Vioxx, a selective COX-2 inhibitor, was withdrawn from the US market in 2004 after several high profile lawsuits
alleging that the drug significantly increased patients’ risk of adverse cardiovascular events. On November 9, 2007,
the manufacturer of Vioxx, Merck, agreed to establish a $4.85 billion settlement fund to compensate Vioxx patients
who experienced a myocardial infarction or ischemic stroke while using the drug.

                                                                                                                   3
Opponents argue that product liability is a useful complement to the FDA, and has resulted in

safer drugs (Kessler and Vladeck, 2008; Curfman, Morrisey, and Drazen, 2008; Glantz and

Annas, 2008).

       Despite the debate over the potential consequences of pre-emption, there has been little

explicit economic analysis that has attempted to determine under what circumstances pre-

emption, or limits on damages more generally, might improve economic efficiency. In this paper

we provide a formal analysis of the dual regulation of medical product safety and the potential

efficiency effects induced by product liability in the presence of the FDA. Our main argument is

that the standard efficiency implications of product liability are altered when there is dual

regulation of safety through another government agency such as the FDA. In particular, lowering

liability (through pre-emption or other means) in the presence of the FDA can raise welfare

under conditions when it would otherwise lower welfare in the agency’s absence. Two central

aspects of the FDA’s activities drive these opposite effects. First, the FDA generates information

about product quality prior to marketing beyond what would be the case with liability alone.

Second, the FDA requires a minimum level of product quality before marketing.

       As is well known, when consumers are fully informed about product quality, product

liability cannot improve on an already efficient outcome. Any efficiency gains from either

product liability or the FDA must therefore come from lack of full information about product

quality on the demand side. When the demand side is uninformed, particularly when it

underestimates the potential harms of a drug, product liability accomplishes two socially

desirable actions. First, it helps provide the efficient level of quality or safety by giving firms

incentives to provide safe products. Second, it ensures the efficient level of product quantity.




                                                                                                      4
Since consumers will over-consume a drug when they underestimate its risk, product liability

acts as a beneficial tax.

        However, by imposing and verifying a minimal safety level, the FDA addresses both of

these issues directly. On the quality side, to the degree that the FDA’s safety standards are

binding on firms, product liability may not induce them to provide additional safety. In terms of

quantity, since the FDA verifies safety, consumers are more informed, mitigating the concern of

overconsumption. In the agency’s presence, product liability thereby merely acts as a tax. Even

if this tax is paid back to patients in the form of damages, a dead-weight loss still exists due to

reduced access. Thus, while product liability may raise efficiency in the absence of the FDA by

inducing firms to provide safety and appropriately restrict access, in the agency’s presence it can

actually reduce welfare by inappropriately reducing access. We offer an empirical test of the

conditions under which increased liability may reduce efficiency through the quality-dimension

that involves testing for changes in the price and safety effects of liability changes.

        Clearly, our efficiency analysis for pre-emption should by no means be interpreted as

abolishing product liability altogether, e.g. for fraud or activities for which FDA has no

jurisdiction, but simply for those activities in which a public entity like the FDA is overseeing

the same type of behavior as product liability—in these cases, the duplication of regulation and

liability is inefficient. To reiterate, our arguments do not apply to all activities, just those for

which there are dual government interventions.

        We consider the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (NVICP) as a case

study to illustrate how to test for the welfare effects of changes in liability. This program

shielded vaccine makers from liability in exchange for a special compensation program funded

by an excise tax on vaccines. This program therefore essentially mimicked pre-emption by



                                                                                                       5
lowering the cost of liability dramatically for manufacturers. Prior to the implementation of

NVICP, there was a substantial increase in liability actions relating to vaccines, and this increase

is associated with a rapid increase in prices. After the NVICP was implemented, prices fell.

However, we find no evidence that the NVICP led to more unsafe vaccines. If the effects of this

program are indicative of a more general pattern of no safety effects and reduced prices when

reducing liability in presence of FDA, then pre-emption may be efficiency enhancing.

       The paper is briefly organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on the dual

regulation of drug safety. Section 3 presents and discusses our analysis of the efficiency effects

of pre-emption. Section 4 discusses our case studies for vaccines covered by the NVICP. Lastly,

Section 5 concludes and discusses future research.




                                                                                                     6
Section 2: Background on US Medical Product Safety Regulation.

       In the United States, the FDA is the federal agency charged with regulating drug safety

and efficacy. The majority of the agency’s efforts are devoted towards pre-market activities,

whereby the agency supervises and evaluates a series of clinical trials undertaken by drug

manufacturers in order to establish drug safety and efficacy. The clinical trial process begins

when a firm files an Investigational New Drug application, which requests permission from the

FDA to conduct clinical trials on humans. Typically, this application contains the available

preclinical information, as well as protocols for the drug’s clinical trials, and any data on trials

conducted overseas.

       Once the FDA gives its approval, the firm may begin conducting clinical trials for the

drug, which proceed in three phases. The goal of Phase I is to evaluate the drug’s safety and to

obtain data on its pharmacologic properties. Typically, Phase I trials enroll small numbers (20-

80) of healthy volunteers. Phase II trials then enroll slightly larger (100-130) numbers of sick

volunteers. The goal of these trials is to begin investigating a drug’s efficacy and optimal

dosage, and to monitor the drug’s safety in diseased patents. Finally, Phase III testing typically

involves larger numbers (more than 1,000) of sick patients and is the most costly stage of the

approval process. Phase III testing seeks to establish more definitively the efficacy of a drug, as

well as to discover any rare side effects. Upon the completion of Phase III testing, the firm

submits a New Drug Application to the FDA, which is accompanied by the results of the clinical

trials. The FDA may then reject the application, require further clinical testing, or approve the

drug outright.

       In addition to issuing approval of the drug, the FDA must approve the label that

accompanies it. This label provides data on the drug’s pharmacologic properties and side effects,



                                                                                                       7
as well as brief summaries of the clinical trials reported to the FDA. Perhaps most importantly,

the label also lists the indications (or diseases) that the drug is approved to treat. Thus, approval

by the FDA is not merely approval of the drug, it is approval of the drug for specific uses. If a

firm wishes to obtain approval for additional indications, it typically must begin a new set of

clinical trials for those indications. Use of a drug for an indication not listed on the label (“off-

label use”) is not illegal, and indeed occurs regularly in many areas, such as oncology. However,

it is illegal for a manufacturer to advertise a drug for a non-approved indication. In addition,

insurers may not always pay for off-label use of a drug.

         The FDA also oversees the safety and efficacy of medical devices. Here, the process is

more complex, because the statutory definition of a medical device is extremely broad3 and

includes a wide variety of implements, such as tongue depressors, home pregnancy tests, and

drug eluting stents. All devices are categorized into one of three classes (I, II, and III), based on

the degree of patient risk. Class I devices are the least risky, and typically require no premarket

approval from the FDA, although the manufacturer must register with the FDA prior to

marketing the device. Class II devices pose more risk to patients, and must receive prior

approval via the 510(k) review process, which typically seeks to establish that the given device is

substantially equivalent to another device that has received FDA approval. The most risky (class

III) devices require approval via the premarket approval process (PMA), which, similar to the

process for pharmaceuticals described above, involves the submission of a PMA application

establishing the device’s safety and efficacy, usually through the results of clinical trials. After

3
  According to the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, a medical device is defined as “an instrument, apparatus,
implement, machine, contrivance, implant, in vitro reagent, or other similar or related article, including any
component, part, or accessory, which is (1) recognized in the official National Formulary, or the United States
Pharmacopeia, or any supplement to them, (2) intended for use in the diagnosis of disease or other conditions, or in
the cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease, in man or other animals, or (3) intended to affect the
structure or any function of the body of man or other animals, and which does not achieve its primary intended
purposes through chemical action within or on the body of man or other animals and which is not dependent upon
being metabolized for the achievement of its primary intended purposes.”

                                                                                                                       8
receipt of a PMA or 510(k) application, the FDA reviews it and decides whether to allow the

device to be marketed in the US. For devices approved via PMAs, further changes require

different types of supplemental applications (supplemental PMAs), depending on the nature of

the modification. Large-scale changes to the device, such as changes in its indication or

substantial changes in design, require a Panel Track Supplement, which is in effect equivalent to

submitting a new PMA. More modest changes require a 180-day Supplement, and minor

modifications require a Real-time Supplement. In addition, changes in the manufacturing

process must be approved via a 30-day Supplement.

       While the FDA is the primary and most visible player in drug and device safety

regulation, product liability also plays a role in ensuring safety by allowing patients to sue

manufacturers for unsafe drugs or devices and recover damages for any adverse events that they

suffer. Patients can generally sue manufacturers under one of three theories of legal liability.

The first, defective design, allows a patient to sue on the basis that the design of a drug or device

was inherently unsafe. Second, patients can sue for defective manufacturing of an otherwise

safe drug or device. Finally, under the theory of defective warnings, patients can sue by showing

that the firm failed to provide sufficient warning of the possibility of an adverse event if it knew

or shown have known about the risks. Given that the FDA approval encompasses a drug or

device’s safety and the sufficiency of the warnings in the drug label, firms have tried to use FDA

approval as a shield against product liability suits. For drugs, this argument has generally been

accepted by the courts (Garber, 1993), under a widely cited comment included in Restatement

(Second) of Torts, which states that drugs are an example of an “unavoidably unsafe product,” in

other words, drugs are not generally unreasonably dangerous, and the dangers associated with

them are not evidence of defects in the drugs themselves. However, for medical devices, rather



                                                                                                       9
than drugs, design lawsuits are more common, since there is more ability to design a device with

a better safety profile. Since courts have generally held that drug manufacturers cannot be sued

for faulty design, the vast majority of drug lawsuits to date have been for failure to warn, and

here, courts have in general held that FDA approval of the warnings on the label does not

provide a shield against liability lawsuits. Courts have generally held that compliance with FDA

regulations is a minimum standard. Thus, failure to comply with the FDA leaves a firm

extremely vulnerable to lawsuits, but compliance does not shield a firm against lawsuits.

However, it is important to note that the FDA maintains tight control over the information that a

firm can release about a drug, including the release of warnings. For example, the FDA can

prohibit the firm from adding a warning to the product label. Even if the FDA prohibits the firm

from adding a warning, the firm can still be found liable for failing to warn consumers (Garber,

1993; Calfee, 2006). Lawsuits against firms proceed under state laws, and therefore, the

determination of whether the firm knew, or should have known, about a particular risk is based

on state-specific legal standards. If the patient prevails at the trial, he can recover compensatory

damages for the adverse event, as well as punitive damages, if it is found that the firm

intentionally hid evidence from the FDA.

       While estimates of the costs of liability for pharmaceuticals and devices are few, there are

indications that these costs are substantial, especially when viewed as a share of marginal costs.

The latter is an important issue, as from an economic perspective, legal costs will have a larger

effect on welfare when they comprise a large portion of marginal costs. Given that the marginal

costs of drug production are low for drugs, even small legal costs may account for a significant

proportion of marginal costs. A report prepared by the Council of Economic Advisers (2002)

found that in 2000, liability costs across all US industries were $180 billion, or roughly 1.8



                                                                                                    10
percent of GDP. The same report suggested that the inefficiencies from the liability system were

equivalent to the inefficiencies that would occur from a 2 percent increase in consumption taxes,

a 3 percent tax on wages, and a 5 percent tax on capital income.

       There is research suggesting these relative liability costs are even higher for drugs.

Manning (1994) identified liability costs for the diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus vaccine by

comparing changes in the vaccine’s price against changes in the price of the diphtheria-tetanus

vaccine, as the only difference in the vaccines is the pertussis component, which adds a

negligible cost to the production price of the vaccine and was the subject of numerous lawsuits.

Using this approach, Manning found that liability accounted for up to 90% of the price of the

diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus vaccine’s price. In addition, in related work (Manning, 1997),

Manning finds that differences in product liability regimes can explain much of the difference in

the Canadian and US prices of drugs.




                                                                                                  11
Section 3: An Efficiency Analysis of Regulation and Liability of Medical Products

        In this section, we analyze the efficiency effects of pre-emption. Our analysis begins in

with a brief review of standard models of product liability (see Shavell, 2007; Polinsky and

Shavell, 2007 for a review) which concern how post-market legal activities affect firms’ safety

and pricing decisions. It is well known that under perfect information, product liability has no

effect on the level of safety firms provide or social welfare. Thus, the purpose of product

liability is to give firms proper incentives to provide safety when consumers are uninformed. In

addition, product liability helps achieve the optimal quantity in the face of consumer

misinformation by affecting the prices that consumers pay.

        We then add to this model the presence of pre-market regulations governed by the FDA.

We assume that FDA (i) mandates and verifies a minimum safety level which may or may not be

binding given the deterrence effect of product liability and (ii) that FDA generates information

about product quality beyond what is generated under product liability alone. We show that these

aspects of FDA may affect the sign of the efficiency effects of increased liability. Under perfect

information about product quality, neither product liability nor any quality screening activities of

the FDA will raise efficiency so we focus on the case of an uninformed demand side.



3.1. The Framework

Consider when marginal are constant and for a given level of safety s are given by

                                                                          (1)

where       is the marginal cost of production that rises in safety and         is the marginal cost of

legal costs that falls in safety. Our notion of safety s is extremely flexible, and can accommodate


                                                                                                     12
a wide variety of specifications. For example, s could refer to a vector of drug characteristics,

such as the safety of the drug itself, as well as the adequacy of warnings about the drug. For the

informed consumer, the inverse demand curve            is given by a component of a perfectly safe

drug,      less the expected harm he faces given the drug’s safety         , plus the damages he

expects to receive.



The demand curve adopts the form

                                                                    (3)

showing that the informed consumer treats the expected harm as a tax and the expected damages

received as a subsidy. Social welfare is therefore given by


                                                                    (4)


While damage payments          do not directly enter the equation for social welfare, as they

simply represent a transfer payment from firms to consumers, they may indirectly affect social

welfare through their effects on price p and therefore the quantity consumed          .



3.2. The Neutrality of Product Liability Under Perfect Information

        With perfectly informed consumers, the firm chooses the level of safety the maximizes its

profit function, given by

                                                                          (5)

It is easy to show that with perfect information, damages do not affect the firm’s safety

provision. Although damages enter into the firm’s cost function, they also increase the

consumer’s valuation for the good by an equivalent amount. Therefore, in choosing the optimal

                                                                                                    13
safety level, the firm ignores the effect of damages on marginal costs and demand and simply

chooses the safety level that equates the marginal revenue of increased safety with the marginal

cost. Moreover, while damages raise the firms’ costs and therefore price, they have no effect on

output since consumers are aware in advance of the damages they receive. Thus, under perfect

information, liability has no effect on social welfare or the firm’s provision of safety.



3.3. Product Liability with Uninformed Consumers

         Given that product liability and the FDA cannot have any welfare enhancing effects in

the case of perfectly informed consumers we consider the case where consumers are uninformed.

We assume that consumers under-estimate4 the harm of the product and are uninformed of

damages so that the inverse demand curve is simply                  . Under these assumptions, the firm’s

profit function is given by

                                                                                      (6)

The first order condition for the optimal level of safety under product liability, denoted                   , is

then given by

                                                                      (7)

This simply states that the firm chooses the level of safety that minimizes costs through equating

increased costs of production with reduced liabilities. Social welfare is now given by


                                                                               (8)


which stands in contrast to social welfare under perfect information in that the total quantity

consumed is now determined by the uninformed demand curve                         .

4
 Clearly, if consumers over-estimate harm, this would strengthen our arguments, as in this case quantity is already
undersupplied.

                                                                                                                    14
        The effect of product liability on welfare is twofold. In terms of product quality, it gives

firms incentive to provide safety by forcing them to internalize the costs of safety—clearly, they

would have no such incentives in the absence of product liability with uninformed consumers.

Second, for a given level of safety, product liability affects quantity as shown in Figure 1. This

figure plots the uninformed demand curve         , the cost of production     , the firm’s marginal

cost            , and the social cost of the good which is the cost of production plus the expected

harm,              . The socially optimal consumption level occurs when price equals social cost

(point A). However, in the absence of product liability, consumption occurs where price equals

the marginal cost of production (point B). As shown in the figure, product liability therefore

acts as a Pigouvian tax that reduces overconsumption by having consumers internalize the

expected harm (point C). Indeed, optimal consumption is attained by setting damages            equal

to expected harm        so that points C and A converge.




                                                                                                     15
                          Figure 1 – Welfare Under Product Liability




3.4. Product Liability with the FDA

       The previous section discussed the traditional efficiency role of product liability to give

firms incentives to provide levels of safety by facing firms with the social cost associated with

unsafe products. To extend our analysis to incorporate the FDA, suppose that the agency

mandates and monitors a minimal level of safety denoted          . For example this minimum level

of safety could refer to product design, manufacturing practices, or the adequacy and timeliness

of warnings about adverse effects. With the addition of the FDA, there are now two possibilities.

If the level of safety the firm chooses to provide under product liability is higher than the level

mandated by the FDA, then the firm will continue to provide the safety level         and in this case,


                                                                                                      16
the addition of the FDA has no safety-effects. However, if      is less than    , then the firm

will provide the minimal level of safety enforced by the FDA. We refer to the latter case as a

situation where the FDA mandated level of safety is binding on firms. Thus, if product liability

alone, perhaps through imperfect enforcement or under-estimation of risks, does not give firms

sufficient incentives to provide safety, the addition of the FDA can improve safety if the FDA

mandates a level of safety higher than what firms would choose to provide under product

liability alone.

                   Figure 2 – Welfare under Product Liability and the FDA




                                                                                                  17
         In the face of a binding FDA, the effects of product liability on safety and output are now

different. If the FDA’s regulations are binding, then by definition product liability has no

additional effect on the firm’s provision of safety. The effects on output are shown in Figure 2.

We assume that the FDA verifies safety and provides information prior to marketing so that

patients are informed about safety but not about the damages they receive5. In that case, the

demand curve for the good                 is the uninformed demand curve                shifted down by the

expected harm h(s), and the socially optimal level of consumption occurs where the informed

demand curve meets the marginal cost of production (point E). As shown in Figure 2, product

liability in the face of the FDA now leads to an inefficiently low level of output (point D). When

consumers are uninformed, product liability acts as a Pigouvian tax that serves a social benefit by

pricing in the expected harm of the drug. However, when the FDA provides safety information

prior to marketing product liability simply serves as an additional tax that reduces output with a

dead-weight loss. The presence of the FDA therefore affects the sign of the impact on efficiency

by increased liability.



3.5. The Welfare Effects of Pre-emption

The pre-emption doctrine, as described in the introduction, would allow FDA approval to shield

firms from lawsuits based on state law. In effect, the doctrine would set legal costs                       equal to

zero if the firm provided safety at least as high as the FDA mandated level. To analyze the effect

of a product liability exemption on welfare, consider Figure 3 below, where the x-axis shows the

level of safety s and the U-shaped curve                is the firm’s costs. The optimal choice of safety



5
  Note that even if consumers are informed about safety, if they are uninformed about damages, then the legal
regime d(s) will affect the firm’s safety provision, since damages raise the firm’s costs without affecting consumers’
valuation of the good.

                                                                                                                   18
chosen by the firm      is the bottom of        (point A), where the marginal cost of producing

safety equals the marginal benefits in terms of reduced liability costs. Under a regime that

lowers product liability, the cost curve shifts to      , which differs from the initial cost curve in

two dimensions. First, costs are lower under         , since firms pay lower liability costs.

Second, with the reduced liability, the optimal level of safety is reduced to      . The firm’s costs

are therefore given by point B.

       Figure 3 – Product Liability Exemption and Social Welfare: non-Binding FDA




       The level of safety mandated by the FDA,          , may lie to the left or to the right of the

level of safety induced by liability    , depending on whether FDA safety levels are binding.

Consider the first case, as shown in figure 3. In this case the level of safety mandated by the

                                                                                                        19
FDA is not binding on firms, so they will provide safety      in the absence of a product liability

exemption and        with the exemption. In this case, the welfare effect of the exemption is

ambiguous, as the exemption lowers marginal costs and price, but also safety.

       On the other hand, suppose that the safety mandated by the FDA lies to the right of       ,

as shown in Figure 4. In this case, the level of safety mandated by the FDA is binding on firms,

they will provide      with or without the reduced level of liability. In this case, the pre-

emption raises welfare by lowering marginal costs from point C to point D, while having no

effects on safety.

         Figure 4 – Product Liability Exemption and Social Welfare : Binding FDA




                                                                                                 20
        This analysis suggests that the pre-emption doctrine has the potential to increase welfare

in the case where the presence of the FDA is binding on firms. Intuitively, product liability in

general affects welfare by inducing firms to provide safe drugs and by raising prices, thereby

reducing overconsumption by uninformed consumers. When the level of safety mandated by the

FDA is binding, the agency mitigates the beneficial effects of product liability. Since the level of

safety is binding, product liability has no additional effect on safety. And since consumers are

informed, there is no need for a tax to reduce overconsumption. Since the agency’s actions

duplicate those of product liability, the latter simple acts as a tax that raises prices and

inefficiently restricts access. It is worth reiterating that two components of FDA regulation drive

this result. The first is that the FDA verifies and therefore informs consumers about safety. As

previously discussed, with uninformed consumers, price increases due to product liability may

actually be socially desirable, but with informed consumers these price increases reduce welfare.

The second is that under the FDA, consumers are still uninformed or at least underestimate the

damages the receive, so that price increases from product liability actually reduce output.

        Several additional points are worth noting. First, since our discussion makes no

assumptions on whether the level of safety chosen by the FDA is first- or second- best, our

fundamental result holds: as long as the FDA mandated level of safety is binding, liability

reductions will increase welfare, regardless of whether the FDA’s choice is socially optimal.

Second, product liability serves as a form of forced product insurance by raising price for all

patients and compensating those who suffer harm. The effect of a removing product liability,

therefore, is to eliminate this source of insurance for patients, which could reduce welfare if

patients are risk averse. However, this loss could be averted if it is possible for patients to

purchase insurance from third party providers or the government, as in the case of the vaccines,



                                                                                                   21
which we discuss in the next section. Moreover, to the degree that the liability system

inefficiently compensates patients—for example, because of high legal and administrative costs,

patients may be better off self insuring or obtaining insurance through third parties.




                                                                                             22
Section 4: A Case Study of Recent Drug Liability Limitations

        In this section, we consider a case study of the price- and safety effects of the National

Vaccine Injury Compensation Program, which sharply reduced vaccine manufacturers’ legal

liability by creating a patient compensation fund supported by excise taxes on vaccine users.

As discussed in the previous section, if FDA regulations are binding on vaccine makers, then a

product liability exemption could reduce prices without affecting safety. Since the National

Vaccine Injury Compensation Program shielded vaccine makers from the larger liability risk

before the program, it serves as a useful case study of whether a product liability exemption

would impact price and safety. Section 4.1 provides background on the program, while section

4.2 details our analysis.

4.1: Background on the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program

        Vaccines are credited with sharply reducing morbidity from several diseases, such as

pertussis, polio, and tetanus (CDC, 1996). Currently, vaccinations for diphteria, pertussis,

tetanus, measles, mumps, rubella, and polio are required for children attending kindergarten or

middle school in all 50 states, and most states require vaccinations against hepatitis B and

varicella zoster (chicken pox) virus as well. In addition to these required vaccines, several

optional vaccines also exist for childhood and adult diseases, such as Hepatitis C and influenza.

        Although vaccines are generally safe, as with all drugs, there is the potential for adverse

side effects. For example, the pertussis vaccine (typically given in combination with vaccines

for diptheria and tetanus) has long been associated with severe neurologic illnesses such as

convulsions (Manning, 1994; CDC, 1996), while more recently, there has been controversy over

the association between thiomersal, a preservative used in many vaccines, and autism.6 Prior to


6
 While the IOM, AMA, CDC, and FDA have stated there is no causal link between thiomersal and autism, to date,
over 5,000 claims relating to autism have been filed with the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program.

                                                                                                           23
the passage of the National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act in 1986, patients could sue vaccine

manufacturers by alleging manufacturing defect, failures to provide proper warnings to the

physician or patient, and/or failures to provide for safer alternatives (Ridgway, 1999). These

lawsuits appear to have been substantial in the amount of damages relative to sales. For

example, between 1980 and 1986, vaccine lawsuits alleged a total of $3.6 billion in damages

(Davis and Bowman, 1991).

        Concerns that lawsuits might lead vaccine manufacturers to exit the market, or reduce the

supply of vaccines led Congress to pass the National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act in 1986,

which established the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (NVICP) on October 1,

1988. The NVICP requires payment of an excise tax for the vaccines covered, which funds a

pool of money, the Vaccine Injury Trust Fund, used to compensate victims of adverse events.

Prior to 1998, excise taxes were set at the estimated level of liability costs. For example, the

excise tax for the diptheria-pertussis-tetanus vaccine, which contains the pertussis component

associated with neurologic disease and lawsuits, was $4.56, compared to only $0.06 for the

diptheria-tetanus vaccine. In 1998, the program was changed so that all vaccine recipients pay a

common excise tax of $0.75 per dose7 to fund the Vaccine Injury Trust Fund. If a patient suffers

an adverse reaction after vaccination, he must first file a claim with the NVICP before

proceeding to civil litigation against the vaccine manufacturer. In order to receive compensation,

the patient’s claim must establish that the vaccine caused the adverse event. Alternatively, the

NVICP also maintains a table of vaccines, associated adverse effects, and time periods. If the

patient’s adverse effect is listed on the table and occurs within the specified time period,

causality is presumed and the patient is entitled to compensation.


7
 A dose is defined per disease, so combination vaccines, count as more than one dose. For example, the excise tax
for the Measles-Mumps-Rubella (MMR) vaccine is $2.25, since it counts as having three doses.

                                                                                                               24
       Claims with the NVICP are decided by Special Masters of the Court of Federal Claims.

Patients who are found to have suffered an adverse event that was caused by a vaccine are

entitled to recovery of damages for medical and other expenses, such as lost earnings. However,

in the case of death, payments to the patient’s estate are limited to $250,000; this cap also applies

to pain and suffering damages. As long as the claim meets certain minimal standards, legal

expenses up to $30,000 are reimbursed, regardless of the Special Master’s decision. Acceptance

of the Special Master’s decision forecloses future legal claims against the vaccine manufacturer.

If a patient disagrees with the decision, he can proceed to sue the manufacturer, but is barred

from utilizing several approaches, such as lawsuits based on failures to warn.

       The above description of the NVICP applies to patients who received a vaccine from

1988 onwards, and generally applies to patients who received a vaccine prior to 1988, with a few

differences. First, patients who received a vaccine prior to 1988 are allowed to bypass the

NVICP and proceed directly to civil litigation. However, if they choose to file a claim with the

NVICP, they must have done so by January 31, 1991. In addition, they face a limit of $30,000

for attorney’s fees, pain and suffering, and lost income. Instead of an excise tax, payments to

these patients are funded by general revenues.

       Table 1 provides a brief summary of the economic costs of the program. For several

vaccines, the table lists the CDC price per dose which is the price available to organizations

receiving CDC grant funds, such as state health departments, as well as the private sector price

which is the price mandatorily reported by the manufacturer to the CDC. Table 1 also reports the

excise tax for each vaccine which is fairly small relative to the private sector price for most of

the vaccines.




                                                                                                     25
                    Table 1 – Prices and Excise Taxes for Selected Vaccines, 2010

                                           BRAND         CDC                     PRIVATE SECTOR
    DISEASE                                NAME          PRICE/DOSE              PRICE/DOSE                TAX
                                                   Childhood
    Diptheria/Pertussis/Tetanus            Tipedia           $13.25                     $23.05             $2.25
    Diptheria/Pertussis/Tetanus/
    Polio/Hepatitis B                      Pediarix              $48.75                 $70.72             $3.75
    Hepatitis A                            Havrix                $12.75                 $28.74             $0.75
    Hepatitis B                            ENGERIX B             $9.75                  $21.37             $0.75
    Measles, Mumps, and Rubella            MMRII                 $18.30                 $48.31             $2.25
                                                    Adult
    Hepatitis A                            Havrix                $20.59                 $63.10             $0.75
    Hepatitis B                            ENGERIX-B             $26.70                 $52.50             $0.75
    Diptheria/Tetanus                      None                  $13.25                 $18.23             $1.50

    Influenza                              Fluzone                $8.15                  $9.72             $0.75

    Notes: Prices shown are as of January 12, 2010. Source: CDC Vaccine Price List, accessed at
    http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/vfc/cdc-vac-price-list-archives.htm on February 1, 2010


           Table 2 provides summary statistics on inflation adjusted payments made by the NVICP

between FY 1989 and FY 2009. The first column shows award amounts and attorney’s payments

for claims that were compensated by the NVICP, while the second column shows attorney’s

payments for claims dismissed by the NVICP. Between FY 1989 and 2009, the NVICP paid out

a total of nearly $2.4 billion for 4,581 claims. However, as previously noted, the NVICP

reimburses legal costs even for dismissed claims, as long as minimal standards are met, so not all

of these payments were made for successful claims against the Program. For compensable

claims, the average award was roughly $1 million, of which roughly $36,000 was used for

attorney’s fees.8 The program paid an average of roughly $23,000 for attorney’s fees associated

with dismissed claims.




8
  We previously stated that the NVICP caps attorney’s fees at $30,000 in nominal terms; the reason why this average
is higher is due to discounting and adjusting for inflation.

                                                                                                                 26
      Table 2 – Summary Statistics on Payments Made by the NVICP, FY 1989-FY2009

                                       COMPENSABLE CLAIMS                      DISMISSED CLAIMS
Total Number of Payments               2,355                                   2,226
Total Payments                         $2,411,085,611                          $51,794,790

Average Payment per Claim              $1,023,815.55                           $23,268

Average Award per Claim                $988,019                                N/A
Average Attorney’s Fee per             $35,795                                 $23,268
Claim
Notes: All dollar amounts are in 2008 dollars. Source is January 20,2010 statistics report from the National Vaccine
Injury Compensation Program, available at http://www.hrsa.gov/vaccinecompensation/statistics_report.htm.



4. 2: The Price and Safety Effect of the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program

        Table 3 shows the nominal excise tax for each vaccine between 1988-1996 and the

nominal price of the vaccine in 1988. Recall that between 1988 and 1996, the excise taxes for

each vaccine were set to represent expected liability costs. Thus, Table 3 suggests significant

variation in vaccine liability. The DT and OPV vaccines appear to have had low legal exposure,

as excise taxes comprised between 3 to 8% of the 1988 prices. Conversely, the measles, mumps,

rubella, MMR, and DTP vaccines appear to have had higher legal exposure, as the excise taxes

accounted for 19-41% of their 1988 prices.

                                          Table 3 – Vaccine Excise Taxes

                                                                                          EXCISE
                                              1988-1996 EXCISE              1988         TAX(% OF
                  VACCINES                           TAX                   PRICE          PRICE)
           Measles                                  $4.44                   $13.79         32%
           Mumps                                    $4.44                   $15.26         29%
           Rubella                                  $4.44                   $14.24         31%
           MMR                                      $4.44                   $23.23         19%
           DTP                                      $4.56                   $11.03         41%
           DT                                       $0.06                    $0.78         7.7%
           OPV                                      $0.29                    $8.67         3.3%
           Notes: Prices shown are in nominal (1988) dollars. Source: Source: CDC Vaccine Price List,
           accessed at http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/vfc/cdc-vac-price-list-archives.htm on
           February 1, 2010


                                                                                                                 27
           Expanding on the work of Manning (1994), we begin by examining the prices of the DT

and DTP vaccines before and after the NVICP. Comparing the prices of these two vaccines is

particularly helpful, since they are essentially similar except for the Pertussis component of the

DTP vaccine, which was the subject of numerous lawsuits over neurological adverse events. As

Manning (1994) discusses, the prices of the DT and DTP vaccines were quite similar prior to

1982, when lawsuits were rare. For example, in 1975 one dose of DTP cost 76 cents and one

dose of DT cost 74 cents, a difference that remained largely unchanged up until 1982. However,

after 1982, when the number of lawsuits for adverse events for the Pertussis component began to

rise sharply, the price of the DTP vaccine increased significantly compared to the price of the DT

vaccine. Since the two vaccines are otherwise similar except for the presence of the Pertussis

component and had similar prices prior to 1983, Manning (1994) interprets the post-1982

difference in the prices of the two vaccines as the cost of liability for the Pertussis component.

At its peak in 1986, the difference in the price of the two vaccines was $14.58, and liability costs

accounted for nearly 96 percent of the DTP vaccine’s price.

           Figure 5 plots the prices, net of excise taxes, for the DT and DTP vaccines between 1975

and 1995.9 Prices from 1975 through 1986 are Blue Book and Red Book wholesale prices

collected by Manning (1994) who did not collect data after the NVICP program was

implemented. To assess the time trend surrounding this program, from 1987 and beyond, we

used private-sector vaccine prices reported by drug manufacturers and published by CDC. We

chose 1995 as the end date because DTP prices were no longer available past this point, as the

vaccine was replaced with the DTaP vaccine, a safer version of the DTP vaccine which uses an

acellular form of the Pertussis pathogen. Figure 5 suggests that not only did prices of DTP rise
9
    We performed similar analyses using prices inclusive of excise taxes; the results are similar to those shown here.

                                                                                                                     28
with increased liability but they also fell after the introduction of the National Vaccine Injury

Compensation Program in 1988, with the price (net of taxes) falling from $11.78 in 198810 to

$7.73, a 34% decrease.         Since price of the DT vaccine slightly rose during the same period, the

fall in the price of the DTP is likely due to changes in liability, as opposed to changes in the costs

of production or increased competition.

                     Figure 5 - Prices for the DTP and DT vaccines, 1975-1995




Notes: All values shown are in 2008 dollars. Sources described in text.

         As shown in Figure 6, in addition to the DTP vaccine, the measles, mumps, rubella and

MMR vaccines also appear to have faced high liability, given that that the excise tax accounted

for a large percentage of each vaccine’s price. Figure 6 plots the time series of the (net of tax)

prices for each vaccine. As with the DTP vaccine, we find that the NVICP substantially lowered


10
  As stated in section 4.1, the NVICP took effect late in 1988, so we use the 1988 price as the last price prior to the
program’s introduction.

                                                                                                                     29
vaccine prices from their 1988 highs, with decreases ranging from 22% for the mumps vaccine to

31% for the measles vaccine. Taken together, Figures 5 and 6 suggest that the prices for heavily

litigated vaccines fell significantly following the NVICP. As controls, Figure 7 plots the time

series of prices (net of excise taxes) for two less heavily litigated vaccines, the DT and OPV

vaccines. In contrast to the other more heavily litigated vaccines, we find that prices for these

vaccines actually increased or stayed constant following passage of the NVICP, suggesting that

the observed price decreases for heavily litigated vaccines were not due to other factors such as

changes in market conditions.

     Figure 6 - Prices for the Measles, Mumps, Rubella, and MMR Vaccines, 1975-1995




Notes: All values shown are in 2008 dollars. Sources described in text.

        With information about the demand for vaccines, standard methods can be used to

estimate the welfare gains from these price reductions induced by reduced liability. Specifically,



                                                                                                    30
consider when demand function has a constant price elasticity, so that the inverse demand

function is


                                                                           (9)


where     is the elasticity of demand and             is a shifter of demand based on safety s. With this

demand specification can easily be shown that increase in welfare from a z percent reduction in

price is given by

                                                                    (10)

                     Figure 7 - Prices for the DT and OPV Vaccines, 1975-1995




Notes: All values shown are in 2008 dollars. Sources described in text.

        We consider an elasticity of 1.25, based on Philipson and Sun (2008). They utilize patent

expiration evidence (Grabowski and Vernon, 1992; Berndt, Cockburn, and Griliches, 1996;


                                                                                                        31
Caves, Whinston, and Hurwitz, 1991), which implicitly estimates the demand elasticity for drugs

by from supply-induced price-reductions from patent expiry. This elasticity of demand differs

from the co-pay elasticity of demand estimated by others (Goldman, Joyce, and Karaca-Madic,

2006; Goldman, Joyce, and Zheng, 2007), because the latter is the elasticity of demand from

patients who already have insurance, and only need to pay their insurance co-pay for the drug.

Our elasticity of demand is the elasticity of demand facing the manufacturer, which takes into

account the demand for health insurance itself and other factors as well.

         Given an elasticity of 1.25, Figure 8 shows the social surplus increases (                     from

equation 10) for the DTP vaccines, based on prices decreases from their peak values in each year

of the NVICP. Overall, we find that the NVICP has substantial effects on consumer and

producer surplus by lowering vaccine prices. For example, our results suggest that in 1995, the

DTP vaccine was 34% lower than its pre-NVICP price, suggesting an increase in social surplus

of 11%.

         Although Figure 8 shows that the NVICP likely had large effects on social welfare by

reducing prices and increasing access, these gains must be balanced against any reductions in

vaccine safety. There are two margins along which the NVICP may have affected safety. The

first is on vaccines marketed before the program’s implementation. Since the design of these

vaccines did not change after the program, there was likely no change in safety for those

vaccines.11 Thus, the NVICP appears to have unambiguously raised welfare in the case of the

vaccines discussed above.




11
  This concerns design effects. If there are safety issues in manufacturing that are affected by liability, they may be
affected after the product has been invented.

                                                                                                                     32
                 Figure 8 – Effect of NVICP on Annual Social Surplus, 1989-1995




Notes: All values shown are in 2008 dollars. Source is author’s calculations, as described in text.




         The second margin is on vaccines marketed after the program’s implementation, as the

NVICP may have given firms incentives to market less safe vaccines. As one approach for

looking at this issue, we examined the incidence of reported adverse events to the vaccines listed

in Table 4. These vaccines were chosen because they comprise the recommended list of

vaccinations for children, as given by the CDC. Table 4 also reports the recommended ages of

administration for each vaccine, and the date each vaccine entered the market.

         To estimate the incidence of adverse events, we used the Vaccine Adverse Event

Reporting System (VAERS), which has collected reports on adverse events from immunizations

since 1990. The VAERS consists of self-reported incidents of adverse events, from vaccine



                                                                                                      33
manufacturers (42%), health care providers (30%), state immunization programs (12%), patients

(7%), and other sources (9%). It is important to reiterate that these events are self reported, and

that VAERS makes no effort to identify whether the vaccine actually caused the adverse event.

Table 5 shows the total number of adverse events reported to VAERS for each vaccine between

1990 and 2006. To obtain the incidence, we divided the number of adverse events by the total

number of children in the recommended ages during the periods for which the vaccine was

available, using US Census data on population estimates by single years of age between 1990

and 2006. Since the Census only reports population by single years of age, we rounded the

recommended ages listed in Table 4 up to the nearest whole year.

         Overall, our results suggest that the newer vaccines are not less safe than vaccines

introduced prior to the NVICP. For the five vaccines introduced prior to the NVICP, the mean

number of adverse events per 100,000 doses is 15.4 (s.d. 10.8), while for the eight vaccines

introduced after the NVICP, the mean probability of an adverse event is 9.28 (s.d. 9.03).

Although the incidence of adverse events is slightly lower with the newer vaccines, the

difference between the groups is not statistically significant (p<0.2).




                                                                                                  34
                Table 4 – Incidence of Adverse Events for Childhood Vaccines, 1990-2006

                                                                                             NUMBER
                                                                                                OF
                                                            NUMBER           TOTAL
                                                                                             ADVERSE
                       YEAR OF         RECOMMENDED             OF         POPULATION
   VACCINE                                                                                    EVENTS
                    INTRODUCTION           AGES             ADVERSE         AT RISK
                                                                                               PER
                                                             EVENTS        (MILLIONS)
                                                                                              100,000
                                                                                              DOSES
                                   Vaccines Introduced Prior to NVICP
    DTP                   1950               <=6yrs           20,221            465                4.35
  Poliovirus              1964           2-15mos, 4-6y        23,574            332                7.10
  Hepatitis B             1981             <=18mos            29,741            199                19.0
 Haemophilus
                          1985              <=15mos           37,822            199                14.9
      B
    MMR                   1987         12-15mos, 4-6y        41,866             133                31.6
                                    Vaccine Introduced After NVICP
                                       Children 6mos-
    Influenza           Annually                             28,203            1,262               2.23
                                             18y;
    DTaP                  1994              <=6yrs           34,760             412                8.43
   Varicella              1995         12-15mos, 4-6y        28,407             94                 30.4
Pneumococcal
                          2000             <=15 mos           13,268            166                7.99
 (Conjugate)
Meningococcal
                          2001               11-12y            1,150            20                 5.68
   Vaccine
  Hepatitis A             2005             12-24mos            6,699            98                 6.85
  Rotavirus               2006              6-14wks             710             36                 1.98
   Human
                          2006               11-12y             429              4             10.78
Papillomavirus



       Overall, then, our analysis suggests that the NVICP has not resulted in more dangerous

vaccines. However, it is useful to note several limitations to our analysis. First, as described

above, the VAERS may not provide a completely accurate measure of the number of adverse

events. On the one hand, VAERS may understate the true number of adverse events, since it the

data is self-reported; however, since VAERS makes no attempt to verify whether a vaccine did

cause a reported adverse event, it may also overstate the true of events. In addition, our measure

of the total population at risk includes only the number of children who were at the

recommended age for the vaccine. This value may understate the true number of patients


                                                                                                    35
receiving the vaccine to the degree that vaccinations are delayed and therefore received at later

ages. Conversely, this approach may understate the number of patients taking the vaccine if

compliance is not perfect. However, to the degree that these shortcomings equally affect the

vaccines in our sample, they would not significantly affect our results. Overall, then, we find

that the NVICP likely increased welfare by lowering prices, without affecting safety.

       An additional benefit of the NVICP is that it may have compensated patients more

efficiently than the product liability system. First, data from Manning (1994) and the NVICP

itself suggest that the program did not, on average, reduce compensation to persons suffering

vaccine injury. According to Manning (1994), between 1980 and 1985, prior to the passage of

the NVICP, the average amount paid for vaccine injury claims was $420,185 (in 2008 dollars).

As shown in Table 2, since the NVICP, the average amount paid per compensated claim is

roughly $1 million. While we cannot exclude the possibility that the nature of injuries and the

probability of receiving compensation may have changed over time, these findings provide some

evidence that compensation to injured patients has not fallen as a result of the NVICP.

Moreover, Manning (1994) estimates that prior to passage of the NVICP, the cost of

compensating a patient $1 cost firms between $7-$22 in legal/administrative costs. By contrast,

between FY 1989-FY2009 the NVICP compensated patients a total of $2.3 billion while paying

out roughly $140 million in attorney’s costs. While not definitive, since this latter figure leaves

out the administrative costs of running the NVICP as well the legal costs associated with any

cases that did go to trial, these findings suggest that the NVICP compensated patients more

efficiently than the product liability system.




                                                                                                    36
Section 5: Concluding Remarks

       Our analysis examined the value of liability reductions in the presence of FDA

regulations to ensure medical product safety. When one mechanism dominates the other in

providing safety then there may be efficiency gains in eliminating the second. We argued that

this may be the case in medical product safety when FDA safety levels are binding on firms so

that reductions in liability do not affect safety but lowers prices and hence expand output and

access to medicines. We discussed qualitative evidence for a case study of the National Vaccine

Injury Compensation Program which suggested that prices but not safety fell after the

government reduced liability. Although pre-emption is an obvious example of liability

reduction, and one which has been the subject of recent Supreme Court decisions, it is useful to

point out that our theoretical results also extend to other forms of liability reduction, such as caps

on punitive damages and damage caps.

       The fact that the NVICP program displayed these safety and price patterns is consistent

with other observations that the level of safety mandated by the FDA is binding on

manufacturers. First, because firms seldom exceed the safety investments required by the FDA,

such as performing more clinical trials than what the agency demands (Garber, 1993). Second,

trials in which a firm is alleged to have violated FDA standards or misled the FDA are rare

(Garber, 1993). Given the strong possibility that the FDA mandates a higher level of safety than

firms would be willing to provide under product liability alone, our analysis suggests that the

adoption of the pre-emption doctrine could significantly increase welfare by reducing prices.

       Our analysis stresses the substitutability between FDA and liability and therefore

suggests the lowest cost substitute to minimize costs. There are two other reasons why FDA may

be the best substitute to minimize costs. The first is that the ex-ante regulations of FDA may



                                                                                                   37
tradeoff the safety of a product with the adverse R&D effects it may have by lengthening the

time and cost to bring a product to market. Ex-post court decisions are unlikely to take into

account this tradeoff at all. This is particularly true with lay juries who are spending other

peoples’ money to compensate victims of product failures ex-post with any deliberation about

the R&D effects involved. The second argument against government provided product liability

is that the market can, and often does, provide warranties by itself if welfare enhancing. Product

liability is essentially a mandatory warranty that the market has chosen not to provide, and it is

not clear what market failure this mandatory warranty solves.

        Recent policies and court decision have tended towards reducing firms’ legal liability.

For example, the recent inclusion of the pre-emption doctrine in the Federal Register, as well as

the Supreme Court’s decision in Riegel v. Medtronic , which upheld the doctrine in the case of

medical devices, represent recent legislative and executive branch policies that reduced firms’

liability. However, in Wyeth v. Levine, the Court ruled 5-4 that preemption does not apply to

pharmaceuticals. While there may or may not be good legal justification for applying pre-

emption to medical devices and not to pharmaceuticals, our analysis suggests that the economic

rationale for doing so is less clear.

        There are several useful extensions to our analysis which we believe are of further

interest. First, we examined the impact of safety regulation on static efficiency. Since regulation

affects firms’ profits and therefore their incentives to invest in R&D, further work should also try

to determine what types of regulatory regimes maximize dynamic welfare taking into account

innovation incentives. For example, in the case of the NVICP, firms may have had less incentive

to invest in safety for a given vaccine, since the Program reduced their legal liability. However,

by lowering costs and increasing profits, the Program may have increased R&D efforts more



                                                                                                     38
generally. It may also be the case that vaccine R&D may be less responsive to reductions in

liability compared to other markets, such as drugs and devices, because vaccine manufacturers

operate in a monopsony market and therefore face lower profits. Second, further work should

attempt to further quantify the discussed welfare gains from pre-emption. The model we

developed suggests that potential welfare gains are larger when liability accounts for a

significant fraction of marginal costs. Given that drugs and vaccines are typically thought to

have low marginal costs of production, it likely that even small legal costs can account for a

significant fraction of overall marginal costs. The larger are the price reductions from pre-

emption, the larger gains in access and welfare. Third, it would be interesting to examine the

interplay of the FDA and product liability in affecting off-label drug use, such as whether firms

may be less likely to invest in off-label studies, if doing so leads to increased liability exposure.

Lastly, we did not discuss the potential complimentary roles of FDA and product liability, in

which different forms of product safety is enhanced by the two different public interventions.

For example, liability may make up for poor enforcement of the FDA. When there are such

complementarities pre-emption will still lead to price reductions but may now also induce a

reduction in safety.

       Overall, we hope that future theoretical and empirical analysis will better address the

rationales for the dual nature of safety regulation and enforcement by governments around the

world, and increase our understanding of when it adds costs larger than the benefits compared to

using one form alone or compared to using the market itself.




                                                                                                    39
                                    References

Berndt, E., Cockburn I., and Griliches, Z. 1996. “Pharmaceutical Innovations and Market
       Dynamics: Tracking Effects on Price Indexes for Antidepressant Drugs.” Brookings
       Paper on Economic Activity, Microeconomics, 1996: 133-199.

Calfee, J. 2006. “Striking a Balance : Drug Labeling and the FDA.” AEI Online,
        available at http://www.aei.org/publications/pubID.23868/pub_detail.asp.

Calfee, J. 2008. Written Testimony before the United States House of Representatives
        Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, May 14.

Calfee J., Berndt E., Hahn R., et al. 2008. Amicus Brief to the Supreme Court in Wywth v.
       Levine

Caves, R., Whinston, M., and Hurwitz, M. 1991. “Patent Expiration,
       Entry, and Competition in the U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry.” Brookings Papers on
       Economic Activity, Microeconomics, 1991:1-61.

Goldman, D., Joyce, G., and Karaca-Mandic, P. 2006. “Varying Pharmacy Benefits with
      Clinical Status: The Case of Cholesterol-Lowering Therapy.” American Journal of
      Managed Care 12(1):21-38.

Goldman, D., Joyce, G., and Zheng, Y. 2007. “Prescription Drug Cost-Sharing: Associations
      with Medication and Medical Utilization and Spending, and Health.” JAMA 29(1):61-69.

Grabowski, H., Vernon, J., and Thomas, L. 1978. “Estimating the Effects of Regulation on
      Innovation: An International Comparative Analysis of the Pharmaceutical Industry.”
      Journal of Law and Economics, 21(1): 133-163.

Curfman, G., Morrisey, S., and Drazen, J. 2008. “Why Doctors Should Worry About
      Pre-emption.” New England Journal of Medicine 359:1-2.

Davis, T., Bowman, C. 1991. “No-Fault Compensation for Unavoidable Injuries: Evaluating the
       National Childhood Vaccine Injury Compensation Program.” University of Dayton Law
       Review 16(2):277-321.

Garber, Steven. 1993. Product Liability and the Economics of Pharmaceuticals and Medical
       Devices. RAND Report R-4285-ICJ, RAND, Santa Monica, CA.

Glantz L., and Annas, G. 2008. “The FDA, Pre-emption, and the Supreme Court.” New
       England Journal of Medicine 358(18):1883-1885.




                                                                                            40
Kessler, D. and Vladeck, D. 2008. “A Critical Assessment of the FDA’s Efforts to Preempt
       Failure-to-Warn Claims.” Georgetown Law Journal 96:462-495.

Manning, R. 1994. “Changing Rules in Tort Law and the Market for Childhood Vaccines.”
      Journal of Law and Economics 37(1):247-275.

Manning, R. 1997. “Product Liability and Prescription Drug Prices in Canada and the United
      States.” Journal of Law and Economics 40(1):203-243.

Philipson, T. J. and Sun, E. 2008. "Is the Food and Drug Administration Safe and Effective?"
       Journal of Economic Perspectives 22(1): 85-102.

Polinsky, A.M. and Shavell, S. 2007. “Public Enforcement of Law.” In Handbook of Law and
       Economics, ed. A.M. Polinsky and S. Shavell. Elsevier.

Ridgway, D. 1999. “No-Fault Vaccine Insurance: Lessons from the National Vaccine Injury
      Compensation Program.” Journal of Health Politics, Policy, and Law 24(1):59-90.

Shavell, S. 2007. “Liability for Accidents.” In Handbook of Law and Economics, ed. A.M.
       Polinsky and S. Shavell. Elsevier.

United States Centers for Disease Control (CDC). 1996. “Update: Vaccine Side Effects,
       Adverse Reactions, Contraindications, and Precautions.” Morbidity and Mortality
       Weekly Report 45:no. RR-12.

United States Council of Economic Advisors. 2002. Who Pays for Tort Liability Claims? An
       Economic Analysis of the U.S. Tort Liability System. Washington, D.C.




                                                                                               41
