NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTEGRATING RETIREMENT MODELS
Alan L. Gustman
Thomas Steinmeier
Working Paper 15607
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15607

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2009

This paper was supported by a grant from the National Institute on Aging, 5 R01 AG024337. All opinions
and views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views or opinions
of either the National Bureau of Economic Research or of the National Institute on Aging.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Alan L. Gustman and Thomas Steinmeier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Integrating Retirement Models
Alan L. Gustman and Thomas Steinmeier
NBER Working Paper No. 15607
December 2009
JEL No. C61,D31,D91,E21,H55,I3,J14,J16,J26,J32
ABSTRACT
This paper advances the specification and estimation of models of retirement and saving in two earner
families. The complications introduced by the interaction of retirement decisions by husbands and
wives have led researchers to adopt a number of simplifications to increase the feasibility of estimating
family retirement models. Our model relaxes these restrictions. It includes the extended choice set
created when each spouse makes an independent retirement decision. It also includes the full range
of complexity found in dynamic-stochastic models of retirement decision making, so far analyzed
only in the context of single earner households. Retirement outcomes include full retirement, partial
retirement and full-time work. Reverse flows from states of lesser to greater work are also included.
The preference structure incorporates heterogeneity in time preference, varying taste parameters for
full-time and part-time work, and the possibility of changes in preferences after retirement. The opportunity
set reflects the full range of nonlinearities created by pensions and Social Security. Financial returns
are stochastic. Exogenous shocks such as layoffs are also included. Estimation is based on data from
the Health and Retirement Study.
The solution method is based on backward induction. We show that this method is superior to a method
based on a Nash equilibrium, providing plausible behavioral predictions when Nash equilibrium criteria
fall silent.
In contrast to some recent studies, the findings suggest the flow of wives into the labor force in the
last few decades has probably reduced the amount of husbands’ work. The model also provides plausible
responses to various policies. For example, we find that any effort to promote opportunities for partial
retirement as a means to increase overall work is likely to be unsuccessful as any induced decline in
full retirements is offset by a decrease in full-time work.

Alan L. Gustman
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
ALAN.L.GUSTMAN@DARTMOUTH.EDU
Thomas Steinmeier
Department of Economics
Texas Tech University
Lubbock, TX 79409
thomas.steinmeier@ttu.edu

I. Introduction
As the baby boomers begin to swell the ranks of the retired and increase demands on our
retirement programs, retirement behavior and retirement saving are becoming an even more
central concern of policy makers. Researchers and policy makers must fully understand
retirement behavior if they are to determine how rules and regulations governing the Social
Security system and private pensions influence retirement and saving outcomes, program
participation and costs, and the welfare of retirees.
Researchers continue to make progress toward a comprehensive econometric model of
retirement and saving. Our aim in this paper is to make contributions on two levels. First, we
contribute to the analysis of retirement and saving at the family level by introducing a level and
complexity in the decision making of each spouse not found in previous work. Second, we bring
together into a model of family retirement details regarding the choice set, preferences and
constraints previously found only in models of retirement in one earner households, and typically
not found together in a single model, even of one earner households.
Among the features in our family retirement model: 1. Outcomes include full-time work,
partial retirement and full retirement. 2. People are forward looking in their decision making. 3.
Saving and retirement are jointly determined. 4. The analysis is structural. It specifies separately
the preferences and constraints guiding each individual’s behavior. 5. Saving and retirement are
modeled on the assumption that one cannot borrow on future income or Social Security. Thus
liquidity constraints are incorporated into the analysis. 6. There is heterogeneity in time
preference. This means that the response rates to future rewards from wages or from postponing
Social Security or pension claiming differ among members of the population. It also means,
consistent with the distribution of wealth, that some will be well prepared for retirement and

1

others poorly prepared. 7. There are two utility functions, two decision makers, and one budget
constraint. Each spouse makes his or her own decisions. However, the decisions are made with
awareness of the other spouse’s decision making, preferences and opportunity set, implications
for the income and wealth of the household, for joint consumption, and for the welfare of the
spouse. 8. In this specification, the solution to the model is not as obvious as in the case with a
single (unitary) utility function. Household decision making is solved through backward
induction. We show that this set up often provides different results from a solution based on a
Nash equilibrium. That is, the Nash equilibrium, which assumes that each spouse takes the
decision of the other spouse as given, is not always equivalent to methods in which the choice of
each spouse takes into account the possible responses of the other spouse. For example, when
decisions arrived at independently by each spouse, including awareness of the responses of their
spouse, would leave both spouses worse off, the husband and wife are assumed to avoid this
outcome. 9. The interactions of the decisions of each spouse are fully integrated into the
estimation procedure. 10. The analysis is dynamic, following retirement outcomes from full-time
to part-time work and or retirement, and following saving over the life cycle. 11. The analysis is
stochastic. People may reduce their work effort over time, then subsequently increase it. Some
people may return to the labor force after retiring fully, or increase their hours of work after
partially retiring, as circumstances change, with some events foreseen and others not. Others may
change their decisions as they realize they have made an error, or as decisions of husbands and
wives interact in ways that have not previously been analyzed. 12. Incentives from pensions and
Social Security are included on an individual basis for each individual in the sample. The
analysis includes the effects of the very sharp, nonlinear incentives from defined benefit pensions
that still account for two thirds of the pension wealth of those on the cusp of retirement. To do

2

this, the estimation makes use of linked data in calculating the opportunity set, including detailed
pension plan descriptions obtained from employers and Social Security records. It does not use
typical or representative pension incentives. 13. There are minimum hours constraints at work.
Many jobs typically held in the prime working years and paying higher wages require full-time
work or none at all. Partial retirement is not allowed on the main job unless specified. 14. The
wage offer depends on tenure and on hours of work. Typically when one leaves a full-time job,
the wage offer drops substantially, as it often does for part-time work. 15. Layoffs are
incorporated in the analysis.
The paper contributes to the analysis of decision making at the family level. Alternative
rankings of husbands and wives among the many potential outcomes are modeled. This involves
a richer array of outcomes than has been considered in earlier models of family decision making.
Each spouse decides on full, partial or nonretirement, the path to be taken in future years, the
implications for the behavior of the spouse and responses to changes in that behavior.
Econometric estimation of this model is based on the Health and Retirement Study. The
resulting model is sufficiently detailed to facilitate policy analysis, allowing researchers to
change the specification of the equations representing the incentives created by Social Security,
pensions, labor market opportunities, including the availability of partial retirement or spouse
employment opportunities, and other constraints on individual behavior. With this model it is
possible to judge the determinants of retirement and saving behavior, and to estimate the likely
effects on both retirement and saving of those at different parts of the income and wealth
distribution.
We have conducted simulations to highlight important interdependencies that are lost in
models that ignore the interaction of decisions reached by husbands and wives. For example,

3

given a certain juxtaposition of preferences, higher wealth at the beginning of the period, all
other things being equal, may cause the work effort of one of the spouses to increase, even if the
work effort of the other spouse remains the same. This is contrary to the usual implication from a
unified model where a pure wealth effect should cause a decline in labor supply. Interactions
between the decisions of husbands and wives also may induce a path where labor supply is first
reduced, then increased.
In a longer paper of the same title written for the National Institute on Aging, we have
included simulations of the effects of a number of policy initiatives, including increasing the
early entitlement age to Social Security, the effects of the trend from defined contribution to
defined benefit plans, and a loss in assets of 25 percent, simulating the effects of the recent
recession. To limit the length of this paper, the empirical analysis focuses on a detailed
description of decision making at the household level. Simulations are then presented to
highlight the unique features of the model.
Section II highlights the many gaps in the retirement literature that have motivated the
present study. Section III presents the stochastic, dynamic model of retirement where previously
omitted dimensions of retirement and saving are included in an econometric model of decision
making by the two earner family. The decision process in the two earner family is explored in
Section IV. Data and estimation are discussed in Section V. Section VI presents a number of
counter intuitive simulations designed to highlight the importance of specifying the full set of
interactions in the two earner family. Section VII concludes. Two appendices have been posted
with this working paper on the NBER web site. Appendix 1 describes the construction of the
variables used in this study. Appendix 2 explores a number of issues encountered in estimating
time preference from information on asset levels and retirement.

4

II. Gaps in The Retirement Literature
Among the various dimensions of behavior that a retirement model should explain, a first
requirement is that it explain the major flows among the various retirement states, including
reverse flows. 1 In the process, it must also explain such major features of the retirement hazard
as the spikes in retirement at ages 62 and 65. Second, the model should explain the joint
distribution of retirement by husbands and wives. Retirement data clearly show that couples
coordinate their retirement decisions. 2 A third requirement is that model outcomes are consistent
with the wealth accumulated for retirement by each household.
The majority of empirical retirement studies are reduced form or quasi reduced form.
The dependent variable typically is some measure of retirement or labor force activity.
Independent variables include a measure of incentives affecting labor-leisure choice, including
some type of pension and/or Social Security delta, measuring the change in the present value of
benefits if retirement is postponed. Typically these models assume that individuals are forward
looking (Coile and Gruber, 2000). Consequently, decision makers consider not only the

1

Gustman and Steinmeier (1984) and Maestas (2010, forthcoming) provide detailed descriptive
data documenting the various flows among retirement states.
2

Couples coordinate their retirement despite age differences and differences in incentives to
retire (Hurd, 1990; Gustman and Steinmeier, 2000b, 2004; Maestas, 2001; and Michaud, 2003).
A general overview of bargaining within the family is provided by Lundberg (1999).
Bourguignon, Browning and Chiappori (2006) discuss decision making at the family level,
including the inconsistencies between the data and parameters estimated for a unified model in
which a single utility function is used to describe the consumption and labor supply of the
family. For a nonparametric analysis of the determinants of household consumption that focuses
on the problems of a unitary model in analyzing household consumption, but restricts the sample
of couples to those that are fully employed and thus does not include an analysis of the
determinants of labor supply, see Cherchye, De Rock and Vermeulen (2009).
5

immediate change in benefits from postponing retirement (or benefit claiming), but also the
option value of being able to continue at work.
One important limitation of reduced form models should be noted. They are unable to
explain a key feature of the retirement hazard, the spike in retirements at age 62. It is not that the
authors are unaware of the importance of the spike in retirement. Reduced form models often
include age specific dummy variables on the right hand side of a retirement equation. The
coefficient on a variable indicating the individual is age 62 is typically highly significant and
very large. This coefficient estimate indicates the height of the retirement spike and age 62, but it
does not explain the spike. The problem is that as soon as Social Security benefits become
available at age 62, those with high time preference claim their benefits. Because the Social
Security benefit structure is actuarially fair, the changes in the present value of benefits with
retirement typically included in reduced form retirement equations are zero. Nor can a reduced
form equation with an age dummy at 62 be used to analyze the effects of changing policies that
have generated the spike. More generally, reduced form models confound the effects of
unmeasured preferences with the economic incentives created by retirement programs, limiting
the ability to predict the likely effects of policy changes on retirement outcomes.
A related approach uses difference-in-difference analysis to analyze the effects of
changes in government programs. Krueger and Pischke’s (1992) analysis of the effects of the
notch in Social Security on retirement is a well known early example. In cases, where there are
no unmeasured differences between the control group and the experimentals that affect
retirement, the difference-in-difference analysis will successfully indicate the effects of the
change being studied on retirement. However, this approach is not useful for analyzing the likely
effects of new and untried policies, such as raising the Social Security early entitlement age.

6

In view of inability of reduced form equations to explain the key features of retirement
outcomes and the related limitations of reduced form difference-in-difference analyses,
researchers have continued working to improve structural retirement models. These models
incorporate the separate influences of preferences and elements of budget constraint, including
incentives shaped by Social Security and related retirement policies. 3
Although the specifications of structural models are much more complex than reduced
form equations, most structural models rely on simplifying assumptions to facilitate estimation.
Unfortunately, in many cases these simplifications are not innocuous. As we will see,
oversimplification frequently limits the ability of the model to explain key characteristics of
retirement behavior. Even worse, oversimplification sometimes confounds various causes and/or
creates biased estimates.
Many structural retirement models ignore partial retirement and/or the complexity of
retirement dynamics. 4 Some models include partial retirement but ignore reverse flows
(Gustman and Steinmeier, 1986a), while other include retirement dynamics, but ignore partial
retirement. For example, while Blau and Gilleskie (2006) pay a great deal of attention to the
dynamic structure of the dependent labor market status measure, Cutler, Liebman and Smyth

3

The strength of reduced form studies is that they do not impose a rigid structure, so
they are not subject to the kind of specification error that can affect the interpretation of key
parameters in a structural model. Moreover, there is a fear that identification of structural models
is based on functional form. As will be seen when we discuss our estimated model, however,
estimation is based on many very different moments, while a standard specification is used for
the utility function, greatly loosening the relation between identification and the form of the
utility function. Moreover, identification is to a large part determined by nonlinearities in the
budget constraint caused by retirement programs. These nonlinearities are estimated from
original pension documents obtained from employers, as well as from Social Security rules.
4
An important early study by Berkovec and Stern (1991) included reverse flows in their
analysis. That study ignored the role of pensions, as described below.
7

(2006, p. 19) note they make a trade-off by eliminating partial retirement as an option in the
model.
Another major problem is that until recently, structural models of retirement did not
explicitly consider the joint determination of retirement and wealth. Saving was something that
went on in the background and parameter estimates did not take account of the level of wealth
accumulated by the household. These shortcomings were addressed by Rust and Phelan (1997),
who estimated a structural model that jointly considered retirement and saving. But they greatly
oversimplified the budget constraint by assuming that capital and insurance markets were
inoperative. French (2005) estimates a model with joint saving and retirement, a line of research
that continues in French and Jones (2004). Van der Klaauw and Wolpin (2006) also make a very
useful contribution in their joint analysis of retirement and wealth.
However, these and other structural models continue to oversimplify the relation
between retirement and saving. For example, French (2005) assumes the same time preference
parameter for all individuals. As Cutler, Liebman and Smyth (2006) note, “French’s approach
does not allow for heterogeneity in preferences or heterogeneity in the data generating process
for the state variables. Moreover, French uses non-separable preferences that constrain the
income and substitution effect of an increase in wage levels to cancel.”
Returning to the complex retirement variable, as Gustman and Steinmeier (2005) show, a
model must be able to explain the spikes in retirement observed in the data at ages 62 and 65, as
well as the very wide distributions of wealth at each level of lifetime earnings. 5 However, other
simplifications found in recent contributions to the structural retirement literature also

5

Gustman and Steinmeier (1999) and Venti and Wise (1999) demonstrate the extent to
which asset accumulation varies among those who have the same lifetime earnings.

8

importantly affect the ability of the model to reproduce retirement and wealth outcomes. For
example, Van der Klaauw and Wolpin (2006) allow for heterogeneity in the consumption
parameter, but not in the time preference rate. Heterogeneity in the consumption parameter is not
sufficient to simultaneously generate a reasonable wealth distribution and a spike in retirement at
age 62. Unless there is some arbitrary parameter in the utility function at age 62, we are
essentially back to the same problem that plagues the reduced form option value model.
Some investigators who recognize the important effects of simplification resort to
estimating for limited subsamples to avoid having to include certain complexities in their
models. For example, a researcher whose model cannot address nonlinearities, such as those
created by discontinuities commonly found in defined benefit pension formulas, may limit the
sample to those who do not have a defined benefit pension. Rust and his colleagues (in BenitezSilva et al., 1999 and Benitez-Silva et al., 2004) limit the sample to exclude those who are
covered by a pension. Van der Klaauw and Wolpin (2006) eliminate from their sample those
who have a DB plan on their current job, as well as those who had a DC plan at any time. French
(2005) uses summary measures of pension incentives rather than the individual accrual profiles
relevant to the particular observation. Bound et al. (2006) assume, counterfactually, that all
defined contribution assets and nonpension wealth are paid out as an annuity. In addition, they
do not allow saving in their model. As a result, all payments are assumed to be immediately
consumed and there is too rigid a linkage between the timing of income, including the assumed
timing of income from assets, and the timing of expenses. Resulting parameter estimates are
highly unlikely to be representative of the population values, especially since a large majority of
couples approaching retirement age who are covered by a pension continue to be covered by a
defined benefit pension plan (Gustman, Steinmeier and Tabatabai, 2010a).

9

Gustman and Steinmeier (2005) models the joint determination of retirement and wealth,
while Gustman, Steinmeier and Tabatabai (2010b) allows reversals of flows from states of
greater to lesser retirement. These studies are able to reproduce spikes in the retirement hazard of
appropriate size at ages 62 and 65. However, these papers take the retirement decision of the
spouse to be exogenous.
Some retirement studies include the effects of joint retirement decision making of
husbands and wives, but most do not. Most studies include families, both those with
single earners and those including two earners, but they either ignore spouse earnings, or
if included treat spouse earnings as exogenously determined. For example, Bound et al.
(2006) confine their estimation to single individuals, and thus do not deal with
interactions between spouses at the level of the family.
Turning now to studies that do focus on joint retirement decision making, some models
such as Coile (1999) are clearly reduced form. They will be of only limited help in policy
analysis, and the parameters estimated cannot be directly related to the deeper parameters from
the utility function and separated from the elements of the budget constraint.
There are a few structural studies of the determination of retirement within the
household. To simplify analysis to make room for considerations arising at the family
level, the studies currently available do not include many of the advances found in
structural retirement models of the behavior of individuals. For example, Gustman and
Steinmeier (2000) focuses on the joint determination of retirement, but the analysis does
not include partial retirement, reverse retirement flows, or the joint determination of
saving. In the absence of consideration of the joint determination of household wealth
together with the retirement decisions of each spouse, the models lose their ability to

10

generate the key spike in retirement at age 62. Blau and Gilleskie (2006) pay a great deal
of attention to the dynamic structure of the dependent labor market status measure, but
again do not include saving or related behavior. Other studies of retirement suffering from
these or related limitations include Blau (1997, 1998) and Michaud (2003). Gustman and
Steinmeier (2004), a model that jointly addresses retirement and saving decisions in a
family context, nevertheless ignores partial retirement.
Once independent decision making is allowed within the context of a family
model, it is useful to consider the various ways in which the retirement decisions of
spouses may be related. Gustman and Steinmeier (2000) estimate the separate effects of
correlation in budget constraints, correlation in preferences, and dependence of
preferences of one spouse on the retirement status of the other.
A simple model for analyzing the retirement dates of the two individuals assumes
a household utility function which is a weighted average of the utility functions of the two
spouses. Blundell et al. (2001) uses a static, working life framework. There is no saving,
and the emphasis seems to be on the issue of whether consumption is private to the two
spouses or public between them. The analysis considers the relative weight in the decision
process given to each spouse. In this setting, the problem reverts to maximizing a single
function with respect to the budget constraint. The weights can be variable, as in Maestas
(2001), where the weights depend on the responses of the two spouses to questions
relating to which spouse has more influence on the financial decisions of the household. 6

6

Blundell et al. (2001) use weighted utility functions, but in this model (and unlike Maestas) the
weights have an unobserved effects component. Since they eventually linearize virtually
everything, this does not have serious consequences, but it would introduce some large
difficulties in a more structural environment.
11

The weighting model can reproduce joint retirement in approximately the right amounts.
However, the weighting model does not reproduce the spike in retirements at age 62.7
Consider another simplification in the basic specifications adopted in these
models. In modeling retirement within the family, Maestas (2001) attempts to distinguish
the effects of correlated preferences from bargaining power within the family and
introduces information from the HRS on the relative influence of each spouse on decision
making within the family. However, she assumes that husbands respond to leisure
complementarity while the wife does not, a relationship that should be a product of her
analysis.
The models of family retirement also simplify their treatment of pensions. Even
though employer provided pension data are very useful in identifying the sources of
incentives independently affecting the behavior of husbands and wives, most family
retirement models do not include the separate incentives of pension plans held by each
spouse. Thus this important source of identification is not available to studies that
eliminate those with a pension from the sample, or who use files with imputed pension
wealth that by design cannot catch the nonlinearities creating the spike in DB accrual
profiles at early retirement age (e.g., Cutler, Liebman and Smythe, 2006). Taking an
analogous approach, Maestas (2001) throws out observations with DB plans so she can

7

Note that it is in general never optimal for the standpoint of one spouse to have the remaining
spouse retire earlier, since this does not increase the utility of the first spouse’s retirement and
only reduces the income available for consumption. Since weighting means that the retirement of
each spouse is in effect a compromise between the desires of the two spouses, it tends to
eliminate the spikes in retirement that would otherwise be apparent. In our attempts to estimate
the model using weighted functions, the retirement spikes of the two spouses were small
fractions of 1 percentage point. Thus while we expect interdependence of spouse decision
making to reduce the age 62 spike somewhat, and to spread retirements to other years, using a
weighted function reduces the age 62 spike much too much, virtually eliminating it.
12

ignore the pension spikes, losing an important potential source of model identification
between husbands and wives in the process. Michaud (2003) also ignores the spikes in
accruals. Turning once again to Maestas (2001), she also assumes there is a perfect capital
market and that one can freely borrow from Social Security and pension wealth. Once the
assumption of perfect capital markets is relaxed, as discussed previously, it is important to
allow for heterogeneity in time preference, something none of these models allows.
Gustman and Steinmeier (2000, 2004), precursors to the current paper, provide an
exception.
All of these efforts by previous researchers have contributed to our understanding
of joint retirement behavior within the household, and suggest a number of basic
conclusions. They provide an important foundation for ongoing analyses. But the extent
of omissions and simplifications creates doubt about the reliability of their findings. To
address the remaining questions, we turn to a more comprehensive specification of the
family retirement model, and attempt to estimate it using all of the information available
in the HRS for describing retirement and saving behavior.
III. The Dynamic, Stochastic Model
The utility functions of the two spouses are fairly standard functions of consumption (a
public good within the household) and labor supply over the lifetime. For the husband, the
lifetime utility function is give by:

Uh =

⎡ −ρt
⎢e
∑
t =0 ⎣
T

3

∑s

m =1

m, t

(

1
α

)

⎤
h
C αm,t + e X t β h + ε h VLh (Lht , Lwt ) ⎥ .
⎦

In this function, Cm,t is consumption at time t in survival state m, where m is an indicator
whether both spouses are still living at time t, only the husband is living at time t, or only the

13

wife is living. sm,t is the probability that the household will be in state m at time t. Lht and Lwt

are the leisure amounts of the husband and wife, respectively, at time t, and VLh is the value of
leisure to the husband. Note that the value of leisure to the husband may depend on the amount
of leisure of the wife in the same period. The exponential form preceding VLh is a multiplicative
factor for the value of leisure. It consists of a standard linear form Xβ plus an individual effect
ε which reflects the strength of the husband’s preferences for retirement over work. The
elements of X contain a constant, age, and health status. As age increases, work gradually
becomes more onerous and retirement more desirable. When the utility of retirement exceeds the
utility of consumption from the income earned from work, retirement occurs.
Leisure can take on three values associated with full-time work, partial retirement, and
full retirement. The value of retirement for the husband can be modified if the wife is also
retired. For the case where the wife is working full-time, the basic value of leisure VLh for the
husband is normalized to zero if he is working full-time, unity if he is fully retired, and VPh if
he is partially retired. Note that if leisure is a normal good, which we assume that it is, the value
of VPh should fall between one-half and one if partial retirement is equated with approximately
half-time work. The closer the value is to one, the greater the value of partial retirement is
relative to full retirement, and the more frequently and longer should be the spells of partial
retirement.
The model allows for the value of retirement to be increased if the husband prefers to
spend time with the wife, and the wife is also retired. In the case without partial retirement, this
can be accomplished simply by adding a term to the Xβ linear form that has whether the spouse
is retired as an additional variable. With partial retirement, however, the picture is a little more
complex. The general idea is that the wife’s retirement adds to the utility of the husband’s
14

retirement only up to the point of the husband’s retirement. If the husband is partially retired, it
doesn’t matter whether the wife is fully retired or partially retired, since the additional leisure of
the wife if she is fully retired doesn’t add anything to the husband’s leisure during the time that
the husband is at work. If the husband is fully retired, however, it does make a difference
whether the wife is partially retired or fully retired, since only the part of his leisure that he
shares with the wife is augmented. If the augmentation factor is g, the values of the function
VLh as a function of its two arguments can be written as follows:
Husband’s Retirement Status

Wife’s
Retirement
Status

Full-Time Work
Partial Retirement
Full Retirement

Full-Time
Work

Partial
Retirement

0
0
0

VPh
g VPh
g VPh

Full
Retirement
1
g VPh + (1 - VPh )
g

If the husband is working full time, he doesn’t have any leisure, and the value of the
leisure is zero regardless of the retirement status of the wife. If the husband is partially retired,
the value of leisure is VPh if the wife is working full-time, and this gets multiplied by a factor of
g if the wife is working at least part time. If the husband is fully retired, the value of leisure is
unity, and this again gets multiplied by a factor of g if the wife is also fully retired. If the wife is
partially retired, then we can divide the husband’s leisure into two parts. The partial retirement
leisure has a value of VPh , and this gets multiplied by g because the wife is also partially
retired. The remaining leisure has a value of 1 - VPh , but this leisure does not get multiplied
because the wife is not there for this leisure. The total value of the husband’s leisure is the sum
of these two parts.
The utility function of the wife is symmetric:
15

Uw =

⎡ −ρt
⎢e
∑
t =0 ⎣
T

3

∑s

m =1

m, t

(

1
α

w

C αm,t + e X t

βw + εw

)

⎤
VLw (Lht , Lwt ) ⎥
⎦

Where the superscripts and subscripts w refer to the wife’s utility and leisure. The budget
constraint for the family is given by the asset evolution equation:
A t +1 = (1 + rt ) A t + (1 − Lht ) Wth + Bht + (1 − Lwt ) Wtw + B wt + I t − C m,t

All quantities in the equation are measured in real terms. Assets, which are constrained to be
non-negative, grow at the real interest rate rt. The second term on the right side is the husband’s
earnings, and the fourth term is the wife’s earnings. The third and fifth terms are the husband’s
and wife’s pension and Social Security benefits, respectively. Although not indicated by the
notation, these benefits depend on the past work and retirement decisions. In the case of Social
Security, these can even depend on the past work and retirement decisions of the spouse. The
term It is any inheritances that the household may receive, and the last term is household
consumption. Note that consumption is dependent on the survival state of the household, and that
the budget constraint must hold regardless of the mortality experience.
The stochastic structure of the model is as follows. The real interest rate rt is stochastic
and is assumed to come from the actual distribution of asset returns, as documented by Ibbotson.
The time periods in this model are annual, and we assume that asset returns are uncorrelated over
time, which is approximately the case. The time preference parameter ρ is assumed to be
heterogeneous over the population of households, and we treat the value of this parameter as
being a fixed effect whose value is estimated for every household in the population. 8 The

8

It would be preferable to allow time preference to have separate values for each of the two
spouses. However, allowing for separate time preference parameters for each spouse within the
household would introduce enough additional complexity to preclude our being able to estimate
the model.
16

mortality outcomes reflected in the underlying the survival state probabilities sm,t are also
considered stochastic.
The two epsilon terms in the linear forms multiplying leisure, εh and εw, are considered
to come from normal distributions with a mean of zero and standard deviations of σh and σw,
respectively, and with a correlation parameter ρε. These terms allow husbands and wives to have
different preferences for leisure vs. work, and the correlation allows for the possibility that one
reason that the spouses in households may retire at about the same time is that the two spouses
share the same attitudes toward leisure vs. work. For estimation purposes, the initial values of
these two epsilon terms are treated as random effects. After the individual first leaves full-time
work, the value of leisure may suffer an unanticipated change. For instance, it may fall if the
individual finds that leisure is not as pleasurable as anticipated. This may provide one reason
why individuals return to work after retirement. To provide for this possibility, the model allows
the value of the epsilons to change over time after the initial retirement, with correlation
parameters over time of ρh and ρw for the husband and wife, respectively. We considered the
possibility that the spouses might anticipate that the values of leisure might change after
retirement, but this led to problems that are discussed in Appendix 2. As a result, the model
assumes that these changes are completely unanticipated.
The final stochastic elements, which are stochastic from the estimator’s point of view but
not from the individual’s point of view, are the values of partial retirement, VPh and VPw . These
h

h

are assumed to come from an exponential distribution f ( VPh ) = c e γ t VP defined over the
interval 0.5 to 1, where c is a factor necessary to make the integral of the distribution over the
allowable range equal to 1, as must be the case for all distributions. The higher γ ht , the greater

the probability that the husband’s value of VPh will be close to 1, which would make it more
17

likely that he will go through a period of partial retirement. Conditional on employment, the
probability of partial retirement increases with age. Accordingly, we allow the value of γ ht to
increase with age according to the equation γ ht = γ oh + γ1h a ht , where a ht is the husband’s age
at time t. We characterize the husband’s relative preference for partial retirement as not
changing. Consequently, the model assumes that the husband’s relative position within this
distribution does not change even as the entire distribution changes to higher values of VPh . The
values VPh for the wife are treated in a symmetric way.
The sequence of events in the model is as follows. In every period, the couple starts with
a level of assets. If the husband was still in his career job in the previous period and if that job
had a defined contribution pension, he may also have a given level of defined contribution
pension assets. If he was not in the career job in the previous period but had a defined benefit
pension in that job, he may also have a pension benefit amount, which may or may not be
currently collectable. The same situation with regard to pension amounts also applies to the wife.
Further, the household may be eligible to collect a given level of Social Security benefits, either
currently or sometime in the future. Given their current situation, the spouses make their
decisions as to what their retirement status (working full-time, partial retirement, or full
retirement) will be during the current period, and how much they will save or spend down from
their accumulated assets. At the end of the current period, a random draw is taken from the
distribution of asset returns, and assets plus any defined contribution amounts are assumed to
grow at that rate of asset returns. One of the spouses may die, causing a transition between the
survival states. Depending on the retirement status decisions made in the current period, the
amount of future defined benefit pensions and Social Security amounts may also be increased.

18

The model assumes that before age 50, the spouses are working at whatever their
earnings were before age 50. After age 70, the spouses are assumed to be retired. These
assumptions are made in order to reduce computational burden somewhat. Between ages 50 and
70, the spouses make their decisions about working full-time, partially retiring, or fully retiring.
With two utility functions, two decision makers, and one budget constraint, the solution of the
model is not as obvious as in the case with a single utility function. The mechanism by which
they make these decisions is relatively complex and is described in detail in the next section.
Note that if one of the spouses is below 50 years of age or above 70, and the other is within the
50 to 70 age range, only the spouse within the age range will need to make a work/retirement
decision. At all ages, however, decisions are made as to how much to consume, given income in
the current period and the assets owned when the couple entered the period.
The number of state variables depends on what period of life the spouses are in, and
whether they are still in their career jobs. For all ages, one of the state variables is the amount of
accumulated assets. Below age 50, the primary additional state variable is the amount
accumulated in defined contribution pension plans, if the career job had these kinds of pensions.
Up to age 70, each spouse has a value of ε, which relates to the preference for work vs.
retirement. After age 70, ε is irrelevant, since past that age individuals are presumed to be retired.
Between ages 50 and 70, the most important state variable is whether each spouse is still in his or
her career job. If so, the associated state variable is the amount in the defined contribution plan.
If the spouse has left the career job, there are two state variables associated with pensions and a
third associated with Social Security. One pension variable relates to the level of pension
benefits, and the other is a binary variable related to whether the individual can currently receive
the benefits or must wait until a later date, as would occur if the individual had left the career job

19

before becoming eligible for early retirement benefits. The Social Security variable is one of a
pair of such variables (one for the husband and one for the wife) that define the level of joint
Social Security benefits that the couple is eligible for. The pension and Social Security variables
are initially set at the point the individual leaves the career job. For the pension variable, this
value is adjusted downward over time, since few pensions are fully indexed for inflation. For the
Social Security variable, the value for future periods may be increased if the individual returns to
full-time work or engages in partial retirement work, an increase that is due either to a reduction
in the early reduction amount or an increase in the delayed retirement amount. However, the
amount of the Social Security value that may be collected in the current period may be reduced if
the individual works either full-time or part-time and the earnings from that work exceed the
earnings test limit of Social Security. Past age 70, the pension amounts (except for the inflation
erosion) and the Social Security amounts are fixed at their levels at age 70.
In the estimations and simulations, all continuous variables (assets, the epsilons, pension
and Social Security amounts) are broken down into a vector of discrete amounts. If required, any
amount between these discrete amounts is interpolated.

IV. The Decision Process
This section describes the process by which, in each period, the husband decides how
much he will work and the wife decides how much she will work. Each spouse is cognizant of
the possibility that their own decision may influence the decision of the spouse, and they take
account of these ramifications in making their own decision. Since these decisions are being
made in a backwards induction framework, it is assumed that the spouses have already calculated
how their current decisions will affect their future decisions.

20

A. Joint Decisions with a Work/Retirement Choice.
To begin this analysis, it will help to look first at a framework where each spouse is
deciding either to work full time or retire. This leaves the analysis of partial retirement until later
in the section. In such a framework, the joint decision result has four possibilities: both spouses
work; both spouses retire; the husband works and the wife retires; and the husband retires and the
wife works. These possibilities can be represented by the following grid:
Husband’s Decision
Work

Retire

Wife’s

Work

A

B

Decision

Retire

C

D

Thus, decision B is for the husband to retire and the wife to work, and similarly with the other
alternatives.
Both the husband and the wife have utility values associated with each of these
alternatives. Let U hB be the husband’s utility if the wife works and the husband retires. This
utility will include the utility of decisions in future periods, given the income and consumption in
the current period and any restrictions that the current decision to work places on future
decisions. For instance, the decision to be retired in the current period may mean that in any
future periods the wage rate for full-time work will be lower than if the husband had continued in
his career job. Similarly, U Cw would denote the wife’s utility if she retires and the husband works
full time.
If U hA < U hB , it means that the husband prefers to retire, given that the wife is working
full-time. If U Ch > U hD , it means that the husband prefers working full-time, give that the wife

21

is retired. This situation can be represented by drawing horizontal arrows between the
corresponding decision points, as follows:
A

→

B

C

←

D

where the arrows point to the preferred decision between the two choices. If U Aw > U Cw , it
means that the wife prefers working full time to retirement, given that the husband is also
working full-time. If U Bw < U Dw , it means that the wife prefers retirement to working, given
than the husband is retired. The situation for the wife can be represented by vertical arrows
between the corresponding decision points:
A
↑
C

B
↓
D

where again the arrows point to the preferred decision between the two choices. We can
represent the combined preferences for both the husband and the wife by including both sets of
arrows, as follows:
A
↑
C

→
←

B
↓
D

Since it takes four arrows to denote the relative preferences of both the husband and wife,
and since any of these arrows can point in two directions, there are sixteen combinations of
arrows that represent any combination of preferences of the two spouses. These sixteen
combinations may be represented as follows:

22

1.

A → B
2. A → B
3. A ← B
4. A ← B
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
C → D
C ← D
C → D
C ← D
5. A → B
↓
↑
C → D

6. A → B
↓
↑
C ← D

7. A ← B
↓
↑
C → D

8. A ← B
↓
↑
C ← D

9. A → B
↑
↓
C → D

10. A → B
↑
↓
C ← D

11. A ← B
↑
↓
C → D

12. A ← B
↑
↓
C ← D

13. A → B
↑
↑
C → D

14. A → B
↑
↑
C ← D

15. A ← B
↑
↑
C → D

16. A ← B
↑
↑
C ← D

We will analyze each of these combinations in turn. Since the combinations below the main
diagonal of this chart (combinations 5, 9, 10, 13, 14, and 15) are mirror reflections of
combinations above the main diagonal, we need only to analyze the combinations on or above
the main diagonal, and the results can be applied to the mirror images.
1. This is a case where the husband wants to retire, given the wife’s decision, and the
wife wants to do likewise. But the arrows do not take account of the fact that each spouse’s
decision may influence the other spouse’s decision. The husband has two choices: to retire
regardless of the wife’s decision or to wait to see what the wife will do and then decide what he
wants to do as a result. If he retires, he knows that his wife will also retire, and the result will be
combination D. If he waits to make his decision, the decision shifts to the wife. She knows that
if she retires, he will too, and the result will be combination D. If neither one takes the decision
to retire, they will stay at combination A. Thus, the final choice for both spouses is between
combination A and combination D. If either spouse prefers combination D to combination
A, that spouse will retire, and the other spouse will follow, and the final result will be
combination D. But if both spouses prefer combination A to combination D, neither spouse
23

will have the incentive to be the first to retire, and the final result will be combination A, which
both spouses prefer.
2. In this case the husband prefers to retire if the wife works, but to work if the wife
retires. The wife wants to retire, given either decision of the husband. The key to understanding
this case is to compare the husband’s utility of combinations A and C. These are two
combinations where the husband is working, but the wife is either working or retired. Since the
husband is working and the utility value of leisure is zero, whether the wife works or not does
not affect the value of the leisure term in the husband’s utility function. However, if she works,
there will be additional income to the family, and this additional income will increase the
consumption component of the husband’s utility function. Hence, the husband’s utility will be
higher if the wife works, and he will prefer combination A to combination C. Since in this case
the husband prefers combination C to combination D and combination B to combination A, this
gives a strict ordering of the husband’s preferences among the four combinations: B > A > C >
D, where combination B is the most preferred and combination D is the least preferred.
The husband might prefer combination B to combination A, but he knows that if he
retires his wife will certainly follow suit, leaving him with combination D, his least preferred
result. To avoid this, the husband will continue working. The wife knows that the husband will
continue working in any case, so her choice is between combination A and combination C.
According to her preferences, she chooses combination C. Thus, combination C is the final result
in this case.
3. Here, the wife’s preference is to retire, given a retirement decision by the husband. For
the husband, his preference is to do the same thing as his wife does, given her decision. This case
is similar to case 1. The husband knows that if he retires first, his wife will follow, leading to

24

combination D. The wife knows that if she retires first, her husband will follow, again leading to
combination D. If neither retires, they will remain at combination A. The final decision depends
on the relative preferences between combinations A and D by the two spouses. If either spouse
prefers combination D to combination A, that spouse will retire, and the other spouse will follow
suit. If both spouses prefer combination A to combination D, neither spouse will want to be the
first to retire, and combination A will be the result.
4. This is a case where the husband wants to work, given either decision of his wife, and
the wife wants to retire, given either decision of her husband. The husband knows that if he
retires, his wife will too, and combination D will be the result. However, by the same reasoning
as in case 2, the husband will prefer combination A to combination C, and given the preferences
in this case he will prefer combination C to combination D. By transitivity, this means that both
combinations A and C are preferred to combination D, so the husband will not want to be the
first to retire. Given that the husband is continuing to work, his wife’s choice comes down to
combination A or combination C, and given her preferences, she will choose combination C.
Thus, the final result in this case is combination C.
6. In this case, both partners want to do the opposite of their spouse’s choice, given their
spouse’s choice. By the same reasoning as was applied to case 2, the four outcomes can be
ranked by the husband as B > A > C > D, with combination B as the most preferred and
combination D as the least preferred. Symmetric reasoning applied to the wife’s preferences
yields a ranking by the wife of the four outcomes as C > A > B > D, with combination C as the
most preferred and combination D as the least preferred. The ideal situation for the husband
would be for him to retire first. In this case, the best choice for the wife would be for her to
continue working, leading to choice B. This is the best outcome from the husband’s perspective,

25

but only the third choice outcome for the wife. For the wife, her ideal situation is for her to retire
first. If she does this, her husband will continue to work, and the outcome will be combination C.
This is her most preferred outcome, but not so good for the husband.
The incentives for this case are for each spouse to be the first to retire. But if they both
retire, the result will be combination D, which is the worst result for both spouses. We assume in
this case that the spouses cooperate enough that they want to avoid the worst result, and that
neither one retires. This would lead to combination A, which although not the most preferred
outcome for either spouse, is the second choice outcome for both spouses. This avoids a
destructive race to see who can be the first to retire, which risks producing the least preferred
outcome for both spouses.
7. This is a case where the husband wants to do the same thing as the wife, given the
wife’s decision, but she wants to do the opposite of the husband, given his decision. The key to
analyzing this case is to look as the wife’s ordering of the four outcomes. By the same reasoning
as used in case 6 (which is symmetric to the reasoning used in case 2), her ordering of the four
outcomes is C > A > B > D, where C is her most preferred outcome and D is her least preferred
outcome. She knows that if she retires, her husband will follow suit, and the result will be
combination D, which is her least preferred outcome. Thus, she will not want to retire. This
leaves the husband with the choice between combinations A and B, and by his preferences in this
case he will choose not to retire. This leaves the final result in this case as combination A, where
both spouses continue working.
8. Here, the husband wants to continue working, given either choice by the wife, while
the wife prefers to work if the husband retires and retire if the husband works. For the wife, by
the same reasoning used in case 5, the ordering of her preferences is C > A > B > D. If the wife

26

retires first, the husband will continue working, and the resulting combination C will give her the
most preferred outcome. If the husband were to retire first, the wife would continue to work, and
the resulting outcome would be combination B. The final result depends on the husband’s
evaluation of combination B vs. combination C, an ordering that is not a priori determined by the
preferences in this case. If the husband prefers combination C, he may simply let the wife retire
first. If the husband prefers combination B to combination C, the situation reverts to much the
same situation as occurred in case 6. Both spouses will have an incentive to retire first, but if
both succeed in retiring, the result will be combination D. This combination is the least preferred
result for the wife. For the husband, the ordering of the outcomes becomes A > B > C > D, so
that combination D is his least preferred outcome as well. Thus, both spouses would have an
incentive to avoid the consequences of both of them trying to retire first, and both retiring. We
assume that in this case, the spouses cooperate enough that neither of them tries to be the first to
retire, and the resulting outcome of combination A is more preferred by both spouses than is
combination D, which would be the result if both of them tried to retire first and both succeeded.
The final outcome in this case is combination C if the husband prefers combination C to
combination B, and combination A otherwise.
11. In this case, both spouses prefer to do the same thing as the other spouse, given the
other spouse’s decision. The husband knows that if he retires his wife will as well, and the
resulting outcome will be combination D. Symmetrically, the wife knows that if she retires, her
husband will too, with combination D as the result. If neither retires, the result will be
combination A. The final outcome depends on the assessment of both spouses of combination A
relative to combination D. If either spouse finds that combination D is preferable to combination
A, that spouse will retire and the other spouse will follow, with combination D as the final result.

27

If both spouses find that combination A is preferable to combination D, neither will want to be
the first to retire, and the final outcome will be combination A.
12. The preferences in this case indicate that the husband wants to work, given either
decision by the wife, while the wife wants to do the same thing as the husband, given the
husband’s decision. This is perhaps the most complicated of the cases. The husband knows that
if he retires, the wife will also retire, and the resulting outcome will be combination D. If the
husband prefers combination A to combination D, he will want to continue working. Since the
wife will want to continue workings if the husband continues working, the resulting outcome
will be combination A. If, on the other hand, the husband prefers combination D to combination
A, he will have an incentive to retire. If the wife prefers combination D to combination C, she
will allow him to retire, and she will follow, resulting in combination D being the outcome. If,
however, she prefers combination C to combination D, she would want to be the first to retire,
since if she retires first, the husband will continue working. This outcome would also be
preferable to the husband over combination D, so he will refrain from retiring and allow the wife
to retire first. The final outcome will be combination A if the husband prefers it over
combination D. Otherwise, the outcome will be combination D if the wife prefers it over
combination C, and if not the outcome will be combination C.
16. This case reflects a situation where both spouses want to continue working, given
either decision of the other spouse. The husband knows that if he retires first, the wife will
continue to work. This would result in combination B, which the husband finds less preferable
than combination A. Similarly, the wife knows that if she retires first, the husband will continue
to work. For her, the resulting combination C is less preferable than combination A. Thus, both

28

spouses will have an incentive not to retire, and the final result is that both of them will work,
yielding combination A as the result.
These results may be summed up in the following table:
Husband’s Preferences
Wife’s
Preferences
A
↓
C

B
↓
D

A
↓
C

B
↑
D

A
↑
C

B
↓
D

A
↑
C

B
↑
D

A → B
C → D
A if U hA > U hD
and U Aw > U Dw ,
otherwise D

B

A if U hA > U hD
and U Aw > U Dw ,
otherwise D

B

A → B
C ← D

C

A

A

B if U Bw > U Cw ,
otherwise A

A ← B
C → D
A if U hA > U hD
and U Aw > U Dw ,
otherwise D

A

A if U hA > U hD
and U Aw > U Dw ,
otherwise D

A if U Aw > U Dw ,
otherwise D if
U hD > U hB ,
otherwise B

A ← B
C ← D

C

C if U Ch > U hB ,
otherwise A

A if U hA > U hD ,
otherwise D if
U Dw > U Cw ,
otherwise C

A

In the table, the columns represent the husband’s preferences. For instance, the second column
corresponds to the case where U hA < U hB (the husband prefers to retire, given that the wife is
working) and U Ch > U hD (the husband prefers to work, given that the wife is retired). The rows
refer to the wife’s preferences. In several cases, the preferences between working and retiring,
given the retirement state of the spouse, are not sufficient by themselves to determine the
decision, in which case other relationships between the utilities of one or both spouses are
required to ascertain which outcome will be chosen.

29

B. Decisions with Partial Retirement.
The addition of partial retirement introduces a third choice for both the husband and the
wife, but the general method of analysis remains the same. To analyze the choices with partial
retirement, we denote the nine possible outcomes as follows:
Husband’s Retirement State
Working

Partially Retired

Fully Retired

Wife’s

Working

A

B

C

Retirement

Partially Retired

D

E

F

State

Fully Retired

G

H

I

Again, each of these states has a utility value associated with it for both the husband and the
wife. Each spouse knows that the other spouse may react to their decision, and they make their
own decisions with regard to the other spouse’s reactions.
The general approach is similar to the case previously described with only the two
choices of working or retirement. At the beginning of each period each spouse calculates the
utility of retiring, given the other spouse’s reaction. Each spouse then ascertains whether it would
be better to go ahead and retire, given the other spouse’s reaction, or continue working and
allowing the other spouse to make the decision either to continue working or retire. If both
spouses conclude that they are better off working, or if only one spouse concludes that it is in his
or her interest to retire first, then those decisions determine the final outcome. If each spouse
concludes that it is in his or her interest to be the first to retire, then there is a possible conflict in
the decisions that is in need of resolution.
To be more specific, consider the case of the husband deciding whether to be the first to
retire. If he initially retires fully, then the wife must decide, given the husband’s decision to retire

30

fully, whether to continue working, to partially retire, or to retire fully herself. Call the utility
value of the resulting combination U hFR , which indicates the final utility if the husband makes
the initial decision to fully retire. An alternative is for the husband to initially retire partially. In
that case, the wife must again decide whether to continue working, to retire partially, or to retire
fully. If she decides to retire partially, that corresponds to combination E on the diagram above.
But the repercussions may not stop there. In response to her decision to retire partially, the
husband may decide to retire fully as a result, and it is possible that this may further induce the
wife to retire fully. The analysis from combination E may be done in the same fashion as the
two-by-two analysis done previously, considering only the combinations E, F, H, and I. From E,
any of these combinations are possible as each spouse decides whether it is in his or her best
interest to retire fully, given that both spouses are at least partially retired. An alternative for the
wife is that she may decide to retire fully, given that her husband has partially retired. In this
case, she takes into account that her husband may decide to retire fully if she does. Given the
possible reactions of the husband, then, the wife compares the utility of the final outcomes and
decides whether to partially retire or fully retire, given that her husband partially retires. For the
husband, the utility of the final outcome, given his initial decision to partially retire, may be
denoted as U hPR . For the husband, the decision as to whether he is better off by initially retiring
partially or fully is determined by comparing U hFR and U hPR . H would make the choice
associated with the greater utility. That utility may be denoted as U hR , which may be interpreted
as the utility that the husband would derive if he were the first to make the decision to retire in
some form. The wife makes a symmetric decision as to what her utility would be if she were the
first to make the decision to retire in some form. Call this utility U Rw .

31

Each spouse must then make the decision whether it would be advantageous to retire
first. If the husband retires first, his utility would be U hR . If he does not retire first, then the wife
would choose whether to retire or to keep working. That is, she would choose between her
retirement choice, with utility U Rw , or the outcome where both spouses were working full-time,
which for her has a utility value of U wW . Let the higher utility value be denoted as U wwC , where
the subscript wC stands for “wife’s choice.” Correspondingly, let the husband’s utility for this
outcome be U hwC . This is basically the utility for the husband if he initially just keeps on
working. The husband then compares U hR to U hwC to decide whether he wants to make the initial
move towards retirement. If U hR is the higher value, he wants to retire initially because if he
leaves the initial decision to his wife, the utility value will be lower. If U hwC is the higher value,
on the other hand, he is content to let the wife make the initial decision to retire if she so chooses
because that will yield a higher utility to the husband than if he retires first. Needless to say, the
wife is going through a similar process to decide whether it is to her advantage to be the first to
retire.
There are four possible outcomes to this process. Each spouse may conclude that it is not
in his or her best interest to initiate retirement, in which case both will continue to work fulltime. A second possibility is that the husband may conclude that it in his best interest to partially
or fully retire, knowing that the wife may ultimately partially or fully retire as a result, and the
wife concludes that it is in her interest to let the husband do so. A third possibility is the
symmetric case where the wife concludes that it is in her best interest to initiate retirement, and
the husband concludes that it is in his interest to let her do so. In both the second and third cases,
there is no conflict between the spouses as to what to do, so the spouse that initially decides on

32

retirement can do so, and the other spouse will respond accordingly. The fourth case is that both
spouses may decide that it is to their advantage to make the initial retirement decision before the
other. In this last case there is a conflict between the decisions of the two spouses which needs to
be resolved.
If both spouses attempt to carry out their retirement desires simultaneously, the final
result depends on whether those desires were for partial retirement or full retirement. If both
spouses want to partially retire, then they would be a combination E in the diagram above. At
that point, one or both of them could decide that they would prefer to be fully retired, according
to the decision dynamics relating to the combinations E, F, H, and I. If the decision of one of the
spouses is full retirement, then the remaining spouse would have to choose whether, given the
full retirement decision of the first spouse, the second spouse wanted to be partially or fully
retired. If the decision of both spouses is to be fully retired, then that is the choice if both spouses
pursue their desired for retirement. Whatever the case, let the utility of the two spouses if they
w
both pursue retirement be given as U hbR and U bR
, where bR signifies that both spouses are

pursuing their retirement goals.
This is not the end of the story, however. It may well be that having both spouses
working dominates the scenario where both spouses try to retire. This would occur if U hW > U hbR
w
and U wW > U bR
. In this case, it is assumed that both spouses know that if they retire, the other

spouse will retire as well. For both spouses, it would be better to not retire as long as the other
spouse didn’t retire, and as a result both spouses would continue working. The economic
rationale for this case is that if one spouse retires, he or she loses not only his or her earnings, but
the earnings of the other spouse as well. Even if it turns out that having both spouses working
dominates having both retired, it may be true that allowing the husband to retire first (outcome
33

hC) or the wife to retire first (outcome wC) dominates, for both spouses, having both spouses
working. If that occurs, then one spouse will allow the other spouse to make the retirement
decision which delivers a higher utility for both of them. Otherwise, if having both spouses
working dominates having both retired, the final outcome will be for both spouses to be working.
C. Unexpected Implications of the Decision Process.
There are a couple of implications of this decision process that might not be expected, but
which have entirely logical explanations. The first is that retirement reversals can occur without
any changes in preferences (other than the increasing desire for retirement over time) or any
changes in effective compensation. Normally, without changes in preferences or compensation,
one would expect that once an individual retired, he or she would stay retired, since nothing has
changed to bring them out of retirement. But in the present model, that is not always the case.
This effect can be illustrated with simple work/retirement decisions, without the need to
introduce additional complications via partial retirement. Suppose that in a given year, the
husband’s and the wife’s utility matrices look as follows:
Husband’s Decision
Work
Retire
Husband’s Payoff Matrix
Wife’s
Decision

Work
Retire

5.032577
5.023245

5.026383
5.015767

Wife’s Payoff Matrix
Wife’s
Decision

Work
Retire

5.042582
5.072982

4.997644
5.026156

Given these utility matrices, the husband prefers to work for any given retirement state of the
wife, and the wife prefers to be retired for any given retirement state of the husband. This

34

corresponds to case 4 of the analysis in the previous part of this section, and in that analysis we
concluded that in this case, the husband will work and the wife will be retired.
Suppose that a year later, the utility matrices look as follows:
Husband’s Decision
Work
Retire
Husband’s Payoff Matrix
Wife’s
Decision

Work
Retire

4.924987
4.915709

4.931819
4.921649

Wife’s Payoff Matrix
Wife’s
Decision

Work
Retire

4.932621
4.967829

4.889473
4.923471

The utility values are generally a little bit lower, largely reflecting the higher mortality rates as
individuals age. The wife still prefers retirement regardless of the retirement state of the husband,
but due to his being a year older, the husband now prefers to be retired regardless of the
retirement state of the wife. This corresponds to case 1 in the previous analysis. For that case, the
outcome depended on the comparisons of combination A, where both spouses worked, with
combination D, where both spouses are retired, for both spouses. For both spouses, combination
A is preferred, so the final result is that both spouses will be working. Since in the previous year,
the husband was working but the wife was retired, this means that the wife has switched back to
working from retirement even without any change in compensation or retirement preferences.
The essence of this case can be summarized as follows. In the first year the wife is
retired, and the husband is working but is close to the border between working and being retired.
In the following year the husband crosses that border and would be retired if he were just giving
up his own earnings by doing so. Each spouse knows that if they retire rather than work, the
other spouse will also retire, because for each of them the extra consumption from their own
35

earnings is insufficient to compensate for the lost leisure. However both spouses know that if
they retire and as a consequence the other spouse retires as well, they will lose both incomes.
Since in this example the loss of both incomes outweighs the loss of leisure for either spouse,
neither spouse sees an advantage in retiring as long as the other spouse does not retire. The wife
essentially returns to working as an inducement for the husband to continue working and provide
additional income which benefits them both.
A second rather unexpected implication of the decision process is that higher wealth at
the beginning of the period, all other things being equal, may cause the work effort of one of the
spouses to increase, even if the work effort of the other spouse remains the same. This is contrary
to the usual implication that a pure wealth effect should cause a decline in labor supply.
This effect can again be illustrated with a simple work/retirement decision, without the
need to introduce additional complications via partial retirement. Suppose that at a given level of
initial wealth, the husband’s and the wife’s utility matrices look as follows:
Husband’s Decision
Work
Retire
Husband’s Payoff Matrix
Wife’s
Decision

Work
Retire

4.288884
4.266930

4.266913
4.261674

Wife’s Payoff Matrix
Wife’s
Decision

Work
Retire

4.312152
4.315635

4.271539
4.271357

Using the previous analysis, this corresponds to case 8. The husband prefers to work regardless
of the retirement state of the wife. The wife prefers to be retired if the husband works, but if he is
retired she prefers to work. In the analysis of that case, the outcome depended on a comparison
of combinations B and C for the husband (B is the combination where the husband retires but the
36

wife works, and C is the combination where the husband works and the wife retires). By a slight
margin, the husband prefers combination C to combination B, so the final result is that the
husband works and the wife retires.
At a slightly higher level of initial wealth, the two utility matrices look as follows:
Husband’s Decision
Work
Retire
Husband’s Payoff Matrix
Wife’s
Decision

Work
Retire

4.289692
4.267776

4.267817
4.262585

Wife’s Payoff Matrix
Wife’s
Decision

Work
Retire

4.312960
4.316480

4.272443
4.272268

Note that all of the utility amounts, conditional on work status, have increased due to the
increased wealth. The pattern of utilities still fits the criteria for case 8, but in this case the
husband prefers combination B to combination C. In this case both spouses would like to be the
first to retire, since they know that if they retire first the other spouse will stay on the job.
However, if both retire, they will both arrive at combination D, the least preferred result, so they
both continue to work. Compared to the case with lower initial wealth, the husband’s work effort
has remained the same, but the wife’s work effort has increased in the case with higher initial
wealth.
The essence of this situation may be explained as follows. At the lower level of wealth,
the husband finds it advantageous to work even if the wife retires. At a slightly higher level of
wealth, however, the husband finds retirement somewhat more appealing, he would prefer to be
retired and have the wife working rather than the other way around. In this case, both spouses
would like to retire and have the other work, but if they both retire they will be in the worst
37

possible scenario for both of them. To forestall this, both agree to continue working. In essence,
the wife has changed her behavior to keep the husband working even though he would otherwise
retire at the higher wealth level.
D. Nash Equilibrium vs. Sequential Decisions.
The difference between Nash equilibria and the results of the decision process described
above can be readily seen in the bivariate work/retirement scenario, so we will examine it in this
scenario rather than introduce the further complications of partial retirement. The simplest case is
illustrated in case 1 in part A of this section. In this case, both spouses would find it to their
advantage to retire, given either decision of the other spouse. The Nash equilibrium in this case is
straightforward: both spouses would retire. And yet, the possibility remains that both spouses
might be better off if both of them continued to work. The decision process described in this
paper recognizes that both spouses realize that if either of them retire, the other spouse will retire
as well, and hence they are both reluctant to retire for fear of inducing the other spouse to retire
as well. The essential difference is that the Nash equilibrium assumes that the actions of one
spouse have no impact on the decisions of the other spouse, which may be appropriate for a pair
of prisoners held incommunicado, but is probably less appropriate for spouses. In contrast, the
decision process of this paper assumes that both spouses realize that their own choices may
affect the choices of the other spouse.
There may also be a case where there is no Nash equilibrium, yet the decision process
described in this paper will deliver an unambiguous and defensible solution. In terms of the
classification of cases in Part A of this section, cases 7 and 10 have no Nash equilibria. These are
cases where one spouse wants to do the same as the other spouse, but the second spouse wants to
do the opposite of the first spouse. In these cases, no Nash equilibrium can make both spouses

38

completely happy with their decision, given the decision of the other spouse. Case 7 was the case
where the husband wanted to do the same thing as the wife, but the wife wanted to do the
opposite of the husband. Utilizing the sequential decision making process, the wife knows that if
she retires, the husband will as well, and that is her least preferred outcome. So she continues
working and the husband does too. The wife would really prefer that she retire and the husband
stays working, but she knows that this is an impossible outcome, because she knows what the
husband will do in response to her retirement. So she settles for her second best outcome, and the
decision process has a definite and defensible result in spite of the fact that there are no Nash
equilibria in this case.
In any case, as we have shown, the backward induction method does not always yield the
exact same result as the Nash equilibrium, even in cases where a Nash equilibrium exists. More
generally, the Nash equilibrium, which assumes that each spouse takes the decision of the other
spouse as given, is not always equivalent to methods in which the choice of each spouse takes
into account the possible responses of the other spouse.

V. Data and Estimation.
Estimation in this study is based on data from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), a
survey of roughly 7600 households with individuals born from 1931 to 1941. 9 The study uses
observations from households of married couples for whom both spouses appear to have career
jobs from which retirement would be a meaningful concept. Details of the sample restrictions, as
well as the construction of the variables used in the estimation, are described in Appendix 1.

9

The HRS is conducted by the University of Michigan under a grant from the National Institute
on Aging (grant number U01AG009740).
39

Both spouses in HRS households were interviewed separately. This is true even if one
spouse was in the eligible birth cohorts but the other was not. The survey started in 1992, at
which time these individuals were between 51 and 61 years old, and the same households were
re-interviewed every two years thereafter. This study uses the retirement data through the first
six waves of the survey, by which time the eligible birth cohorts would have been 61 to 71 years
of age. By age 61 half of the individuals would have retired, and virtually all by age 71, so this
period includes the overwhelming majority of retirements for the sample individuals.
The HRS also has two important supplements, which are available on a restricted basis.
First, Social Security earnings records are attached for about 75 percent of the sample, allowing
fairly precise estimates of Social Security earnings and benefits for this part of the sample.
Secondly, for respondents who indicated that they had pensions, the survey obtained and coded
the summary pension documents from the employers of about two thirds of those in the sample
with a pension on their current job. This enables a much more precise determination of the
retirement incentives of pensions than is normally obtainable from the respondents themselves.
The estimation method is the generalized method of simulated moments (GMM). In this
procedure, a group of moments is gathered into a column vector m. These moments are
generally the difference between some observed statistic, such as the percentage retired as of a
specific age, and the percentage that is simulated for the sample using specified values of the
parameter. In general, these moments come from an asymptotically normal distribution with a
mean value of zero. The estimation procedure seeks the parameter value which minimize q =
m'W-1m, where W =

n

∑ m m′ . The
i =1

i

i

mi vectors are the moments of the individual

observations, and the W matrix is essentially the observed variance-covariance matrix of the
moments. Variances of the estimates are calculated from var(Θ) = [G'W-1G]-1, where Θ is the
40

vector of parameters and G is the derivative of the moments with respect to the parameters. If
the model is correctly specified, m is distributed around zero, and q should have a χ2
distribution with λ – k degrees of freedom, where λ is the number of moments and k is the
number of parameters estimated.
To construct the moments for a specific observation using a specific set of parameters,
we need first to estimate the value of the time preference parameter ρ for the couple associated
with that observation. To do this, we use the observed full-time retirement dates if the spouses
have already retired, or the expected retirement dates if one or both spouses have not retired. If
the retirement from full-time work was into partial retirement, a second retirement date from
partial retirement into full retirement is established in the same way. These retirement dates fix
the leisure parts of both utility functions as well as the complete earnings stream for the couple.
What remains is to compute the consumption stream conditional on a value of ρ. The
consumption model is computed using the usual backward induction method of dynamic
programming models. In this model, the rate of return on assets is taken to be stochastic, using
the observed distribution of asset returns. The model is then simulated to obtain an associated
path of wealth, and during this simulation the realized asset returns are used. The calculated
amount of wealth in a particular year, say 1992, can then be compared with the actual wealth
observed in that year. The calculated wealth depends on the assumed value of ρ, and this
parameter is adjusted up or down until the calculated wealth matches the actual wealth. In these
calculations, observed wealth is taken to be the sum of financial, real estate, business assets, and
non-pension retirement assets (e.g., IRA’s).
The use of actual or expected retirement dates to calculate ρ avoids the necessity of
using the values of the random effects (εh, εw, VPh , and VPw ) in the calculations of ρ, since
41

the random effects affect only the leisure terms in the utility functions. This approach requires a
couple of approximations. First, the actual or expected retirement dates refer to situations where
both spouses survive and do not tell us what would have happened if one of the spouses had
died. In general, the retirement ages would be expected to depend on the survival experience of
both spouses, since if one spouse dies the income stream of the surviving spouse will be altered.
However, since the pre-retirement mortality rates are relatively low, and since the bulk of
lifetime income will have been earned before the observations begin, we make the approximation
that the retirement dates of one spouse do not depend on whether the other spouse survives. The
second approximation is the approximation discussed in Appendix 2. The uncertainty in
retirement dates in the complete model probably induces couples to hold more assets than if the
retirement dates were certain, and even then the amount of wealth associated with observed
retirement dates and asset returns is not completely fixed. However, the discussion in Appendix
2 suggests that this is probably not a serious problem. The primary purpose of calculating time
preference rates is to distinguish households which place a substantial value on future utility
from those for whom present utility is paramount, and this approximation should be sufficient for
those purposes.
Once the time preference rate ρ is calculated, we make a random draw from the joint
distribution of εh and εw, given the parameters σh, σw, and ρε of the distribution. We also
make random draws of VPh and VPw , given the parameters γ ho , γ 1h , γ ow , and γ 1w for those
distributions. With these preference parameters, the path of retirement states for both spouses can
be calculated using the methods discussed above, and the values associated with the various
moments are tabulated. Another draw is made from the distribution of εh and εw . Another set
of retirement states for both spouses is calculated, and the values associated with the various
42

moments are updated. The process continues through a large number of simulations (10,000 per
observation). The moments used in the estimation are calculated by comparing the observed
tabulations to the simulated distributions. Once the model has been estimated, the calculation of
the 10,000 simulations does not add appreciably to the time required, so we use this number in
order to make the simulated moments close to the theoretical moments. However, in order to
make the calculations feasible, new draws of VPh and VPw are not made for each of the 10,000
simulations per observation, but new draws of these values are made for each individual.
The moments used in the simulation are chosen to provide identifying information on the
parameters. The moments used are as follows:

Description of moments
The percentage retired from full-time work at ages 54-66
Husband
Wife
The percentage completely retired at ages 55, 58, 60, 62, and 65
Husband
Wife
The percentage retired from full-time work at ages 55, 58, 60, 62,
and 65 among families in the bottom third of
potential earnings
Husband
Wife
The percentage retired from full-time work at ages 55, 58, 60, 62,
and 65 among families in the upper third of
potential earnings
Husband
Wife
The percentage retired from full-time work at ages 55, 58, 60, 62
and 65 among those in poor health
Husband
Wife
The percentage of reversals where the respondent was working
full-time after having been partially or fully retired
in the previous interview
Husband
Wife
The percentage of couples in each interview where both spouses

Number
of moments
13
13
5
5

5
5

5
5

5
5

5
5

43

were working full-time
The percentage of cases where one partner was working full-time
in one of the later interviews and the other was
retired in one of the earlier interviews
Total moments

6

6
88

The first 26 moments help to establish the overall pattern of retirements, as governed by
βho , β1h , β ow , β1w , σh, and σw. The next 10 moments reflect the amount of partial retirement by

age, and hence help to establish the values of γ ho , γ 1h , γ ow , and γ 1w , which determine the
distribution of the value of partial retirement. The next 20 moments help to establish the value of
α. The higher the value of α, the later will be the retirement of high earning individuals relative

to the retirement of lower earning individuals. The next 10 moments, which involve those
individuals in poor health, help to determine β h2 and β 2w . The following 10 moments, which
have to do with reversals, help to establish the values of ρh and ρw, which are the changes in
leisure preferences after retirement which could induce a return to work. The next six moments,
which relate to joint retirement, help to determine the values of β h3 and β 3w , which govern how
much the leisure of one spouse is augmented by the presence of the other spouse. The final six
moments, which measure how often one spouse retires early and the other spouse retires much
later, help to establish the value of ρε, the correlation between εh and εw. High values of ρε
should mean that cases where one spouse retires early and the other much later occur less often
than if the value of ρε is relatively low.
The results of the parameter estimates are given in Table 1. Most if not all of the
parameter estimates are significant at conventional significance levels. 10 For 70 degrees of

10

If the observed moments do not match the moments generated by the model very well,
the q value will be high and the prob value will be low, indicating that the model is not doing a
44

freedom, the 5% critical value of the χ2 distribution is 90.53 and the 1% critical value is 100.43.
The estimated value of 65.09 is well below these critical values, which indicates that there is
little evidence that the model does not fit the model well, at least in the dimensions measured by
the moments previously listed. Another way of looking at this is that the probability value of this
q value is 0.64, which suggests that by chance, the q value would be higher than the estimated
amount more than half of the time. 11
Since this model is a combination of two of our previous models, we can see how
different these estimates are from those in the previous models. One of the models (Gustman and
Steinmeier, 2008) was a model of joint retirement decisions for both spouses within a family, but
that model did not include stochastic returns or any partial retirement. The other model was a
very good job of explaining the observed data. The degrees of freedom for the χ2 distribution is
equal to the number of moments minus the number of parameters estimations, which for the
current estimation gives a value of 70.
11

Other studies have also simplified the estimation of the backward induction
process. A notable approach that would approximate the solution to the model is
suggested by Keane and Wolpin (1997). (The description of the Keane-Wolpin method is
taken from the Appendix in their article in the June1997 JPE.) Unfortunately, their
approximations do not appear to be applicable to our model. They make use of the fact
that there is exactly one error term corresponding to each potential choice, which is to say
that the values of the choices are specified as Vm = fm(S) + εm, where m is a choice and S
is the set of state variables. Our error terms enter the model in a more structural (and we
would argue more realistic) way. While it may be possible to use the Monte-Carlo
methods for simulating expected values, it is not possible to use their method for
computing E[max(Vm)] from a transformation of more easily computed E[Vm]’s. The
reason that their E[Vm]’s are easier to compute is that the expectation has to be integrated
only over the single εm, (in fact, if E[εm] = 0, E(Vm] = fm(S), with no need for integration),
while E[max(Vm)] has to be multiply integrated over all the εm ‘s. Thus, once they
estimate the relationship between the E[max(Vm)]’s and the E[Vm]’s from a small
subsample of the possible state combinations, they can calculate the E[max(Vm)]’s for the
remaining state combinations without doing any integration at all! The cost is a relatively
more restricted error structure tying the errors to the choices in a one-to-one fashion. The
problem for our model is that since there is no strict correspondence between the potential
choices and the error terms, the computation of the m E[Vm]’s is as complicated as the
computation of E[max(Vm)].

45

model which included stochastic returns and a mechanism for varying leisure preferences after
retirement, but took the wife’s labor supply and its associated income as exogenous to the
husband’s retirement decision.
In comparing the current results with the previous family retirement model, the
coefficient of the age variable for the husband is considerably lower in the present model as
opposed to the previous model. Since this coefficient to some extent reflects the scope of
economic circumstances to affect retirement, one would expect that the husband’s retirement
decision would be more sensitive to economic circumstances in the current model. For the wife,
however, the coefficient of the age variable is very similar between the two models.
The coefficient of the spouse retired variable is about the same for the husbands between
the two sets of estimates, but the coefficient of this variable is almost twice as high for the wife
in the current set of estimates as opposed to the previous results. Nevertheless, the husband’s
coefficient is almost two and a half times as great as that for the wife, which leaves unaltered the
conclusion from previous work that the husband’s utility of retirement is much more sensitive to
the presence of the wife than the other way around. Another dimension of joint retirement is the
correlation of retirement preferences, as measured by the parameter ρε. That parameter is
considerably higher in the current estimates than the previous estimates, suggesting that
correlated preferences may play a greater role. However, the previous estimate of this parameter
was not very precise, and the confidence interval for that estimate is very close to including the
current estimate. As a result, it is unclear that this difference in estimates is meaningful.
The coefficients of the health variables are slightly higher in the current model than they
were in the previous family retirement estimates, both for the husband and for the wife. It is not
completely clear why this should be so, but again the confidence intervals for the previous

46

estimates include the values estimated for the current model. The standard deviation of the
leisure preference term, which to a large extent governs the overall spread of the retirement
distribution, is very close between the two estimates for the husbands, but the value for the wife
is somewhat higher in the current model relative to the previous model.
In comparing the current model with the previous stochastic model (Gustman and
Steinmeier, 2006), the most notable difference is that the leisure preferences change much less
after retirement in the current model than in the previous model. This is reflected in the
autocorrelation parameter ρh, which measures how autocorrelated the preferences after
retirement are to the preferences prior to retirement. To a large degree, this parameter reflects
how often individuals return to work after a period of retirement. As indicated earlier in this
report, the mechanism by which the retirement decisions are made for couples introduces some
degree of returns to work, even if there were no other mechanism for inducing returns to work.
This means that the autocorrelation parameter ρh does not have to account for all the returns to
work, but only a part of them. As a result, it is not terribly surprising that the autocorrelation
parameter is higher in the current model than it was in the previous model, which assumed that
the spouse’s retirement was exogenous.
VI. Simulations.
Having obtained estimates for the parameters of the model, we now turn to simulations
with the model. First we will present results from a simulation using the actual budget sets for
the individuals in the sample. We refer to this simulation as the “base” simulation. We will then
present simulations in which the wife is not in the labor force, to see what effect the wife’s work
has on the husband’s retirement, and simulations in which partial retirement is not permitted.

47

Table 2 shows the basic retirement outcomes from the base simulation. For both the
husbands and the wives, the last three rows indicate the percentages of the sample at each age
who were working full-time, partially retired, or fully retired. As expected, the percentage
working full-time falls with age and the percentage partially retired increases with age. For
husbands, by age 62 less than half of the sample is still working full time, while for the wives the
percentage working full time falls to less than half at age 60. Both husbands and wives have
substantial numbers partially retired. For the husbands, the percentage partially retired grows
steady throughout the age range illustrated until it reaches almost 20 percent at age 67. For
wives, partial retirement grows at earlier ages, reaches a peak of around 17 percent at age 62, and
declines thereafter.
The first two columns of the table are what may be referred to as “pseudo” retirement.
These are merely the differences between the figures at adjacent ages in the last three rows. For
instance, 32.1 percent of husbands were fully retired at age 61 and 42.8 percent at age 62. The
difference of 10.7 percent is taken as the pseudo-retirements from work at age 62. It is really a
net result of individuals completely retiring at that age less the individuals who had been retired
at 61 but who returned to work at age 62. In any case, the prominent feature of these numbers is
the spike of retirements at age 62, both for the husbands and to a lesser extent for the wives. The
magnitude of the spike is approximately correct relative to the raw data for the husbands but is a
little short for the wives. The model is a little less successful in capturing the secondary spike at
age 65 for the husbands and not very successful at capturing the secondary spike for the wives.
In any case, the current model is much more successful in capturing the spikes than was our
previous family model, in which the spikes were substantially muted. As mentioned before, this
probably has to do with the much lower estimated coefficent for the age variable for the husband,

48

which makes the husband’s retirement behavior more sensitive to economic incentives in the
current model.
Table 3 decomposes both the full-time work figures and the partial retirement figures in
the last three columns of the previous table. The full-time work percentages are decomposed into
two parts, one for individuals who are still working in career jobs and who have never previously
either fully or partially retired and the other for individuals who previously fully or partially
retired and who have returned to full-time work. For both husbands and wives, the percentage of
the sample who have returned to full-time work rises gradually up until about age 60, peaks at
around 9 percentage points in the early 60’s, and tails off thereafter. At its peak at age 61, more
than 16 percent (9.4 / 57.2) of full-time husbands are individuals who have returned to full-time
work after a period of full or partial retirement. For wives, the figure is even higher at 21 percent
(8.8 / 42.5). Although the numbers of full-time workers decline both in the career jobs and in the
return jobs after age 61, the percentage of full-time workers who have been previously retired
continues to grow until it reaches 28 percent for husbands at age 67 and 30 percent for wives at
the same age.
For partial retirement, the decomposition is between those who have partially retired
from full-time work without going through a period of full retirement and those who have been
fully retired at some previous point. From the table, it is clear that the majority of part-time work
is done by individuals who are on a traditional path of moving from full-time work to partial
retirement and then to full retirement, but part-time work by individuals who have previously
been fully retired is not insignificant. For the husbands, a little over a third of part-time workers
in their mid to late 50’s have been previously retired. This figure increases during the early 60’s
until by age 67 around half of the part-time husbands have previously been fully retired. The

49

same trend occurs for the wives, though the percentages of previously retired part-time workers
is somewhat lower, particularly in the mid 50’s.
Table 3 indicates the percentage of individuals who had returned to full-time work from
partial or full retirement and the percentage who had returned to part-time work after full
retirement, but it does not indicate the frequency with which husbands and wives go through at
least one period of transitioning from a state of greater retirement to a state of less retirement.
Table 4 provides this information. For both husbands and wives, around a third returned to fulltime work at some point in time after a period of partial or full retirement, with the percentage
being slightly higher among wives than among husbands. The percent returning to part-time
work after a period of full retirement was around a quarter for both husbands and wives. Since
these are not mutually exclusive categories, they cannot simply be added up since some
individuals will go through both transitions. Accordingly, the last row of the table suggests that a
little over two fifths of husbands go through a period of transition from greater retirement to less
retirement, and almost half of the wives do so.
Table 5 addresses one of the issues particular to a model of the retirement behavior of
couples, namely, the frequency with which both spouses retire at the same time. The figures in
the top part of the table give the frequencies for which the husband retires before the wife, and
the figures in the bottom part of the table give the frequencies for which the wife retires before
the husband. Despite the fact that on average the husband is a couple of years older than the wife,
the husband retires first in only about half the cases, while the wife retires first in around 36
percent of the cases. The remaining 13.5 percent of the cases are instances where both spouses
retire in the same year. Note that this is around 10 to 11 percentage points higher than the
surrounding figures, which measure the instances where the husband retires a year or two before

50

the wife, or the wife retires a year or two before the husband. This is almost surely a result of the
spouse retirement variables in the model, which increase the value of leisure of one spouse if the
other spouse is also retired. The correlation in leisure preferences would also lead to an increased
tendency for spouses to both retire early or both retire late, but a correlation in leisure
preferences should lead to more of a smooth hump in the joint retirement distribution as opposed
to a spike, as found in studies of joint retirement outcomes.
Table 6 reports on another distribution of interest, namely, the distribution of time
preferences. Not quite half of the households have a time preference rate of less than 5%, while
around a third have time preference rates of 50% or higher. The latter group essentially has no
financial assets other than forced savings, meaning that they are effectively consuming all of
their available income. Only around a sixth of the households fall in the middle, with time
preference rates between 5% and 50%, and most of those are in the bracket from 5% to 10%. The
clear implication of this result is that models which assume that all households have a uniform
time preference rate will almost certainly yield very misleading results for a third of the
households, but models which allow two mass points for the time preference distribution, one at
a relatively low time preference rate and the other at a relatively high time preference rate, may
be a lot closer to the truth. Even here, though, as suggested by Figure 2 in the appendix, there is a
very substantial difference between the amount of wealth that would be accumulated by an
individual with a 1% time preference rate relative to an individual with a 3% time preference
rate, and a model with only two mass points of time preference is unlikely to reflect this
difference.
We now turn to two simulations which address a couple of interesting questions. The first
has to do with the effect on husband’s retirement of having the wife in the labor force. To shed

51

some light on this subject, we examine a simulation in which the wife is assumed to be out of the
labor force. The results of this simulation are reported in Table 7. The figures in the table are
differences between the simulation holding the wife out of the labor force and the base
simulation. As might be expected, excluding the wife from the labor force leads to a substantial
increase in full-time work by the husband. From the husband’s viewpoint, the income provided
by the wife is largely an increase in family resources not associated with his work. Taking away
this wealth leads to a wealth effect, which should have the impact of reducing both leisure and
consumption. The reduction in leisure is mainly reflected in increased full-time work effort,
amounting to over 13 percentage points in the early 60’s. Leisure itself, as reflected in the
percentage of the sample being fully retired, drops by a comparable amount, again reaching
around 13 percent in the early 60’s. During the 50’s and early 60’s, the percentage of the sample
who are partially retired is reduced, but after that age partial retirement is increased by the
exclusion of women from the labor force. To put it another way, in the early years full-time work
is increased substantially at the expense of both partial retirement and full retirement, but in later
years full retirement is increased substantially at the expense of both full-time work and partial
retirement. In any case, it seems clear that all else being equal, the flow of wives into the labor
force in the last few decades has probably reduced the amount of work that the husbands would
have done otherwise.
A second simulation looks to see what would be the effect if work were a full time or
nothing decision. This is meant to address the issue of the effects of the possibility of part-time
work on overall work effort. One of the arguments in favor of expanding the opportunities for
part-time work is that increased part-time work would expand overall work effort by allowing
older Americans to work into years when health or other issues might make it impossible or

52

difficult to work full-time. Table 8 presents results from a simulation where the option to work
part-time is effectively eliminated and the respondents would be forced to choose only between
full-time work and full retirement. The figures in this table are the differences between the
percentage of individuals in the stated work/retirement category in this simulation and the
comparable percentage of individuals in the base simulation. For instance, the first entry in the
table, 1.9 percent, means that at age 55, the number of husbands working full-time would be 1.9
percentage points higher if part-time work were eliminated as a possibility. Note that the sum of
the two columns for each gender is the percent of individuals partially retired in Table 2. That is,
of the 3.4 percent of husbands who were partially retired in the base simulation, if partial
retirement were eliminated 1.9 percent of them would switch to full-time work and 1.5 percent of
them would switch to being fully retired.
In general, eliminating partial retirement would lead to increases both in the number
working full-time, which would increase overall work effort, and in the number fully retired,
which would reduce overall work effort. For husbands, the increase in full-time work outweighs
the increase in full retirement up until about age 62, which means that up until that age overall
work effort would increase if partial retirement were eliminated. After age 62, for the husbands
the elimination of partial retirement would cause the increase in full retirement to outweigh the
increase in full-time work, which would imply a reduction in overall work effort for this group.
For the entire 55 to 67 age range illustrated in the table, the increase in full retirement outweighs
the increase in full-time work, but only by a small amount.
Making partial retirement more generally available or more attractive, of course, would
have the opposite effect. One might expect that the husbands would exhibit a slight increase in
overall work effort as individuals continued to work in partial retirement beyond the date that

53

they would otherwise retire. This effect, however, is largely offset because with the increased
availability of partial retirement, individuals would be induced to leave full-time work for partial
retirement earlier than they would have left full-time work in the absence of partial retirement.
The simulation suggests that this offsetting effect is sufficient to largely negate any effort to
promote opportunities for partial retirement as a means to increase overall work. The goal of
increasing work effort, in turn, is often promoted as a means of stabilizing Social Security’s
finances or for other ends.
The pattern for the wives is similar to that for the husbands, although there are some
important differences. Before age 62, partial retirement among the wives is more common than
among husbands, so the increases in full-time work and in full retirement are both greater than
for the husbands. It is still true, however, that before age 62 the increase in full-time work from
eliminating partial retirement outweighs the increase in full retirement. After age 62, the reverse
is true: the figures are less for the wives than for the husbands, and the increase in the percentage
fully retired is larger than the increase in the percentage working full-time. Again, over the entire
age range, the increase in the percentage fully retired outweighs the increase in the percentage
working full-time, but only by a small amount. Therefore, the implications about the goals of
increasing opportunities for partial retirement among the wives are essentially the same as the
implications for the husbands outlined in the previous paragraph.

VII. Conclusions.
This paper has integrated many features of retirement models into a single framework.
This has made it possible to utilize the full set of labor market information provided by the
Health and Retirement Study, including survey responses, pension plan descriptions and Social

54

Security earnings data provided individually for husbands and wives. The integrated model is
much richer than previously specified models of family retirement, allowing each spouse to retire
and unretire, transitioning among the states of full-time work, partial retirement and full
retirement. It explains in much greater detail the effects of interdependence in the decisions made
by each spouse, including clustering of retirements by husbands and wives, while at the same
time allowing for forward looking behavior, explaining saving at the family level, incorporating
the nonlinear budget constraints from still dominant defined benefit pensions and Social
Security, and allowing for the effects of exogenous shocks to market opportunities, health and
asset returns.
As we found in our past research, increasing the richness of the model allows us to
address phenomena that otherwise cannot be explained by conventional models of retirement. At
the family level we are able to isolate the key role of heterogeneity in time preference, allowing
the model to explain the wide differences in wealth accumulated by families with similar
earnings opportunities. The retirement hazard exhibits the important spike in retirement at age 62
in the face of an actuarially fair Social Security system, captures the extent of partial retirement
by each spouse, reproduces the flow from states of greater to lesser retirement, and relates each
of the flows for one spouse to the decisions made by the other. We also allow each spouse to
have heterogeneous preferences for both full-time and part-time work.
The theoretical discussion increases understanding of the wide variety of situations that
families face when approaching the retirement decision. It illustrates how choices focused on one
spouse’s welfare will take account of the welfare and independent reactions of their mate,
incorporating the roles of different preferences and different market opportunities. Allowing for
the variety of circumstances facing different families, the theoretical framework incorporates the

55

many different situations facing different couples into a unified framework, and directly into the
estimation. We also have shown why, when both spouses realize that their own choices may
affect the choices of the other spouse, a solution method based on backward induction is superior
to a method based on a Nash equilibrium, including a finding that a solution based on backward
induction may provide plausible behavioral predictions when the Nash equilibrium criteria fall
silent in attempting to predict the optimal solution.
We have found some surprising implications of the model. For example, retirement
reversals can occur without any changes in preferences (other than the increasing desire for
retirement over time) or any changes in effective compensation. Also, contrary to the usual
implication that a pure wealth effect should cause a decline in labor supply, higher wealth at the
beginning of the period, all other things being equal, may cause the work effort of one of the
spouses to increase, even if the work effort of the other spouse remains the same.
Simpler specifications cannot simultaneously explain heterogeneity in wealth; liquidity
preference and retirement spikes when benefits become available; the high rate of return from
states of lesser work to states of greater work despite the assumption of forward looking
behavior, and in the absence of changes either in preferences or in market opportunities; the
different sequence of retirements by husbands and wives; and why in some cases increased
wealth may reduce retirements.
Comparisons of the integrated model of retirement behavior with models that either
simplify the retirement options and dynamic, stochastic nature of decision making, or simplify or
ignore the importance of interdependence of retirement decision making in a family setting, have
shown the value of the estimates obtained with the integrated model. While preserving key
findings, such as the conclusion from previous work that the husband’s utility of retirement is

56

much more sensitive to the presence of the wife than the other way around, the integrated model
can explain the key features of retirement outcomes that a simple specification of the family
model failed to explain, including the ability to simulate with accuracy the spike in retirements at
age 62. There also are substantial differences in key coefficients between the integrated more
constrained specifications, such as in the coefficient on age, which governs the sensitivity of the
retirement response to incentives from policies, as well as changes in preferences after
retirement, which are smaller in the integrated model.
We find interesting effects from counter factual experiments. The flow of wives into the
labor force in the last few decades has probably reduced the amount of work that the husbands
would have done otherwise. In the early years full-time work is increased substantially at the
expense of both partial retirement and full retirement, but in later years full retirement is
increased substantially at the expense of both full-time work and partial retirement. In another
experiment, we find that eliminating partial retirement would lead to increases both in the
number working full-time, which would increase overall work effort, and in the number fully
retired, which would reduce overall work effort. Altogether, the increase in full retirement
outweighs the increase in full-time work, but the difference is small. The simulation suggests that
this offsetting effect is sufficient to largely negate any effort to promote opportunities for partial
retirement as a means to increase overall work.
Although there is a great deal of effort required to estimate and simulate with a structural
model that incorporates many dimensions of behavior, it appears to be worth the effort. One
reward is an increased understanding of behavior, providing insight into many dimensions of
retirement behavior, and behavior at the family level, that is not otherwise available from more
simplified approaches. Another reward is a clearer picture of the likely effects of events, where

57

simplified approaches either fall silent or, worse, may provide misleading guidance for policies.
In previous studies we have examined the effects of various policies on retirement. In a longer
report to the National Institute on Aging, we also apply the present model to analyze the effects
of delaying the Social Security early entitlement age and the effects of substituting defined
contribution for defined benefit plans. The implications of these and related changes for saving
and retirement simply cannot be understood when behavior must be analyzed with a less
structural approach. Since the Health and Retirement Study has been designed to support these
complex analyses, there is additional effort required to design and estimate the basic behavioral
models incorporating all the relevant dimensions of behavior, but additional effort is not required
to collect the requisite data.

58

Table 1
Parameter Estimates

Parameter
Symbol

Description

Estimated
Value

Absolute
t-Statistic

-10.37

106.00

0.12
6.00
2.63
4.75
0.86

5.43
5.84
2.20
7.44
14.01

-0.68

1.47

0.24

2.58

-10.35

49.73

0.19
4.25
1.18
5.04
0.87

4.16
3.77
0.75
8.42
18.12

-6.14

4.02

0.06

0.32

0.67
-0.47

1.70
4.80

Husband’s Parameters
β

h
o

β1h
β h2
β h3
σh
ρh
γ

h
o

γ

h
1

Parameters for the Value of Leisure
Constant
Age
Own Health
Spouse Retired
Standard Deviation of εh
Correlation of εh After Retirement
Parameters for the Value of Partial Retirement
Constant
Age
Wife’s Parameters

β

w
o

β
β

w
1
w
2
w
3

β
σw
ρw
γ

w
o

γ

w
1

ρε
α

Parameters for the Value of Leisure
Constant
Age
Own Health
Spouse Retired
Standard Deviation of εw
Correlation of εw After Retirement
Parameters for the Value of Partial Retirement
Constant
Age
Correlation Between εh and εw
Consumption Parameter
Number of observations
Q Value

851
65.09

59

Table 2
Retirement States in Base Simulation, By Age and Gender

Age

Percent
Pseudo-Retiring
From
From
FT Work
All Work

in
FT Work

Percent
Partially
Retired

Fully
Retired

3.4
4.1
5.4
6.1
7.5
9.3
10.8
14.7
16.2
17.3
18.3
18.6
19.0

9.2
11.0
14.0
17.5
21.8
27.2
32.1
42.8
48.2
53.9
60.9
65.9
69.4

6.9
8.1
9.6
11.1
12.8
14.0
14.9
16.7
16.1
14.9
13.5
11.7
10.2

17.1
20.2
23.7
27.8
32.1
37.5
42.5
51.3
58.2
64.5
70.7
76.1
80.6

Husbands
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

3.5
2.5
4.3
4.2
5.7
7.2
6.4
14.7
6.9
6.8
7.9
5.3
3.9

2.7
1.8
3.0
3.4
4.3
5.4
4.9
10.7
5.4
5.7
7.0
5.0
3.5

87.4
84.9
80.6
76.4
70.7
63.5
57.2
42.5
35.6
28.8
20.8
15.5
11.6
Wives

55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

4.6
4.3
5.0
5.6
6.1
6.6
6.0
10.5
6.3
5.1
4.8
3.6
3.1

3.2
3.1
3.5
4.1
4.4
5.4
5.0
8.8
6.9
6.3
6.2
5.4
4.5

76.0
71.7
66.7
61.1
55.1
48.5
42.5
32.1
25.7
20.6
15.8
12.2
9.2

60

Table 3
Returns to Work in Base Simulation, By Age and Gender

Age

Percent
in Main
Job

Percent
to FT Work
after
Retiring

Percent
in PT Work
after
FT Work

Percent
in PT Work
after
Retiring

Husbands
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

82.3
78.8
73.8
68.5
62.2
54.5
47.7
35.9
28.9
22.9
16.1
11.6
8.4

5.1
6.1
6.8
7.9
8.5
9.0
9.4
6.6
6.7
5.9
4.8
4.0
3.2

2.3
2.6
3.5
3.9
4.8
5.9
6.7
9.9
10.0
10.0
10.2
9.7
9.4

1.1
1.5
1.9
2.2
2.7
3.4
4.1
4.8
6.2
7.3
8.1
8.9
9.6

4.9
5.8
6.7
7.6
8.5
9.0
9.3
11.0
9.8
8.6
7.6
6.3
5.3

2.0
2.3
2.9
3.5
4.3
5.0
5.6
5.7
6.3
6.3
5.9
5.4
4.9

Wives
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

69.8
64.7
59.0
52.9
46.5
39.7
33.8
25.8
20.8
16.3
11.9
8.7
6.3

6.1
7.0
7.7
8.3
8.6
8.8
8.8
6.3
5.0
4.3
3.9
3.5
2.8

61

Table 4
Respondent Returning to Work in Base Simulation, By Gender
Husbands Wives
Percent returning to full time work after full or partial retirement
Percent returning to part time work after full retirement
Percent returning to full time work after full or partial retirement
or returning to part time work after full retirement

29.0
23.7

34.4
25.7

43.2

48.5

62

Table 5
Distribution of Differences in Retirement
Years in Base Simulation

Husband
Retires
First

Wife
Retires
first

Difference
in Retirement
Dates
(Years)

Percent of
Households

10+
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10+

19.3
3.1
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.5
3.7
3.6
3.6
3.5
13.5
2.2
2.8
2.9
3.2
3.5
3.3
3.4
3.0
2.7
9.1

Note: The retirement date is the year the
individual first retired from full-time work.

63

Table 6
Distribution of Time Preference
Rates in Base Simulation
Time
Preference
Rate

Percent of
Households

0-5%
5-10%
10-25%
25-50%
>50%

44.5
12.6
8.0
1.9
33.0

64

Table 7
Simulated Effect on Husbands Retirement Status
of Eliminating Wife's Labor Force Participation

Age

55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

Change in Percent
in Full
Partially
Time Work
Retired

7.8
9.3
11.1
12.4
12.8
13.1
13.3
9.7
8.9
7.6
6.0
5.0
4.1

Husbands
-2.4
-2.5
-3.0
-2.8
-2.5
-2.1
-1.5
3.5
4.0
4.5
4.3
4.6
4.8

Fully
Retired

-5.5
-6.7
-8.1
-9.5
-10.3
-11.0
-11.9
-13.2
-12.9
-12.1
-10.4
-9.6
-8.9

65

Table 8
Simulated Effect of Eliminating Partial Retirement

Age

Change in Percent
in Full
Fully
Time Work
Retired

Change in Percent
in Full
Fully
Time Work
Retired

Husbands
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

1.9
2.4
3.4
4.2
5.0
6.1
7.0
7.8
7.9
7.3
6.9
5.9
4.9

Wives
1.5
1.7
2.0
1.9
2.5
3.2
3.7
6.9
8.3
10.0
11.4
12.7
14.1

3.5
4.2
5.3
6.3
7.3
8.0
8.0
6.4
6.1
5.1
4.4
3.6
2.6

3.4
3.9
4.3
4.8
5.5
6.0
7.0
10.2
10.0
9.8
9.1
8.1
7.6

66

References

Benitez-Silva, Hugo, Moshe Buchinsky, Hiu Man Chan, John Rust and Sophia
Cheidvasser. 1999. “An Empirical Analysis of the Social Security Disability Application,
Appeal and Award Process”. Labour Economics 6: 147-178.
Benitez-Silva, Hugo, Moshe Buchinsky and John Rust. (2004) "How Large is the
Bias in Self Reported Disability?" Journal of Applied Econometrics , 19(6): 649-670.
Berkovec, James C. and Steven Stern. 1991. AJob Exit Behavior of Older Men@.
Econometrica 59(1): 189-210.
Blau, David. 1997. ASocial Security and the Labor Supply of Older Married
Couples@. Labour Economics 4(4): 373-418.
________________. 1998. ALabor Force Dynamics of Older Married Couples@.
Journal of Labor Economics 16(3): 525-629.
Blau, David M. and Donna B. Gilleskie. 2006. AHealth Insurance and Retirement
of Married Couples@. Journal of Applied Econometrics 21: 935–953.
Blundell, Ricard, P.A. Chiappori, T. Magnac and C. Meghir (2001). ACollective
Labor Supply with Nonparticipation@. IFS Working Paper 01/19.
Bound, J., T.R. Stinebrickner and T. Waidmann. 2006. “Health, Economic
Resources and the Work Decisions of Older Men”. Paper presented at NBER Summer
Institute on Aging.
Bourguignon, Francois, Martin Browning and Pierre-Andre Chiappori. 2006.
“Efficient Intra-household Allocations and Distribution Factors: Implicatins and
Identification”. Working paper 2006-02. Centre for Applied Microeconmetrics,
Department of Economics, University of Copenhagen.
Cherchye, Laurens, Bram De Rock and Frederic Vermeulen. 2009. “Opening the
Black Box of Intrahousehold Decision Making: Theory and Nonparametric Empirical
Tests of General Collective Consumption Models”. Journal of Political Economy 117(6):
1074-1104.
Coile, Courtney C. 2004. ARetirement Incentives and Couples Retirement
Decisions”. Topics in Economic Analysis and Policy 4(1): article 17.
Coile, Courtney and Jonathan Gruber. 2000. “Social Security and Retirement”. NBER
Working Paper 7830.
Cutler, David M., Jeffrey B. Liebman and Seamus Smyth. 2006. “How Fast
Should the Social Security Eligibility Age Rise?” National Bureau of Economic
Research, Retirement Research Center Working Paper.
French, Eric. 2005. AThe Effects of Health, Wealth, and Wages on Labor Supply
and Retirement Behavior@. Review of Economic Studies 72: 395-427.
67

French, Eric and John Bailey Jones. 2004. AThe Effects of Health Insurance and
Self-Insurance on Retirement Behavior@. Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,
Working Paper 2004-12.
Gustman, Alan L. and Thomas L. Steinmeier. "Modeling the Retirement Process for
Policy Evaluation and Research." Monthly Labor Review 107(7): 26-33.
________________. 1986a. "A Structural Retirement Model." Econometrica,
54(3): 555-584.
________________. 1999. "Effects of Pensions on Savings: Analysis with Data
From the Health and Retirement Study". In Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy 50: 271-326.
________________. 2000. "Retirement in a Family Context: A Structural Model
for Husbands and Wives". Journal of Labor Economics 18(3): 503-545.
________________. 2004. ASocial Security, Pensions and Retirement Behavior Within
the Family@. Journal of Applied Econometrics , 19(6): 723-738.
________________. 2005. “The Social Security Early Retirement Age In A Structural
Model of Retirement and Wealth.” Journal of Public Economics 89(2-3): 441-463.
________________. 2006. “Social Security and Retirement Dynamics”. Michigan
Retirement Research Center, Working Paper 2006-121.
________________. 2008. “How Does Modeling of Retirement Decisions at the Family
Level Affect Estimates of the Impact of Social Security Policies on Retirement?” University of
Michigan, Retirement Research Center, Report on Project UM08-03.
________________. 2009. “How Changes in Social Security Affect Recent Retirement
Trends.” Research on Aging 31(2): 261–290.
Gustman, Alan L., Thomas L. Steinmeier and Nahid Tabatabai. 2010a. Pensions in the
Health and Retirement Study. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
_______________. 2010b. “What the Stock Market Decline Means for the Financial
Security and Retirement Choices of the Near-Retirement Population”. Journal of Economic
Perspectives. Winter.
Hurd, Michael D. 1990. AThe Joint Retirement Decision of Husbands and Wives@. In
Issues in the Economics of Aging, edited by David A. Wise. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press: 231-254.
Ibbotson Associates. 2002. Valuation Edition 2002 Yearbook. Chicago: Ibbotson
Associates.
Keane, Michael P. and Kenneth Wolpin. 1997. “The Career Decisions of Young Men.
Journal of Political Economy 105(3): 473-522.

68

Krueger, Alan B., and Pischke, Jorn-Steffen. “The Effect of Social Security on
Labor Supply: A Cohort Analysis of the Notch Generation.” Journal of Labor Economics
10 (4) (Oct. 1992): 412 – 437.
Lundberg, Shelly. 1999. “Family Bargaining and Retirement Behavior,” in Behavioral
Dimensions of Retirement Economics, ed. Henry Aaron, Russell Sage/Brookings: 253-272.
Maestas, Nicole. 2001. ALabor, Love & Leisure: Complementarity and the Timing of
Retirement by Working Couples@. Berkeley: Xerox.
________________. 2010 (forthcoming). “Back to Work: Expectations and Realizations
of Work After Retirement”. Journal of Human Resources.
Michaud, Pierre-Carl. 2003. AJoint Labour Supply Dynamics of Older Couples@.
IZA Discussion Paper 832.
Rust, John and Christoper Phelan. 1997. AHow Social Security and Medicare Affect
Retirement@. Econometrica 65(4):781-831.
Scholz, Seshadri and Khitatrakun. 2006. “Are Americans Saving Optimally for
Retirement”. Journal of Political Economy 114(4): 607-643.
Van der Klaauw, Wilbert and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 2006. ASocial Security and the
Retirement and Savings Behavior of Low Income Households@. Journal of Econometrics 145(12): 21-42.
Venti, Steven F. And David A. Wise. 1999. “Lifetime Earnings, Saving Choices, and
Wealth at Retirement.” In James P. Smith and Robert J. Willis, Editors, Wealth, Work and
Health: Innovations in Measurement in the Social Sciences. Ann Arbor, University of Michigan
Press, pp. 87-120.

69

