                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       CRIMINAL RECIDIVISM AFTER PRISON AND ELECTRONIC MONITORING

                                            Rafael Di Tella
                                         Ernesto Schargrodsky

                                         Working Paper 15602
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15602


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2009




We thank Juan Marcos Wlasiuk, Cecilia de Mendoza and David Lenis for excellent research assistance.
We are grateful to Marcelo Lapargo for generous conversations that improved our understanding of
the legal system. We also thank David Abrams, Rodrigo Borda, Ilyana Kuziemko, Randi Hjalmarsson,
Nestor Gandelman, Julio Rotemberg, Justin Wolfers and participants at Wharton for very helpful discussions.
We also thank participants at the NBER/LICIP, CIfAR (Ottawa), Maryland Crime and Population
Workshop, LACEA, and NBER/IASE conference for comments on earlier versions of this project.
We thank Fernando Diaz, Julio Quintana, Sergio Buffa, Martín Canepa, José Castillos, and Marcelo
Acosta for generous help. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Rafael Di Tella and Ernesto Schargrodsky. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Criminal Recidivism after Prison and Electronic Monitoring
Rafael Di Tella and Ernesto Schargrodsky
NBER Working Paper No. 15602
December 2009, Revised March 2010
JEL No. K42

                                              ABSTRACT

We study the re-arrest rates for two groups: individuals formerly in prison and individuals formerly
under electronic monitoring (EM). We find that the recidivism rate of former prisoners is 22% while
that for those ‘treated’ with electronic monitoring is 13% (40% lower). We convince ourselves that
the estimates are causal using peculiarities of the Argentine setting. For example, we have almost as
much information as the judges have when deciding on the allocation of EM; the program is rationed
to only some offenders; and some institutional features (such as bad prison conditions) convert ideological
differences across judges (to which detainees are randomly matched) into very large differences in
the allocation of electronic monitoring.


Rafael Di Tella
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field Rd
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
and also CIFAR
rditella@hbs.edu

Ernesto Schargrodsky
Universidad Torcuato Di Tella
eschargr@utdt.edu
I. Introduction


Every year a large number of convicted criminals are sent to prison. Given that prisons
are expensive to build and run, and often involve cruel treatment of fellow citizens,
possibly contributing to the conversion of inmates into ‗hardened‘ criminals, it is
unsurprising that alternatives to imprisonment have been tried out. One of the more
intriguing experiments in this area is the substitution of incarceration for electronic
monitoring (EM).1 ‗Tagging‘, as it is also sometimes called, involves fitting offenders
with an electronic device (typically on the ankle) that can be monitored remotely by
employees of a correctional facility who can verify whether the individual is violating a
set of pre-established conditions. The most common of these conditions is to stay at
home, although in some cases a provision for attending work or school is included. By
2007, more than 250,000 people in the US and Europe alone had been ‗treated‘ with
electronic monitoring, in spite of the obvious complexity of a full cost-benefit analysis. In
this paper we seek to contribute to an evaluation of electronic monitoring (and more
broadly to the debate about the effectiveness of using prisons) by providing one of the
estimates needed for such an exercise: the difference between the recidivism rate of
offenders formerly under electronic monitoring and the recidivism rate for offenders
released from a standard prison.


Theoretically, the difference in these two recidivism rates is ambiguous. On the one hand,
specific deterrence theory suggests that spending time under electronic monitoring rather
than incarceration might make low punishment salient, implying a positive relationship
between light punishment (electronic monitoring) and ulterior recidivism. On the other
hand, several theories point out to a negative relationship. For example, imprisonment
might be criminogenic through harsh prison conditions or peer effects that are not present
under electronic monitoring. In particular, electronic monitoring could prevent contact
with hardened criminals, or reduce the perception that society is ‗mean‘ and ‗deserving of
the crime it receives‘ (one variation is in Sherman and Strang, 2007). Moreover,


1
 See, for example, the discussions in Schwitzgebel (1969), Petersilia (1987), Schmidt and Curtis (1987),
Morris and Tonry (1990), Tonry (1998), and Payne and Gainey (1998).


                                                   2
electronic monitoring could differ from prison in its effect on the improvement of skills
(social, applied or cognitive) and labor market prospects.2


A simple comparison of recidivism rates across the prison and electronic monitoring
samples, however, is typically unlikely to be very informative. There are at least two
practical empirical problems in trying to derive a causal estimate, one of which can be
called a problem of selection and the second a problem of differential risk of the target
population. The problem of selection refers to the fact that, at least one criterion for the
granting of electronic monitoring to an offender is her/his potential risk of recidivism.
Thus, low post-release recidivism of a population of offenders treated with electronic
monitoring could simply reflect the success of the legal system at the selection stage if
the objective was to target ‗kind types‘ (low risk offenders). The problem of the
‗differential risk of the target population‘ refers to the possibility that electronic
monitoring programs are applied to low risk populations (for example, drunk drivers).
The failure to detect a negative effect of electronic monitoring on ulterior recidivism
could simply reflect that this population is at very low risk of crime in general and that
the control population receives a very light treatment (short prison sentences with good
prison conditions).


In practice, these and other problems have interfered with the evaluation of electronic
monitoring. In a recent review by Renzema and Mayo-Wilson (2005) the authors
conclude that “applications of Electronic Monitoring as a tool for reducing crime are not
supported by existing data.” A similar conclusion is reached in the review by Aos, et al
(2006), who “find that the average electronic monitoring program does not have a
statistically significant effect on recidivism rates”.




2
  Reviewing the vast literature on these issues is beyond the scope of this paper. But many relevant aspects
are covered in the recent review by Bushway and Paternoster (2009). See also Nagin (1998) on the
evidence on deterrence, as well as Sherman and Berk (1984), Smith and Gartin (1989), Stafford and Warr
(1993) and Piquero and Pogarsy (2002) for discussions of different aspects of deterrence. On peer effects,
see, for example, Glaeser et al, (1996) and Bayer et al, (2009). An early reference on the correlation
between cognitive skills and imprisonment is Banister, et al, (1973). Stigmatization following incarceration
is discussed, for example, in Schwartz and Skolnick (1962).


                                                     3
In this paper we study electronic monitoring in the Province of Buenos Aires, Argentina.
We measure recidivism through re-arrest rates of offenders treated with electronic
monitoring since the program‘s inception in the late 1990‘s. As a benchmark, we take a
group of former prisoners of similar observable characteristics treated with incarceration.
We find a large, negative and significant correlation between electronic monitoring and
re-arrest rates. The correlation survives different specifications.


A reasonable interpretation of our estimate is that it is the causal effect of treating an
apprehended offender with electronic monitoring instead of prison. The main reason is
that offenders are randomly matched to judges and the likelihood an offender is sent to
electronic monitoring instead of prison differs substantially across judges. This occurs, in
part, because of the usual ideological differences across judges, and in part because these
differences become exaggerated when liberal-leaning judges are reluctant to send
offenders on pre-trial detention (i.e., who in most cases have not received a final sentence
in a full trial) to Argentine prisons frequently denounced as too cruel by human rights
organizations. Indeed, some judges (often called ―garantistas‖ –from ―individual
guarantees‖, which in the US would approximately correspond to liberal) often send
offenders to electronic monitoring whereas other judges never do so (these are often
called ―mano dura‖ –literally ―tough hand‖, which in the US would approximately
correspond to conservative). The assignment of judges is exogenous to prisoners‘
characteristics: whenever a person is detained by the police, she/he is assigned to the
judge who was on duty on that day, and duty turns are assigned by a lottery. With
extreme ideological differences (and judges behaving like automata who never send an
offender to prison), the process results in a correlation that can be directly interpreted as
the causal effect of electronic monitoring on recidivism. Alternatively, it is possible to
instrument the decision to send an offender to prison or electronic monitoring with a
proxy for the judge‘s ideology. This also reveals a negative and significant effect of
electronic monitoring on later re-arrest rates.


Two other features of this setting contribute to a causal interpretation of our findings.
First, the judge in charge of allocating EM typically does so without meeting the offender



                                              4
and immediately after arrest rather than after a lengthy trial. This means that the
information available to the judge is very close to the information available to us, so that
controlling for observables is likely to circumvent a substantial part of the selection
problem. Second, we can exploit the fact that the EM program is relatively small, with
capacity to supervise a maximum of 300 offenders at any point in time. Thus, even
without random assignment to judges, those that receive EM are likely to be similar to
other offenders sent to prison by that same judge.


These institutional features of the Argentine setting also ensure that electronic monitoring
is applied to offenders that have committed relatively serious crimes, thus addressing the
problem of differentially low risk of the target population. Note also that electronic
monitoring in Argentina is associated with the objective of lessening the punishment
during the pre-trial period. In other words, the counterfactual for the group under
electronic monitoring is incarceration. This is to be contrasted to the phenomenon of ‗net
widening‘ in the US, whereby electronic monitoring is linked to an increased
punitiveness of the penal system, as it is applied to former prisoners who would have
otherwise been on lower supervision (e.g, parole supervision). Finally, it is worth
emphasizing that EM in Argentina does not complement other programs (education,
work, anger management, drug addiction, alcohol abuse, etc) as a requisite, something
that facilitates the interpretation of our treatment.3


Previous work on electronic monitoring using data from the US has been inconclusive.
For example, Courtright, et al (1997) compares recidivism for drunk driving offenders
treated with electronic monitoring versus those receiving jail sentences. The recidivism
rates following release were extremely low for both groups (and the difference was not
significant). The paper by Gainey, et al (2000) finds some evidence of lower recidivism
amongst (mostly low risk) offenders who spend time under electronic monitoring, but the
effect is not robust to the inclusion of control variables. Previous work has found it hard

3
  The evidence available from the US and Europe typically refers to concomitant programs, where
electronic monitoring is only one of the treatments received (see, for example, Bonta et al, 2000, and the
description in Gainey et al, 2000). Renzema and Mayo-Wilson (2005) discuss studies focused on groups
judged to have intermediate and high risk of recidivism, which are still on the low side when compared to
the groups we study.


                                                    5
to control for the possibility that offenders treated with prison might be particularly
dangerous and inherently more likely to commit crimes.4 Renzema and Mayo-Wilson
(2005) review the literature and find only two studies with random assignment and with
recidivism as the dependent variable, including Petersilia and Turner (1990).
Unfortunately they describe several limitations in these studies (including incomplete
administration of the program) and conclude that they do not help in the evaluation of
electronic monitoring.5 An interesting paper is Marklund and Holmberg (2009), which
evaluates a Swedish program that allows prisoners to apply to electronic monitoring as a
substitute for prison (early release) as long as they have an occupation and they subject
themselves to regular sobriety controls.6 They find that participation in the electronic
monitoring program is associated with lower recidivism.


Our paper is also related to work studying the effect of incarceration on recidivism,
where a similar selection problem is present (see, for example, Lerman, 2009 and
Villettaz, Killias and Zoder, 2006). Two comprehensive reviews by Gendreau, Goggin
and Cullen (1999) and by Nagin, Cullen and Jonson (2009) conclude that incarceration
appears to have a null or mildly criminogenic effect on future criminal behavior, but that
the evidence is not sufficiently strong to be used in policy. Two recent papers by Chen
and Shapiro (2007) and Kuziemko (2007) pays special attention to selection and reach
somewhat different conclusions. Chen and Shapiro (2007) exploit the fact that there is a
discontinuity in the mechanism that assigns prisoners to security levels (and hence prison

4
  Interestingly, papers that look at re-arrest rates of people with different lengths of time on electronic
monitoring (but that are all treated) suffer less from this criticism. The fragility of the results in Gainey, et
al (2000) is thus particularly disappointing.
5
  It is worth pointing out that the sign of the bias introduced by selection problems depends on the nature of
the program. For example, Finn and Muirhead-Steves (2002) describe the application of electronic
monitoring to violent offenders who would otherwise have been released in Georgia, US. It is compared
with a group of violent offenders who were released and finds no difference in recidivism rates. Given that
this is a case of net widening, the selection problem has the opposite sign: those selected for continued
supervision are potentially at a higher risk of recidivism, so the similarity in recidivism rates is consistent
with positive effects of electronic monitoring.
6
   The average age of the electronic monitoring group was 38. Of them, 19% received help from the
probation service in finding a job, while 28% had arranged participation in a program organized by the
state employment agency, with the rest having regular jobs that they had organized themselves. In
comparison to the prison population sentenced to a similar term in prison (more than two years), the group
of successful applicants to the electronic monitoring program contained a smaller proportion of individuals
with more than a single prior court conviction and/or who had used drugs during their time in prison. They
were also more often married or had a partner with whom they lived than the prison population.


                                                       6
conditions) in the US. Thus, they are able to observe recidivism rates of former prisoners
that were ex-ante very similar (i.e., on both ―sides‖ of the cutoffs) and conclude that, if
anything, harsher prison conditions lead to slightly higher recidivism rates. On the other
hand, Kuziemko (2007) finds that recidivism falls with time served using two different
identification strategies. In one, she exploits ―an over-crowding crisis‖ which resulted in
the release of 900 prisoners on a single day, so that conditional on the original sentence,
the length of time served for this group was determined by the date the sentence began.
The second is a regression-discontinuity design using the variation in time served
generated by cut-offs in parole-board guidelines. See also Song and Lieb (1993), Helland
and Tabarrok (2007), Bhati and Piquero (2008) and Drago, et al (2009).7 It is also worth
mentioning that one of the identification strategies used here, based on random
assignment to judges with different ideological inclination, is not new. For example it is
very much related to the one recently employed by Kling (2006) in his study of the
effects of incarceration length on employment and earnings. He finds no consistent effect
using instrumental variables for incarceration length based on randomly assigned judges
with different sentencing propensities.8


Section II describes the implementation of electronic surveillance in the Province of
Buenos Aires. Section III describes our data and empirical strategy. Section IV presents
our main set of results, while Section V provides a discussion that includes the problem
of escapees. Section VI concludes.




II. Crime and Electronic Monitoring in Argentina


Crime in Latin America is a major social and economic problem. For example, deaths
due to violence in Latin America is 200% higher than in North America and in the
Western Pacific, 450% higher than in Western Europe, and 30% higher than in the former

7
  See also Needels (1996). Iyengar (2010) discusses the difficulties in interpretation of experiments that
have not been widely communicated to the public.
8
  Other papers studying measures of inter judge variation in sentencing include Waldfogel (1991), Payne
(1997) and Anderson, et al (1999). Using variation in sentencing across randomly assigned judges, a recent
paper by Green and Winik (2008) finds similar recidivism rates after incarceration and probation.


                                                    7
communist bloc (Soares and Naritomi, 2010). Our data comes from Argentina, a country
with traditionally low levels of crime which has conformed to the Latin American
patterns of high crime rates during the early 1990‘s. Within Argentina, we focus on the
largest province, Buenos Aires, which has been the first district in Latin America to
implement an electronic surveillance system for the custody of offenders. The Province
of Buenos Aires is the most significant economically and the most populated of
Argentina, with a population of almost 15 million people (about 37.9% of the population
of the country). In 2007, the Penitentiary Service of the Province of Buenos Aires hosted
a population of approximately 25,170 inmates, which represents 41.5% of the total
imprisoned population of the whole country.9


The system of electronic monitoring (EM) in the Province of Buenos Aires started in
December of 1997.10 At its inception, electronic monitoring was granted to the old and
terminally ill, with the objective of allowing them to spend their final days with their
families and under house arrest. Soon, all new entries to the electronic monitoring
program were detainees awaiting the final sentence (Argentine legislation only allows the
use of EM as a reduction in the severity of punishment to those awaiting trial). Over time
the coverage shifted towards individuals under criminal indictment awaiting trial. As far
as we can tell (from the data presented in this paper and from the interviews with key
informants), there were no restrictions and any individual accused of any crime qualified
for the use of electronic monitoring. Given the very slow functioning legal system, this
period can be substantial and a large proportion of individuals under the supervision of

9
  The imprisonment rate of the Province of Buenos Aires (188 per hundred thousand population) is higher
than the country‘s rate (156). As a reference, consider that this rate for the US is 737, 262 for Chile, 211 for
Brazil, 198 for Mexico, 193 for Uruguay, 107 for Canada, 85 for France and 93 for Germany. Isla and
Miguez (2003) provide an account of urban violence in Argentina using ethnographic evidence from low
income areas, prisons and gangs.
10
   Gomme (1995) explains that the first electronic monitoring device was developed by Harvard
psychologist Robert Schwitzgebel as a humane and inexpensive alternative to custody. ‗Dr. Schwitzgebel's
Machine,' as it was called, consisted of a battery pack and a transmitter capable of emitting a signal to a
receiver within a quarter-mile. In 1977, Judge Jack Love of Albuquerque, New Mexico was inspired by an
episode in the Spiderman comic book series to explore the possible use of electronic monitoring for
offenders. Spiderman, the comic book hero, had been tagged with a device that allowed a villain to track
his every move. Judge Love persuaded an electronics expert, Michael Goss, to design and manufacture a
monitoring device and in 1983, Love sentenced the first offender to house arrest with electronic monitoring
(Gomme, 1995). As cited in a The John Howard Society of Alberta, 2000.



                                                       8
the penal system are awaiting a definitive sentence. In the province of Buenos Aires, up
to 85% of detainees were in this category during our sample period. Since its inception,
and up until April 2007, more than 910 men had been at some point under electronic
surveillance.


The electronic monitoring system in the province of Buenos Aires consists of a bracelet
worn in the ankle or wrist of the offender. The bracelet transmits a signal to a receptor
installed in the inmate‘s house. The receptor has a battery in case there is an electric
stoppage. If the signal is interrupted, manipulation is detected, or vital signs of the
individual are not received, the receptor sends a signal to the service provider through a
telephone line.11 The provider tries to investigate the reason for the signal and, whenever
necessary, reports to the penitentiary system which sends a patrol unit to the inmate‘s
house.12 The contractor is the South American representative of a leading international
provider. The fee paid by the provincial government in May 2007 was $32
(approximately U$10) per month. The Buenos Aires Penitentiary Service has a small
office (employing fewer than 20 employees) that is in charge of the administration..


An important factor is how the monitoring surveillance system is allocated. The
surveillance program is relatively small, with a capacity of handling a maximum of 300
detainees simultaneously. The process of allocating a bracelet is as follows. When a
person is arrested, the police must first decide whether to ―convert‖ the apprehension into
a detention. The overwhelming majority of cases are immediately converted (for
example, because they involve flagrance, i.e., individuals apprehended while they
commit crimes) and assigned to a State-appointed defense attorney, a prosecutor (in
charge of the investigation) and a judge. The identity of the judge that will be put in

11
   Note that a requirement is that the offender has a telephone, so there could be a problem of selection if
some offenders do not have access to a telephone. It was explained to us that in practice this does not occur,
perhaps because of the enormous desirability of EM relative to prison. Obtaining a telephone is relatively
cheap. We checked with the telephone company, which confirmed that within a maximum of 30 days a
connection can be obtained in the province of Buenos Aires. We also obtained census data which
confirmed that a significant fraction of low income people have access to telephone service. For example
the 2001 census reveals that, within the lowest income group (characterized by having unmet basic needs,
which accounts for 13% of the population of the province of Buenos Aires), 40% has a telephone.
12
   More modern versions, like the one introduced in Bogota, Colombia, in 2009, perform the monitoring
globally through a global positioning system (GPS).


                                                      9
charge varies depending on who was on duty in that district on the day of the
apprehension. One turn on duty lasts for one or two weeks and duty turns are assigned by
a lottery.13 Thus, the allocation of judges to prisoners is exogenous to prisoners‘
characteristics. With the offender under police custody, the prosecutor can ask the judge
to detain the offender ―preemptively‖ until the trial if he/she represents a flight risk (or
might endanger/interfere with the investigation). While it is possible in principle for the
judge to require more information for her/his decision (and even interview the offender),
this is extremely rare in practice.14 At the discretion of the judge, he/she can detain the
offender at home with electronic monitoring instead of prison. 15 If there are no available
equipments, then the detainee is incorporated into a waiting list. The program was
discontinued in October 2008 after the Fernandez massacre (see below). Our sample
period ends October 2007 (when we were allowed to start hand collecting the data).




III. Data and Empirical Strategy


III.a. Data
Our aim is to compare the effect of electronic monitoring with the effect of imprisonment
on criminal recidivism. Our data were compiled from two sources within the
administrative records of the Penitentiary Service of the Province of Buenos Aires. The
first data source, which was relatively easy to obtain, does not have information on
recidivism but has data on other characteristics of offenders. For the purposes of
inclusion in our sample, we first consider all the men that went through the Buenos Aires
penal system from January 1, 1998 until October 23, 2007. Given that the involvement in

13
   A potential problem is that criminals could find out who is the judge on duty on a given day and decide
their criminal behavior based on that information. In practice, it was explained to us by key informants
(which included defense lawyers for low income groups) that this never occurs. When asked to suggest
how this could happen, one informant answered that it could possibly apply to sophisticated criminals –
operating in bands – but that he himself had not heard of it. Note that drug trafficking is a federal offense
and is not part of our sample.
14
   We have explicitly asked about to several informants. None reported knowing of such a case. A system
of bail is only used for economic crimes.
15
   It is inadmissible for judges to use the type of crime (or the expected penalty) as a justification for denial
of electronic monitoring (see the rulings on the Verbitsky case and, in particular, the Diaz Bessone case by
the Camara de Casacion Penal, ―Diaz Bessone, Ramón Genaro s/recurso de inaplicabilidad de ley' - CNCP
30/10/2008).


                                                      10
criminal activity declines with age (see for example, Freeman, 1996 and Hansen, 2003),
we focus on men below 40 years of age (born after January 1, 1957).16 This first cut
leaves a sample of 43,618 men.


We then construct two groups. The first group (the electronic monitoring group) is made
up of individuals whose last period under the supervision of the penal system was spent
under electronic monitoring. We exclude from this group offenders that are in our sample
but that died while under electronic monitoring. We also exclude those that were sick and
those with missing data on the specific type of crime, their birth date, their detention date,
or their release date. This gives a monitoring surveillance group of 454 individuals.


The second group (the comparison group) is constructed using a similar criterion. It starts
with the group whose last period under the supervision of the penal system was spent in
prison. We then exclude offenders that passed away, the sick, those characterized as
dangerous, and those with missing data on the specific type of crime, birth date, detention
date, or release date. This leaves a sample of 37,378 individuals who were released from
prisons. Table A shows the pattern of crimes for these two populations. A unique feature
of the Argentine system is immediately apparent: many of the offenders under electronic
monitoring are being prosecuted for serious offenses.


Data on recidivism for these individuals is not publicly available and was kept separately.
When we approached the Buenos Aires Penitentiary Service with our request to access
this second data source, it was granted (after several requests) under the condition that the
data was copied by hand (i.e., the files could not leave their premises). This meant that
copying the information for the full sample with three research assistants was impractical.
We note that judicial sentencing decisions in advanced countries take primarily into
account criminal history and offense category. In the US, for example, efforts to reduce
sentencing disparities (which led to sentencing commissions and presumptive sentencing
guidelines) led to emphasis on these two variables (see, for example, chapter 2 in Morris

16
  The average age in our sample is 27. The upper limit on 40 is a compromise between the assumption that
offending peaks in the mid twenties and the findings of Piquero et al (2001), who show that many more
offenders are on trajectories that are non-declining in age when incapacitation periods are take into account.


                                                     11
and Tonry, 1990). One example is the sentencing grid of the Minnesota sentencing
guidelines system which gives the presumptive sentence for each offense/criminal history
combination. Likewise, in their review of the evidence, Nagin, Cullen and Jonson (2009)
emphasize work that are able to measure a ―minimum set of control variables –age, race,
sex, prior record and current offense.‖ (see page 148). We note that in the Argentine
setting, data on even such a minimal set of control variables is theoretically superfluous
because we are not dealing with sentencing decisions (but rather pre-trial detention). We
then decided on the following matching criteria. For each prisoner in the first group
(released from electronic monitoring), we identified all those prisoners with similar age
(+/- 6 months), similar imprisonment date (+/- 6 months), similar imprisonment length
(+/- 20 percent), same type of crime, same number of episodes of previous imprisonment,
and with similar judicial status. Finally, from this group (the matching group of prisoners
identified for each offender under EM), we randomly selected three individuals. Note that
the features of the pre-trial detention setting and the fact that we can select matches from
a very large group of former prisoners means that we do not run into the ―curse of
dimensionality‖ (see Nagin, Cullen and Jonson, 2009 on the practical problems in
previous work that have too many variables to match).


This second source had more detailed information (besides recidivism) which allowed us
to reconfirm the information we had already collected (in particular, on the intervening
judge), and correct multiple entries (when individuals re-offending had given slightly
different names on the second entry into the penal system). A small group (of 7
individuals) spent time under electronic monitoring but later went back to prison (because
of misconduct or because they received a final sentence) and are also excluded.17 This



17
  The reason for their return to prison varies across cases. Note that they may distort our estimates if they
are particularly ―bad types‖ (as that would generate a selected sample of those in electronic monitoring).
However, a really ―bad type‖ would escape supervision altogether and avoid being re-sent to prison.
Escapees do not pose a problem as they count when they commit new crimes (see the discussion in section
IV.c. below, where we also report data on the relatively high recidivism rate of escapees in our sample). We
run some robustness tests including the 7 ―returnees‖ in our sample of electronic monitoring. Even if we
use the most pessimistic assumptions we find that our main results are not affected. As an illustration note
that a back of the envelope calculation suggests that if we count all 7 of them and then assume that they all
recidivate at the rate of the prison sample, the recidivism of the electronic monitoring sample would rise to
13.4% (from 13.21%). If all of the 7 are assumed to re-offend and get apprehended by the police, then the


                                                    12
procedure gave us complete information for a total database of 1,538 individuals (1,152
formerly in prison and 386 formerly under electronic monitoring). Note that after this
detailed information is used as filter the remaining data is no longer exactly matched 3:1
(2.98:1 instead of 3:1). The second information source also provided data on the number
and type of visitors each individual had while imprisoned and a measure of their
estimated income based on their profession.


III.b. Empirical Strategy
We compare the recidivism rate of the electronic monitoring and prison population
running the following regression model:


                  Recidivism i  α   ElectronicMonitoringi  ε i                           (1)


where Recidivismi is a dummy variable that indicates whether individual i went back to
detention in the Province of Buenos Aires after his release; Electronic Monitoringi is a
dummy variable that indicates whether individual i was in the electronic monitoring
group. We also include in some specifications a set of controls (although note that in the
basic regressions the sample is matched following age, time since release, detention time,
previous imprisonment, type of crime and year of release).


An obvious concern with this strategy is that the allocation of electronic monitoring to
offenders is potentially non-random but instead follows the type of criminal. In particular,
the concern is that electronic monitoring is assigned to individuals that have a ―kind‖ type
or that have a lower risk of re-offending following release. We provide several pieces of
evidence that reasonably suggest that this is not a serious concern in our sample and
suggest different approaches to obtain a causal estimate of the parameter of interest.
Some of this evidence originates in differences across judges.




rate would rise to 14.8%. Thus, the effect of electronic monitoring would be 7.5 percentage points (instead
of 9), or a fall in the recidivism rate of 33% (instead of 40%).


                                                    13
Institutional Features of the Argentine Context
Although the Argentine legal system gives de jure less discretion to judges than in
common law countries, de facto judges have ample room to express their views.
Heterogeneity in views comes from a combination of ideology and practical
considerations. Of particular relevance in the case of Argentina is differences across
judges over what to do with individuals accused of crimes before they receive a final
sentence (whereas in the US judicial ideology gives rise to differences in sentencing
across judges). Indeed, given the slow rate at which individuals accused of crimes are
brought to trial and receive a final sentence, a pressing decision for judges is what to do
with these individuals as they enter the oversight of the legal system and until they
receive a firm sentence, either because they have reached the end of the appeals process
or because they have opted for not appealing their sentences (very few cases). Two
extreme judicial positions have been widely reported in the media: garantistas vs mano
dura, which, mutatis mutandis, corresponds to the debate in the US between liberal and
conservative judges. A liberal judge (or garantista) may take the position that in
Argentina prisons have poor conditions that violate basic human rights and thus, should
be used very rarely for pre-trial detention.18 Moreover, individuals that do not have a final
sentence (for example, because they have appealed their conviction in a lower court) are
innocent and therefore should be either free or, theoretically, if they are unable to provide
economic guarantees (individually or through a family member) that they do not
represent a flight risk to the court, then with minimum supervision (because such lack of
guarantees are derived from low socioeconomic status rather than actions for which
individuals themselves are responsible).


On the other hand, a conservative (or ―mano dura‖) judge, would emphasize the rights of
victims and their families. They might also consider prisons to be in bad shape, but not
out of line with other problems in the country. Moreover, he/she may take the position
that individuals coming before him or her are already likely to be guilty (given that the


18
   On overcrowding and prison conditions in the Province of Buenos Aires, see Borda and Pol (2007). See
―Latin American Prisons: Inhuman Hell on Earth -Rights Violations, Violence are Rampant‖, The Seattle
Times, February 17, 1997. Katz, et al (2003) show that even in the US, prison conditions can have a large
effect on behavior.


                                                   14
police is unable to cast a very wide net, it brings to the attention of the legal system only
cases where there is clear evidence against the detainee). This would explain why the
system incarcerates the vast majority of those accused of criminal acts, even before they
have been convicted in their first trial. Interestingly, while in other countries there has
been an attempt to introduce procedures that harmonize treatment, at least when it comes
to sentencing, so as to remove the arbitrary component of the judge‘s identity (for
example, sentencing guidelines have been adopted to encourage consistency of
sentencing across judges in the US and the UK), these are absent in Argentina.


This results in an institutional setting where judges have very different criteria when it
comes to assigning electronic monitoring. Liberal judges regularly assign it, while
conservative judges never do so. The rhetoric used is consistent with these differences.
As an illustration of the liberal position consider the case of Eugenio Zaffaroni, a
Supreme Court judge who explains that electronic monitoring violates basic human rights
and introduces the danger that we could all be monitored in a prison-society, but that it
should not be denied to individuals detained without a sentence whose only alternative is
confinement in overcrowded prisons.19 As another illustration consider Judge Schiavo,
who stated that ―denying electronic monitoring because a person is ‗dangerous‘ would
violate the law and the National Constitution‖. Judge Schiavo is noteworthy because he
assigned electronic monitoring to a certain Angel Fernandez, accused of illegal
possession of a handgun, a relatively minor offense. While under electronic monitoring,
Fernandez killed a family of four (children aged 8 and 10). Fernandez had a prior entry
into the penal system: in 1987 he had been convicted to 25 years in prison for robbery,
rape, followed by triple a murder.20


As an illustration of the conservative position, consider the statement of Judge Ramos
Padilla when rejecting the pre-trial release of an individual accused of robbery, with 15
19
   See ―Electronic Monitoring is today‘s shackle with a Bloody Iron Ball‖, by Eugenio Zaffaroni in Critica,
October 1st, 2008.
20
   He had been released after only 15 years because a law at the time mandated that days in prison without a
final conviction count double. Schiavo‘s statement about the inadmissibility of using evidence on
―dangerousness‖ at the time of deciding on conditions of pre-trial detention was made to the media
following the Fernandez affair. See, for example, ―Should Judge Schiavo stand trial?‖, by María Helena
Ripetta, Luciana Geuna and Santiago Casanello, in Critica, October 5th, 2008.


                                                    15
prior penal convictions: ―I am unwilling to face the accused again if he were in the future
to be accused of murder during a robbery, and to have to give explanations to the family
of whomever might be his victim‖.21 Another illustration comes from simply noting the
political demands for more punitive judges. A newspaper reported ―Former Argentine
President Nestor Kirchner followed up the assault initiated by his wife, Cristina Kirchner
against the Judicial power by stating that it is time for magistrates to ‗put on their long
trousers‘ and stop ‗liberating and liberating‘ criminals.‖22


Data on Judges in our Sample
Besides the rhetorical evidence on judge heterogeneity, we can formally examine
differences in pre-trial detention practices across judges. The assignment to electronic
monitoring or prison by a judge (who happens to be on duty the day of apprehension)
takes place with a minimum of information, the main one being the type of crime for
which an individual is accused. If these judges were selecting the ―kindest‖ criminals for
treatment with electronic monitoring (retribution logic), we would see no person accused
of homicide in the EM sample.23 Yet, the anecdotal evidence discussed above suggests
this is not the case. Table A shows that this is not an isolated case. There are 36
individuals accused of homicide who receive electronic monitoring, which constitutes
7.93% of the EM sample. A t-test comfortably rejects equality to zero. This is relatively
strong evidence that selection on retribution grounds is not guiding assignment.


Alternatively, if these judges were selecting the criminals with lowest risk of recidivism
(deterrence logic) we would expect to see no person accused of robbery in the EM

21
   He then added ―I can‘t make a generalized criticism of colleagues who probably take into account the
shortcomings of prison institutions, the lack of resources of the judicial system, the excessive work load,
and the deficiencies in some laws, and then proceed to take responsibility for situations that, at the end of
the day, correspond to other branches of the State. … each one of the powers of the State must accept its
responsibilities and judges must act according to the mandate in the preamble of the Constitution, attending
to the concrete realities faced by the penal system…‖. See ―Judge Rejects Freedom-Pending-trial and
criticizes ‗garantista‘ collegues‖, in El Dia, Monday, October 3rd 2009.
22
   See, for example, ―Néstor Kirchner: It is time for the Judicial System to put on the long trousers‖, in La
Nación, Thursday, October 30th 2008. To which Supreme Court judge Eugenio Zaffaroni replied: ―Some
hypocrites expect that everyone is locked up and that judges act as executioners of the poor and the
excluded. They ask that children are sentenced to jails were they will be raped so that they emerge as
psychopathic killers‖. In ―Kirchner is badly mistaken‖, Crítica, November 2nd, 2008.
23
   Note that the ―retribution‖ logic is being applied in a sample of individuals accused but not yet tried in
court (although given the slow/inefficient legal system, only strong cases are brought forward).


                                                    16
sample.24 Yet, Table A shows that there are 246 individuals accused of aggravated
robbery who receive electronic monitoring, which constitutes 54.41 % of the EM sample.
A t-test comfortably rejects equality to zero. This is relatively strong evidence that
selection on deterrence grounds is not guiding assignment.


Table A is also informative because it contains the types of crimes committed by the
prison population.25 For example, there are 2,687 individuals imprisoned for Homicide,
which is 7.03% of the sample. For attempted homicide, the number is 545, or 1.55% of
the sample. Given that these numbers are remarkably close to those in the electronic
monitoring sample (compare with 7.93% and 1.76% respectively), it is possible that the
distribution of crimes is similar for the two samples.26 The hypothesis that judges are
selecting the ―kind‖ types to send to electronic monitoring requires (at least) that the
electronic monitoring sample has relatively low frequency for the more serious crimes.
The evidence suggests that there are no differences in the more serious categories (in fact
the point estimate is higher for the electronic monitoring sample). It is also possible to
run a regression of electronic monitoring on the types of crimes (this can be done for the
full sample of 37,832 offenders). For illustrative purposes, Table B presents the results of
three simple OLS regressions where the dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the
offender received electronic monitoring at some point and 0 otherwise. Column (1)
includes only a dummy equal to 1 if the court ever sent an offender to electronic
monitoring. The coefficient is positive and highly significant. Column (2) repeats this
estimation but includes the indicators for the type of crimes (homicide is the base
category). The shaded categories are crimes that are broadly similar in terms of
seriousness (defined as those categories for which the Argentine legislation provides
broadly similar penalties). As can be seen, severity of the crime has no predictive power

24
   Robbery is the category with highest recidivism rate in our sample. Langan and Levin (2002) report
recidivism rates in the US, by type of offense. It shows that the percent of released prisoners who, within 3
years, were re-arrested was highest for property crimes (79% for motor vehicle theft) and lowest for violent
offenses (under 41% for homicide; no controls for age included). Recidivism rate for robbery was 70.2%.
The classification used is not identical to that used in Argentina.
25
   Note that drug-trafficking is a federal offense so individuals accused of this crime are not part of our
sample.
26
   Indeed, we test if the distribution of crimes in the electronic monitoring sample is similar to the
distribution of crimes in the prison sample and we cannot reject equality. This test does not take into
account the severity of the crimes and weighs equally similarity in any category.


                                                    17
on the allocation of electronic monitoring (more appropriate estimation strategies, such as
probit estimation, yield similar results). Moreover, the point estimate of Court ever sent
to EM experiences no significant change when these controls are included (the adjusted R
squared is 0.01, also unchanged; compare with 0.0005 in column 3).


Further evidence on this issue can be gathered by looking at data on judges. Table C uses
data on the 199 judges in our sample. Of these, only 101 (or 50.7%) have ever used
electronic monitoring. Thus, we have evidence that approximately half our sample of
judges have never used electronic monitoring when it was available to them. This is
consistent with ideological judges (constrained by the 300 bracelet limit). Of course, this
could also be considered a noisy indicator of the judge‘s inclination to use it. For
example, some judges might have used it initially by accident or to experiment or under
an incomplete understanding of its implications, and subsequently decided not to use it.
Alternatively, some judge‘s that appear as not having sent anyone to electronic
monitoring might have done so but were unsuccessful in obtaining it given that the
electronic monitoring program was small. Note in the bottom half of Table B that some
judges are effective in sending a high proportion of people to electronic monitoring.




IV. Results


We present three different ways of exploiting the environment described to arrive at
causal estimates of the effect of electronic monitoring on recidivism. As a baseline note
that a simple test of means suggest differences in recidivism between the electronic
monitoring and the prison population. The recidivism rate (i.e., the proportion of
individuals released from the penal system that have returned for another crime) is
22.22% for offenders released from prison, whereas it drops to 13.21% for those released
after electronic monitoring.27



27
   The period for which is calculated varies across individuals. On average, 7.1% (10.5%) of those released
from EM (prison) re-offend and are apprehended within the first year.


                                                    18
IV.a. Selection on Observables
The first identification approach exploits the fact that the judge allocating EM has to
make the decision with very little information. Thus, a plausible assumption is that we
have available the same amount of information as the judge has at the moment of
allocation. Note that the judge is not initially sentencing the offender at a trial where the
objective is to find out if the accusations are true and where judges might want to find out
more about the accused. He/she is simply replying to a request by the prosecutor to keep
a person detained until trial, evaluating only if the offender represents a flight risk (the
only other criterion is if the offender can interfere with the investigation, and it usually
plays a minor role). In principle, they could ask to interview the offender. However, we
are unaware that it ever happens. In practice, the decision of the judge is relatively
straightforward, perhaps because the police only bring forward a relatively small set of
cases, the vast majority of which involve offenders caught during a criminal act (or, in
some occasions, very shortly thereafter). Thus, a simple way to address the potential
selection bias in our estimates is to collect data on the observables available to the judge
so as to ensure that we make comparisons across similar individuals that only differ in
their prison experience.28 Our sample is matched along types of crimes for which the
offenders are being accused, which is the main variable potentially affecting the
decision.29 They are also matched for age, imprisonment date, imprisonment length, same
number of episodes of previous imprisonment, and judicial status.


Column (1) in Table 1A presents an OLS regression between recidivism and a dummy
indicating if the person was released from electronic monitoring. The coefficient repeats
the observation that difference between the two groups is 9.01%. Column (2) repeats the
regression including the above mentioned set of controls plus a set of geographic
dummies. The coefficient on EM does not change (the sample is matched along these
controls, with the exception of the geographic information), while those on the types of
28
   Heckman, Ichimura, Smith and Todd (1998) show that efforts to focus on groups that are similar along
observable dimensions to the group of interest (for example using propensity scores) can be as effective as
random assignment. For an interesting discussion on the role of age and criminal history in sentencing, see
Bushway and Piehl (2007).
29
   Note that, as emphasized by garantista judges (see the excerpts above), using the type of crime as a
criterion in the allocation of electronic monitoring is unconstitutional (this point was later made explicitly
in the so-called Diaz Bessone case mentioned above).


                                                     19
crime are consistent with what we expect from other studies (with highly significant, like
robbery and attempted robbery). Column (3) repeats the exercise with a probit regression.
The implied marginal effect is again 9 percentage points. Column (4) repeats the exercise
restricting the sample to the most common type of crime (Robbery or Aggravated
Robbery), finding similar results.


In the first three columns of Table 1B we exploit some of the added information
regarding the prison population. As explained above, the judge does not seem to have
(and is not supposed to use) this extra information. The approach, however, shows the
robustness of the results, perhaps allowing comparison with different types of prisoners.
Two dimensions are explored: income (captured through the offender‘s profession,
converted into a monetary value using the average income earned by people with these
professions in the Buenos Aires household survey) and family connections (spouse,
number of visits by the spouse, number of visits by the inmate‘s children and number of
visits by the inmate‘s siblings). The results are extremely similar, though the sample size
falls due to some missing data.30


IV.b. Capacity Limits of the Program
The electronic monitoring program is limited to 300 offenders at any one time. This is
very small compared to the population in prison. The prison population is approximately
25,000 detainees, of which approximately 85% are on pre-trial detention and in principle
could receive EM. Thus, the program covers only 1.4% of the population that can
theoretically receive EM, with long waiting lists compiled by the Buenos Aires
Penitentiary system with the requests of the judges. Offenders are placed on EM
following the order in which the requests arrive.31 Given this, and the institutional setting
described above, a plausible assumption is that allocation of EM is determined by
availability of one of the bracelets, which is essentially random. Note that a causal
30
   The small changes in the size of the coefficient can be traced to the changing sample rather than the
influence of the covariates.
31
   A potential problem is corruption: if some offenders are able to bribe their way to the top of this list our
estimates would be biased (though the likely bias is down, as these would presumably be ―high risk‖
offenders). Note, however, that after the Fernandez scandal mentioned above, which led to the interruption
of the program, an investigation of the division in charge of EM of the Buenos Aires penitentiary service
did not find evidence of misconduct.


                                                     20
interpretation is possible even if matching to judges is non-random (and, for examples, all
―bad‖ types go to one judge).


Thus, the OLS estimate in column (1) in Table 1A is directly interpretable as causal, now
not because of successful selection on observables, but rather because of random
allocation (following order of arrival) of limited EM equipment.


Perhaps, one would want to make sure that these judges are indeed sending people to
EM. In this case we would want to compare those placed on EM with those released from
prison, but only for the sample that stood before a judge that sent someone to EM. These
judges were sensitive to the possibility of sending pre-trial detainees to EM. Column (1)
in Table 2 repeats the base regression (column 2, Table 1A) but restricts the sample to
offenders detained by courts that sent at least one offender to EM. The results are similar.
Column (2) in Table 2 conducts a similar exercise but with the full sample and includes a
dummy if the court ever sent an offender to EM. This dummy variable is insignificant,
with a point estimate of -0.0035. This is helpful because we now have an estimate of the
difference in recidivism across former prisoners who stood before the two different types
of judges (besides those that received EM). The evidence is consistent with no selection
on the part of judges. The reason is as follows. There are three groups in the sample:
those that went to electronic monitoring, those that went to prison sentenced by a judge
that sent someone to EM, and those that were sent to prison by a judge that never sent
offenders to EM. If the liberal judges were in fact judges selecting the good types (low
recidivism risks) for treatment with EM, then those that were not selected for EM should
be bad types (high recidivism). In particular, their average type should be worse than the
average type of the conservative judges who did zero selection. In other words, the point
estimate on Court ever uses EM should be positive (as the base category in column 2 is
those that were sent to prison by judges who never sent anyone to EM). The Table below
makes the same point using the raw data on recidivism rates.




                                            21
                           Liberal Judges                      Conservative Judges

                            EM=13.21% (51/386)
                                                            Prison= 22.39% (105/469)
                         Prison= 22.11% (151/683)




IV.c. Fully Ideological Judges
Differences across judges in the amount of people sent to EM arise in their ideological
differences. Given the details of the decision (for example, involving pre-trial detention)
it is possible that judges that assign EM do so as a matter of principle. Thus, it is possible
that they act like automata, sending to EM all offenders that come before them. There is
still the question of why they do not send 100% of offenders to EM, but given the small
size of the program (300 at any one time) this is to be expected. If this ―automata‖
assumption is accepted then we have a situation where the assignment of electronic
monitoring is fully determined by the luck of the draw of which judge happened to be on
duty at the time and place of apprehension.


Thus, the OLS estimate in column (1) in Table 1A is then directly interpretable as causal,
now not because of successful selection on observables, nor because of the mechanical
limit on program capacity, but rather because of random allocation across ideologically
different judges who do not select offenders as a matter of principle.


Perhaps, one would want to restrict the sample to offenders that stood before judges that
sent at least 10% of their offenders to electronic monitoring. This is the group of judges
in our sample that were most likely to be ideological and to behave like automata,
sending all offenders to EM instead of prison, regardless of their type. The effect of
electronic monitoring on recidivism is still negative and significant, with a point estimate
of -0.12 (results available upon request). Most interesting is the fact that we can reject the
hypothesis of a lower point estimate relative to column (1) in Table 1A. If judges that
sent offenders to EM are really selecting, then those in this group (the group that most



                                              22
frequently sends) should be the least likely to be selecting (with the success or not in
obtaining electronic monitoring status being determined by availability of the bracelets).
Therefore, the ideological judges are the most likely to have the smallest difference in
recidivism between those with EM and those sent to prison. Thus, the point estimate
should be smaller in absolute value than the one in column (2) in Table 1A (which is the
opposite of what we observe).


IV.d. Somewhat Ideological Judges
As mentioned above, some judges might have had a fuzzy understanding of how the
system worked and its implications so the automata assumption used above is too strong.
Thus, even if the capacity of the EM program was substantially larger, judges would not
fully take up all of the available bracelets because they are exercising some discretion.
This suggests that an instrumental variable strategy can be used using the ideological
differences across judges in the first stage predicting the decision to send offenders to
electronic monitoring.


Column (1) in Table 3A uses court dummies as an instrument (the F-stat for their joint
significance is 3.96). There are 199 judges in our sample, so this approach has
limitations. Column (2) in Table 3A uses as instrument the percentage of offenders that
the court sent to electronic monitoring (excluding the particular offender). We calculate
this using the full sample with almost 37,832 offenders and restrict attention to courts
with more than ten offenders in the sample (sample size falls by 25 -to 1,513). The
coefficient is still negative and significant and somewhat larger in absolute size than the
OLS estimate. Column (3) explores a small variation of this instrument by including a
dummy for whether the court ever sent a prisoner to electronic monitoring (which is a
more flexible approach).


In column (4) we use a different dimension of ideology depending on how early the court
started using EM. Specifically, the instrument is Court has already sent to EM, a dummy
which equals 1 if the court has ever previously sent an offender to electronic monitoring,




                                            23
and equals 0 otherwise. In column (5), we combine the two instruments. In column (6),
we again combine these two instruments in an IV Probit regression, with similar results.


Table 3B provides some robustness results, using our base specification (the two
instruments in all regressions in this table are: the % of inmates of the same court sent to
electronic monitoring, excluding himself, and a dummy which, for each offender, equals
1 if before himself, the court has ever previously sent an offender to electronic
monitoring, and equals 0 otherwise). The covariates used are similar to those explored in
Table 1B above. The conclusion that electronic monitoring causes a reduction in
recidivism is robust. We also experimented with alternative measures of our treatment
with similar results.32




V. Escape and Discussion


Finally, with a system of (close to) random allocation of electronic monitoring, we should
expect a considerable amount of escape. Indeed, in our sample 66 individuals (17% of the
sample) flee by breaking their electronic bracelets and evading from the supervision of
the penal system altogether. How do escapees affect our main estimate?


First, note that escapees come from the group allocated to EM (there are no registered
escapes from prison in our sample). When an escapee re-offends and is apprehended, he
is counted as a recidivist in our sample. In terms of our main estimate this introduces a
potential problem because the subsample containing the worst types in the electronic
monitoring sample is the group most likely to escape and spend more time out of
supervision and thus more time to offend again. Indeed, 18 of the 66 who escape are
apprehended again, for a recidivism rate of over 27%. On this account, our basic




32
  For example, rather than a dummy for whether the individual was in electronic monitoring we used the
proportion of the sentence that was spent under electronic monitoring.


                                                 24
coefficient of interest (e.g, -0.9 in Table 1A) could be an underestimate of the true causal
effect of treating an offender with EM instead of prison.33


There is also the possibility of generating rules that might improve the system. Table 4A
presents the observable characteristics of these escaped offenders. Of them, 19 (almost
29%) had been imprisoned before (this was at least their second entry into the penal
system). This is tested more formally in Table 4B where the probability of escape of the
electronic monitoring sample is estimated against the observables to the judge at the time
of assignment of EM. We analyze how the variables that were observable to the judge at
the time of the allocation decision predict recidivism or evasion from electronic
monitoring. The results show that previous imprisonment is a significant predictor of
both recidivism and evasion.


Although electronic monitoring could be particularly effective in reducing the recidivism
of offenders with a previous criminal record, their evasion and recidivism rates are
high.34 Also for retribution reasons, we might expect offenders accused of homicide,
attempted homicide and rape to be excluded. When we repeat the base regression
(column 2 in Table 1A) but limiting the sample to exclude these 4 groups (those with
previous imprisonment and those accused of homicide, attempted homicide or rape), the
estimated reduction in recidivism from treatment with electronic monitoring is still 9
percentage points (-0.088 with a t-stat of 3.8).


Note that in our study arrest rates are similar for the two samples, with only harshness of
punishment varying (so differential recidivism cannot be explained by the ―gambler‘s
fallacy‖ -whereby apprehended offenders think they will have better chances of avoiding
capture in the future, see Pogarsky and Piquero, 2003 and Clotfelter and Cook, 1993).

33
   A different potential problem concerns differential geographic movements of escapees versus those
released from prison. Escapees are theoretically (we don‘t have evidence on this) less likely to move
around the country (or to other countries) as doing so would make them more vulnerable to routine checks
by the police.
34
   Granting EM to groups with high recidivism or escape rates would certainly be unpopular. Also, we
could not find evidence that EM is particularly effective in reducing the recidivism rates of offenders with
prior imprisonment (we could not reject the hypothesis of equal effect of EM across the group with prior
imprisonment and the rest of the sample; results available upon request).


                                                    25
However, if the electronic monitoring sample has given out more information to the penal
system (for example, an address or family contacts) then the electronic monitoring
sample would be more likely to be re-arrested, so our correlation is an underestimate of
the true causal effect.35


Finally, it is worth noting that several dimensions (beyond recidivism) matter when
society makes these decisions. On the one hand, it is hard to quantify the benefit to
society of having a more humane penal system, in part because this number will depend
on the type of beliefs that prevail in society.36 Even on the fiscal side, precise numbers
seem hard to calculate, although it is clear that electronic monitoring could be
considerably cheaper than sending people to prison.37 Note that given the explosion of
people in prison in some countries (like the US) fiscal considerations will likely play an
important role in favoring the adoption of electronic monitoring. As a final example of
the difficulty in the decision to adopt such a program, note that a proper estimation of the
deterrent effect of putting people on electronic monitoring instead of prison should take
into account the possibility that a much larger fraction of the population might be put
under the supervision of the penal system without building new prisons. In this paper we
do not address these important questions.




VI. Conclusion


All societies must decide what to do with those that commit crimes. Historically, one
approach has been to harm individuals guilty of certain crimes. For example, corporal
punishment, amputation and even death have all been used as part of the penal system
around the world. The alternative used the most in modern democracies, however, is

35
   Our informants from the Penitentiary Service report that this is not the case because, in their opinion, the
police do not follow up their investigations in that detail.
36
   For example, if people believe luck (rather than effort) pays, they will tend to support lighter
punishments. See Di Tella and Dubra (2008) for a model and some evidence.
37
   Although simple comparison of costs of prison vs electronic monitoring requires assumptions about the
activities that will be allowed under electronic monitoring (if work is allowed, even labor taxes and the
substitution of social services have to be computed), and the proportion of the total cost paid by the
offenders under monitoring (in the US this is often a significant fraction), amongst others.


                                                     26
prison confinement for a fixed period of time. Although some small details may have
changed, the basic technology used in prisons appears to have remained constant since
their first descriptions (for example in the Old Testament). This approach has become
common, leading some to wonder about the possible consequences of using prisons and
what alternatives might be available to society when dealing with a criminal offender.
Indeed, at least since Jeremy Bentham, who in 1791 proposed the Panopticon -a glass jail
where inmates could be watched continually by guards who could not be seen-, society
has considered how technological and institutional advances could be used to substitute
for prisons. One of the most intriguing policy proposals in recent years is to use
electronic bracelets to monitor offenders. Electronic monitoring is an increasingly
popular form of surveillance, with over 250,000 offenders having passed through the
system in the US and Europe by 2007. In this paper we seek to contribute to this debate
by providing an estimate of the effect on recidivism of sentencing a person to time under
electronic surveillance instead of prison.


Previous work on this issue is inconclusive (see, for example, Renzema and Mayo-
Wilson, 2005). One of the key challenges in answering this question is that, ideally, we
would like to compare similar individuals after their release from electronic monitoring
and prison. This is rarely observed in practice because judicial allocation decisions are
typically heavily influenced by the offenders ―meanness‖ and risk of recidivism. In this
paper we study the performance of an electronic monitoring program in Argentina, where
it is used to substitute for imprisonment for detainees awaiting final sentence. Three
features of the institutional setting we study in Argentina help with a causal interpretation
of our main estimate. First, judges make the decision before passing the final sentence in
a trial, so the amount of information they have is very limited. In most cases the
information available to the judges is similar to the one we have, so a strategy based on
selection on observables is possible. Second, the capacity of the program is limited to
only 300 bracelets at any one time. Third, very bad prison conditions and the slow
working of the legal system mean that even small ideological differences across judges
can lead to extreme differences in the allocation of electronic monitoring. In fact, liberal
leaning judges have allocated electronic monitoring to individuals accused of very



                                             27
serious crimes (for example homicide) and with prior records of imprisonment.
Moreover, they have done so with some regularity, while others have never done it since
the start of the EM program.


We find that recidivism rates among offenders under electronic monitoring are 9
percentage points lower than offenders who went to prison. Since recidivism rates for
former prisoners is close to 22.2 percentage points on average, the causal effect of
electronic monitoring on recidivism is approximately 40.5%.




                                          28
References

Anderson, James M; Kling, Jeffrey R and Kate Stith (1999) ―Measuring Interjudge Sentencing
Disparity: Before and after the Federal Sentencing Guidelines.‖ Journal of Law and Economics,
42(1; 2), pp. 271-307.

Aos, Steve, Miller, Marna and Elizabeth Drake. (2006) ―Evidence-Based Public Policy Options to
Reduce Future Prison Construction, Criminal Justice Costs, and Crime Rates‖, Olympia:
Washington State Institute for Public Policy.

Banister, P.A., F.V. Smith, K. J. Heskin, and N. Bolton (1973) ―Psychological correlates of long-
term imprisonment‖ British Journal of Criminology, 13(4):312—330.

Bayer, Patrick, Randi Hjalmarsson, and David Pozen (2009). ―Building Criminal Capital behind
Bars: Peer Effects in Juvenile Corrections‖, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 124, No. 1:
105–147.

Bhati, Avinash and Alex R. Piquero (2008). ―Estimating the Impact of Incarceration on
Subsequent Offending Trajectories: Deterrent, Criminogenic, or Null Effect?‖ Journal of
Criminal Law and Criminology 98(1):207–54.

Bonta, James, Wallace-Capretta, Suzanne, and Jennifer Rooney (2000) "Can Electronic
Monitoring Make A Difference? An Evaluation of Three Canadian Programs", Crime and
Delinquency, 46(1): 61-75.

Borda, Rodrigo and Luciana Pol (2007) ―Sobrepoblación y hacinamiento carcelario: La
instrumentación del fallo ―Verbitsky‖ y otras estrategias para solucionar el problema‖,
Documento de Trabajo del CELS.

Bushway, Shawn D. and Anne Morrison Piehl (2007) “The Inextricable Link Between Age and
Criminal History in Sentencing”, Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 53, No. 1, 156-183.

Bushway, Shawn D. and Raymond Paternoster (2009) ―The Impact of Prison on Crime‖, in Do
Prisons Make us Safer? The Benefits and Costs of the Prison Boom, Steven Raphael and Michael
A. Stoll (editors), Russell Sage Foundation: New York.

Chen, Keith and Jesse Shapiro (2007) ―Do Harsher Prison Conditions Reduce Recidivism? A
Discontinuity-based Approach‖, American Law and Economics Review, 9: 1-29.

Clotfelter, Charles T., and Philip J. Cook. (1993). ―The ‗Gambler‘s Fallacy‘ in Lottery Play.‖
Management Science 39(12):1521–25.

Courtright, K. B.L. Berg and R.J. Mutchnick (1997) ―Effects of House Arrest with Electronic
Monitoring on DUI Offenders‖, Journal of Offender Rehabilitation, 24, 35-51.

Di Tella, Rafael and Juan Dubra (2008) ―Crime and Punishment in the ‗American Dream‘‖,
Journal of Public Economics, 2008, 92, no. 7, 1564-84.

Finn, M. A. and S. Muirhead-Steves (2002) ―The effectiveness of electronic monitoring with
violent male parolees‖, Justice Quarterly, 19 (2), 293-312.



                                               29
Freeman, R. (1996) ―Why Do So Many Young American Men Commit Crimes and What Might
We Do About It?‖, Journal of Economic Perspectives 10 (1), 25-42.

Gainey, Randy, Payne, Brian and Mike O‘Toole (2000) ―The Relationship between Time in Jail,
Time on Electronic Monitoring, and Recidivism: An Event History Analysis of a Jail-based
Program‖, Justice Quarterly, 17, 4, 733-52.

Gendreau, Paul, Goggin, Claire and Francis Cullen (1999) ―The Effect of Prison Sentences on
Recidivism‖, user report 1999-3, Corrections Research, Department of the Solicitor General,
Canada

Glaeser, Edward L., Bruce Sacerdote, and José A. Scheinkman (1996) ―Crime and Social
Interactions‖, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2):507-48.

Gomme, I. M. (1995). ―From Big House to Big Brother: Confinement in the future‖, in N.
Larsen, Ed., The Canadian Criminal Justice System (pp. 489-516). Toronto: Canadian Scholars'
Press.

Green, Donald P. and Daniel Winik (2008) ―Using Random Judge Assignments to Estimate the
Effects of Incarceration and Probation on Recidivism among Drug Offenders‖, Yale, unpublished
working paper.

Hansen, Kristine (2003) ―Education and the Crime-Age Profile‖, The British Journal of
Criminology, 43:141-168.

Heckman James, Ichimura, Hidehiko, Smith, Jeffrey and Petra Todd, (1998). ―Characterizing
Selection Bias Using Experimental Data,‖ Econometrica, September, vol. 66(5), pages 1017-98.

Helland, Eric, and Alexander Tabarrok (2007). ―Does Three Strikes Deter? A Nonparametric
Estimation.‖ Journal of Human Resources 42(2):309–30.

Isla, Alejandro and Daniel Miguez (2003) Heridas Urbanas, Buenos Ares: Editorial De Las
Ciencias.

Iyengar, Radha (2010) ―Does Arrest Deter Violence? Comparing Experimental and Non-
Experimental Evidence on Mandatory Arrest Laws‖, forthcoming in The Economics of Crime:
Lessons for and from Latin America, Rafael Di Tella, Ernesto Schargrodsky and Sebastian
Edwards (editors), NBER/University of Chicago Press.

Katz, Lawrence Stephen D. Levitt, and Ellen Shustorovich (2003) ―Prison Conditions, Capital
Punishment, and Deterrence‖, American Law and Economic Review, 5(2):318-43.

Kling, Jeffrey R. (2006) ―Incarceration Length, Employment, and Earnings,‖ American Economic
Review, vol. 96(3), pages 863-76.

Kuziemko, Ilyana (2007) ―Going Off Parole: How the Elimination of Discretionary Prison
Release Affects the Social Cost of Crime‖, NBER wp13380.




                                             30
Langan, Patrick A. and David J. Levin (2002) ―Recidivism of Prisoners Released in 1994‖,
Bureau of Justice Statistics: Special Report, June, NCJ 193427.

Lerman, Amy (2009) ―The People Prisons Make: Effects of Incarceration on Criminal
Psychology‖, in Do Prisons Make us Safer? The Benefits and Costs of the Prison Boom, Steven
Raphael and Michael A. Stoll (editors), Russell Sage Foundation: New York.

Marklund, Fredrik and Stina Holmberg (2009) ―Effects of Early Release from Prison using
Electronic Tagging in Sweden‖, Journal of Experimental Criminology, 5, 41–6.

Morris, N. and M. Tonry (1990) Between Prison and Probation: Intermediate Punishments and a
Rational Sentencing System, New York, Oxford University Press.

Nagin, Daniel, Cullen, Francis and Cheryl Jonson (2009) ―Imprisonment and Reoffending‖,
Crime and Justice, 38, 1, 115-200.

Nagin, Daniel S. (1998) ―Criminal Deterrence: Research at the Outset of the Twenty-first
Century‖. In Michael Tonry (editor) Crime and Justice: A Review of Research, Volume 23.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Needels, Karen E. (1996) ―Go Directly to Jail and Do Not Collect? A Long-term Study of
Recidivism, Employment, and Earnings Patterns among Prison Releasees.‖ Journal of Research
in Crime and Delinquency. 33:4, 471-496.

Payne, A. Abigail (1997) ―Does Inter-judge Disparity really Matter? An Analysis of the Effects
of Sentencing Reforms in Three Federal District Courts.‖ International Review of Law and
Economics, Vol. 17, pp. 337-366.

Payne, B. K. and R. R. Gainey (1998) ―A Qualitative Assessment of the Pains Experienced in
Electronic Monitoring‖, International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative
Criminology, 42, 149-63.

Petersilia, Joan (1987) Expanding Options for Criminal Sentencing, Santa Monica, California:
Rand.

Petersilia, Joan and Susan Turner (1990) ―Comparing Intensive and Regular Supervision for
High-Risk Probationers: Early Results from an Experiment in California‖, Crime and
Delinquency, Vol. 36, No. 1, 87-111.

Piquero, Alex, Blumstein, Alfred, Brame, Robert, Haapanen, Rudy, Mulvey, Edward and Daniel
Nagin. (2001) ―Assessing the Impact of Exposure Time and Incapacitation on Longitudinal
Trajectories of Criminal Offending.‖ Journal of Adolescent Research 16:54-74.

Piquero, Alex R. and Greg Pogarsky (2002) “Beyond Stafford and Warr's Reconceptualization of
Deterrence: Personal and Vicarious Experiences, Impulsivity, and Offending Behavior‖, Journal
of Research in Crime and Delinquency, May 1, 2002; 39(2): 153 - 186.

Pogarsky Greg and Alex R. Piquero (2003) ―Can Punishment Encourage Offending?
Investigating The "resetting" Effect‖, Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, February;
40(1): 95 - 120.



                                             31
Renzema, Marc and Evan Mayo-Wilson (2005) ―Can Electronic Monitoring reduce Crime for
Moderate to High-risk Offenders?‖, Journal of Experimental Criminology, 1, 215-37.

Tonry, Michael (1998) ―Intermediate Sanctions‖, Chapter 25 in The Handbook of Crime and
Punishment, Michael Tonry (editor), New York: Oxford University Press.

Schmidt, Annesley and Christine E. Curtis (1987) ―Electronic Monitoring‖ in Intermediate
Punishments: Intensive Supervision, Home Confinement and Electronic Supervision, edited by
Belinda McCarthy, Monsey, NY: Willow Tree Press.

Schwartz, R.D. and J. Skolnick (1962) ―Two Studies of Legal Stigma‖, Social Problems, 10, 133-
8.

Schwitzgebel, Ralph K. (1969) ―Issues in the Use of an Electronic Rehabilitation System with
Chronic Recidivists‖, Law and Society Review, 3: 597-615.

Sherman, L. (1993) ―Defiance, Deterrence and Irrelevance: A Theory of the Criminal Sanction‖,
Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 30, 445-73.

Sherman, L. and Richard A. Berk (1984) ―The Specific Deterrent Effects of Arrest for Domestic
Assault‖ American Sociological Review, 49(2):261—272.

Sherman, L. and Heather Strang (2007) Restorative Justice: The Evidence, The Smith Institute.

Smith, Douglas A. and Patrick R. Gartin (1989) ―Specifying Specific Deterrence: The Influence
of Arrest on Future Criminal Activity‖ American Sociological Review, 54(1):94-106.

Soares, Rodrigo and Joana Naritomi (2010) ―Understanding High Crime Rates in Latin America:
The Role of Social and Policy Factors‖, forthcoming in The Economics of Crime: Lessons for
and from Latin America, Rafael Di Tella, Ernesto Schargrodsky and Sebastian Edwards (editors),
NBER/University of Chicago Press.

Song, L. and R. Lieb (1993) Recidivism: The Effect of Incarceration and Length of Time Served,
Olympia, WA: Washington State Institute for Public Policy.

Stafford, M.C., and Warr, M. (1993) ―A Reconceptualization of General and Specific
Deterrence‖, Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 30(2): 123-135.

Villettaz, P., Killias, M., and I. Zoder (2006). “The effects of Custodial vs. Non-custodial
Sentences on Re-offending: A Systematic Review of the State of the Knowledge‖. Report to the
Swiss National Science Foundation and the Campbell Collaboration Crime and Justice Group.
Institute of Criminology and Criminal Law, University of Lausanne: Lausanne, Switzerland.

Waldfogel, Joel (1991) ―Aggregate Inter-Judge Disparity in Sentencing: Evidence from Three
Districts‖, Federal Sentencing Reporter, Vol. 4, pp. 151-154.




                                              32
Figure 1: Panopticon blueprint, by Jeremy Bentham 1791.

             A type of prison that allowed prisoners to be monitored at all times
             (without them being aware of when they are being watched). Bentham
             himself described the Panopticon as "a new mode of obtaining power of
             mind over mind, in a quantity hitherto without example‖.




                                              33
       Table A: Type of crime for the electronic monitoring and prison population, 1998-2007

                                        Offenders released      Offenders released
                                            from EM                from Prison         Difference
          Type of Crime                 Freq.      Percent       Freq.      Percent
Homicide                                  36          7.93       2,626        7.03         0.90
Attempted homicide                         8          1.76        579         1.55         0.21
Sexual offenses                           13          2.86        899         2.41         0.45
Other serious crimes                      13          2.86        919         2.46         0.40
Aggravated robbery                       247         54.41      18,493       49.48         4.93
Attempted aggravated robbery              16          3.52       2,571        6.88        -3.36
Robbery                                   36          7.93       4,452       11.91        -3.98
Attempted robbery                         29          6.39       2,757        7.38        -0.99
Possession of Firearms                    24          5.29       1,494        4.00         1.29
Theft / Attempted theft                    7          1.54       1,298        3.47        -1.93
Other minor crimes                        25          5.51       1,290        3.45         2.06

               Total                     454         100        37,378        100




                                                34
        Table B: Electronic Monitoring Assignment and Type of Crimes

                                               1            2               3

Court ever sent to EM                       0.02***       0.02***
                                            (14.80)        (14.89)
1-Attempted homicide=1                                    1.65e-03       1.60e-03
                                                            (0.33)        (0.02)
2-Sexual offenses=1                                       1.63e-03       1.60e-03
                                                            (0.39)        (0.17)
3-Other serious crimes=1                                  2.90e-03       2.90e-03
                                                            (0.70)        (0.10)
3- Aggravated robbery=1                                  4.55E-04       -3.43e-04
                                                            (0.20)        (0.15)
3-Attempted aggravated robbery=1                          -0.01**        -0.01**
                                                            (2.40)        (2.44)
4-Robbery=1                                             -4.79e-03*       -0.01**
                                                            (1.80)        (2.07)
4-Attempted robbery=1                                    -3.22e-03      -3.20e-03
                                                            (1.09)        (1.06)
5- Theft / Attempted theft=1                                -0.01        -0.01**
                                                            (1.59)        (2.22)
5-Possession of Firearms=1                                2.55e-03       2.50e-03
                                                            (0.73)        (0.65)
5-Other minor crimes=1                                     0.01**          0.01
                                                            (1.99)        (1.50)


Adjusted R2                                  0.01          0.01          5.0e-04
Observations                                37,832        37,832         37,832

Notes: The dependent variable is whether the offender received electronic
monitoring. OLS regressions. Absolute values of t statistics in parentheses. Court
ever sent to EM is a dummy equal to 1 if the court sent at least one offender to EM.
The base category of crime is Homicide. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
*** significant at 1%.




                                       35
                                                     Table C: Judges

                                                                                             Robbery and
                                                                          Considering
                                                                                             Aggravated
                                                                       every type of crime
                                                                                              Robbery

Number of judges                                                              199               192

Number of judges that ever used electronic monitoring                         101                64

% of judges that ever used electronic monitoring                            50.70%             33.00%

                                                                            16.60%             25.00%

                                                                            22.50%             35.71%
% of offenders under electronic monitoring for the
                                                                            31.25%             44.44%
five judges with highest ratio
                                                                            45.45%             50.00%

                                                                            80.00%             62.50%




                                                           36
                              Table 1A: Recidivism and Electronic Monitoring
                                                         1                2              3             4
 Electronic monitoring=1                             -0.09***        -0.09***       -0.42***       -0.08***
                                                       (4.26)          (4.11)         (3.99)         (2.87)
 Attempted homicide=1                                                    0.03           0.21
                                                                       (0.49)         (0.62)
 Other serious crimes=1                                                0.18**         0.71**
                                                                       (2.31)         (2.14)
 Sexual offenses=1                                                      -0.02          -0.27
                                                                       (0.41)         (0.61)
 Aggravated robbery=1                                                    0.03           0.19
                                                                       (0.88)         (1.11)
 Attempted aggravated robbery=1                                       1.8e-03           0.07
                                                                       (0.04)         (0.30)
 Robbery=1                                                               0.05           0.25          0.01
                                                                       (1.09)         (1.18)         (0.34)
 Attempted robbery=1                                                     0.09         0.40*
                                                                       (1.61)         (1.74)
 Theft / Attempted theft=1                                               0.03           0.13
                                                                       (0.41)         (0.29)
Possession of Firearms=1                                               0.11*          0.60**
                                                                       (1.88)         (2.12)
 Other minor crimes=1                                                    0.04           0.21
                                                                       (0.65)         (0.81)
 Age                                                               -1.9e-04***    -6.8e-04***     -1.7e-04***
                                                                       (4.05)         (3.09)          (2.72)
 (Age)2                                                             7.2e-09***     2.4e-08**       6.4e-09***
                                                                       (3.34)         (2.29)          (2.26)
 Argentine=1                                                            -0.05          -0.22          -0.11
                                                                       (0.82)         (0.85)          (1.26)
 # of previous imprisonment                                           0.17***        0.67***         0.16***
                                                                       (7.10)         (7.46)          (5.63)
 Time under arrest (prison or ME)                                     7.9e-05       3.7e-04*         1.3e-04
                                                                       (1.34)         (1.74)          (1.38)
 (Time under arrest (prison or ME))2                                  1.6e-08        5.1e-08        -1.3e-08
                                                                       (0.46)         (0.50)          (0.23)
 Great Buenos Aires                                                     -0.01          -0.03           0.01
                                                                       (0.31)         (0.25)          (0.22)
 Large city                                                              0.04           0.16          0.08*
                                                                       (1.06)         (1.17)          (1.88)
Adjusted R2                                             0.01           0.16            0.19           0.15
Observations                                           1,538          1,538           1,538           984
Notes: The dependent variable is a dummy = 1 if the offender went back to prison for a new crime at the Province
of Buenos Aires. OLS regressions (except probit in column 3). Year dummies indicating the year of release from
prison or electronic monitoring included in regressions 2-4. Sample in column 4 is restricted to offenders
prosecuted for Robbery and Aggravated Robbery. Absolute values of robust t (or z) statistics in parenthesis.*
Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.



                                                      37
                    Table 1B: Recidivism and Electronic Monitoring, Robustness
                                          1               2               3              4            5
 Electronic Monitoring=1              -0.11***       -0.09***         -0.11***       -0.09***     -0.09***
                                        (4.17)         (2.86)           (2.85)         (6.35)       (5.06)
 Spouse visiting                                                        0.06
                                                                       (1.45)
 Number of children visiting                                           0.02*
                                                                       (1.93)
 Number of siblings visiting                                          -3.1e-03
                                                                       (0.37)
 Income                                2.7e-05
                                        (1.12)
 Spouse                                                0.04*
                                                       (1.73)

 Adjusted R2                            0.15           0.15             0.23            0.16         0.16
 Observations                           959            1,171            647            1,538        1,538
Notes: OLS Regressions in columns 1 to 5. The dependent variable is a dummy = 1 if the offender went
back to prison for a new crime at the Province of Buenos Aires. All the regressions include as controls
type of crime dummies, age, age squared, Argentine, number of previous imprisonment, total time under
arrest (prison or ME), total time under arrest squared, Great Buenos Aires, large city dummy, and year
dummies. Columns 4 and 5 are similar to Column 2 of Table 1A, but clustering the standard errors at the
judicial district and court levels, respectively. Absolute values of robust t statistics are in parentheses. *
Significant at 10%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                     38
            Table 2: Recidivism and Electronic Monitoring
                                                   1               2

 Electronic monitoring=1                       -0.08***        -0.08***
                                                 (3.42)          (3.73)
 Court ever uses EM                                            -3.5e-03
                                                                 (0.14)
 Adjusted R2                                      0.16            0.16
 Observations                                    1,069           1,538

Notes: OLS Regressions. The dependent variable is a dummy = 1 if the
offender went back to prison for a new crime at the Province of Buenos
Aires. All the regressions include as controls type of crime dummies, age,
age squared, Argentine, number of previous imprisonment, total time
under arrest (prison or ME), total time under arrest squared, Great Buenos
Aires, large city dummy, and year dummies. Column 1 restricts the sample
to offenders that stood in front of a court that sent at least one offender to
EM. Court ever uses EM is a dummy equal to one if the court sent at least
one offender to EM. Absolute values of robust t statistics are in
parentheses. * Significant at 10%; *** significant at 1%.




                                    39
                        Table 3A: Recidivism and Electronic Monitoring, IV Regressions
                                              1            2             3            4            5            6
Second stage:
Electronic Monitoring=1                    -0.08**     -0.13***      -0.12***      -0.12       -0.13***     -0.53**
                                            (2.21)       (2.76)        (2.65)      (1.41)        (2.72)      (2.50)

Adjusted R2 (second stage)                   0.16         0.16         0.16         0.16         0.16         0.16


First stage:
Set of court dummies                         Yes

% Court sent to EM                                      3.88***      3.13***                   3.45***      3.45**
                                                        (17.59)      (13.69)                   (14.64)      (11.44)
Court ever sent to EM                                                0.24***
                                                                      (9.62)
Court has already sent to EM                                                      0.24***      0.12***      0.12***
                                                                                  (10.45)       (4.98)       (4.92)

Adjusted R2 (first stage)                    0.30         0.21         0.26         0.11         0.22         0.22

Observations                                1,538        1,513         1,513       1,513        1,513        1,513

   Notes: Instrumental Variables regressions in columns 1 to 5. The dependent variable is a dummy = 1 if the
   offender went back to prison for a new crime at the Province of Buenos Aires. All the regressions include
   as controls type of crime dummies, age, age squared, Argentine, number of previous imprisonment, total
   time under arrest (prison or ME), total time under arrest squared, Great Buenos Aires, large city dummy,
   and year dummies. In the first column, the instruments are a set of dummy variables indicating the court
   that tried the offender. The F-stat of the joint significance test of all the dummies in the first stage is
   3.96***. In column 2, the instrument for each inmate is the % of offenders of the same court sent to
   electronic monitoring, excluding him. The number of observations in columns 2 through 6 falls from 1,538
   to 1,513 because we exclude courts with less than ten offenders. In column 3 we also include as an
   instrument a dummy for whether the court ever sent a prisoner to electronic monitoring. In column 4, the
   instrument is a dummy which, for each inmate, equals 1 if before himself, the court has ever previously
   sent an inmate to electronic monitoring, and equals 0 otherwise. In column 5, we combine the two
   instruments. In column 6, we again combine these two instruments in an IV Probit regression. All the
   instruments are calculated in the original database of 37,832 offenders. Absolute values of t (or z) statistics
   are in parentheses. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                        40
                          Table 3B: Recidivism and Electronic Monitoring, Robustness (IV regressions)
                                      1               2              3               4              5               6              7
Electronic Monitoring=1            -0.17**         -0.14**        -0.20**          -0.18          -0.17*         -0.13*         -0.13**
                                    (2.92)          (2.21)         (2.31)         (1.66)          (1.86)         (1.80)          (2.36)
Spouse visiting                                                     0.04         0.23***
                                                                   (0.75)         (2.19)
Number of children visiting                                        0.02*           0.03
                                                                   (1.80)         (1.61)
Number of siblings visiting                                       -4.8e-03       -1.2e-03
                                                                   (0.58)         (0.33)
Income                             3.3e-05                                       -1.4e-05
                                    (1.33)                                        (0.32)
Spouse                                             0.04*                          -0.14*
                                                   (1.70)                         (1.55)


Adjusted R2                          0.14           0.15            0.23           0.23            0.16           0.16            0.16

Observations                         946            1,155           637             463           1,513           1,513          1,513

    Notes: Instrumental Variables regressions in columns 1 to 7. The dependent variable is a dummy = 1 if the offender went
    back to prison for a new crime at the Province of Buenos Aires. In all columns, the two instruments are: the % of offenders
    of the same court sent to electronic monitoring, excluding himself, and a dummy which, for each inmate, equals 1 if before
    himself, the court has ever previously sent an inmate to electronic monitoring, and equals 0 otherwise. The instruments are
    calculated in the original database of 37,832 offenders. All the regressions include as controls type of crime dummies, age,
    age squared, Argentine, number of previous imprisonment, total time under arrest (prison or ME), total time under arrest
    squared, Great Buenos Aires, large city dummy, and year dummies. Column 5 includes judicial district dummies. Columns
    6 and 7 are similar to Column 5 of Table 2, but clustering the standard errors at the judicial district and court levels,
    respectively. Absolute values of t statistics are in parentheses. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
    1%.




                                                                   41
                         Table 4A: Escaped, Crime Categories and the Previously Imprisoned

                                                       Escaped                               Escaped
                                                                               (minus those previously imprisoned)

                                           Frequency             Percent

Homicide                                       5                  7.58               4                  8.51

Rape                                           3                  4.55               3                  6.38

Other serious Crimes                           3                  4.55               3                  6.38

Aggravated Robbery                             40                60.61               27                 57.45

Attempted Aggravated Robbery                   1                  1.52

Robbery                                        4                  6.06               3                  6.38

Attempted Robbery                              4                  6.06               3                  6.38

Theft/Attempted Theft                          1                  1.52               1                  2.13

Other Minor Crimes                             1                  1.52               1                  2.13

Possession of Firearms                         4                  6.06               2                  4.26

                                               66                 100                47                 100




                                                         42
                 Table 4B: Escape and Recidivism within EM

                                                     1                   2
                                                Recidivism            Escape

Attempted homicide=1                                 0.06                -0.12
                                                    (0.49)              (1.67)
Other serious crimes=1                              -0.08                 0.19
                                                    (1.05)              (1.08)
Sexual offenses=1                                    0.07                 0.21
                                                    (0.61)              (1.28)
Aggravated robbery=1                              -4.6e-03            -3.3e-03
                                                    (0.07)              (0.04)
Attempted aggravated robbery=1                       0.04                -0.09
                                                    (0.20)              (0.08)
Robbery=1                                          0.22**                -0.03
                                                    (2.01)              (0.24)
Attempted robbery=1                                  0.02                 0.01
                                                    (0.21)              (0.08)
Theft / Attempted theft=1                           -0.13                 0.11
                                                    (1.45)              (0.52)
Possession of Firearms=1                            -0.06                 0.06
                                                    (0.67)              (0.52)
Other minor crimes=1                                -0.02                -0.10
                                                    (0.22)              (1.14)
Age                                               -8.9e-05            -6.6e-05
                                                    (1.08)              (0.69)
(Age)2                                             3.1e-09             1.9e-09
                                                    (0.83)              (0.43)
Argentine=1                                        0.20**                 0.11
                                                    (2.50)              (1.19)
# of previous imprisonment                        0.14***             0.15***
                                                    (2.91)              (3.08)
Great Buenos Aires                                   0.06                 0.03
                                                    (1.45)              (0.70)
Large city                                        0.26***                 0.08
                                                    (2.50)              (0.76)

Adjusted R2                                         0.09                0.03

Observations                                        386                 386

Notes: OLS Regressions. The dependent variable in column 1 is a dummy = 1 if
the offender went back to prison for a new crime at the Province of Buenos
Aires after release. The dependent variable in column 2 is whether the offender
escaped from the electronic monitoring system. In both regressions, we restrict
attention to offenders that received electronic monitoring. Absolute values of
robust t statistics are in parentheses. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
*** significant at 1%.




                                         43
