NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADE, MULTINATIONAL PRODUCTION, AND THE GAINS FROM OPENNESS
Natalia Ramondo
Andrés Rodríguez-Clare
Working Paper 15604
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15604
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2009

We have benefited from comments and suggestions from Costas Arkolakis, Russell Cooper, Ana Cecilia
Fieler, Chad Jones, Pete Klenow, David Lagakos, Alexander Monge-Naranjo, Ellen McGrattan, Nancy
Stokey, Joris Pinkse, Jim Tybout, Stephen Yeaple, and seminar participants at many conferences and
institutions. We also thank the editor, Robert Shimer, and two anonymous referees. We are particularly
grateful to Sam Kortum and Jonathan Eaton for help with several data and technical questions that
emerged during this research. We thank Alex Tarasov for his excellent research assistance. Rodríguez-Clare
thanks the Human Capital Foundation (http://www.hcfoundation.ru) for support. Ramondo thanks
Princeton IES for its hospitality. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Natalia Ramondo and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Trade, Multinational Production, and the Gains from Openness
Natalia Ramondo and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare
NBER Working Paper No. 15604
December 2009, Revised November 2012
JEL No. F1,F10,F23,F43
ABSTRACT
This paper quantifies the gains from openness arising from trade and multinational production (MP).
We present a model that captures key dimensions of the interaction between these two flows: Trade
and MP are competing ways to serve a foreign market; MP relies on imports of intermediate goods
from the home country; and foreign affiliates of multinationals can export part of their output. The
calibrated model implies that the gains from trade can be twice as high as the gains calculated in trade-only
models, while the gains from MP are slightly lower than the gains computed in MP-only models.
Natalia Ramondo
Arizona State University
Department of Economics
POB 879801
Tempe, AZ 85287-9801
Natalia.Ramondo@asu.edu
Andrés Rodríguez-Clare
University of California at Berkeley
Department of Economics
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
andres1000@gmail.com

1

Introduction

There is an extensive literature on the gains that countries derive from interacting with each
other. The attention has been focused on quantifying the gains from single mechanisms in
isolation, especially trade in goods–e.g., Eaton and Kortum (2002)– and, to a lesser extent,
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), or multinational production (MP)–e.g., Burstein and MongeNaranjo (2009), McGrattan and Prescott (2011), and Ramondo (2011).1 Much less attention
has been given to the quantification of the gains from openness when countries interact through
both trade and MP. This is an important omission in light of the strong interactions that exist
between trade and MP, and given that trade agreements often combine tariff reductions and
removal of barriers to MP. In this paper, we construct and calibrate a general-equilibrium multicountry model of trade and MP. Because of the rich interactions between these two flows in our
model, we find higher gains from trade than in existing trade-only models, while our computed
gains from MP are slightly lower than those in models with only MP.
We build on the Ricardian model of international trade developed by Eaton and Kortum
(2002). Our main innovation is to incorporate MP into the model by allowing a country’s
technologies to be used for production abroad. The model has tradable intermediate goods
and non-tradable consumption goods, as in Alvarez and Lucas (2007). For non-tradable goods,
serving a foreign market can be done only through MP, but for tradable goods we have to
consider the choice between exports and MP.2 Trade flows are affected by iceberg-type costs
that may vary across country pairs. To avoid these costs, or to benefit from lower production
costs abroad, firms producing tradable goods may prefer to serve a foreign market through MP
rather than through exports. We assume that MP entails some efficiency losses that may vary
across country pairs. Further, we allow for the possibility that multinationals’ foreign affiliates
use imported inputs from their home country; in our empirical approach, we think of this as
intra-firm trade.3 Our set-up also allows firms to use a third country as a “bridge,” or export
1

Multinational production measures the sales of foreign affiliates of multinational firms. This is arguably at
least as important as trade: For example, in 2007, total worldwide MP was almost twice as high as total world
exports (UNCTAD’s World Investment Report, 2009).
2
A significant part of MP flows is in non-tradable goods. Around 50 percent of the value of production by
U.S. affiliates of foreign multinationals is in sectors other than manufacturing, agriculture and mining (our own
calculations from Bureau of Economic Analysis). Additionally, according to the UNCTAD (2009), in 2007, FDI
stocks in the service sector represented more than 60 percent of the total stock in developed countries.
3
The empirical evidence points to significant intra-firm trade flows related to multinational activities (Hanson,
Mataloni, and Slaughter, 2005; Bernard, Jensen, and Schott, 2005; Alfaro and Charlton, 2009). According to our
own calculations using data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, intra-firm imports from their headquarters

1

platform, to serve a particular market; we refer to this as bridge MP, or simply BMP. For
example, a firm from country i producing a tradable good can serve country n by doing MP in
country l, and shipping it to country n. This entails MP costs associated with the pair {i, l},
as well as trade costs associated with the pair {l, n}.4
Our model captures several dimensions of the complex interaction between trade and MP.
First, as in models of “horizontal” FDI–e.g., Horstmann and Markusen (1992), Brainard (1997),
Markusen and Venables (2000), and Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2004)–trade and MP are
competing ways to serve a foreign market.5 This implies that an increase in trade costs generates
smaller welfare losses, as MP partially replaces the decline in trade. Second, as in models of
“vertical” FDI–e.g., Helpman (1984, 1985) and, more recently, Keller and Yeaple (2010)–the
reliance by foreign affiliates on imports of home-country inputs implies that MP boosts trade
and trade facilitates MP.6 This complementarity between trade and MP implies that an increase
in trade costs leads to larger welfare losses through an indirect negative impact on MP. Finally,
complementarity between trade and MP also arises in our model due to the presence of BMP:
Since BMP flows entail both trade and MP flows, an increase in trade costs decreases MP
associated with BMP and generates larger losses.
The existence of these forces of substitutability and complementarity between trade and
MP implies that models with only trade and models with only MP may generate inaccurate
estimates of the gains from trade and MP.7 If complementarity forces dominate, for example, the
gains from trade calculated in trade-only models will be lower than those in our model, which
takes appropriate account of such forces by calculating the gains from trade as the increase
in real income as we move from a counterfactual situation with only MP to the equilibrium
represent more than 7.5 percent of total gross production done by foreign affiliates of American multinationals.
4
Foreign subsidiaries of multinationals often sell a sizable part of their output outside of the host country
of production. For example, U.S. affiliates in Europe export, on average, 30 percent of their output (Blonigen,
2005).
5
Studies using firm-level data find evidence of such substitutability between trade and MP when considering
narrow product lines (see Belderbos and Sleuwaegen, 1988; Head and Ries, 2001; Barba-Navaretti and Venables,
2004; Head and Ries, 2004). For example, increased presence of Japanese auto-makers in the United States
accompanied a decline in automobile exports from Japan (Head and Ries, 2001).
6
Several studies find that higher FDI leads to an increase in exports of parts and supplies from the home
country to foreign affiliates (see Belderbos and Sleuwaegen, 1988; Blonigen, 2001; Head and Ries, 2001; BarbaNavaretti and Venables, 2004; Head, Ries and Spencer, 2004).
7
Gains from trade (MP) are defined as the increase in the real wage from the counterfactual equilibrium
when trade (MP) costs are taken to infinity to the benchmark equilibrium. For estimates of gains from trade in
trade-only models, see Eaton and Kortum (2002), Alvarez and Lucas (2007), Fieler (2011), and Waugh (2010).
For estimates of gains from MP in MP-only models, see Burstein and Monge-Naranjo (2009), McGrattan and
Precott (2011), and Ramondo (2011).

2

with both trade and MP. Similarly, the gains from MP calculated in MP-only models may also
be incorrect. An important goal in this paper is to gauge the strength of substitutability and
complementarity forces and then to explore their effect on the gains from trade and MP.
We calibrate the model using data on bilateral trade and MP flows for a set of OECD countries, as well as data on intra-firm trade flows for U.S. multinationals and foreign multinationals
operating in the United States. For countries with high inward MP flows, the gains from trade
calculated with our model can be much higher than the gains calculated in trade-only models.8
For example, the gains from trade implied by our model for New Zealand are between eight and
ten percent, whereas trade-only models imply gains of around four percent. This is because
trade facilitates MP by allowing multinationals’ foreign affiliates to import inputs from their
home country. Of course, the fact that trade and MP are competing ways to serve foreign
markets tends to make the gains from trade in our model lower than in trade-only models, but
the large imports of home-country inputs by foreign affiliates observed in the data imply that
complementarity forces dominate in the model. Since MP entails the sharing of technologies
across countries, the result that trade facilitates MP captures the common but largely informal
notion that trade enhances international technology diffusion.9 In contrast to this result for the
gains from trade, the gains from MP calculated in our calibrated model are slightly lower than
the gains computed in MP-only models. This is because, in our model, the substitutability
forces associated with the fact that trade and MP are competing ways of serving a foreign
market dominate the complementarity forces created by BMP.
Our model is, in principle, consistent with the notion that the reallocation of production
to foreign countries by U.S. multinationals could depress U.S. wages. This is because outward
MP could lead to a decline in U.S. exports, worsening its terms of trade.10 But there are two
countervailing forces: First, outward MP generates a demand for intermediate good exports
from the U.S. to foreign subsidiaries of U.S. multinationals, and second, outward MP increases
8

Our results for trade-only models are derived from our model by driving MP costs to infinity. These results
are equivalent to those of Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012), who show that for an important
class of models, the gains from trade are given by a simple formula combining the share of total expenditures
devoted to domestic goods (an inverse measure of trade openness) and the elasticity of trade flows with respect
to trade costs.
9
Yet, our model does not incorporate any causal link whereby trade or MP enhance international knowledge
spillovers. The related literature is surveyed in Keller (2004).
10
Similar ideas have been presented in relation to the debate about off-shoring by rich countries –see Samuelson
(2004) and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2009). See, also, the empirical work on the effect of outward FDI on employment
in the United States by Harrison and McMilan (2011), and in Germany by Becker and Muendler (2010).

3

worldwide productivity, and this benefits consumers everywhere and in the U.S. Our calibrated
model shows that these two positive forces roughly balance the negative terms-of-trade force for
the United States, and, hence, outward MP has basically no net effect on the U.S. real wage.
The models that come closest to the one we present here are Garetto (2012) and Irarrazabal
et al. (2012). Garetto (2012) develops a model in which multinationals from the rich country
produce intermediate goods in low-wage locations and then ship those goods back home for
final assembly and consumption (there is no BMP). Garetto’s model entails an extreme type
of complementarity between trade and MP –without trade there would be no MP. Irarrazabal
et al. (2012) introduce intra-firm trade into Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple’s (2004) “proximityconcentration tradeoff” model of trade and MP to explain the high correlation observed between
these two flows across country pairs. The model does not allow for multinationals’ foreign
affiliates to export their production (there is no BMP). Consistent with our results, Irarrazabal
et al. (2012) find gains from MP that are smaller than the gains that would be computed in
models with only MP; again, this is because of the substitutability forces between trade and
MP. But the absence of BMP implies that the gains from MP computed by Irarrazabal et al.
(2012) are significantly lower than the ones we calculate using our model.
We acknowledge that countries could be gaining from openness in ways other than through
trade and MP. In particular, technologies originated in one country may be used in other
countries in ways that are not recorded as MP. This happens, for example, if U.S. technologies
are used for production in Canada by Canadian firms. This way of sharing technologies is
partly captured as royalties and license fees from unaffiliated foreign sources, but, for the most
part, this leaves no clear paper trail.11 Klenow and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2005), Rodrı́guez-Clare
(2007) and Ramondo and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2010), all follow indirect model-based approaches
to compute gains from openness that, in principle, include all ways through which countries
share technologies. In contrast, the approach in this paper is to restrict our attention to the
gains from openness that take place through trade and MP, which have clear counterparts in
the data.
11

According to the BEA, total income earned by U.S. multinationals from their foreign affiliates amounted
to $325 billion in 2009, whereas in that same year, U.S. income via royalties and licence fees from unaffiliated
foreign sources amounted to a comparatively low $31 billion.

4

2

The Model

We extend Eaton and Kortum’s (2002) model of trade to incorporate MP. Our model is Ricardian with a continuum of tradable intermediate goods and non-tradable final goods, produced
under constant returns to scale. We adopt the probabilistic representation of technologies as
first introduced by Eaton and Kortum (2002), but we enrich it to incorporate MP. We embed
the model into a general-equilibrium framework similar to the one in Alvarez and Lucas (2007).

2.1

The Closed Economy

To introduce the notation and main features of our model, consider, first, a closed economy
with L units of labor. A representative agent consumes a continuum of final goods indexed by
u ∈ [0, 1] in quantities q f (u). Preferences over final goods are CES with elasticity σ f > 0. Final
goods are produced with labor and a continuum of intermediate goods indexed by v ∈ [0, 1].
Formally, intermediate goods in quantities q g (v) are aggregated into a composite intermediate
good via a CES production function with elasticity σ g > 0. (Note that we use superscripts f and
g to denote variables pertaining to final and intermediate goods, respectively.) For simplicity,
we henceforth assume that σ g = σ f = σ. Denoting as Q the total quantity of the composite
intermediate good produced, we have
Z
Q=

σ/(σ−1)

1
g

q (v)

(σ−1)/σ

dv

.

0

The composite intermediate good and labor are used to produce final goods via Cobb-Douglas
technologies:
q f (u) = z f (u)Lf (u)α Qf (u)1−α .

(1)

The variables Lf (u) and Qf (u) denote the quantity of labor and the composite intermediate
good used in the production of final good u, respectively, and z f (u) is a productivity parameter
for good u. Similarly, intermediate goods are produced according to
q g (v) = z g (v)Lg (v)β Qg (v)1−β .
Resource constraints are
Z

1
f

1

Z

Lg (v)dv = L,

L (u)du +
Z 01
0

Qf (u)du +

Z 01
0

5

Qg (v)dv = Q.

(2)

To complete the description of the environment in the closed economy, the productivity parameters z f (u) and z g (v) are drawn independently from a Fréchet distribution with parameters T

and θ > max {1, σ − 1}, namely F (z) = exp −T z −θ for z > 0.
To describe the competitive equilibrium for this economy, it is convenient to introduce
the notions of an input bundle for the production of final goods, and an input bundle for the
production of intermediate goods, both of which are produced via Cobb-Douglas production
functions with labor and the composite intermediate good, and used to produce final and
intermediate goods, as specified in (1) and (2), respectively. The unit cost of the input bundle
for final goods is cf = Awα (P g )1−α , and the unit cost of the input bundle for intermediate goods
is cg = Bwβ (P g )1−β , where w and P g are the wage and the price of the composite intermediate
good, respectively, and A and B are constants that depend on α and β, respectively. In
a competitive equilibrium, prices of final goods are given by pf (u) = cf /z f (u), and prices of
intermediate goods are given by pg (v) = cg /z g (v). In turn, the aggregate price for intermediates
R
1/(1−σ)
1
is P g = 0 pg (v)1−σ dv
. Figure 1 illustrates the cost structure in the closed economy.
Figure 1: Cost Structure in the Closed Economy

 Labor, w

Input bundle
for final goods,
cf = Awα (P g )1−α





Q

Final
goods,
pf (u)= cf /z f (u)

Input bundle
for intermediates,
β
g
g 1−β
 c = Bw (P )

Q
s
Q

@
I
@
@
?

Q
Q

Composite
@ Intermediate

Good, P g
6

?

Intermediate
goods,
pg (v)= cg /z g (v)

The characterization of the equilibrium closely follows the analysis in Eaton and Kortum
(2002) and Alvarez and Lucas (2007), so we omit the details. Suffice it to say here that the
equilibrium real wage is given by
1+η
w
=γ
e·T θ ,
f
P

6

(3)

where P f =

R

1
0

1/(1−σ)
pf (u)1−σ du
is the price index for final goods, η ≡ (1 − α)/β, and γ
e is

a positive constant.

2.2

The World Economy

Now consider a set of countries indexed by i ∈ {1, ..., I} with preferences and technologies as
described above. Country i has Li units of labor.
Multinational Production. Each country i has a technology to produce each final good
and each intermediate good, at home or abroad. These technologies are described by the
n
o
f
f
g
g
vectors z fi (u) ≡ z1i
(u), ..., zIi
(u) and z gi (v) ≡ {z1i
(v), ..., zIi
(v)}. When a country i produces
in another country l 6= i, we say that there is multinational production or MP by country
i in country l. Sometimes, we also say that MP in country l is carried out by country i’s
“multinationals.” The corresponding productivity parameter in this case is zlif (u), or zlig (v).
We adopt the convention that the subscript n denotes the destination country; subscript l
denotes the country of production; and subscript i denotes the country in which the technology
originates. Note that if zlif (u) = zlig (v) = 0 whenever l 6= i, for all u, v ∈ [0, 1], our model
becomes virtually identical to the Alvarez and Lucas’s (2007) version of Eaton and Kortum’s
(2002) model of trade with no MP.12
Trade and MP costs. Intermediate goods are tradable, but final goods are not. Trade
is subject to iceberg-type costs: dnl ≥ 1 units of any good must be shipped from country l
for one unit to arrive in country n. We assume that dnn = 1 for all n and that the triangle
inequality holds: dnl ≤ dnj djl for all n, l, j. Similarly, MP is subject to costs that we model as
iceberg-type efficiency losses. Letting cfli and cgli denote the unit costs of the input bundle for
final and intermediate goods in country l for firms from country i, respectively, MP costs imply
that csli may be different than csl ≡ csll for l 6= i and s = f, g. Taking into account trade and MP
costs, the unit cost of a final good u in country n produced with a technology from country i
f
is cfni /zni
(u), while the unit cost of an intermediate good v in country n produced in country l

with a technology from country i is cgli dnl /zlig (v).
We now provide additional detail about our assumptions regarding MP costs. For final
12

We say “virtually identical” rather than “identical” because our model exhibits varying productivity levels
across a continuum of final goods, whereas in Alvarez and Lucas (2007) there is a single final good. In our
model, T also affects the productivity of final goods. Hence, while in Alvarez and Lucas (2007), the real wage
is proportional to T η/θ , in our setup, the real wage is proportional to T (1+η)/θ (in Eaton and Kortum (2002),
the real wage is proportional to T 1/βθ since they do not have non-tradable goods).

7

goods, we simply assume that there is an iceberg-cost hfli ≥ 1 associated with using a technology from i to produce in l, with hfii = 1 for all i. This implies that cfli = cfl hfli while
cfl = Awlα (Plg )1−α . For intermediate goods, we assume that MP requires the use of what we call
a multinational input bundle for the production of intermediate goods. In particular, we assume
that the multinational input bundle combines the national input bundle from the home country
(i.e., the country where the technology originates) and the host country (i.e., the country where
production takes place). The home country’s national input bundle must be shipped to the
host country, and this implies paying the corresponding transportation cost. The unit cost of
the home country’s national input bundle used in MP by country i in country l is then cgi dli .
The host country’s national input bundle has unit cost cgl , but MP in intermediates incurs an
efficiency loss of hgli ≥ 1, so the unit cost of the host country’s national input used in MP by i
in l is cgl hgli . Combining the costs of the home and host countries’ national input bundles into
a CES aggregator, the unit cost of the multinational input bundle for intermediates produced
by i in l is
cgli

h
i 1
1−ξ 1−ξ
g g 1−ξ
g
,
= (1 − a) (cl hli )
+ a (ci dli )

(4)

where a ∈ [0, 1] and ξ > 1. Note that cgii = cgi = Bwiβ (Pig )1−β . Moreover, if a = 0, then
cgli = cgl hgli . The parameter ξ indicates the degree of substitutability between the national input
bundles from the home and host countries.
Productivity distributions. We assume that the productivity vectors z fi (u) and z gi (v)
for each good are random variables that are drawn independently across goods and countries
from a multivariate Fréchet distribution with parameters Ti , θ > max {1, σ − 1}, and ρ ∈ [0, 1),
namely

F (z si ; Ti ) = exp −Ti

!1−ρ 
X

(zlis )−θ/(1−ρ)

,

(5)

l



for s = f, g.13 Note that limx→∞ F (x, x, ..., zlis , ..., x; Ti ) = exp −Ti (zlis )−θ , so that the marginal
distributions are Fréchet. The parameter ρ determines the degree of correlation among the
elements of z si : if ρ = 0, productivity levels are uncorrelated across production locations, while
in the limit as ρ → 1 they are perfectly correlated, so that productivity is independent of the
location of production (i.e., ziis = zlis , for all l).
13

This distribution is discussed in Eaton and Kortum (2002), footnote 14.

8

2.3

Equilibrium Analysis

In a competitive equilibrium, the price of final good u in country n is simply the minimum
f
unit cost at which this good can be obtained, pfn (u) = mini cfni /zni
(u). Similarly, the price of

intermediate good v in country n is pgn (v) = mini,l cgli dnl /zlig (v). Note that if l = i, then the
intermediate good is exported from i to n, while if i 6= l = n, there is MP from i to n. Finally,
if i 6= l and l 6= n, then country i uses country l as an export platform to serve country n. We
say that, in this case, there is bridge MP, or simply BMP, by country i in country l.
Recall that in Eaton and Kortum (2002), the allocation of expenditures across exporters is
elegantly characterized by simple formulas of the technology parameters, unit costs, and trade
costs. Thanks to the assumption that technologies are distributed according to the multivariate
Fréchet distribution, this property extends in a natural way in our model to the allocation of
expenditures across technology sources and production locations (see Appendix). For final
(non-tradable) goods, the result is quite simple: The share of expenditures by country n on
final goods produced in country n with country i technologies is
 −θ
Ti cfni
π fni = P
 −θ .
f
j Tj cnj

(6)

For intermediate (tradable) goods, we need to take into account all the different ways in which
they can be made available to a particular country. As shown in the Appendix, the share
of expenditures by country n on intermediate goods produced in country l with country i
technologies is
(cgli dnl )−θ/(1−ρ)
Ti (e
cgni )−θ
,
(7)
π gnli = P

P
−θ/(1−ρ)
g
g −θ
(c
d
)
T
e
c
nk
j
ki
k
nj
j
P
−(1−ρ)/θ
−θ/(1−ρ)
g
where e
cgni ≡
.14 This expression has a natural interpretation: The
k (cki dnk )
first term on the RHS is the share of expenditures that country n allocates to intermediate
goods produced with country i’s technologies (independently of the location where they are
produced), while the second term on the RHS is the share of these goods that are produced in
country l. The price index for final (s = f ) and intermediate (s = g) goods is given by
"
#−1/θ
X
Ti (e
csni )−θ
,
Pns = γ

(8)

i
−θ

Note that when dnl → ∞ for n 6= l, then e
cgni = cgni and π gnni = Ti (cgni )
case of final goods.
14

9

/

P

j

Tj cgnj

−θ

, just like in the

where e
cfni = cfni and where γ is a positive constant.15
We next use the previous results to characterize trade and MP flows and present the tradebalance conditions.16
Country n’s total expenditures on final goods are equal to the country’s total income,
wn Ln , while its total expenditures on intermediate goods are proportional to the country’s
total income: Png Qn = ηwn Ln for all n (see Appendix). The value of MP in final goods by i in
n is then
Ynif = π fni wn Ln ,

(9)

while the value of MP in intermediates by country i in country l to serve country n is π gnli ηwn Ln .
Thus, MP in intermediates by i in l is
Ylig = η

X

π gnli wn Ln .

(10)

n

Total imports by n from l are given by the imports of intermediate goods produced in l with
P
technologies from any other country, η i π gnli wn Ln , plus the imports of country l’s input bundle
for intermediates used by country l’s multinationals operating in country n. For concreteness,
we refer to the first type of trade as arm’s-length and the second type of trade as intra-firm. To
compute intra-firm trade flows, let ω nl be the cost share of the home country’s input bundle for
the production of intermediates in country n by multinationals from country l. From equation
(4), ω nl = a (cgl dnl /cgnl )1−ξ . The value of imports of the input bundle for intermediates by n
from l associated with MP by l in n is ω nl Ynlg . Total imports by country n from l 6= n are then
given by the sum of arm’s-length trade and intra-firm trade,
Xnl = η

X

π gnli wn Ln + ω nl Ynlg .

(11)

i

The trade-balance condition for country n is
X

Xnl =

l6=n

X

Xln .

(12)

l6=n

Since cgli is a function of wages w = (w1 , ..., wI ) and price indices P g = (P1g , ..., PIg ), then
so are e
cgni , π gnli , Ynlg and Xnl . The price index equations (8) for s = g and the trade-balance
15

γ ≡ Γ(1 + (1 − σ)/θ)1/(1−σ) where Γ(·) is the Gamma function.
The trade-balance conditions are the appropriate equilibrium conditions given that MP entails no profits
under perfect competition.
16

10

equations (12) can then be used to determine the equilibrium wages and price indices in this
economy.17
For the calibration of our model, a key target will be the trade elasticity, defined as the partial


bnl /X
bnn /∂ ln dnl .
elasticity of relative trade flows with respect to relative trade costs: ∂ ln X
Quantitative trade models such as those of Anderson and van Wincoop (2003), Eaton and
Kortum (2002) and Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2011) all exhibit the useful feature that
this elasticity is common across countries and equal to a structural parameter coming from
preferences or technology. If we shut down MP in our model, then the trade elasticity would be
given by the distribution parameter θ (as in Eaton and Kortum, 2002). In the presence of MP,
however, the trade elasticity is not a constant in our model. There are two reasons for this.
First, arm’s-length and intra-firm trade flows are subject to two different elasticities with respect
to trade costs: the distribution parameter θ, and the elasticity of substitution between home
and host countries’ input bundles for MP, ξ − 1. Second, if ρ > 0, there is positive correlation
g
g
g
among the productivity parameters associated with source country i (z1i
, z2i
, ..., zIi
), whereas

there is no correlation among the productivity parameters associated with production location
g
g
l (zl1
, zl2
, ..., zlIg ).

An interesting case arises if ρ = 0. For this special case, arm’s-length trade flows, defined
bnl ≡ Xnl − ω nl Y g , satisfy a gravity equation similar to that in Eaton and Kortum (2002),
as X
nl
except that the technology in each country is “augmented” by the possibility of MP,
−θ
eg g
bnl = PTl (cl dnl )
ηw L .
(13)
X
eg (cg dnk )−θ n n
T
k
k k
P
g
g −θ
e
Here, Tl ≡ i Ti (hli ) is an augmented technology parameter for the production of intermediate goods in country l that takes into account the possibility of using technologies from other
countries, appropriately discounted by the efficiency losses hgli . This implies that country l0 s
normalized import share in country n depends only on the trade cost dnl , and the price indices
Png and Plg ,

bnl /ηwn Ln  dnl P g −θ
X
l
.
=
g
b
P
n
Xll /ηwl Ll

17

(14)

To compute the equilibrium, we follow an algorithm similar to the one proposed by Alvarez and Lucas
(2007). In particular, we use the set of equations associated with (8) for s = g and n = {1, ..., I} to determine
a function P g (w): I → I. Together with P g (w), equation (8) for s = f also defines a function P f (w) for the
price index of final goods. Using the function P g (w), we can think of the trade-balance conditions in (12) as
a system of I equations in w. This system of equations, together with some normalization of wages, yields an
equilibrium wage vector w. The functions P g (w) and P f (w) then determine the price indices for intermediate
and final goods, respectively, in all countries.

11

This equation is exactly like the one in Eaton and Kortum (2002)–see their equation (12). In
the case with ρ = 0, MP flows also satisfy a gravity-like relationship. In the Appendix, we
describe in detail this relationship.18
In general, for ρ 6= 0 and given that trade data includes intra-firm trade (i.e., we have data
bnl ), our calibration procedure will use the trade elasticity as a target, but
for Xnl and not for X
this will only pin down θ indirectly together with all the other parameters.

2.4

Gains from Trade, MP, and Openness

In this paper, we are particularly interested in quantifying the country-level gains from trade,
MP, and openness. We first establish some terminology.
The gains from openness for country n (GOn ) are given by the proportional change in
country n0 s real wage, wn /Pnf , as we move from a counterfactual equilibrium characterized by
isolation, which attains when trade and MP costs are infinite (dnl , hsli → ∞ for all n 6= l, l 6= i,
and s = f, g), to the actual equilibrium.
The gains from trade for country n (GTn ) are given by the proportional change in wn /Pnf
as we move from the counterfactual equilibrium with MP but no trade (actual hsli for all l, i
and s = f, g but dnl → ∞ for all n 6= l) to the actual equilibrium.
Similarly, the gains from MP for country n (GM Pn ) are given by the proportional change
in wn /Pnf as we move from the counterfactual equilibrium with trade but no MP (actual dnl
for all n, l but hsli → ∞ for all l 6= i and s = f, g) to the actual equilibrium. The gains from
MP can be decomposed into those that arise from MP in intermediates, GM Png , and those that
arise from MP in final goods, GM Pnf , with GM Pn = GM Pnf × GM Png .
We are interested in comparing GTn and GM Pn with the gains that would be computed in
models with only trade and models with only MP. We label these gains by GTn∗ and GM Pn∗ ,
respectively. Formally, GTn∗ is the proportional change in country n0 s real wage as we move
from a counterfactual equilibrium characterized by isolation to an equilibrium with no MP but
with the same trade flows as in the actual equilibrium. Analogously, GM Pn∗ is the proportional
change in country n0 s real wage as we move from a counterfactual equilibrium characterized
by isolation to an equilibrium with no trade but with the same MP flows as in the actual
Another interesting special case arises when MP costs are zero or separable (i.e., hgli = κl µi , for all l, i), in
which case the trade elasticity is θ/ (1 − ρ).
18

12

equilibrium.19
The following lemma establishes that GTn∗ and GM Pn∗ can be calculated as simple formulas
from trade and MP shares, respectively.
Lemma 1. The gains from trade and the gains from MP in trade-only and MP-only models,
respectively, can be directly calculated from trade and MP shares as follows:
!−η/θ
X
GTn∗ = Xnn /
Xnj
,

(15)

j

!−η/θ
GM Png∗ =

g
Ynn
/

X

Ynjg

,

(16)

,

(17)

j

!−1/θ
GM Pnf ∗ =

f
Ynn
/

X

Ynjf

j

with the total gains from MP given by GM Pn∗ = GM Png∗ × GM Pnf ∗ .
The formula for the gains from trade as a function of normalized trade flows in equation
(15) is very similar to Eaton and Kortum’s (2002) equation (15) and exactly the same as the
one in Alvarez and Lucas (2007). The formula is also consistent with the results in Arkolakis et
al. (2012). The formulas in equations (16) and (17) can be seen as natural extensions of these
same ideas for the computation of the gains for MP in MP-only models.
One of the main results of our paper is that GTn can be higher or lower than GTn∗ because
of the substitutability and complementarity forces that exist between trade and MP. If GTn >
GTn∗ , then we say that trade is an MP-complement: the gains from trade are higher than
the ones that would be computed in trade-only models because trade also leads to gains by
facilitating MP. On the contrary, if GTn < GTn∗ , then we say that trade is an MP-substitute–
that is, the gains from trade are lower than the ones that would be computed in trade-only
models because trade decreases the gains from MP. If GTn = GTn∗ , then we say that trade is
MP-independent.
Analogously, if GM Pn < GM Pn∗ , then we say that MP is a trade-substitute, while if
GM Pn > GM Pn∗ (GM Pn = GM Pn∗ ), then we say that MP is a trade-complement (tradeindependent).
19

Of course, the trade (MP) costs necessary to yield the same trade (MP) flows as in the actual equilibrium
may be different in a trade-only (MP-only) model than in our model with trade and MP.

13

2.5

Three special cases

Before presenting the calibration of the full model in the next section, it is instructive to consider
three special cases for which we can derive analytical results: (1) the case with a = ρ = 0 (i.e., no
imports of home-inputs associated with MP, and no correlation across productivity in different
locations); (2) the case of symmetric countries; and (3) the case of a rich and a poor country
with a = 0 and frictionless trade. All proofs are in the Appendix.
2.5.1

a=ρ=0

The following proposition establishes that if a = ρ = 0, then trade is MP-independent.
Proposition 1. Assume that a = ρ = 0. Then, trade is MP-independent in the sense that
GTn = GTn∗ . Moreover, GOn = GTn∗ × GM Pn∗ .
To understand this result, recall that our model captures two opposite forces affecting the
relationship between trade and MP. First, trade tends to be an MP-complement because of
the need to import home-country intermediate goods by multinationals’ foreign subsidiaries.
Second, trade tends to be an MP-substitute because trade and MP are alternative ways to
serve a particular market. The first force is not present if a = 0 because in this case, foreign
subsidiaries do not demand home-country intermediate goods. The second force is not present
if ρ = 0 because with no correlation across productivities in different locations, there is, in a
sense, no longer a technology that can be used in different countries. Proposition 1 implies
that if a = ρ = 0, then it would be valid to use the trade-only model to compute gains from
trade. Moreover, as the last part of the proposition establishes, one can use the trade-only and
MP-only models jointly to compute the overall gains from openness since GOn = GTn∗ ×GM Pn∗ .
In contrast to the result that trade is MP-independent, parameters a = ρ = 0 do not imply
P
that MP is trade-independent. Let bilateral trade shares be denoted by λnl ≡ Xnl / j Xnj ,
and let λ̄nn be the domestic trade share in the counterfactual equilibrium with trade but no
MP. The following proposition establishes the relationship between GM Pn and GM Pn∗ for this
case.
Proposition 2. Assume that a = ρ = 0. Then,
GM Pn = GM Pn∗ λnn /λ̄nn

14

−η/θ

.

Two simple examples illustrate this result. In both examples, there are two countries labeled
North (N ) and South (S). The first example has TN > 0 but TS = 0. The equilibrium in
this case entails MP by North in South but no MP by South in North. Since South has no
technologies of its own, there would be no trade in the counterfactual equilibrium with no MP;
hence, λ̄N N = 1. But λN N < 1 in the actual equilibrium. This implies that λN N < λ̄N N ,
and hence, from Proposition 2, we see that GM PN > GM PN∗ , so MP is a trade-complement
for North. This example captures the gains from BMP for North, which can satisfy domestic
demand at a lower cost by using its superior technologies to produce in South. In the second
example, we have frictionless trade and both regions are identical except that South is smaller:
TN /LN = TS /LS and LS < LN . In this case, the domestic demand share for South increases
as we move from the counterfactual equilibrium with no MP to the actual equilibrium with
MP (i.e., λSS > λ̄SS ). This implies that GM PS < GM PS∗ , so that MP is a trade-substitute for
South: As South becomes more productive thanks to MP, it effectively becomes larger and the
gains from trade decline.
2.5.2

Symmetry

The symmetric case can be solved analytically, but the basic intuition regarding the role of the
various parameters carries to the general case with asymmetric countries. We derive intuitive
formulas for the gains from trade, MP and openness, and then explore the conditions under
which trade (MP) behaves as substitute or complement for MP (trade). We are also interested
in differentiating between the complementarity that arises from the possibility of doing BMP
and the one that arises from the use of the home country’s input bundle in multinational
activities.
Symmetry entails Li = L and Ti = T for all i, dnl = d and hfnl = hgnl = h for all l 6= n. In
equilibrium, wages, costs, and prices are equalized across countries, wn = w, and Pns = P s , for
s = g, f and all n. Thus, the cost of the multinational input bundle collapses to cgli = m · cg , for

 1
all l 6= i, with m ≡ (1 − a)h1−ξ + ad1−ξ 1−ξ , and cgll = cg for all l. The share of expenditure
on the home input bundle done by MP is simply ω = a(d/m)1−ξ .
The equilibrium is characterized as follows (see the Appendix for formal derivations). In the
case of final goods, the situation is straightforward: A country uses some of its own technologies
to serve domestic consumers through local production, and also to serve foreign consumers
through MP. For intermediate goods, there is trade, MP, and BMP: Countries use some of
15

their own technologies to produce at home to serve domestic and foreign consumers (through
exports), and they use some of their technologies for MP whose output is sold to local consumers
(MP), sent back home or sold to third markets (BMP).20 There is also trade associated with
the import of the home country’s input bundle for MP.
The following proposition shows how access to foreign technologies through trade and MP
increases a country’s real wage.
Proposition 3. Under symmetry
1/θ

1 + (I − 1)h−θ
[∆0 + (I − 1)∆1 ]η/θ ,

η/θ
∆0 + (I − 1)∆1
GO
=
,
GT =
limd→∞ GO
1 + (I − 1)m
e −θ

η/θ


GO
−θ 1/θ ∆0 + (I − 1)∆1
GM P =
= 1 + (I − 1)h
,
limh→∞ GO
1 + (I − 1)d−θ
GO =

(18)
(19)
(20)

where
1−ρ
−e
θ

∆0 ≡



1 + (I − 1)(md)

∆1 ≡



d−θ + m−θ + (I − 2)(md)−θ

m
e ≡

e

,

e 1−ρ

e

,

1

lim m = (1 − a) 1−ξ h,

d→∞

e
θ ≡ θ/ (1 − ρ) .
The expression for the gains from openness in equation (18) indicates that a country that
opens up to both trade and MP in the intermediate-goods sector benefits from using its own
technologies abroad and from access to foreign technologies. When domestic technologies are
used (the term ∆0 ), production can be carried out in I − 1 foreign locations through MP at
the cost m, and then goods shipped back home at the cost d. Hence, technologies are “fully”
discounted by (md)−θ . Foreign technologies can be accessed by importing goods, in which case
e

they are discounted by d−θ (first term in ∆1 ); by doing MP, in which case they are discounted
e

by m−θ (second term in ∆1 ); and by doing BMP in I − 2 different locations, in which case
e

the full discount (md)−θ applies (third term in ∆1 ). The term in the first bracket in equation
e

(18) captures the gains from accessing (I − 1) foreign technologies through (inward) MP in the
final-goods sector, at a discount of h−θ .
20

The assumption that technologies are draws from a multivariate Fréchet distribution with ρ ∈ [0, 1) implies
that there is some BMP even with symmetric countries; BMP vanishes only when ρ → 1.

16

It is clear that the gains from openness decrease with h as well as d: The higher the trade or
MP costs, the lower the gains from openness. Additionally, the parameter ρ appears in GO in
association with intermediate goods: As ρ indicates the correlation between technology draws
for a given source country across different production locations, it matters only when both trade
and MP are allowed. As one would expect, GO decreases with ρ. In the case where ρ → 1 (so
s
that zlis = zji
for all l, j and s = g, f ), BMP in intermediate goods vanishes, and trade and MP

no longer overlap: If d > h, there is MP but no arm’s-length trade; in contrast, if h > d, there
is arm’s-length trade but no MP (see the Appendix).
The expression for GT in equation (19) indicates that a country that opens up to trade
benefits through specialization according to Ricardian comparative advantage (which, here,
takes into account trade flows associated with BMP) and from the fact that trade facilitates
MP by allowing multinational affiliates to import inputs from their home country. The following
proposition describes parameter configurations under which trade is an MP-complement or an
MP-substitute.
Proposition 4. Assume that countries are symmetric. (a) If ρ = 0 and a > 0, trade is an
MP-complement, and if ρ > 0 and a = 0, trade is an MP-substitute. (b) Assume that a, ρ > 0.
If ξ → 1, trade is an MP-complement, while if h < d and ξ → ∞, trade is an MP-substitute.
To gain some intuition for these results, start from the case with a = ρ = 0, for which
we know from Proposition 1 that trade is MP-independent. As ρ increases above zero, the
positive correlation between productivity draws across locations generates substitutability. Alternatively, as a increases above zero, the demand for home-country inputs by multinationals
introduces complementarity. If both ρ > 0 and a > 0, then we need to consider the parameter
ξ. If ξ is close to 1, the low elasticity of substitution between home and host countries’ inputs
for MP generates no gains from MP if trade is not possible. Hence, trade is an MP-complement.
Conversely, if ξ is high, then only the cheapest input bundle is used for MP; if h < d, then
trade does not contribute to decreasing MP costs. This implies that trade is an MP-substitute.
Turning to the gains from MP, the first term on the RHS of (20) captures the gains associated
with final goods, whereas the second term captures the gains associated with intermediate
goods. For intermediates, the gains from MP are affected by the substitutability between trade
and MP that arises for ρ > 0.

17

Proposition 5. Assume that countries are symmetric. If ρ = 0, MP is trade-independent,
while if ρ > 0, MP is a trade-substitute.
We emphasize two implications of this proposition. First, the value of a does not affect
whether MP is trade-independent or a trade-substitute. This is because while trade facilitates
MP by reducing the unit cost of the multinational input bundle (m < m
e if a > 0), MP does
not facilitate trade; MP only adds a competing alternative to trade in serving other markets.
Second, the result that MP is trade-independent for ρ = 0 is consistent with Lemma 2: Under
symmetry, we have λ̄nn = λnn . This is because, in this case, MP affects all countries equally
and, therefore, has no effect on trade shares.
2.5.3

Two countries with a = 0 and frictionless trade

This special case shows that the rich country can experience losses from MP. We consider two
countries labeled North (N ) and South (S), with TN /LN > TS /LS . This condition implies that
wages will tend to be higher in North than in South. We assume that MP generates no demand
for home-country intermediate goods (a = 0) and that trade is frictionless (dN S = dSN = 1).
Our main result for this case is established in the following proposition.
Proposition 6. Assume a = 0 and frictionless trade. There exists ρ∗ ∈ [0, 1) such that North
gains from frictionless MP in intermediate goods (GM PNg > 1) for ρ ∈ [0, ρ∗ ), while it loses for
ρ ∈ (ρ∗ , 1) (GM PNg < 1).
The reason why MP can have a negative impact on the rich country is that outward MP
effectively reduces the demand for a country’s exports, worsening its terms of trade. But this
negative effect relies on there being strong substitutability between trade and MP as alternative
ways of serving foreign markets–hence the need for a high correlation parameter ρ for this to
be a dominant effect. Note that in this example, we have assumed a = 0. But in general, with
a > 0, outward MP would generate an increased demand for home-country inputs, and this
would make it less likely for the rich country to lose from MP (see Irarrazabal et al., 2009, and
Becker and Muendler, 2010).21
21
It is also important to note that in our model, outward MP generates no profits, since there is perfect
competition. Such profits would lead to additional gains from MP for rich countries, as in Burstein and MongeNaranjo (2009), and Arkolakis, Ramondo, Rodrı́guez-Clare, and Yeaple (2011).

18

3

Calibration

3.1

Data Description

We restrict our analysis to the set of nineteen OECD countries considered by Eaton and Kortum
(2002): Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Spain, Finland, France, United Kingdom, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, New Zealand, Portugal, Sweden,
and the United States. Except when mentioned otherwise, all the data are averaged over the
period 1996-2001. We use STAN data on manufacturing trade flows from country l to country
n as the empirical counterpart for trade in intermediates in the model, Xnl . We use UNCTAD
data on the gross value of production for multinational affiliates from i in l as the empirical
counterpart of bilateral MP flows in the model, Yli ≡ Ylif + Ylig .22
We complement the bilateral-trade and MP data with data on intra-firm trade by multinational firms in manufacturing, and the share of MP in final goods, relative to all MP. These data
are available for the United States from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). We also use
data from the BEA to compute a measure of BMP for foreign affiliates of U.S. multinationals
and for U.S. affiliates of foreign multinationals, in the manufacturing sector. The Appendix
presents more detail on the data and summary statistics.

3.2

Calibration Procedure

We reduce the number of parameters to calibrate by assuming that bilateral-trade and MP
costs in the intermediate-goods sector are a function of distance and whether countries share a
border and a language, respectively,
dni = 1 + (δ d0 + δ ddist distni ) × (δ dbord )bni × (δ dlang )lni ,

(21)

hgni = 1 + (δ h0 + δ hdist distni ) × (δ hbord )bni × (δ hlang )lni ,

(22)

for all n 6= i, with dnn = 1 and hgnn = 1. The variable distni is the distance between i and n.
The variable bni (lni ) equals one if countries share a border (a language), and zero otherwise.
22

Since the model is one of constant returns to scale and perfect competition, the concept of “firms” is not
clearly defined. There is, thus, a gap between model and data, since the data on MP come from the activities
of multinational firms. On the one hand, this is not a major problem because we use only aggregate MP flows
rather than any firm-level data. On the other hand, however, as we acknowledge in the Introduction, there
is a discrepancy between the concept of MP in the model, which corresponds to the value of production with
technologies from country i in another country l, and the concept of MP in the data, which corresponds to the
value of production in country l performed by affiliates of firms headquartered in country i.

19

Thus, for example, if δ dbord < 1, then countries that share a border have lower trade costs.
We also assume that MP costs in the final-goods sector are proportional to the ones in the
intermediate-goods sector,
hfni = max [1, µhgni ] .

(23)

Finally, we assume that Ti /Li varies directly with the share of R&D employment observed
in the data (an average over the nineties from the World Development Indicators). Thus, for
example, since the share of R&D employment is 0.9 percent in the United States and 0.3 percent
in Greece, we assume that Ti /Li is three times higher in the U.S. than in Greece.
The parameters that need to be calibrated, then, are the parameters that determine trade
and MP costs in the tradable sector, Υ ≡ {δ d0 , δ h0 , δ ddist , δ hdist , δ dbord , δ hbord , δ dlang , δ hlang }, the parameter µ in equation (23), the size parameters, L ≡ (L1 , L2 , ..., LI ), the Fréchet parameters, ρ and
θ, and the remaining technology parameters [α, β, ξ, a].
We calibrate [α, β, ξ] as follows. We set the labor share in the intermediate-goods sector, β,
to 0.5, and the labor share in the final-goods sector, α, to 0.75, as calibrated by Alvarez and
Lucas (2007).23 This implies that η ≡ (1 − α)/β = 0.5. For the parameter ξ, which captures
the degree of complementarity between home and host countries’ inputs for MP, we appeal to
estimates from the labor literature. Becker and Muendler (2010) estimate cross-wage elasticities
of labor demand for German multinationals across multiple production locations. Their results
suggest a value of approximately ξ = 1.5.24
We choose not to include the parameter ρ in the calibration since this parameter is not well
identified from the aggregate data on bilateral trade and MP shares. Instead, we consider two
values for ρ: ρ = 0 (no correlation), and a central value of ρ = 0.5.
We calibrate the remaining parameters through the following algorithm. Given a value
for ρ ∈ {0, 0.5} , the values for [α, β, ξ] as chosen above, and a set of parameters to calibrate
23

They calibrate the parameter β to match the share of value added in gross output in tradable sectors
(agriculture, mining, and manufacturing), and the parameter α to match the fraction of U.S. employment in
the non-tradable sector (services), using input-output data for the OECD countries in 1993. Jones (2011) also
uses β = 0.5.
24
They estimate that the effect of a one-percent increase in German wages on the demand for labor by
multinationals in other countries of Western Europe is 1.2. Since the average share of these multinationals’
wage bill allocated to German workers is 62 percent, the implied elasticity of substitution is 1.94. They also
estimate that the elasticity of German multinationals’ labor demand in Germany to wages in Western Europe
is 0.2. Given that the average share of these multinationals’ wage bill allocated to Western European workers is
15 percent, the implied elasticity of substitution is 1.3. The average of these two elasticities is close to 1.5. This
is close to the elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled workers, which Katz and Murphy (1992)
estimate at 1.4.

20

[ Υ, L, a, µ, θ], we compute the equilibrium and generate the following statistics: a simulated
data set with 361 observations (one for each country pair, including the domestic pairs) for
P
P
the bilateral trade and MP shares, λTnl ≡ Xnl / j Xnj and λM
nl ≡ Yli /
j Ylj , respectively; real
GDP levels for all countries, wn Ln /Pnf ; intra-firm trade to MP ratios, ω li Ylig /Yli ; and MP in the
intermediate-goods sector as a share of total MP, Ylig /Yli . We compute averages of the last two
variables across country pairs where the United States is either the home or the host country
(i.e., i = U S or l = U S). We also compute an estimate of the trade elasticity (i.e., the partial
elasticity of trade flows to trade costs) by running an OLS regression with no intercept on the
following gravity equation for normalized trade flows, similar to Eaton and Kortum (2002),


λTnl
dnl Plg
log T = −ε log
.
(24)
Png
λll
Notice that for ρ = a = 0, this equation is the same as the one in equation (14), and ε = θ.
Otherwise, in general, ε 6= θ, as we explain in more detail below.
Finally, we compute a measure of the explanatory power of the model for bilateral trade
shares given by
h
i2
T,data
T,model
λ
−
λ
ni
ni
n,i;n6=i
,
P
T,data 2
(λ
)
ni
n,i;n6=i

P
RT ≡ 1 −

(25)

We use an analogous formula for the measure of the explanatory power of the model for bilateral
MP shares, which we denote by RM .
This procedure gives us a set of moments that we use to calibrate the parameters [ Υ, L, a, µ, θ]
as follows. First, given Υ and θ, the parameters a and µ are chosen so that the model matches
the moments for the importance of intra-firm trade and MP in intermediate goods, respectively,
and the vector L matches the real GDP levels (relative to the U.S. levels) in the data. Second,
given θ, the parameters in Υ are chosen to minimize (1−RT )+(1−RM ). Finally, the parameter
θ is chosen so that the value for ε above is equal to 4.2, an average of the estimates presented
by Simonovska and Waugh (2011) for the set of nineteen OECD countries that we consider
here.25

3.3

Results

Table 1 reports the calibrated parameters, while the vector L is reported in the Appendix.
25

Various empirical studies using different estimation strategies find a value for ε in the range of the one

21

Cost Parameters
distance
common border
common language
constant
Average Costs
Standard Deviation Costs
Minimum Cost
Maximum Cost

Model with ρ = 0.5

Model with ρ = 0

trade
0.18
0.74
0.60
0.89
2.88
0.40
1.41
5.49

trade
0.13
0.65
0.70
1.09
2.79
0.32
1.51
4.69

Intra-firm trade parameter a
MP cost parameter for final sector µ
Variability parameter in MV Fréchet θ

MP
0.26
1.45
0.40
0.95
3.39
0.47
1.47
7.12
0.15
1.55
3.75

MP
0.31
1.86
0.36
1.30
4.03
0.48
1.56
8.45
0.14
1.11
4.40

Table 1: Calibrated Parameters.
For both calibrations, the effect of distance on trade and MP costs is similar: A ten-percent
increase in distance between a country pair increases trade costs by more than two percent, and
MP costs in the tradable-goods sector by more than three percent. Both calibrations suggest
that a common border decreases trade costs by more than MP costs (δ dborder < δ hborder ), while
the opposite is true for country pairs with a common language (δ dlang > δ hlang ). These calibrated
parameters translate into average MP costs in the tradable sector that are more than 40-percent
higher than the average trade costs, for the calibration with ρ = 0.
We showed in section 2.3 that, in general, the trade elasticity is not equal to θ due to the
existence of intra-firm trade (a > 0) and the fact that ρ might be different from zero. In fact,
our calibration procedure for the case with ρ = 0.5 implies that, to generate a trade elasticity
of ε = 4.2, we need θ = 3.75. This reveals that the trade elasticity is a biased estimator of
θ. The (upward) bias arises because ρ > 0 leads to a higher trade elasticity than θ, as now
there is an additional channel (beside the standard one in Ricardian trade-only models) through
which higher trade costs decrease trade flows–i.e., exports can be replaced by MP or BMP. As
expected, for the case with ρ = 0, the calibrated value of θ is 4.45, which is closer to the value
of the trade elasticity ε. Of course, if a = ρ = 0, then θ = ε = 4.2.
The next two tables illustrate how the calibrated model matches the patterns in the data
calculated by Simonovska and Waugh (2011). See Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003); Eaton, Kortum,
and Kramarz (2011); Burstein and Vogel (2012); Donaldson (2010); and Simonovska (2010).

22

along several dimensions. Table 2 reports statistics from the data and the calibrated model. For
bilateral trade and MP shares, we report the mean, the standard deviation and the correlation
coefficient. We also show the average BMP share implied by the model for foreign affiliates of
U.S. multinationals and for U.S. affiliates of foreign multinationals. While the average bilateral
trade and MP shares generated by the model are similar to the ones in the data, the correlation
between the two flows is higher in the model. We comment on the results for BMP below.
Data
Bilateral Trade Shares
average
0.021
standard deviation
0.038
Bilateral MP Shares
average
0.029
standard deviation
0.063
Correlation bilateral Trade and MP Shares 0.701
Average Outward BMP Shares for the U.S. 0.405
Average Inward BMP Shares for the U.S.
0.090

Model with ρ = 0.5

Model with ρ = 0

0.021
0.035

0.021
0.035

0.024
0.038
0.804
0.115
0.013

0.023
0.041
0.793
0.364
0.065

Table 2: Summary Statistics: Data and Calibrated Model.
Table 3 shows the measure of the model’s explanatory power for bilateral trade and MP, RT
and RM , respectively. Additionally, it presents correlations between magnitudes in the model
and data for bilateral trade and MP shares across country pairs, as well as correlations for
aggregate exports, imports, outward MP and inward MP, as shares of GDP of the source and
the receiving country, respectively.
Both R-squareds and correlation coefficients for bilateral trade and MP shares are high,
indicating that the model captures the observed bilateral patterns of these two flows fairly well.
When we express total exports and total imports as shares of absorption in manufacturing, the
correlations between model and data are still high. Correlations are lower but fairly strong
when we compute total outward and inward MP as shares of GDP. The model performs poorly
in capturing the level of outward and inward MP shares for the largest countries in the sample
(i.e., Germany, Japan, and the United States). Table 10 in the Appendix shows the actual and
simulated data for these four variables for each country against country size.
The model can generate BMP flows–i.e., country i produces in country l 6= i and sells to
23

Model with ρ = 0.5

Model with ρ = 0

Model’s R-squared
bilateral trade shares
bilateral MP shares

0.89
0.64

0.89
0.66

Correlations data and model
bilateral trade shares
bilateral MP shares
total exports shares
total imports shares
total outward MP shares
total inward MP shares

0.93
0.76
0.76
0.85
0.56
0.56

0.92
0.77
0.71
0.85
0.54
0.60

Bilateral MP = gross value of production for affiliates from country i in l; Total Outward MP =
total gross value of production for foreign affiliates from country i; Total Inward MP = total gross
value of production for foreign affiliates in country l. Total exports and imports are expressed as
shares of absorption in manufacturing.

Table 3: Model’s Goodness of Fit.
country n 6= l. Let κli ≡

hP

g
g
n6=l π nli Xn

i

/Ylig denote the share of total production of intermediate

goods in l by country i that is sold in countries other than l. (Note that κll is the export share
of domestic firms in country l.) Using BEA data for the manufacturing sector, we can construct
BMP shares κli for the pairs (l, i) in which either i = U S or l = U S. We refer to the average
κli , for i = U S (l = U S), as the average outward (inward) BMP share for the United States.
In Table 2 we show that the model is reassuringly consistent with the data in the sense
that the average outward BMP share for the United States is much higher than its average
inward BMP share. This is what we would expect since the United States is the largest country
in our sample and has the (second) highest research intensity (see Table 9 in the Appendix),
discouraging the use of the United States as an export platform.
On the one hand, the calibrated model with ρ = 0 implies an average outward BMP share
for the United States of 36 percent, which is not far from the 40-percent share shown in the data.
On the other hand, the calibrated model with ρ = 0.5 implies an average outward BMP share
for the United States of only 11.5 percent. One way to understand why the model calibrated
with ρ = 0.5 does poorly in replicating the observed BMP shares is by recalling the result in
subsection 2.5 that in a symmetric world, BMP flows go to zero as ρ → 1. The reason is that in
a symmetric world with perfectly correlated productivity draws, for country i to serve market

24

n through l implies paying both the MP cost and the trade cost (uniform across all country
pairs by assumption), whereas exporting entails only the trade cost. In principle, moving to
an asymmetric world could lead to positive BMP flows even with ρ → 1, as cheaper countries
become export platforms. But this possibility is of little importance in our sample of developed
countries.26 In contrast, a low value for ρ leads to more BMP because it implies that country
i may have a particularly good productivity draw in l but not in n, so if l and n are “close”
(i.e., dnl is low), then it would be efficient to use l as an export platform to serve n.
Data

Model with rho = 0

1

Model with rho = 0.5

1

1

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

BEL

0.9

0.8

DNK

0.6
AUT
CAN
SWE

0.5
FIN
GER

0.4

GBR
FRA
NZL
PRT NOR
ITA

0.3

GRC

BEL

AUT

0.6

DNK
FIN
NOR

0.5

PRT
SWE
NLD
CAN
GRC

0.4

FRA

0.3

ESP

0.2

0.7

Export share from country l

0.7

Export share from country l

Export share from country l

NLD

BEL

0.7

0.6
FIN

0.5

SWE
NLD
CAN
PRT

0.4

FRA
GRC
ESP
GER

0.3

ESP
GER
NZL
GBR

GBR
ITA

ITA

AUS

AUT

DNK
NOR

0.2

NZL

0.2

JPN

0.1

0.1

0

0

0.1

AUS

JPN

JPN

0

0.5

1

AUS

0
0.5
1
BMP share from the U.S. in country l

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Outward BMP shares from the United States to country l against export share from country l to all
countries, in manufacturing.

Figure 2: BMP Shares: Data and Calibrated Model. The United States.
26

The introduction of asymmetric trade costs could make it profitable for the United States to serve country
n through some country l that is “close” to n (e.g., the United States could serve France through Belgium). But
our calibrated model implies that in most cases, it would make more sense to serve country n directly through
MP rather than through some other country l.

25

Figure 2 shows outward BMP shares for the United States in country l (κl,U S ) on the
horizontal axis and export shares from country l on the vertical axis, in the data and as implied
by the calibrated models with ρ = 0 and ρ = 0.5, respectively.27 The left panel of Figure 2
shows a strong positive relationship between BMP and export shares in the data: An OLS
regression with no intercept and robust standard errors yields a coefficient of 0.88 (s.e. 0.05)
and R2 of 0.95. Countries that deviate from this pattern are small economies, like Belgium,
which has a relatively high export share (95 percent) but lower BMP share from the United
States (60 percent), and Sweden with a relatively high BMP share from the United States (64
percent) but a lower export share (50 percent). The middle panel of Figure 2 shows that,
according to the model calibrated with ρ = 0, BMP and export shares are closely lined up over
the 45-degree line.28 This means that the export intensity of multinationals is close to that
of domestic firms–e.g., the export share of U.S. firms in Belgium is close to that of domestic
Belgian firms. Panel c of Figure 2 shows that the model calibrated with ρ = 0.5 also reproduces
the positive relationship between U.S. outward BMP shares and export shares, but with BMP
shares that are too small.
Turning to inward BMP shares, the average BMP share for the United States is nine percent
as reported in Table 2, while the export share from the United States is also close to nine
percent. The calibrated model with ρ = 0 delivers an average BMP share of 6.5 percent, while
the export share from the United States is 7 percent. In contrast, the calibrated model with
ρ = 0.5 delivers much lower average BMP shares (1.3 percent), but not very different export
shares for the United States (eight percent).
These results reveal that the model calibrated with ρ = 0 does much better in matching the
facts about BMP than the model calibrated with ρ = 0.5. Still, we choose to present results
for both calibrations below to highlight the role of the parameter ρ in shaping the gains from
trade and MP implied by the model.
Country l0 s total exports in manufacturing are normalized by the total gross value of production in manufacturing in country l.
P
P
28
Notice that if a = ρ = 0, then κli = κll for all i, l. Since κli = n6=l π gnli Xn / n π gnli Xn , plugging in for
P
P
−θ θ
θ
π gnli from equation (7) with a = 0 and ρ = 0, κli = n6=l d−θ
n dnl Pn Xn , so that κli = κlj for all i, j.
nl Pn Xn /
27

26

4

Gains from Trade, MP, and Openness

4.1

Gains under Independence

Before presenting the implications of our calibrated model for the measurement of the gains
from trade, MP, and openness, it is instructive to compute these gains under the special case
with a = ρ = 0. We refer to these gains as the gains under independence because, as shown in
Proposition 1, a = ρ = 0 implies that trade is MP-independent in the sense that the gains from
trade are equal to the gains computed in a trade-only model (i.e., GTn = GTn∗ ), and that the
gains from openness are simply GOn∗ ≡ GTn∗ × GM Pn∗ (recall that GM Pn∗ are the gains from
MP computed in a MP-only model). As shown in Lemma 1, GTn∗ and GM Pn∗ can be computed
directly using the data on bilateral trade and MP shares and a value for the parameters η and
θ. The parameter η is easily calibrated (see above), while for a = ρ = 0, the parameter θ can be
recovered from an estimate of the trade elasticity ε (see Section 3). This implies that the results
for GTn∗ are consistent with the formula in Arkolakis et al. (2012) as a general result for a class
of quantitative trade models. We calculate GTn∗ using the data in Table 11 in the Appendix.
For GM Pn∗ , we use the data on inward MP shares in Table 10 in the Appendix, and we assume
that the share of MP in the intermediate-goods sector in each country is 0.5, as the one observed
P
for the United States. With this assumption and η = 0.5, GM Png = (1 − i6=n Yni /(wn Ln ))−η/θ
P
and GM Pnf = (1 − (1/2) i6=n Yni /(wn Ln ))−1/θ .
Table 4 shows the gains from openness, the gains from trade, and the gains from MP, under
independence, calculated directly using the data and the parameters η = 0.5 and θ = 4.2.
Table 4 presents the results for a sub-sample of countries, while Table 12 in the Appendix
shows results for all countries in our sample.
On average, the gains from openness are almost three times as large as the gains from trade
(17 versus 6.6 percent). For countries with high inward MP shares, such as Portugal and New
Zealand, the gains from openness are around five times as large as the gains from trade.

4.2

Gains in the Calibrated Model

The calculations under independence shown above miss the potential gains coming from the
interactions between trade and MP. In this section, we use our calibrated model to explore the
effect of such interactions.

27

New Zealand
Denmark
Portugal
Canada
Germany
Japan
United States

GOn∗

GTn∗

GM Pn∗

Ln

1.365
1.137
1.290
1.261
1.119
1.022
1.053

1.053
1.096
1.064
1.081
1.037
1.006
1.015

1.296
1.037
1.213
1.166
1.079
1.015
1.037

0.7
1.2
1.4
4.4
9.3
13.4
28.7

The variable L is expressed as percentage of OECD(19)’s total size,

P19

i=1

Li .

Table 4: Gains from Openness, Trade, and MP: Independence.

We show results averaged across countries in Table 5, and results by country, for a subset
of countries, in Table 6. Results by country for the entire sample, for ρ = 0 and ρ = 0.5,
respectively, are in Tables 13 and 14 in the Appendix. For meaningful comparisons between
GTn with GTn∗ , and between GM Pn with GM Pn∗ , the variables GTn∗ and GM Pn∗ are calculated
as indicated in Lemma 1 using trade and MP shares implied by the calibrated model.
Average

GOn

GTn

GTn∗

GM Pn

GM Pn∗

ρ=0
1.086
1.034
1.049

1.091
1.039
1.049

ρ = 0.5
1.095
1.032
1.061

1.116
1.051
1.061

Model with
All Sectors
1.148 1.080 1.062
Intermediate goods sector 1.092 1.080 1.062
Final goods sector
1.049
Model with
All Sectors
1.221 1.101 1.074
Intermediate goods sector 1.148 1.101 1.074
Final goods sector
1.061
-

Table 5: Gains from Openness, Trade, and MP: Average.
The implied average gains from openness are between 15 and 22 percent. These gains
are more than twice as large as the average gains from openness coming from a trade-only
model, GTn∗ = 6 − 7%, and around twice as large as the ones coming from a MP-only model,
GM Pn∗ = 9.1 − 11.6%. On average, around two thirds of the gains from openness are from
trade and MP in the intermediate-goods sector.
28

The calibrated model implies that trade is an MP-complement since, on average, GTn >
GTn∗ . Adding trade enhances MP by facilitating intra-firm trade and reducing the unit costs of
MP: The average unit cost of the multinational input bundle decreases by around 50 percent
with respect to the scenario with only MP but no trade, using either version of the calibrated
model.
Turning to MP, the calibrated model implies that, on average, MP is a trade-substitute
since GM Pn < GM Pn∗ when ρ = 0.5. The substitutability is quite weak when we consider
lower values of ρ. In fact, for ρ = 0, MP is practically trade-independent. As suggested by the
analytical results under symmetry in Proposition 5, the complementarity forces associated with
BMP cannot overcome the substitutability arising from the fact that MP adds a competing
alternative to trade in serving foreign markets.
These results imply that while trade-only models tend to underestimate the gains from
trade by a significant amount, MP-only models tend to overestimate the gains from MP by
a small amount. Another interesting result is that the gains from trade are larger than the
gains from MP in the intermediate-goods sector. This implies that, starting at the actual
equilibrium, removing the possibility of trade in intermediate goods would generate larger
losses than removing the possibility of MP in this sector.
Not surprisingly, as shown in Table 6, the gains from openness are larger for smaller countries: The correlation coefficient between Ln and GOn is around -0.64, for both calibrations.
Trade behaves as MP-complement, GTn > GTn∗ , for all countries. MP behaves as a mild tradesubstitute, GM Pn ≤ GM Pn∗ , except for Germany and the United States when ρ = 0, in which
case MP behaves as a trade-complement.29 For a small country like Canada, for which the
model captures (inward) trade and MP flows very well (see Tables 10 and 11 in the Appendix),
the gains from openness are between 20 and 28 percent. This is much larger than the gains calculated using a trade-only model, and larger than the ones calculated using an MP-only model.
The gains from trade for Canada are around 30-percent higher than those calculated with a
∗
trade-only model (with ρ = 0.5, GTCAN = 12.7%, while GTCAN
= 9%), while the gains from

MP are lower than those calculated with an MP-only model (with ρ = 0.5, GM PCAN = 12.8%
∗
and GM PCAN
= 15.7%).
29
Based on Proposition 2 and the discussion of that proposition in Section 2.5, this result can be understood
by noting that both the United States and Germany have large net outward MP flows, implying large gains
from BMP.

29

Average

GOn

GTn

New Zealand 1.265 1.080
Denmark
1.199 1.119
Portugal
1.230 1.115
Canada
1.202 1.104
Germany
1.051 1.040
Japan
1.004 1.004
United States 1.012 1.010
New Zealand 1.320 1.100
Denmark
1.320 1.150
Portugal
1.384 1.140
Canada
1.282 1.127
Germany
1.079 1.056
Japan
1.007 1.005
United States 1.016 1.012

GTn∗

GM Pn

GM Pn∗

Model
1.038
1.097
1.084
1.075
1.036
1.003
1.008

with ρ = 0
1.223
1.238
1.102
1.109
1.141
1.152
1.123
1.132
1.019
1.016
1.001
1.001
1.005
1.004

1.077
1.042
1.054
1.048
1.010
1.001
1.003

Model with ρ = 0.5
1.037 1.221
1.262
1.112 1.120
1.141
1.082 1.192
1.219
1.090 1.128
1.157
1.051 1.018
1.026
1.005 1.001
1.002
1.011 1.002
1.005

1.096
1.032
1.063
1.046
1.005
1.000
1.000

GM Png

Table 6: Gains from Openness, Trade, and MP: Selected Countries.

More generally, the gap between GTn and GTn∗ is increasing in the amount of inward MP (as
a share of GDP) in the calibrated model, across countries. Figure 3 illustrates this relationship.
For example, countries with inward MP flows near 50 percent of GDP have gains from trade
that are around three percentage points larger than in trade-only models, whereas this gap falls
to one percentage point for countries with inward MP flows near 15 percent.
It is noteworthy that Japan and the United States, the two largest countries in our sample,
have extremely low gains from MP. In fact, if we restrict our attention to the gains from MP in
the intermediate-goods sector and the calibration with ρ = 0.5, the United States gains virtually
zero from MP (GM Png = 1). By doing outward MP, the United States reallocates production
from home to foreign countries, in effect sharing its superior technologies with the rest of the
world and worsening its terms of trade (see Proposition 6). In principle, as explained in Section
2.5, there are three forces that could counteract this negative effect: first, gains from inward
MP; second, gains from BMP; and third, increased demand for home production of inputs by
foreign affiliates of multinational firms. In the calibrated model, these forces are just strong
enough to offset the negative terms of trade effect. It is important to caution, however, that
30

0.045
NZL

0.04

Complementarity (GT - GT*)

0.035

AUT

BEL

PRT

0.03

GRC
CAN

0.025
DNK
NOR

0.02

GBR
NLD
FIN
SWE

0.015

0.01

ESP
ITA
FRA
AUS

0.005

0

GER

USA
JPN

0

0.1

0.2

0.3
0.4
Inward MP (as share of GDP)

0.5

0.6

0.7

GT − GT ∗ refers to the difference between the gains from trade calculated from the calibrated model
with ρ = 0 and the gains from trade calculated from a trade-only model.

Figure 3: Inward MP and Complementarity
the calibrated model fails to generate the high inward MP flows observed in the data for the
largest countries in our sample. Hence, our measures of the gains from MP for these countries
are significantly underestimated. This can be easily seen by comparing GM Pn∗ calculated with
the observed data (in Table 4) and with simulated data (in Table 6): While GM PU∗ S calculated
from the data is 3.7 percent, the model’s calibration delivers around 0.2 to 0.5 percent (see
Table 10 in the Appendix).
Finally, it is interesting to explore how trade and MP costs affect a country’s real income
level. We focus on New Zealand, a small and relatively isolated country: Its average inward
trade (MP) costs are 4.67 (5.78) versus an average of 2.9 (3.4) for all countries in our sample.
We use the calibrated model to quantify the effect on New Zealand if its bilateral inward and
outward trade and MP costs became equal to those of Canada or Belgium, two “centrally”
located countries. We compute the percentage change in the real wage for New Zealand of
moving from the equilibrium in the calibrated model to one of three counterfactual scenarios:
(1) a situation in which the trade costs equal those of Canada or Belgium; (2) a situation in

31

which the MP costs equal those of Canada or Belgium; and (3) a situation in which both the
trade and MP costs equal those of Canada or Belgium.
New Zealand’s iceberg-type costs as in:
Trade
MP
Trade and MP

Canada
Belgium
% change in real wage
30
70
119

39
55
75

Calculation using calibrated model with ρ = 0. Change in real wage for New Zealand of moving from the
calibrated level of trade and MP costs to a situation in which: (1) trade costs equal the ones calibrated for
Canada (Belgium); (2) MP costs equal the ones calibrated for Canada (Belgium); (3) both trade and MP costs
equal the ones calibrated for Canada (Belgium).

Table 7: Gains from Openness, Trade, and MP: New Zealand.
The potential gains for New Zealand of having its bilateral trade and MP costs decline to
the levels prevailing in Canada or Belgium are very large. Table 7 shows that if trade costs
were changed to the level of Canada, New Zealand’s real wage would increase by 30 percent,
while doing the same for MP costs would increase its real wage by 70 percent. The gains of
simultaneously changing trade and MP costs to Canadian levels would increase the real wage
in New Zealand by 119 percent. These gains for New Zealand would come mainly from having
cheaper access to U.S. technologies through MP in both tradable and non-tradable goods.
Table 7 shows that New Zealand also would experience significant gains if its trade and MP
costs declined to the levels prevailing in Belgium, but not as much as if they declined to the
levels prevailing in Canada. Overall, the gains computed in this experiment are quite large
compared to the gains from trade and MP for New Zealand in Table 6. This result is consistent
with Eaton and Kortum’s (2002) and Waugh’s (2010) findings that the gains from trade relative
to autarky are small relative to the gains of removing existing trade costs towards a frictionless
world.

5

Conclusion

It is reasonable to think that countries, specially small ones, benefit greatly from their interaction with the rest of the world. Whereas much attention has been devoted to trade as the
main channel for such benefits, we argue in this paper for the need to investigate other channels
32

as well. We have taken a step in this direction by developing and calibrating a multi-country
general-equilibrium Ricardian model of trade and MP. An important consideration in building
this model has been to allow for both the forces that make trade and MP substitutes and the
forces that make them complements, as the empirical evidence suggests. The calibration reveals
that the gains from openness are much higher than the gains from trade, and also higher than
the gains from MP. On net, trade behaves as a complement to MP, while MP behaves as a mild
substitute for trade. As a result, for countries with large inward MP flows, the gains from trade
can be much higher than those calculated in models with only trade. For example, the gains
from trade implied by our model for New Zealand are between eight and ten percent, whereas
trade-only models imply gains of around four percent. This is because our model captures the
indirect gains from trade associated with its role in facilitating MP. In contrast, the gains from
MP calculated in our calibrated model are slightly lower than the gains computed in MP-only
models. This is because, in our model, the substitutability forces associated with the fact that
trade and MP are competing ways of serving a foreign market dominate the complementarity
forces created by BMP.

References
Alfaro, Laura, and Andrew Charlton. 2009. “Intra-Industry Foreign Direct Investment ”. American Economics Review, 99(5), 2096-2119.
Alvarez, Fernando, and Robert E. Lucas. 2007. “General Equilibrium Analysis of the EatonKortum Model of International Trade”. Journal of Monetary Economics. Volume 54, Issue 6.
Anderson, James, and Eric van Wincoop. 2003.“Gravity And Gravitas: A Solution To The
Border Puzzle”, American Economic Review, 93(1), 170-192
Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andres Rodrı́guez-Clare. 2012. “New Trade Models,
Same Old Gains?”. American Economic Review, 102(1), 94–130.
Arkolakis, Costas, Natalia Ramondo, Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare, and Stephen Yeaple. 2011. “Innovation and Production in the Global Economy”. Mimeo, Arizona State, Penn State, and Yale
University.

33

Barba-Navetti, Giorgio, and Anthony Venables. 2004. Multinational Firms in the World Economy. University Press, Princeton.
Becker, Sascha, and Marc-Andreas Muendler. 2010. “Margins of multinational labor substitution”. American Economic Review, 100(5), 1999-2030
Belderbos, R. and L. Sleuwaegen. 1998. “Tariff jumping DFI and export substitution: Japanese
electronics firms in Europe”. International Journal of Industrial Organization, Volume 16, Issue
5, September, 601-638.
Bernard, Andrew, Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum. 2003. “Plants
and Productivity in International Trade”. American Economic Review, 93(4), 1268–1290.
Bernard, Andrew, J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter Schott. 2005. “Importers, Exporters, and
Multinationals: a Portrait of Firms in the US that Trade Goods”. NBER, Working Paper
11404.
Blonigen, Bruce A. 2001. “In Search Of Substitution Between Foreign Production And Exports”. Journal of International Economics. Volume 53 (Feb), 81-104.
Blonigen, Bruce A. 2005. “A Review of the Empirical Literature on FDI Determinants”. Atlantic
Economic Journal, Vol. 33: 383-403.
Brainard, Lael. 1997. “An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity-Concentration Trade-off between Multinational Sales and Trade”. The American Economic Review, vol. 87(4) 520–544.
Burstein, Ariel, and Alex Monge-Naranjo. 2009. “Foreign Know-How, Firm Control, and the
Income of Developing Countries”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 124, No. 1:149.
Burstein, Ariel, and Jonathan Vogel. 2012. “International Trade, Technology, and the Skill
Premium ”. Unpublished, UCLA.
Carr, David, James Markusen, and Keith Maskus. 2001. “Estimating the Knowledge-Capital
Model of the Multinational Enterprise”. American Economic Review, 91: 693-708.
Donaldson, David. 2010. “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Economic Impact of Transportation Infrastructure”. Unpublished, MIT.

34

Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum. 2002. “Technology, Geography and Trade”. Econometrica, Vol. 70(5).
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramarz. 2011. “An Anatomy of International
Trade: Evidence from French Firms”. Econometrica, Vol. 79, No. 5, 1453-1498.
Feenstra, Robert, and Robert Lipsey. 2005. NBER-United Nations Trade Data.
Fieler, Ana Cecilia. 2011. “Non-Homotheticity and Bilateral Trade: Evidence and a Quantitative Explanation”. Econometrica, vol. 79(4), 1069-1101.
Garetto, Stefania. 2012. “Input Sourcing and Multinational Production”. Unpublished, Boston
University.
Hanson, Gordon, Raymond Mataloni, and Matthew Slaughter. 2005. “Vertical Production Networks in multinational firms”. Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(4), 664–678.
Harrison, Ann, and Margaret McMilan. 2011. “Offshoring Jobs? Multinationals and US Manufacturing Employment”. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(3), 857–875.
Head, Keith, John Ries, and Barbara Spencer. 2004. “Vertical Networks and U.S. Auto Parts
Exports: Is Japan Different?” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 13(1), 37-67.
Head, Keith, and John Ries. 2004. “Exporting and FDI as Alternative Strategies”. Oxford
Review of Economic Policy, 20(3).
Helpman, Elhanan. 1984. “A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational Corporations”. Journal of Political Economy, 92(3), 451-471.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, and Stephen Yeaple. 2004. “Export versus FDI with Heterogenous Firms”. American Economic Review, 94(1), 300-316(17).
Horstmann, Ignatius J. and James Markusen. 1992. “Endogenous market structures in international trade (natura facit saltum)”, Journal of International Economics, Elsevier, vol. 32(1-2),
109-129.
Irarrazabal, Alfonso, Andreas Moxnes, and Luca D. Opromolla. 2012. “The Margins of Multinational Production and the Role of Intra-firm Trade”. CEPR Discussion Paper DP7145.
35

Jones, Charles I. 1995. “R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth”. Journal of Political Economy, 103, 759-784.
Jones, Charles I. 2011. “Intermediate Goods and Weak Links in the Theory of Economic Development”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, , 3(2), 1–28.
Katz, Lawrence and Kevin Murphy. 1992.“Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
Demand Factors”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1), 35-78.
Keller, Wolfang. 2004. “International Technology Diffusion”. Journal of Economic Literature,
42, 752-782.
Keller, Wolfang, and Stephen Yeaple. 2010. “Gravity in the Weightless Economy”. NBER
Working Paper 15509.
Klenow, Peter, and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare. 2005. “Externalities and Growth”. Handbook of
Economic Growth, Vol. 1A, P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, eds., 817-861 (chapter 11).
Kortum, Samuel. 1997. “Research, Patenting and Technological Change”. Econometrica, 65,
1389-1419.
Lipsey, Robert, and M. Weiss. 1981. “Foreign Production and Exports in Manufacturing Industries ”. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 63(4).
Markusen, James, and Anthony Venables. 2000. “The theory of endowment, intra-industry and
multi-national trade”, Journal of International Economics, 52(2), 209-234.
McGrattan, Ellen, and Edward Prescott. 2009. “Openness, Technology Capital, and Development”. Journal of Economic Theory, 144(6), 2454-2476.
Ramondo, Natalia. 2011. “A Quantitative Approach to Multinational Production”. Unpublished, Arizona State University.
Ramondo, Natalia, and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare. 2010. “Growth, Size, and Openness: A Quantitative Approach”. American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings.
Rodrı́guez-Clare, Andrés. 2007. “Trade, Diffusion, and the Gains from Openness”. Unpublished,
Penn State University mimeo.
36

Rodrı́guez-Clare, Andrés. 2010. “Offshoring in a Ricardian World”. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(2).
Samuelson, Paul A. 2004. “Where Ricardo and Mill Rebut and ConÖrm Arguments of Mainstream Economists Supporting Globalization”. Journal of Economic Perspectives, Sum- mer,
18(3), 135-46.
Simonovska, Ina. 2010. “Income Differences and Prices of Tradables”. NBER Working Paper
16233.
Simonovska, Ina, and Michael Waugh. 2011. “The Elasticity of Trade for Developing Nations:
Estimates and Evidence ”. UC Davis Working Paper No. 11-2.
Waugh, Michael. 2010. “International Trade and Income Differences”. American Economic
Review, 100(5), 2093 - 2124.

37

A

Proofs and Other Results

Expenditure Shares and Price Indices. We show that some important EK results can be
applied to our setup. In particular, we derive expressions for the expenditure share in country
n devoted to goods produced with technologies from country i, and the CES price indices in
country n, both for final and intermediate goods. This will prove the results in equations (6) ,
(7), and (8) .
Since final goods are identical (i.e., they enter preferences symmetrically) except for their
productivity parameters, we follow Alvarez and Lucas (2007) and drop index u, labeling final
goods by Z f ≡ (z f1 , ..., z fI ). Similarly, we label intermediate goods by Z g ≡ (z g1 , ..., z gI ). In a
f
and pgn (Z g ) = mini,l cgli dnl /zlig .
competitive equilibrium, prices are pfn (Z f ) = mini cfni /zni

Consider, first, the case of intermediate goods and let pgni ≡ minl cgli dnl /zlig . The probability
that pgni is lower than p is
Ggni (p) = 1 − Pr (zlig ≤ cgli dnl /p for all l) .
Under the assumption that zlig are draws from the multivariate Fréchet distribution in equation
(5), we have

Ggni (p) = 1 − exp −Ti

!1−ρ 
X

(cgli dnl /p)−θ/(1−ρ)



l

= 1 − exp
where

e
cgni

≡

P

−θ/(1−ρ)
g
l (cli dnl )

−(1−ρ)/θ

h

−Ti (e
cgni )−θ

p

θ

i

,

. Since pgni is independent across i, then the reasoning

in Eaton and Kortum (2002) can be immediately applied to show that country n will buy goods
−θ
P
produced with country i’s technologies for a measure of goods equal to Ti (e
cgni )−θ / j Tj e
cgnj .
Of the goods purchased by country n that are produced with country i technologies, what
share is produced in country l? This is equal to the probability that, for a specific good, country
g
,
l is the cheapest location for i to serve market n. This is equivalent to cgli dnl /zlig ≤ cgji dnj /zji
g
or zji
≤ zlig (cgji dnj )/(cgli dnl ) for all j 6= l. Without loss of generality, assume that l = 1.
g
g
The probability that zji
≤ anji z1i
for all j 6= 1 where anji ≡ (cgji dnj )/(cg1i dn1 ) is given by
R∞
F1 (z, an2i z, ..., anIi z; Ti )dz. But
0
1

1− 1−ρ
i
h
F1 (z, an2i z, ..., anIi z; Ti ) = (cg1i dn1 )θ (e
cgni )−θ
Ti θz −θ−1 exp − (cg1i dn1 )θ Ti (e
cgni )−θ z −θ ,

38

and
Z

∞

h
i
θ (cg1i dn1 )θ Ti (e
cgni )−θ z −θ−1 exp − (cg1i dn1 )θ Ti (e
cgni )−θ z −θ dz = 1.

0

This implies that
Z
0

∞

(cg1i dn1 )−θ/(1−ρ)
F1 (z, an2i z, ..., anIi z; Ti )dz = P g
,
−θ/(1−ρ)
l (cli dnl )

(26)

and, hence, of the goods that country n buys that are produced with country i technologies,
the share that is produced in country l is given by the expression in (26).
Combining the two previous results, we conclude that the share of intermediate goods bought
by country n that are produced in country l with country i technologies is given by the RHS
of equation (7) . The corresponding result for final goods is derived simply by letting dnl → ∞
for n 6= l.
The previous result relates to shares of goods, while we are interested in expenditure shares.
Just as in Eaton and Kortum (2002), however, the price distribution of the goods that country
n buys is independent of the production location and is also independent of the origin of
the technology with which the good is produced. This implies that all the adjustment is
on the “extensive margin” and that the share of goods that country n buys from country l
that is produced with country i technologies is also the share of the total expenditures by
country n that is allocated to those goods. To see this, focus on intermediate goods and
condition on market n and technologies from country i. The probability that pgni ≤ p and
that l is the least-cost production location to reach n is the probability that dnl cgli /zlig ≤ p and
g
g
dnj cgji /zji
≥ dnl cgli /zlig for all j, or zlig ≥ dnl cgli /p and zji
≤ zlig (dnj cgji )/(dnl cgli ) for all j. Without

loss of generality, assume that l = 1 and again let anji ≡ (dnj cgji )/(dn1 cg1i ). We want to compute
R∞
F (z, an2i z, ..., anIi z; Ti )dz. A similar procedure to the one used to get equation (26)
dn1 cg /p 1
1i

establishes that
Z ∞


i
(dn1 cg1i )−θ/(1−ρ) h
g −θ θ
1
−
exp
−T
(e
c
)
p
.
F1 (z, an2i z, ..., anIi z)dz = P g
i
ni
−θ/(1−ρ)
dn1 cg1i /p
l (cli dnl )

To get the distribution of prices in market n conditional on the good produced in 1 with
P
technology i, we need to divide by (cg1i dn1 )−θ/(1−ρ) / l (cgli dnl )−θ/(1−ρ) . This yields a probability
equal to


Ggni (p) = 1 − exp −Ti (e
cgni )−θ pθ .

(27)

Since this expression does not depend on 1, it implies that for market n and conditioning on
country i technologies, the distribution of p for goods that actually are produced in l is the
39

same for l = 1, 2, ..., I. But independence of productivity draws across i allows us to apply the
results from Eaton and Kortum (2002) to establish that the distribution of prices for goods


cgni )−θ pθ for all i. This implies that the
that n actually buys from i is Ggn (p) = 1 − exp −Ti (e
average price of goods is the same, regardless of where they are produced and of the origin of
the technology. As a consequence, expenditure shares for n across (l, i)-combinations are the
same as the shares of goods bought by n across (l, i)-combinations. This finally establishes that
expenditure shares for intermediates are given by the expressions in (7). The result in equation
(6) is simply obtained by letting dnl → ∞ for n 6= l. This same reasoning establishes that the
price index for final and intermediate goods is given by equation (8) .
Expenditures on intermediate goods. Here, we establish that total expenditures on
intermediate goods is just a constant fraction of total expenditures on final goods. First note
that Pn Qn is the total cost of the intermediate goods used in production in country n. We
first calculate the total cost of the intermediate goods produced in country n. This is wn Lgn +
P
Png Qgn , plus the intra-firm imports of foreign multinationals located in n, i6=n ω ni Ynig , minus
the exports of the domestic input bundle for intermediates to country n0 s subsidiaries abroad,
P
g
i6=n ω in Yin . Hence, the total cost of intermediate goods produced in country n is
X
X
wn Lgn + Png Qgn +
ω in Ying .
ω ni Ynig −
i6=n

i6=n

In equilibrium, this must be equal to the value of intermediate goods produced in country n.
Hence,
wn Lgn + Png Qgn +

X

ω ni Ynig −

X

P

j

π gjni Pjg Qj implies

P

i

Ynig =

P P
i

j

X

Ynig .

(28)

i

i6=n

i6=n

But Ynig =

ω in Ying =

π gjni Pjg Qj . Together with Xjn =

P

i

π gjni Pjg Qj +

g
ω jn Yjn
, we have

X

Ynig =

i

X

π gnni Png Qn +

i

X


g
Xjn − ω jn Yjn
.

j6=n

Substituting into equation (28) and simplifying, we get
X
X g
X
ω ni Ynig =
π nni Png Qn +
Xin .
wn Lgn + Png Qgn +
i

i6=n

Using the trade-balance condition (12) to substitute

i6=n

P

i6=n

Xin for

P

i6=n

Xni , using equation

(11), and simplifying, yields
wn Lgn + Png Qgn = Png Qn ,
40

(29)

where we have used that

P P
i

j

π gnij = 1.

Now, we know that
Lfn
Qfn
and


=

Lgn
=
Qgn



α
1−α



β
1−β



Png
,
wn

(30)

Png
.
wn

(31)

Equations (29) and (31) imply that Qgn = (1 − β) Qn , and combining this with Qfn + Qgn = Qn ,
we have
Qfn = βQn .

(32)

Plugging Qgn = (1 − β) Qn back into equation (29), we get wn Lgn = βPng Qn , and using Lgn +Lfn =
Ln , we have
wn (Ln − Lfn ) = βPng Qn .
(33)

α
From equations (30) and (32), we get wn Lf n = 1−α
βPng Qn . Using equation (33), we then

α
have Lfn = 1−α
(Ln − Lfn ), and, hence, Lfn = αLn . Plugging into equation (33), we finally get
(1 − α)wn Ln = βPng Qn , or Png Qn = ηwn Ln .
MP Gravity. In the case with ρ = 0, MP flows also satisfy a gravity-like relationship.
Using equation (10) and some manipulation, we have
Ylig

Ti (cgli )−θ
=P P
−θ Ψl ,
g
j
k Tj ckj dlk

where
Ψl ≡

X  dnl P g −θ
l

n

Png

(34)

ηwn Ln .

The first term on the RHS of equation (34) captures the “relative competitiveness” of country
i’s technologies in country l, while Ψl can be interpreted as country l0 s market potential.30 We
can then write
Ylig /Ψl
=
Yiig /Ψi

e
hgli Pig
Plg

!−θ
,

(35)


−1 P
bll /ηwl Ll
b
Rearranging equation (14) and substituting into the expression for Ψl , we get Ψl = X
n Xnl .
P
−1
If there is no intra-firm trade, then trade balance implies n Xnl = ηwl Ll , so Ψl = (Xll /ηwl Ll ) ηwl Ll : Larger
and more open countries have a higher market potential.
30

41

where e
hgli ≡ cgli /cgii is an average relative cost of producing in country l rather than in country
i with country i’s technologies. The term e
hgli in equation (35) plays the analogous role of the
term dnl in equation (14).
Proof of Lemma 1. A trade-only model is obtained from our model with hfli , hgli → ∞ for
all l 6= i. In this case, equation (11) implies that trade flows satisfy Eaton and Kortum’s (2002)
gravity equation,
Tl (cgl dnl )−θ X
Xnl = P
Xnj .
−θ
g
d
)
T
(c
nk
k
k
k
j
P
If hgli → ∞ for all l 6= i, then equation (8) implies that k Tk (cgk dnk )−θ = γ θ (Png )−θ and, hence,
using
cgn = Bwnβ (Png )1−β ,

(36)

we have

!−1/βθ
wn /Png

−1/β

= (γB)

Tn1/βθ

Xnn /

X

Xnj

.

(37)

j
−1/θ f
cn ,

If hfli → ∞ for all l 6= i, then (8) implies that Pnf = γTn

and together with

cfn = Awnα (Png )1−α ,

(38)

this implies that wn /Pnf = (γA)−1 Tn (wn /Png )1−α . Using equation (37), we finally get
1/θ

!−η/θ
wn /Pnf = γ
eTn(1+η)/θ

Xnn /

X

Xnj

,

j

where γ
e ≡ (γA)−1 (γB)−η . This establishes the result for the real wage in the closed economy
in equation (3), and it also shows that the gains from trade in a trade-only economy are given
by equation (15).
A similar procedure leads to the formula for the gains from MP in an MP-only model, which
obtains from our model as dnl → ∞ for all n 6= l. In particular, equations (7) and (10) imply
h
iP
P
that Ylig = Ti (cgli )−θ / Tj (cgli )−θ
j Ylj . Together with equations (8) and (36), this implies
that

!−1/βθ
wn /Png = (γB)−1/β Tn1/βθ

g
Ynn
/

X
j

42

Ynjg

.

(39)

 −1/θ
P
But equation (8) implies Pnf = γ Tenf
cfn , where Tenf ≡ i Ti (hfni )−θ . Together with equations (38) and (39), we get


wn /Pnf = γ
e Tenf

1/θ

!−η/θ
Tnη/θ

g
Ynn
/

X

Ynjg

.

(40)

j

Finally, from equation (6), we see that
f
Tn
Tn (cfn )−θ
Ynn
P f = P  −θ = f .
f
Ten
j Ynj
i Ti cni

(41)

Plugging (41) into (40), we finally get
!−1/θ
wn /Pnf = γ
eTn(1+η)/θ

f
Ynn
/

X

Ynjf

!−η/θ
g
Ynn
/

X

j

Ynjg

.

j

From this equation, we get (16), (17), and GM Pn∗ = GM Png∗ × GM Pnf ∗ . 
Proof of Proposition 1. Given ρ = 0, equations (10) and (8) imply that Ylig = γ −θ Ti (cgli /Plg )−θ Ψl ,
P
where Ψl ≡ n (dnl Plg /Png )−θ ηwn Ln . Hence,
Yllg = γ −θ (cgl /Plg )−θ Tl Ψl .

(42)

Using equation (36), this implies that
wl /Plg = (γB)−1/β Tl

1/βθ

(Yllg /Ψl )−1/βθ .

(43)

P
Letting Tenf ≡ i Ti (hfni )−θ , and using (38),
Pnf



= γ Tenf

−1/θ

Awnα (Png )1−α .

This implies that wn /Pnf = (γA)−1 (Tenf )1/θ (wn /Png )1−α . Using equation (43), we get
g
wn /Pnf = γ
eTnη/θ (Tenf )1/θ (Ynn
/Ψn )−η/θ .

(44)

But from equation (14), given a = 0, and using balanced trade,
X
Ψn = (
Xnj /Xnn )ηwn Ln .
j

43

(45)

Using ηwn Ln =

P

i

Ynig , and plugging into equation (44), the real wage is then
!−η/θ

!−1/θ
wn /Plf = γ
eTn(1+η)/θ

f
/
Ynn

X

Ynjf

×

g
/
Ynn

X

Ynjg

!−η/θ
×

Xnn /

X

j

j

Xnj

, (46)

j

where we have used equation (41) to substitute out Tenf for actual MP flows in final goods (this
equation is always valid, not only when dnl → ∞ for all n 6= l). This immediately implies that
GOn ≡

wn /Pnf

limhg ,hf ,dnl →∞ wn /Pnf
li li
!−1/θ
X f
f
=
Ynn
/
Ynj
×

!−η/θ
g
Ynn
/

j

=

GM Pnf ∗

×

X

Ynjg

!−η/θ
×

j

GM Png∗

×

Xnn /

X

Xnj

j

GTn∗ .

(Note that the limit hgli , hfli , dnl → ∞ is taken for all l 6= i and n 6= l–the same applies for all
such limits below).
To compute GTn , we need to obtain wn /Pnf as dnl → ∞. Clearly, this implies that
P
P
P
f
g
Xnn / j Xnj −→ 1. But what happens to Ynn
/ j Ynjf and Ynn
/ j Ynjg ? First, we know
P
f
that Ynn
/ j Ynjf = Tn /Tenf , so that MP shares for final goods are independent of trade costs.
We now show that something very similar happens for MP shares for intermediate goods, and
P
P
Yllg / j Yljg = Tl /Telg , where Telg ≡ i Ti (hgli )−θ . From equation (42) we have
γ −θ (cgl /Plg )−θ Tl Ψl
Yg
P ll g =
.
ηwl Ll
j Ylj
Using equation (8) for s = g and a = ρ = 0 and equation (45), this implies that
P
Yllg
Tl
Telg (cgl )−θ
Tl
j Xlj
P g = gP g g
= g,
−θ
e
Xll
Tel
Tel
j Ylj
k Tk (ck dlk )
where the last result comes from the fact that, with a = ρ = 0, equation (7) implies that
−θ
P
P
P
Teg (cg )
f
Xll = P elg lg
Xnj . Since neither Ynn
/ j Ynjf nor Yllg / j Yljg are dependent on trade
−θ
j
k Tk (ck dnk )
costs, we conclude that
!−η/θ
f
X
wn /Pn
= Xnn /
= GTn∗ .
GTn ≡
Xnj
f
limdnl →∞ wn /Pn
j

44

Proof of Proposition 2. Here, we compare GM Pn with GM Pn∗ ≡ GM Pnf ∗ × GM Png∗ .
First, note that neither trade flows nor MP flows in intermediate goods depend on MP in final
goods. Hence,
GM Pnf ≡

wn /Pnf



limhf →∞ wn /Pnf
li

Next, the gains from MP in

=

Tn
Tenf

−1/θ
=

f
Ynn
P f
j Ynj

!−1/θ
= GM Pnf ∗ .


P g −η/θ
g
g∗
are determined by GM Pn = Ynn / j Ynj
intermediates,
P
which Xnn / j Xnj changes as we take hgli → ∞. Let λnn ≡
GM Png ,

together with the way in
P
Xnn / j Xnj , and λnn the domestic demand share for the counterfactual equilibrium with
hgli → ∞. Then,
wn /Pnf

GM Png ≡

limhgli →∞ wn /Pnf
!−η/θ 
−η/θ
X g
λnn
g
=
Ynn /
Ynj
λnn
j
−η/θ

λnn
g∗
= GM Pn
.
λnn

Since the second term on the RHS is, in general, not equal to one, this implies that GM Png 6=
GM Pn∗g . Finally, we have GM Pn = GM Pnf × GM Png . Hence, GM Pn 6= GM Pn∗ . 
Characterization of the Symmetric Equilibrium
Under symmetry, we can explicitly solve for trade and MP shares, as well as for the real
wage. Using the results for the expenditure shares in equation (6), we have
yf ≡

h−θ
Ynif
=
,
wn Ln
1 + (I − 1)h−θ

for i 6= n, while for i = n,
f
Ynn
1
=
.
wn Ln
1 + (I − 1)h−θ

(47)

Similarly, using equation (7), we have
yg ≡

Ynig
g
g
= y1g + yB,0
+ yB,1
,
ηwn Ln

g
for i 6= n. The term y1g captures MP for goods destined to stay in the domestic market, yB,0
is
g
MP for goods that go back to the country where the technology originates, and yB,1
is MP for

45

g
g
goods that go to a third market. Both yB,0
and yB,1
take place through BMP. The respective

formulas are
−ρ/(1−ρ)

y1g

−ρ/(1−ρ)

−ρ/(1−ρ)

∆1
m−θ
∆
(md)−θ g
(I − 2)∆1
(md)−θ
g
=
, yB,0
= 0
, yB,1 =
,
∆0 + (I − 1)∆1
∆0 + (I − 1)∆1
∆0 + (I − 1)∆1
e

e

e

where ∆0 , ∆1 , and e
θ are defined in the text. This implies that
−ρ/(1−ρ)

g
Ynn
∆
= 0
ηwn Ln

−ρ/(1−ρ) −e
θ

+ (I − 1)∆1
∆0 + (I − 1)∆1

d

.

(48)

The equilibrium trade share is given by
x≡

Xnl
= x0,B + x1 + x1,B + ωy g ,
ηwn Ln

for l 6= n. The term x0,B captures the imports of goods produced abroad (in l) with the
importer’s (country n) own technologies through BMP; the term x1 is the standard component
associated with imports from a country that used that country’s technology for production
(country l uses its technologies to export to n); the term x1,B captures imports of goods produced
with country l technologies in countries other than l (BMP); and the term ωy g captures imports
of the input bundle from l for domestic operations of country l multinationals. The formulas for
g
g
x0,B and x1,B are the same as the formulas for yB,0
and yB,1
, respectively, while x1 = y1g (d/m)−θ .
e

This implies that
−ρ/(1−ρ)

Xnn
∆
= 0
ηwn Ln

−ρ/(1−ρ)

+ (I − 1)∆1
∆0 + (I − 1)∆1

m−θ

e

.

(49)

It is easy to see from these results that the total value of BMP as a share of total MP is
g
g
yB,0
+ yB,1
κ≡
.
yf + yg

The limit as ρ → 1, so that technology draws are the same across production locations. In this
case, κ → 0. Further, when h > d, y g → 0 and there is only trade, x = d−θ /(1 + (I − 1)d−θ ). On
the contrary, when h < d, trade is just associated with MP flows, x = ωm−θ /(1 + (I − 1)m−θ ) =
ωy g .
Proof of Proposition 3. We want to compute GO, GT , and GM P under symmetry. We
start by computing the real wage when there is trade and MP, and under isolation. We know
that wi = w, for all i, and that the price index for intermediate goods collapses to
P g = (γB)1/β [∆0 + (I − 1)∆1 ]−1/βθ T −1/βθ w.
46

The price index for final goods is
−1/θ −1/θ

P f = γ 1 + (I − 1)h−θ
T
Awα (P g )1−α .
Using the result for P g above, the real wage is then


w
−1 (1+η)/θ
−θ 1/θ
=
γ
e
T
1
+
(I
−
1)h
[∆0 + (I − 1)∆1 ]η/θ ,
f
P

(50)

where γ
e ≡ (γA) (γB)η . The real wage under isolation is obtained by letting d → ∞ and h → ∞
in equation (50). Hence,
GO ≡



w/P f
−θ 1/θ
=
1
+
(I
−
1)h
[∆0 + (I − 1)∆1 ]η/θ .
f
limh,d−→∞ w/P

To calculate GT , we need to calculate the real wage when there is only MP. By letting d → ∞
in equation (50), the real wage with only MP is

1/θ 
η/θ (1+η)/θ
lim w/P f = γ
e−1 1 + (I − 1)h−θ
1 + (I − 1)m
e −θ
T
,

d−→∞

where m
e is as defined in the text. Hence,

η/θ
∆0 + (I − 1)∆1
w/P f
=
.
GT ≡
limd−→∞ w/P f
1 + (I − 1)m
e −θ
Similarly, by letting h → ∞ in equation (50), the real wage when there is only trade is

η/θ (1+η)/θ
lim w/P f = γ
e−1 1 + (I − 1)d−θ
T
,

h−→∞

and, hence,

η/θ


w/P f
−θ 1/θ ∆0 + (I − 1)∆1
= 1 + (I − 1)h
.
GM P ≡
limh−→∞ w/P f
1 + (I − 1)d−θ
It is easy to check that the first term on the RHS is GM P f while the second term is GM P g .

Proof of Proposition 4. From Proposition 3, Lemma 1, and equation (49), we have
−ρ/(1−ρ)

−ρ/(1−ρ)

GT /GT ∗ = (B 0 /B ∗ )−η/θ , where B ∗ ≡ ∆0
+(I −1)∆1
Again, ∆0 , ∆1 , e
θ, and m
e are defined as in the text.

47

m−θ , and B 0 ≡ 1+(I −1)m
e −θ .
e

(a) For ρ = 0, B ∗ = 1 + (I − 1)m−θ . But a > 0 implies that m
e > m and, hence, m
e −θ < m−θ ,
so 1 + (I − 1)m
e −θ < 1 + (I − 1)m−θ , and B ∗ > B 0 . Then, GT > GT ∗ and trade is an MPcomplement. For ρ > 0 and a = 0, we have m
e = m. Hence, using the definitions for ∆0 and
∆1 ,
−ρ/(1−ρ)

−ρ/(1−ρ)

B ∗ − B = ∆0
+ (I − 1)∆1
m−θ − 1 − (I − 1)m−θ



−ρ
−ρ
−e
θ
−e
θ
−e
θ
−θ
= 1 + (I − 1)(md)
(d/m) + 1 + (I − 2)d
− 1 + (I − 1)m
−1 .
e

This is negative if ρ > 0.
(b) For a > 0, limξ→1 m
e → ∞. Thus, limξ→1 GT = [∆0 + (I − 1)∆1 ]η/θ . Thus, for trade
to be an MP-complement when ξ → 1, we need to show that [∆0 + (I − 1)∆1 ]η/θ > GT ∗ . But
this is equivalent to B ∗ > 1. Using the definitions for ∆0 and ∆1 , we have
−ρ

−ρ

−e
θ
∗
−e
θ
−e
θ
−e
θ
−e
θ
.
B = 1 + (I − 1)(md)
+ (I − 1)m
(d + m + (I − 2) (md)
1−ρ

e
For ρ = 0, B ∗ = 1 + (I − 1)m−θ > 1. For 0 < ρ < 1 and d = 1, B ∗ = 1 + (I − 1)m−θ
> 1.
Since B ∗ is increasing in d, it follows that B ∗ > 1, for all d.
Now, consider again the case with a > 0 and let ξ → ∞. We want to show that if h < d,
then trade is an MP-substitute, or GT < GT ∗ . We have limξ→∞ m
e = h and limξ→∞ m =
min [h, d] = h. Then GT < GT ∗ in the limit when ξ → ∞ is equivalent to
h
i
h
i
e −ρ
e
e
e
e −ρ
1 + (I − 1)h−θ > 1 + (I − 1)(hd)−θ
+ (I − 1)h−θ d−θ + h−θ + (I − 2)(hd)−θ
.
The first term on the RHS of this inequality is smaller than one, so it is sufficient to show that
h
i
e
e
e
e −ρ
h−θ > h−θ d−θ + h−θ + (I − 2)(hd)−θ
.
If d → ∞, then the RHS is h−θ . Since the RHS is increasing in d, then it must be lower than
h−θ for any finite d.
Proof of Proposition 5. From Proposition 3, Lemma 1, and equation (48), we have
"
#−η/θ
1 + (I − 1)d−θ
GM P g
.
=
−ρ/(1−ρ)
−ρ/(1−ρ) −e
GM P g∗
∆0
+ (I − 1)∆1
d θ
It is obvious that GM P g∗ = GM P g for ρ = 0. We want to show that GM P g∗ > GM P g for
0 < ρ < 1. Using the definitions of ∆0 and ∆1 in the text, GM P g∗ > GM P g is equivalent to




e
e −ρ
e −ρ −θ
1 + (I − 1)d−θ > 1 + (I − 1)(md)−θ
+ (I − 1) 1 + (m/d)−θ + (I − 2)m−θ
d .
48

This is clearly true for 0 < ρ < 1.
Proof of Proposition 6. The formula for expenditure shares of intermediate goods in
equation (7) implies that, under frictionless trade and with a = 0, we have
π gSSS =

TS (e
cgS )−θ
(cgS )−θ
,
·
TN (e
cgN )−θ + TS (e
cgS )−θ (e
cgS )−eθ
e

TN (e
cgN )−θ
(hcgS )−θ
·
=
.
TN (e
cgN )−θ + TS (e
cgS )−θ (e
cgN )−eθ
e

π gSSN


 e

−1/eθ
e −1/θ
e
e
e
where e
cgN ≡ (cgN )−θ + (hg cgS )−θ
,e
cgS ≡ (hg cgN )−θ + (cgS )−θ
, and e
θ ≡ θ/(1 − ρ). Analogous expressions hold for π gN N N and π gN N S . The trade-balance condition then entails
(1 − π gSSS − π gSSN ) ηwS LS = (1 − π gN N N − π gN N S )ηwN LN .
No MP in intermediates (hg → ∞) implies that π SSN = 0, e
cgN = cgN and e
cgS = cgS , so the
trade-balance condition implies that (just as in Alvarez and Lucas, 2007)
wN /wS = ν 1/(1+θβ) ,
where ν ≡

TN /LN
.
TS /LS

The real wage in North is then
lim
g

h →∞

wN
PNf

= TN + TS (hf )−θ

1/θ

TN + TS ν ζ

η/θ

,

(51)

where ζ ≡ θβ/(1 + θβ). As one would expect, this does not depend on ρ (since there is no MP).
Now, consider the case with frictionless MP in intermediates (hg = 1). The trade-balance
condition now implies that
wN /wS = δ ≡ (LS /LN )1/(1+θβ) ,
e

while the final-goods price index in North is
PNf = TN + TS (hf )−θ

−1/θ


−η/eθ
e
(TN + TS )−η/θ 1 + δ θβ
wN .

Hence,
lim wN /PNf = TN + TS (hf )−θ
g

1/θ

h −→1


η/eθ
e
(TN + TS )η/θ 1 + δ θβ
.

The results in equations (51) and (52) imply that GM PNg ≷ 1 is equivalent to

η/eθ
η/θ
e
(TN + TS )η/θ 1 + δ θβ
≷ TN + TS ν ζ
.
49

(52)

This is equivalent to
f (ρ) ≡ 1 + lθβ/(1−ρ+θβ)

(1−ρ)

(ν + l) − ν − lν ζ ≷ 0,

where l ≡ LS /LN . But
f (0) = l

1+ζ

h
i
ζ
−ζ
l + ν/l + 1 − (ν/l) .

On the one hand, since 0 < ζ < 1, then ν/l + 1 > (ν/l)ζ , for any ν/l, implying that f (0) > 0.
On the other hand,

lim f (ρ) = l − lν ζ = l 1 − ν ζ .

ρ→1

Since v > 1, then this expression is negative. It is easy to show that f 0 (ρ) < 0 for ρ ∈ [0, 1),
implying that there is a ρ∗ ∈ [0, 1) such that f (ρ∗ ) = 0. Hence, we conclude that GM PNg > 1
for ρ < ρ∗ and GM PNg < 1 for ρ > ρ∗ .

50

B

Data

The UNCTAD measure of MP includes both local sales in n and exports to any other country,
including the home country i. Of the 342 country pairs, the number of observations for which
we have available data drops to 216. For a detailed description of the UNCTAD MP data, see
Ramondo (2011). The data are averages over the period 1996-2001.
Total expenditures on intermediate goods in the model are given by ηwn Ln , while in the
data, we compute a measure of total expenditures on manufacturing from all the countries in
our sample. This measure is computed as gross production in manufacturing in country n,
plus total imports of manufacturing goods into country n from the remaining countries in the
sample, minus total manufacturing exports from country n to the rest of the world. Data on
these three variables for each country are from the STAN database (an average over the period
1996-2001). Total expenditures on final goods in the model are wn Ln while in the data, we
use GDP for country n plus total imports into country n from the remaining eighteen OECD
countries in the sample, minus total exports from country n to the rest of the world. Data on
GDP are from the World Development Indicators, in current dollars, and total exports and
imports are from Feenstra and Lipsey (2005).
We use intra-firm imports by multinationals’ foreign affiliates from their home country as
the empirical counterpart for imports of the national input bundle from the home country for


MP, normalized by gross production of affiliates from i in n, ω ni Ynig / Ynig + Ynif . We combine
data on intra-firm exports from U.S. parent companies to their affiliates abroad with data
on imports done by foreign affiliates located in the United States from their parent firms, an
average over the period 1999-2003.


For the empirical counterpart of the bilateral share of MP in intermediate goods, Ynig / Ynig + Ynif ,
we use data on gross production of affiliates from country i in n in the manufacturing sector
as share of total gross production for affiliates of multinational firms from i in n. The relevant
data on bilateral MP in manufacturing are also for i = U S or n = U S, an average over the
period 1999-2003.
We are able to compute BMP in manufacturing when the United States is the source country,
again as an average over the period 1999-2003. The BEA divides total sales of American
affiliates produced in country l into sales to the local market, to the United States, and to
P
other foreign markets. This is the empirical counterpart for n6=l π gnli Xng /Ylig , from i = U S

51

in a country l belonging to the OECD(19). We average out across l’s, and obtain an average
bilateral BMP share for the U.S. affiliates in the OECD(19). A similar procedure yields the
average bilateral BMP share for U.S. affiliates of foreign multinationals. The caveat is that the
data for affiliates of foreign multinationals in the United States for the manufacturing sector
are available for only seven countries in our sample. Hence, we also compute and present the
BMP share for all sectors.
Bilateral distance is the distance in kilometers between the largest cities in the two countries.
Common language is a dummy equal to one if both countries have the same official language or
if more than 20 percent of the population share the same language (even if it is not the official
one). Common border is equal to one if two countries share a border. The source from these
data is the Centre d’Etudes Prospectives et Informations Internationales (CEPII).

C

Additional Tables

Distance (in thousands of km)
Common language
Common border
Bilateral trade share
Bilateral MP share
Bilateral intra-firm share†
Bilateral MP share in manufacturing†

Mean

Standard Deviation

Observations

6.006
0.110
0.090
0.021
0.029
0.072
0.480

6.009
0.310
0.280
0.038
0.063
0.072
0.130

342
342
342
342
216
34
33

(†): from/to the United States.

Table 8: Summary Statistics: Data.

52

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Spain
Finland
France
Great Britain
Germany
Greece
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
New Zealand
Portugal
Sweden
United States

R&D employment

Real GDP per worker

Ln

Tn

0.007
0.005
0.007
0.006
0.006
0.004
0.012
0.006
0.005
0.006
0.003
0.003
0.010
0.005
0.008
0.005
0.003
0.008
0.009

0.81
0.79
0.88
0.80
0.79
0.69
0.73
0.77
0.70
0.73
0.55
0.87
0.63
0.81
0.87
0.63
0.54
0.70
1.00

0.12
0.05
0.06
0.15
0.04
0.16
0.03
0.25
0.24
0.32
0.05
0.28
0.46
0.09
0.04
0.03
0.05
0.05
1.00

0.09
0.03
0.04
0.11
0.03
0.07
0.05
0.18
0.15
0.23
0.02
0.09
0.52
0.06
0.03
0.01
0.02
0.05
1.00

R&D employment is calculated as share of total employment. Real GDP per worker, Ln , and Tn are
calculated relative to United States. The variables Ln and Tn are from the calibrated model with ρ = 0.
R& D employment and real GDP per worker are from the data.

Table 9: Data and Model’s Variables.

53

Data
outward MP inward MP
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Spain
Finland
France
Great Britain
Germany
Greece
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
New Zealand
Portugal
Sweden
United States
Average

0.15
0.06
0.66
0.28
0.19
0.03
0.51
0.16
0.10
0.40
0.01
0.04
0.17
1.11
0.19
0.03
0.04
0.35
0.17
0.24

Model with ρ = 0
outward MP inward MP

0.29
0.36
0.56
0.51
0.14
0.27
0.25
0.21
0.45
0.28
0.08
0.14
0.06
0.62
0.10
0.73
0.60
0.40
0.14
0.33

0.08
0.23
0.42
0.17
0.20
0.08
0.31
0.17
0.21
0.16
0.09
0.07
0.01
0.19
0.22
0.11
0.08
0.24
0.09
0.17

0.09
0.61
0.67
0.46
0.39
0.16
0.28
0.10
0.33
0.07
0.48
0.12
0.003
0.28
0.37
0.70
0.51
0.27
0.02
0.31

Model with ρ = 0.5
outward MP inward MP
0.08
0.23
0.42
0.18
0.23
0.10
0.39
0.20
0.22
0.20
0.10
0.08
0.02
0.22
0.26
0.10
0.09
0.28
0.11
0.18

0.12
0.58
0.63
0.45
0.42
0.23
0.29
0.12
0.32
0.09
0.56
0.18
0.01
0.33
0.39
0.64
0.58
0.30
0.02
0.33

Outward MP is total gross value of production for foreign affiliates from country i. Inward MP is total gross value
of production for foreign affiliates in country l. Flows are normalized by country’s GDP.

Table 10: MP Shares: Data and Model.

54

Data
imports exports
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Spain
Finland
France
Great Britain
Germany
Greece
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
New Zealand
Portugal
Sweden
United States
Average

0.24
0.53
0.92
0.48
0.54
0.27
0.30
0.30
0.34
0.26
0.32
0.21
0.05
0.62
0.42
0.35
0.40
0.40
0.12
0.37

Model with ρ = 0
imports=exports

Model with ρ = 0.5
imports=exports

0.09
0.64
0.72
0.48
0.56
0.31
0.52
0.32
0.26
0.27
0.44
0.25
0.03
0.47
0.53
0.28
0.51
0.45
0.07
0.38

0.10
0.60
0.72
0.48
0.55
0.35
0.54
0.36
0.30
0.31
0.39
0.29
0.04
0.49
0.53
0.24
0.44
0.48
0.08
0.38

0.11
0.38
0.82
0.54
0.48
0.20
0.39
0.30
0.27
0.34
0.08
0.22
0.10
0.76
0.28
0.28
0.28
0.49
0.09
0.34

Trade shares are for manufacturing. Trade flows are normalized by the country’s total manufacturing expenditures (gross value of production in mfg. minus total mfg. exports plus mfg. imports from the countries in
the sample).

Table 11: Trade Shares: Data and Model.

55

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Spain
Finland
France
Great Britain
Germany
Greece
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
New Zealand
Portugal
Sweden
United States

GOn∗

GTn∗

GM Pn∗

Ln

1.118
1.209
1.599
1.261
1.137
1.116
1.116
1.103
1.197
1.119
1.069
1.064
1.022
1.368
1.091
1.365
1.290
1.190
1.053

1.033
1.093
1.343
1.081
1.096
1.039
1.044
1.044
1.051
1.037
1.048
1.028
1.006
1.122
1.066
1.053
1.064
1.062
1.015

1.082
1.106
1.191
1.166
1.037
1.074
1.069
1.056
1.139
1.079
1.020
1.035
1.015
1.220
1.024
1.296
1.213
1.121
1.037

3.3
1.5
1.6
4.4
1.2
4.7
1.0
7.1
7.0
9.3
1.4
7.9
13.4
2.7
1.1
0.7
1.4
1.6
28.7

Countries are sorted by size Ln , as percentage of total OECD(19)’s size,

P19

i=1

Li .

Table 12: Gains from Openness, Trade, and MP: Independence.

56

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Spain
Finland
France
Great Britain
Germany
Greece
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
New Zealand
Portugal
Sweden
United States

GOn

GTn

GTn∗

GM Pn

GM Pn∗

GM Png

Ln

1.032
1.310
1.363
1.202
1.199
1.080
1.154
1.066
1.118
1.051
1.204
1.060
1.004
1.143
1.184
1.265
1.230
1.136
1.012

1.016
1.157
1.189
1.104
1.119
1.053
1.103
1.050
1.054
1.040
1.098
1.040
1.004
1.090
1.111
1.080
1.115
1.087
1.010

1.011
1.123
1.154
1.075
1.097
1.043
1.087
1.044
1.034
1.036
1.068
1.033
1.003
1.073
1.089
1.038
1.084
1.070
1.008

1.022
1.179
1.200
1.123
1.102
1.040
1.072
1.025
1.086
1.019
1.133
1.030
1.001
1.073
1.096
1.223
1.141
1.069
1.005

1.022
1.197
1.224
1.132
1.109
1.039
1.074
1.023
1.087
1.016
1.141
1.029
1.001
1.073
1.101
1.238
1.152
1.070
1.004

1.010
1.067
1.075
1.048
1.042
1.018
1.033
1.013
1.034
1.010
1.052
1.014
1.001
1.032
1.040
1.077
1.054
1.031
1.003

3.3
1.5
1.6
4.4
1.2
4.7
1.0
7.1
7.0
9.3
1.4
7.9
13.4
2.7
1.1
0.7
1.4
1.6
28.8

Countries are sorted by size Ln , as percentage of total OECD(19)’s size,

P19

i=1

Li .

Table 13: Gains from Openness, Trade, and MP: Calibration with ρ = 0.

57

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Spain
Finland
France
Great Britain
Germany
Greece
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
New Zealand
Portugal
Sweden
United States

GOn

GTn

GTn∗

GM Pn

GM Pn∗

GM Png

Ln

1.048
1.427
1.478
1.282
1.320
1.141
1.236
1.102
1.162
1.079
1.346
1.107
1.007
1.234
1.295
1.320
1.384
1.214
1.016

1.025
1.172
1.202
1.127
1.150
1.079
1.131
1.070
1.078
1.056
1.125
1.062
1.005
1.122
1.141
1.100
1.140
1.114
1.012

1.014
1.129
1.185
1.090
1.112
1.059
1.110
1.062
1.048
1.051
1.067
1.046
1.005
1.095
1.106
1.037
1.082
1.090
1.011

1.028
1.179
1.184
1.128
1.120
1.056
1.071
1.026
1.083
1.018
1.184
1.043
1.001
1.087
1.108
1.221
1.192
1.075
1.002

1.035
1.216
1.250
1.157
1.141
1.068
1.091
1.035
1.105
1.026
1.210
1.053
1.002
1.104
1.129
1.262
1.219
1.095
1.005

1.015
1.049
1.047
1.046
1.032
1.023
1.017
1.009
1.036
1.005
1.065
1.019
1.000
1.028
1.029
1.096
1.063
1.023
1.000

3.5
1.6
1.7
4.4
1.3
4.8
1.0
7.2
7.0
9.4
1.5
8.1
13.4
2.8
1.1
0.8
1.5
1.7
27.5

Countries are sorted by size Ln , as percentage of total OECD(19)’s size,

P19

i=1

Li .

Table 14: Gains from Openness, Trade, and MP: Calibration with ρ = 0.5.

58

