                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




HOW DO RETIREES VALUE LIFE ANNUITIES? EVIDENCE FROM PUBLIC EMPLOYEES

                                            John Chalmers
                                           Jonathan Reuter

                                        Working Paper 15608
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15608


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2009




We thank Pierluigi Balduzzi, Daniel Bergstresser, Jeffrey Brown (discussant), John Campbell, David
Chapman, Daniel Cooper, Cliff Holderness, Edie Hotchkiss, Alexander Ljungqvist (editor), Alan Marcus,
Robin McKnight, Bertrand Melenberg, Ali Ozdagli, Joshua Rauh, Antoinette Schoar, Phil Strahan,
Peter Tufano, Eric Zitzewitz, an anonymous referee, and participants at the 2010 Netspar Pension
Workshop, 2010 Boston Area Consumer Finance Working Group, and 2011 American Finance Association
Meetings in Denver for helpful discussions related to this project. We thank Benjamin Goodman for
providing data on how TIAA priced life annuities over our sample period, and we thank employees
from the Oregon Public Employees Retirement System who provided invaluable assistance by compiling
and helping us to interpret their data. Because PERS was subject to major legislative changes in late
2003, our description of the system only applies to the period for which we possess data. This research
was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #10-M-98363-1-01 to the
National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium. The
findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views of
SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by John Chalmers and Jonathan Reuter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
How Do Retirees Value Life Annuities? Evidence from Public Employees
John Chalmers and Jonathan Reuter
NBER Working Paper No. 15608
December 2009, Revised February 2012
JEL No. D14,G11,G22,H55

                                                ABSTRACT

Economists have long been puzzled by the low demand for life annuities. To shed new light on this
puzzle, we study payout choices in the Oregon Public Employees Retirement System, where each
retiree must choose between a lump sum and a life annuity. Notably, the average life annuity we study
is better than actuarially fair when compared to the lump sum and 85% of retirees choose the life annuity.
Whether and how retirees respond to variation in the value of life annuity payments depends crucially
on the source of variation. We find strong evidence that demand responds to variation in retiree characteristics.
In contrast, we find little evidence that demand responds to plausibly exogenous variation in annuity
pricing, which is economically meaningful but less salient. Finally, we find robust evidence that demand
for the lump sum increases with recent equity market returns and other salient measures of investor
sentiment.


John Chalmers
Charles H. Lundquist College of Business
University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403
jchalmer@lcbmail.uoregon.edu

Jonathan Reuter
Carroll School of Management
Boston College
224B Fulton
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
reuterj@bc.edu
1. Introduction

         Ever since Yaari’s (1965) seminal paper, economists have argued that retirees should al-

locate a substantial portion of their assets to life annuities. Because life annuities continue mak-

ing payments until death, they insure retirees against outliving their accumulated financial assets.

In a standard life-cycle model, this insurance is quite valuable. It is puzzling, therefore, that the

private market for life annuities is small.1 The traditional explanation for this inconsistency be-

tween economic models and economic behavior is that adverse selection drives up annuity pric-

es, which drives down demand. This presupposes that retirees are rationally comparing the price

of a life annuity to the expected benefit of smoother lifetime consumption.2 Alternatively, as de-

lineated in Brown (2009) and Benartzi, Previtero, and Thaler (2011), the dearth of annuitization

may reflect poor financial decision-making, resulting from financial illiteracy or behavioral bias-

es. Distinguishing between rational and behavioral explanations for “under annuitization” is im-

portant because their welfare and policy implications are quite different.

         Life-cycle models predict that demand for life annuities will be higher when the life an-

nuity payments available to retirees are more valuable. Variation in the value of these payments

can arise from differences in retiree characteristics or from differences in life annuity pricing.

However, due to the lack of plausibly exogenous variation in life annuity pricing, the existing

literature focuses on variation in retiree characteristics (e.g., Brown (2001), Finkelstein and

Poterba (2004), Bütler and Teppa (2007), Previtero (2010), and Inkmann, Lopes, and

Michaelides (2011)). While informative, these papers offer an incomplete picture of retiree be-



1
  According to Beacon Research, life annuity sales (outside of employer-sponsored retirement plans) were $8 billion
in 2010, which is small relative to annual sales of other financial products, such as mutual funds.
2
  Even when Yogo (2009) extends existing life-cycle models to include endogenous investments in health, he finds
that the expected utility gains from access to life annuities vary from 13% to 18%, with smaller gains for retirees in
poorer health. Although these gains are approximately half those estimated in Mitchell, Poterba, Warshawsky, and
Brown (1999), they are economically significant.


                                                          1
havior. The fact that demand for life annuities responds to variation in retiree health, for exam-

ple, need not imply that it responds to variation in life annuity pricing, which may not be salient

even when economically significant.

        To offer a fuller picture of how retirees value life annuities, we study the actual payout

decisions of retirees covered by the Oregon Public Employees Retirement System (PERS).3 Our

sample includes 32,060 retirements between January 1990 and June 2002. It has two notable

features. First, each retiree must choose whether to receive higher life annuity payments and no

lump sum payment (the “total life annuity” option) or lower life annuity payments and a lump

sum payment (the “lump sum” option). The choice between additional life annuity payments

and cash is analogous to the choice that retirees face in the private market. Second, our empiri-

cal setting provides us with a unique opportunity to study the impact of plausibly exogenous var-

iation in life annuity pricing on retiree demand for life annuities.

        Variation in life annuity pricing arises from the unusual way in which PERS calculates

retirement benefits. Employees contribute a fixed percentage of their salary into an account with

two investment options. Under the lump sum option, retirees are offered their accumulated re-

tirement account balance as the lump sum payment. Under the total life annuity and lump sum

options, life annuity payments are calculated using as many as three formulae, and retirees are

automatically offered the maximum payments for which they are eligible. For some retirees, the

maximum payment is based on the retiree’s years of service and salary history. For other retir-

ees, the maximum payment is obtained when the retirement account balance is multiplied by a

conversion factor, referred to as the actuarial equivalency factor, which depends only on the re-

tiree’s age. While the conversion factors used in the private market offer retirees a risk-free rate

3
 PERS is the state agency that administers retirement plans for approximately 95% of the state and local public em-
ployees in Oregon. Our data exclude judges, politicians, or university employees. In 2009, PERS held nearly $53
billion in assets, making it the 21st largest public or private pension fund in the United States.


                                                        2
of return based on the yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury Note, the conversion factors used by

PERS offer retirees a risk-free rate of return of approximately 10 percent regardless of current

market conditions.4

        These features cause the pricing of PERS life annuities to deviate in three significant

ways from the pricing of life annuities in the private market. First, PERS life annuity payments

are significantly larger than those that could be purchased with the lump sum in the private mar-

ket. This reflects that fact that the yield on the 10-year Treasury Note is below 10 percent during

our entire sample period. For the median retiree, the total life annuity option has a “money’s

worth” of $1.45, meaning that the incremental life annuity payments have an expected present

value of $1.45 per $1.00 in forgone lump sum payment. By way of comparison, Mitchell,

Poterba, Warshawsky, and Brown (1999) show that the money’s worth of life annuities offered

by life insurance companies are between $0.80 and $0.90. Second, the fact that different retir-

ees’ maximum life annuity payments are calculated using different formulae generates cross-

sectional variation in the value of PERS life annuity payments. Consider a retiree whose maxi-

mum life annuity payment is based on her years of service and salary. Because she is also eligi-

ble for life annuity payments offering a 10 percent rate of return, the payments based on her

years of service and salary history must offer an even higher rate of return. This is one example

of how retiree characteristics that would not impact the level of life annuity payments in the pri-

vate market can impact the level of PERS life annuity payments. Another example is that retir-

ees who first contributed into PERS after August 1981 are eligible to have their (maximum) total

life annuity payments calculated using one fewer formulae than retirees who contributed into

PERS before that date. Finally, because PERS conversion factors are not adjusted to reflect

4
  The PERS conversion factors are used to determine the initial life annuity payment. Because they were set well
before our sample period begins, when interest rates were routinely near 8 percent, they assume that the risk-free
rate of return is 8 percent. Because of the cost of living adjustment, payments then increase by 2 percent per year.


                                                         3
market conditions, time-series variation in the risk-free rate generates time-series variation in the

value of the PERS life annuities relative to those in the private market. Everything else equal,

the lower is the yield on the 10-year Treasury Note, the more valuable is the total life annuity

option.

          If retirees understand that PERS life annuities are better than actuarially fair, we should

observe lower demand for lump sum payments in our setting than in other settings. Indeed, only

15% of PERS retirees choose the lump sum option. This fraction is significantly lower than one

might surmise from a reading of the literature on the under-annuitization puzzle. It is all the

more striking given that there is no default payout option, and that Oregon public employees are

eligible to receive life annuity payments from Social Security.5 One interpretation for our find-

ing is that the average retiree recognizes that PERS life annuities are a “good deal.” However,

this begs the question of whether retirees respond to variation in the generosity of the life annui-

ties available from PERS.

          The fraction of retirees choosing the lump sum option ranges from 6.9% in 1992 to

21.7% in 2000. To explain variation in retiree choices we estimate both time-series regressions

using the fraction of retirees choosing the lump sum option each month and logit regressions us-

ing individuals’ choices. The logit regressions allow us to exploit the cross-sectional and time-

series variation in the value of life annuity payments described above. They also allow us to

control for differences in retiree characteristics, which we conjecture are the most salient source

of variation. For example, not only should a life annuity be less valuable to a (single) retiree in

poor health, but also the impact of poor health on the value of the life annuity should be easily


5
  Because Madrian and Shea (2001) show that default options can have a dramatic impact on financial choices, it is
fortuitous that PERS retirees are not assigned to either payout option by default. Retirees must actively choose. We
should only observe a retiree choosing the total life annuity option when the value she attaches to the incremental
life annuity payments exceeds the value she attaches to the lump sum payment.


                                                         4
understood. Indeed, we find strong evidence that retirees understand how differences in health,

risk aversion, and the level of already-annuitized income impact the value of the incremental life

annuity income. These findings are consistent with the predictions of life-cycle models, and with

Brown (2001), Finkelstein and Poterba (2004), and Inkmann, Lopes, and Michaelides (2011).

       In contrast, when we focus on plausibly exogenous variation in life annuity pricing, our

findings are difficult to reconcile with the predictions of life-cycle models. Although we observe

significant cross-sectional variation in the value of life annuity payments due to the use of multi-

ple benefit formulae, the evidence that retirees respond to this variation is weak. This suggests

that cross-sectional variation in annuity pricing is not salient. And, although demand for the

lump sum option should decrease when the gap between the life annuity payments available from

PERS and insurance companies like TIAA increases, we find the opposite. One explanation for

this puzzling relation is that retirees are confused about the role that interest rates play in life an-

nuity valuation, which is consistent with the evidence in, for example, Campbell (2006) and

Lusardi and Mitchell (2007) that financial illiteracy leads to financial mistakes.

        An alternative explanation is that falling interest rates are correlated with declining eco-

nomic conditions, which increase the relative value of the lump sum payment. Similarly, be-

cause our sample period includes the NASDAQ bubble, changes in interest rates may be corre-

lated with changes in investor sentiment. To address concerns about potential omitted variables

bias we include proxies for economic conditions and investor sentiment that include the return on

the S&P 500 index over the prior 12 months, the inflation-adjusted level of the NASDAQ index,

and the level of the CBOE Volatility Index (VIX). While including these controls reduces the

size of the puzzling relation, we still do not find any evidence that lower interest rates decrease

demand for the lump sum option. Instead, we find robust evidence that demand for the lump




                                                   5
sum option is higher when equity market returns are higher, even after directly controlling for

returns posted to retirees’ PERS retirement accounts. Although we do not observe if retirees in-

vest the lump sum payment in risky assets, this finding is consistent with retirees using the lump

sum to naively chase past returns.6

        Because the life annuities available from PERS offer a risk-free rate of return of at least

10 percent, retirees who overvalue the lump sum option are likely to be making a costly and irre-

versible mistake. To put the economic magnitude of this mistake in context, consider the 453

retirees who choose the lump sum option in 2000. The average retiree trades life annuity pay-

ments with an expected present value of $225,421 for a lump sum of $151,367, suggesting an

average loss of $74,054.7

         In Section 2, we discuss the existing empirical literature. In Section 3, we motivate our

empirical predictions and discuss identification. In Section 4, we describe our data. In Section

5, we study how demand for lump sum payments varies with retiree characteristics, the relative

value of the incremental life annuity payments, and recent equity market returns. In Section 6,

we conclude. The Appendix provides a detailed description of the PERS benefit calculations.

2. Related Empirical Literature

        Our findings complement existing studies of the choice between incremental life annui-

ties and lump sums. Finkelstein and Poterba (2004) find evidence of adverse selection using data

on life annuities purchased from a large U.K. annuity company. Similarly, we find that ex post

mortality is associated with lower demand for incremental life annuities, especially among retir-



6
  Benartzi (2001) provides evidence that employees allocate more of their 401(k) contributions to company stock
when the company’s stock return over the prior decade is higher. Similarly, Chevalier and Ellison (1997) and Sirri
and Tufano (1998) provide evidence of return chasing behavior by mutual fund investors. However, Berk and
Green (2004) argue that return chasing is not necessarily irrational when choosing mutual funds.
7
  This calculation ignores the fact that retirees with shorter-than-average life expectancy are more likely to choose
the lump sum option, but it also ignores the insurance value that risk-averse retirees derive from life annuities.


                                                         6
ees who are more likely to be single. Inkmann, Lopes, and Michaelides (2011) use cross-

sectional data from the 2002-2003 English Longitudinal Study of Ageing to study household

demand for voluntary life annuities. They find that demand responds to differences in life expec-

tancy, the level of already-annuitized income, and other household characteristics. Then, they

argue that a life-cycle model that incorporates demand for life annuities, life insurance, savings,

and portfolio choice can rationalize the fact that only 5.9% of the households in their sample

purchase incremental life annuities. Interestingly, although PERS retirees’ characteristics have a

qualitatively similar impact on demand for incremental life annuities, we find that 85% of the

retirees in our sample choose incremental life annuities.

        Bütler and Teppa (2007) study payout choices for ten Swiss pension funds. Consistent

with our findings, they find that the majority of retirees choose life annuities over lump sums.

Therefore, the low demand for life annuities in the private market may reflect the fact that retir-

ees have access to sufficient life annuity income through their pensions, or it may signal that the

search costs associated with shopping for a life annuity are high. Previtero (2010) studies the

choice between life annuity and lump sum payments by private employees using data from de-

fined benefit plans. Consistent with our findings, he finds that demand for life annuities is nega-

tively correlated with recent stock market returns. However, because the money’s worth of the

life annuities in his setting match those available in the private market, the welfare cost of return

chasing is lower than in our setting, where life annuities are better than actuarially fair.

3. Empirical Predictions

        In a standard life-cycle model, life annuities increase expected utility by making the indi-

vidual’s consumption between retirement and death both higher and less uncertain.8 In our set-


8
 Yaari (1965) derives conditions under which a retiree with an unknown date of death should convert all of her liq-
uid retirement assets into life annuities. Davidoff, Brown, and Diamond (2005) extend this analysis by showing that


                                                        7
ting, incremental life annuity payments increase expected utility by increasing the level of risk-

free income, and therefore potential consumption, during retirement. The lump sum option, on

the other hand, trades incremental life annuity payments for a cash payment, which can be in-

vested in risky liquid assets, invested in safe liquid assets, or used to purchase goods and ser-

vices.9 Therefore, the choice between the total life annuity and lump sum options should depend

on the expected present value of incremental life annuity payments relative to the level of the

lump sum payment, plus any option value associated with holding liquid assets. We use his

tradeoff to motivate our empirical predictions.

         Note that because the vast majority of PERS incremental life annuities are better than ac-

tuarially fair, an implicit assumption throughout our paper is that market frictions limit the ability

of retirees to convert life annuities into lump sums in the private market. A natural and likely

source of friction is asymmetric information about retiree life expectancy. In the absence of the-

se frictions, all retirees with a normal life expectancy should choose the total life annuity option,

and those who prefer a lump sum should convert some portion of their life annuity payments into

a (larger) lump sum.

3.1. Variation in Retiree Characteristics

         Our first set of predictions are based on the fact that differences in retiree characteristics

can generate cross-sectional differences in the expected utility associated with life annuity pay-

ments. Because Brown (2001), Finkelstein and Poterba (2004), Bütler and Teppa (2007), and

Inkmann, Lopes, and Michaelides (2011) find support for related predictions, we are primarily



retirees would benefit from converting a significant fraction of their assets into life annuities under much less re-
striction conditions. Life annuities in the private market are able to offer higher rates of return than other risk-free
investments because they transfer assets from those who die to those who survive.
9
  Bequest motives typically reduce demand for life annuities. However, because the incremental life annuities that
we study are better-than-actuarially fair, PERS retirees with bequest motives should choose the total life annuity
option and use the monthly payments to purchase life insurance.


                                                           8
interested in exploring whether PERS retirees behave like the retirees studied in other settings.

        We consider seven retiree characteristics. First, because PERS does not adjust life annui-

ty payments for differences in retiree health, we predict that the lump sum option will be more

valuable to single retirees in poor health, who should expect to receive fewer payments. Second,

because PERS does not adjust life annuity payments for the different life expectancies of males

and females, we predict that the lump sum option will be more valuable to single male retirees,

who should expect to receive fewer payments than single female retirees. Third, like other forms

of insurance, life annuities should be less valuable to a retiree who is less risk averse. We predict

that a retiree who allocates more of her retirement account allocations to the riskier of the two

investment options will be more likely to choose the lump sum option. Fourth, to the extent that

police and fire officers’ greater tolerance for occupational risk translates into greater tolerance

for financial risk, police and fire officers will be more likely to choose the lump sum option.

Fifth, because the marginal value of insurance declines with the level of insurance, the value that

a retiree attaches to the incremental life annuity should fall with the level of already-annuitized

income. We predict that demand for the lump sum option will rise with the level of the life an-

nuity payments under the lump sum option. Sixth, we predict a retiree who is more reliant on

PERS retirement benefits because she spent a larger fraction of her career working for PERS

employers is less likely to choose the lump sum option. Seventh, to the extent that financial lit-

eracy is positively correlated with income (Campbell (2006)), we predict that a retiree with a

higher pre-retirement salary will be less likely to choose the lump sum payment over a better

than actuarially fair life annuity.

        Note that because all retirees receive some life annuity payments, retirees must also

choose between single life annuities, which stop making payments when the retiree dies, and




                                                 9
joint life annuities, which stop making payments only after the retiree and their beneficiary have

died. Because joint life annuities are more likely to be chosen by married retirees, who must also

consider the financial needs of their spouses, we expect the characteristics of retirees choosing

joint life annuities to explain less variation in demand for lump sums (which is what Brown

(2001) finds.) Finally, Brown and Poterba (2000) argue that access to joint life annuities should

make married retirees less likely to fully annuitize their retirement assets than single retirees.

The complication with testing this prediction in our setting is that, although we lack the data

needed to systematically compare the money’s worth of single and joint life annuities, calcula-

tions based on the actual payout options of a married retiree suggest that joint life annuities are

significantly more generous than single life annuities.

3.2. Cross-Sectional Variation in Life Annuity Pricing

       Our second set of predictions focus on plausibly exogenous cross-sectional variation in

life annuity pricing arising from how PERS calculates retirement benefits. To understand how

we exploit this variation, it is necessary to provide additional details on how retirement benefits

are determined under the total life annuity and lump sum options. PERS employees contribute

6% of their salary to a defined contribution-style retirement account with two investment op-

tions. They have the option to invest 25%, 50% or 75% of their contribution to the riskier “vari-

able” account; the remainder is invested in the safer “regular” account. The contributions and

returns posted to these two accounts determine the accumulated account balance at retirement,

which is the size of the lump sum payment under the lump sum option.

       The level of the life annuity payment under the total life annuity option is automatically

calculated as the maximum of three possible benefit formulae. DC is a traditional defined con-

tribution retirement benefit that depends on the actuarial equivalency factor that PERS uses to




                                                10
annuitize the retirement account balance. DB is a traditional defined benefit retirement benefit

that depends on years of service, salary history, whether the retiree is a police or fire officer, and

an adjustment for early retirement. DCDB is a hybrid benefit that equals half of DC plus slightly

more than half of DB, but that is only available to employees who first contributed into PERS on

or before August 1981.10 The level of the life annuity payments under the lump sum option is

automatically calculated as the maximum of two benefits: half of the total life annuity payment

under DC or slightly more than half of the total life annuity payment under DB. Eligibility for

DCDB only impacts the level of the life annuity payments under the total life annuity option.

        When comparing the total life annuity option to the lump sum option, life-cycle models

predict that retires will compare the expected present value of the incremental life annuity pay-

ments under the total life annuity option to the lump sum payment they must forgo. Dividing the

incremental life annuity payment by the lump sum payment yields an annuity price that is analo-

gous to the actuarial equivalency factor quoted in the private market. The fact that PERS uses

multiple formulae to calculate life annuity payments under the total life annuity and lump sum

options generates cross-sectional variation in this annuity price. Depending on the combination

of formulas used to calculate the maximum life annuity payments, the dollar value of the incre-

mental life annuity payments can range from 32.5% to 50% of the total life annuity payment. If

this variation in annuity pricing is salient to retirees, we predict that demand for the lump sum

option will be lower when the relative value of the incremental life annuity payments is higher.

        Because the total life annuity payments of retirees who first contributed into PERS after

August 1981 are calculated using two formulae instead of three, there are circumstances under

which these retirees are eligible for smaller incremental life annuity payments than retirees who


10
 PERS refers to the DC, DB, and DCDB options as “Money Match”, “Full Formula”, and “Formula plus Annuity”.
We state the various total life annuity and partial life annuity formulas in the Appendix.


                                                   11
first contributed into PERS on or before August 1981 (holding retiree characteristics and the re-

tirement account balance constant). If this particular source of cross-sectional variation is sali-

ent, we predict that it will increase demand for the lump sum option.

       While variation due to the choice of retirement benefit formulas would normally raise

concerns about strategic behavior, PERS retirees automatically receive the maximum life annuity

payments for which they are eligible. While retirees can expect to increase their future retire-

ment benefits by working another year, or by allocating a larger fraction of their retirement con-

tributions to the risky investment, they have no influence over which formulas PERS uses to cal-

culate their life annuity payments under the total life annuity and lump sum options, and hence

no influence over the level of the incremental life annuity payments.

3.3. Time-Series Variation in Life Annuity Pricing

       The final prediction concerns variation in PERS life annuity pricing due to time-series

variation in the risk-free rate. In the market for private life annuities, insurance companies use

the prevailing risk-free rate to set the actuarial equivalency factor, which determines the level of

life annuity payment per dollar invested. When interest rates fall, the actuarial equivalency fac-

tors available from TIAA and other insurance companies fall. In contrast, the actuarial equiva-

lency factors that PERS uses in its retirement benefit calculations rarely change. Because of this

inertia, when the risk-free rate falls, life annuity payments available from PERS become relative-

ly more generous than the life annuity payments available from TIAA. To be clear, lower inter-

est rates do not change the dollar value of the PERS incremental life annuity payments. Instead,

they increase the cost of buying the same incremental life annuity payments in the private mar-

ket. Or, put differently, they increase the gap between the rate of return that retirees can earn on

their retirement account balance by choosing the total life annuity option and the risk-free rate of




                                                12
return available in the market. For this reason, we predict that demand for the lump sum option

will be lower when interest rates are lower.

         There are several caveats. The prediction that lower interest rates make life annuities

more valuable is unique to our setting. Milevsky and Young (2002) argue that retirees in the pri-

vate market should delay annuitization when interest rates are low, rather than lock in perma-

nently low life annuity payments.11 The facts that PERS life annuity payments become relatively

more valuable when the risk-free rate falls, and that they are only available at the time of retire-

ment, imply that PERS retirees are unlikely to benefit from delaying annuitization.

         More importantly, our prediction holds the value of the lump sum payment constant. To

identify retirees’ choices as mistakes, we must rule out the possibility that lower interest rates

rationally increase demand for risky liquid assets, safe liquid assets, or consumption. Although

we are limited by the fact that we do not observe whether the lump sum is invested or consumed,

we are able to explicitly test two alternatives. The first is that lower interest rates increase the

value of already-annuitized income, and that the resulting income effect increases demand for the

lump sum option. The second is that lower interest rates proxy for greater economic uncertainty,

which increases the value of the lump sum option by even more than it increases the value of the

incremental life annuity payments. To control for variation in economic uncertainty, we control

for the level of the CBEO Volatility Index (VIX) at the end of the month before the payout

choice.12 If larger values of VIX, which is also known as the “fear index”, increase demand for

liquid savings, the coefficient on the control variable will be positive.13


11
   Also see Tergesen, Anne, and Leslie Scism, “Are Annuities Being Overhyped as a Retirement Cure-All?”, Wall
Street Journal, February 13, 2010.
12
   VIX measures the expected volatility on U.S. equity over the next 30 days. It has been shown to be negatively
correlated with mutual fund flows and other measures of investor sentiment. See, for example, Ben-Rephael,
Kandel, and Wohl (2010).
13
   On the other hand, Sundaresan (2001, p. 208) provides evidence that interest rate volatility is positively correlated
with the level of interest rates. Given the 2% annual cap on cost of living adjustments it seems just as likely that


                                                          13
        Finally, demand for the lump sum option may respond, for rational or behavioral reasons,

to time-series variation in investor sentiment. If fluctuations in interest rates and investor senti-

ment are correlated, and we do not control for fluctuations in investor sentiment, the coefficient

on our measure of relative generosity will suffer from omitted variables bias. To distinguish the

impact of interest rates from the impact of the NASDAQ bubble, which burst toward the end of

our sample period, we control for the inflation-adjusted level of the NASDAQ index, which has

a correlation of 0.4638 with our measure of PERS generosity. We also control for the return on

the S&P 500 index over the prior 12 months. To the extent that retirees forgo better than actuar-

ially fair life annuity payments in response to recent equity market conditions, they may be mak-

ing costly mistakes.

3.4. Measuring Variation in Life Annuity Pricing

        As introduced earlier, the money's worth of the incremental life annuity is the expected

present value of the future life annuity payments, per dollar of initial outlay. The money's worth

of the incremental life annuity payments available to retiree k is defined as:

                             1 
           k
         MWMax   Ak    k   EPVgk                                                                  (1)
                            P 

where Ak is the initial level of the incremental life annuity payment to retiree k, Pk is the level of

the forgone lump sum payment (i.e., the price of the incremental life annuity payments), and

EPV kg denotes the expected present value of retiree k receiving $1.00 in month 1, $1.00 (1+g) in

month 2, …, until death, which depends on the probability that retiree k is alive to receive each

payment.14 When incremental life annuity payments are priced to be actuarially fair, money’s


higher interest rate volatility could generate more demand for lump sum payments, which could be invested in assets
offering even better inflationary hedges. This argument suggests that lower interest rates should decrease demand
for the lump sum option.
14
   When estimating the expected present value of life annuity payments for retiree k in month t, we use the yield on
10-year Treasury Notes on the first trading day of month t, and we use the mortality tables published by the Social


                                                        14
worth equals $1.00.

         Life annuity payments are quoted in terms of actuarial equivalency factors, which state

the (fixed, nominal) number of dollars paid out each month until death, per $1,000 in initial out-

lay. When the maximal total life annuity and partial life annuity payments for retiree k are both

calculated under DC, the money’s worth of the incremental life annuity payments is

                       AEFPERS
                            k
                                 Account Balance          1         
         MW   k
                                                                    EPVg
                                                                               k
                                                                                                            (2)
              DC
                               $1,000             Account Balance 

where AEFPERS increases with retiree age, to reflect declining life expectancies, but does not vary

with gender.15 Because PERS life annuities include a cost of living adjustment that is capped at

2.0% per year, and because that cap is binding throughout our sample period, we set g equal to

0.17% per month. To distinguish between the cross-sectional and time-series variation that we

described in sections 3.2 and 3.3, we rewrite the money’s worth of the incremental life annuity

payments as the product of three terms:

                                       MWMax
                                           k
                                                 MWDC k
                                                            
         MW    k
               Max
                       MW  k
                             TIAA
                                    
                                                           MWTIAA       
                                                                      k           k        k
                                                                                                            (3)
                                       MWDC   MWTIAA 
                                           k           k




The first term is the money’s worth of the life annuity that retiree k could purchase from TIAA

with the lump sum payment, our proxy for how life annuities are priced in the private market.

The second term, , captures cross-sectional variation arising when the maximum life annuity

payments under the total life annuity and lump sum options are not both calculated using the DC

benefit formulas. For example,  captures cross-sectional differences in the money’s worth of

retirees’ incremental annuity benefits based on whether they are ineligible for the DCDB total

Security Administration for 2004. The second assumption leads us to slightly overestimate the estimated present
value in 1990 relative to 2002.
15
   Finkelstein, Poterba, and Rothschild (2009) study the transfer from males to females that results from not allowing
actuarial equivalency factors to vary with gender. These restrictions apply to the market for pension annuities in the
United Kingdom, Oregon's Public Employees Retirement System, and TIAA, among others.


                                                         15
life annuity benefit because they first contributed into PERS after August 1981. The third term,

, captures time-series variation in the value of PERS life annuities relative to those available

from TIAA, which is driven by changes in the risk-free rate.

4. Data

       Between January 1990 and June 2002, we observe the payout choices of 32,060 retirees

between the ages of 50 and 70. For each retiree, we observe whether she chooses the total life

annuity option or the lump sum option. We also observe her retirement account balance, her al-

location between the regular and variable account prior to retirement, her choice between a sin-

gle and joint life annuity, and the other demographic characteristics required to calculate her life

annuity payments under the different benefit formulae for which she is eligible.

       In Table 1, we provide separate summary statistics for retirees whose total life annuity

benefits are calculated using DC (66.4% of retirees), DB (9.8%), and DCDB (23.8%). Columns

(2) through (8) summarize inputs into the various life annuity benefit formulas, and columns (9)

and (10) report the (initial) monthly life annuity payments under the total life annuity and lump

sum options. Monthly Salary (4), PERS retirement Account Balance (5), Total Life Annuity (9),

Partial Life Annuity (10), and Incremental Life Annuity (11) are converted to December 2003

dollars using the Consumer Price Index.

       Although PERS automatically determines which life annuity formula applies to each re-

tiree, the fact that columns (2) through (8) are inputs into these formulas results in significant

differences in the panels of Table 1. For example, life annuity payments calculated under DC are

increasing in the level of the PERS retirement account balance, while payments calculated under

DB are not. Consequently, the average Account Balance ranges from $110,538 to $197,325 un-

der DC, but from $27,484 to $73,329 under DB.




                                                16
         Table 1 highlights the variation in annuity pricing faced by retirees whose maximal total

life annuity payments are calculated under DC, DB, and DCDB. Consider retirees in 1995. In

Panel A, the average retiree forgoes approximately 50% of the total life annuity monthly pay-

ment of $2,434 to receive an immediate lump sum payment of $141,662. On the other hand, in

Panel B, the retiree forgoes approximately 40% of the total life annuity monthly payment of

$643 to receive an immediate lump sum payment of $27,484.

         In Table 2, we illustrate how the relative value of PERS life annuity payments varies with

the risk-free rate of return. Specifically, we calculate the money’s worth of PERS incremental

life annuity payments under DC for male retirees who turn 65 in January 1990, January 1991, …,

January 2002. We also calculate the money’s worth of the life annuity payments that retirees

could purchase from TIAA using the lump sum payment. For these retirees, the PERS life an-

nuity is always better than actuarially fair, with money’s worth ranging from $1.14 in January

1990 to $1.50 in January 2002.

         Within our sample of 32,060 retirees, the money’s worth of the incremental life annuity is

better than actuarially fair for all but 112 retirees. In contrast, the money’s worth of the life an-

nuities offered by TIAA is less volatile, and never more than $0.92. For a 65-year old male in

Table 2,  ranges from 1.30 to 1.77. Within our full sample of retirees,  ranges from 1.17 to

1.82, with an average value of 1.60. The main source of time-series variation in  is the fact that

TIAA adjusts its actuarial equivalency factors each January, based on changes in annuitant life

expectancy and the risk-free rate, whereas PERS does not.16 In the bottom row of Table 2, we

show that the correlation between the yield on 10-Year U.S. Treasury Notes and TIAA’s actuari-


16
  PERS adjusts its actuarial equivalency factor tables once during our sample period. On January 1, 1997, PERS
switches from actuarial equivalency factors that increase annually, in the retiree’s birth month, to factors that in-
crease monthly. At the same time, PERS increases actuarial equivalency factors for those retiring below the age of
55. However, the increases are small, ranging from 2.2% at age 50 to 0.1% at age 54.


                                                         17
al equivalency factors (column (4)) is 0.935. We also show that the correlation between the

Treasury yield and  (column (9)) is -0.955.

5. How Do PERS Retirees Value Incremental Life Annuities?

       Table 3 reports the fraction of PERS retirees choosing the lump sum option each year.

Notably, only 15% choose the lump sum option; the other 85% choose to receive all of their re-

tirement benefits in the form of life annuity payments. The high demand for incremental life an-

nuities in our setting is striking, and is consistent with the fact that PERS incremental life annui-

ties have much higher money’s worth than life annuities available in the private market.

       The low demand for lump sum payments is also consistent with alternative explanations.

It may reflect the fact that individuals with greater demand for annuitized retirement benefits are

more likely to become public employees. It may reflect the fact that it is easier for employees to

choose the total life annuity payout option over the lump sum option than it is for other retirees

to research and purchase incremental life annuities in the private market. Or, because PERS re-

ports the monthly payment associated with each payout option rather than the implied rate of re-

turn, it may reflect the framing effect described in Brown, Kling, Mullainathan, and Wrobel

(2008). We cannot measure the impact of these explanations on the average demand for lump

sum payments. However, because they are time-invariant, they are unlikely to explain time-

series variation in the fraction of retirees choosing the lump sum option.

5.1. Time-Series Regressions

       Figure 1 reveals significant time-series variation in the fraction of retirees choosing the

lump sum option, and Table 3 shows that this variation exists regardless of how the total life an-

nuity benefit is calculated. In Table 4, we seek to explain this time-series variation in demand

for the lump sum option. The dependent variable in each time-series regression is the fraction of




                                                 18
retirees that choose the lump sum option in month t. Because the number of retirements varies

significantly across months (from a low of 6 in January 1990 to a high of 2,999 in February

1998), this fraction is a noisier estimate of retiree preferences in some months than others. To

account for this heteroskedasticity, we weight each observation by the number of retirements in

that month. Standard errors are estimated using the Newey and West (1987) estimator, allowing

autocorrelation to persist for 24 months.

       Our basic prediction is that demand for the lump sum option will fall when incremental

life annuities are more valuable. Yet, in column (1), we find that demand for the lump sum op-

tion rises when PERS life annuities are relatively more generous than those available from

TIAA. The coefficient is statistically significant at the 1-percent level. It is also economically

significant. A one-standard deviation increase in the relative generosity of PERS is associated

with a 3.2 percentage point increase in the demand for the lump sum option. In other words,

demand for lump sums is increasing precisely when the relative value of the incremental life an-

nuities available from PERS is increasing. One interpretation is that retirees are confused about

the impact of interest rates on the value of PERS life annuity payments. For example, they may

be following advice like that in Milevsky and Young (2002) to delay annuitization when the risk-

free rate is low—despite the fact that this advice does not apply in our setting. However, as we

discuss in Section 3.3, it is important to control for variation in economic conditions and investor

sentiment that may lead retirees to prefer a lump sum despite the lower interest rates.

       We learn three things when we control for the return on the S&P 500 index over the prior

12 months, the level of VIX in the prior month, and the inflation-adjusted level of NASDAQ in

the prior month. First, the coefficient on our measure of PERS generosity falls by approximately

60% between column (1) and column (4), highlighting the need to control for variation in eco-




                                                19
nomic conditions and investor sentiment. Second, the coefficient nevertheless remains positive

and statistically significant at the 1-percent level in columns (2) through (4), and at the 10-

percent level when we switch from levels to first differences in column (5). It also remains posi-

tive and statistically significant at the 1-percent level in an unreported regression that ends the

sample in December 1998, to exclude the NASDAQ crash. In other words, regardless of how we

control for economic conditions and investor sentiment, we find no evidence that retirees under-

stand that lower interest rates increase the value of PERS life annuity payments.17

        The third insight is that economic conditions and investor sentiment help to explain de-

mand for the lump sum option. We find some evidence that demand for the lump sum option is

increasing in both the level of VIX and the inflation-adjusted level of NASDAQ in the month

immediately before the payout choice. However, the estimated coefficient on VIX is not statisti-

cally significant when we control for the level of NASDAQ. Our most robust finding is that de-

mand for the lump sum option rises with recent equity market returns (p-value of 0.001). In

terms of economic significance, a one-standard deviation increase in the lagged return on the

S&P 500 index is associated with a 2.2 to 2.6 percentage point increase in the demand for the

lump sum option. The most provocative interpretation of this correlation is that retirees are ex-

trapolating future equity market returns from recent equity market returns, and then using the

lump sum payment to chase recent equity market returns.18

5.2. Predicting Individual Demand for the Lump Sum Option

        We now turn our attention to individual-level retirement payout choices. In Table 5, we


17
   In an unreported specification, we include the fraction of retirees who chose the lump sum payment in the previ-
ous month, as a control for the impact of economic conditions and investor sentiment in the prior month, as well as
the P/E ratio on the S&P 500 index in the prior quarter. The coefficient on our measure of PERS generosity increas-
es from 0.111, in column (4), to 0.137, and remains statistically significant from zero at the 1-percent level.
18
   The return chasing interpretation is consistent with behavior that Chevalier and Ellison (1997) and Sirri and
Tufano (1998) observe in the mutual fund industry, and that Benartzi (2001) observes when studying how investors
allocate 401(k) plan assets to company stock.


                                                        20
report marginal effects from five logit models where the dependent variable equals one if retiree

k chooses the lump sum option, and zero if she chooses the total life annuity option. We use

three sets of independent variables to explain the individual payout choices of 31,809 retirees.19

The first set measures differences in retiree characteristics, including differences in life expec-

tancy, risk aversion, and the level of life annuity income under the lump sum option. The second

set measures variation in the money’s worth of the incremental life annuity payments, which dis-

tills our cross-sectional and time-series variation into a single measure of annuity pricing. (In

Table 6, we distinguish between different sources of variation in money’s worth.) The third set

controls for economic conditions and investor sentiment. It includes the lagged return on the

S&P 500 index, the lagged return earned in the retiree’s PERS retirement account, the inflation-

adjusted level of NASDAQ measured at the end of the previous month, the level of VIX at the

end of the previous month, and the local (county-level) unemployment rate.

        Each specification includes a separate fixed effect for each year of service (1, 2, 3, …) to

control for variation in payout choices that is related to length of service within PERS. Columns

(2) through (5) also include a separate fixed effect for each year of age (50, 51, 52, …) to control

for variation in payout choices that is related to age at retirement.20 Because retirees choosing

joint life annuities are more likely to be married, their payout choices should depend on the char-

acteristics of the retirees, which we observe, and on the characteristics of the spouses, which we

do not observe. For this reason, in columns (3) and (4), we separately estimate logit models for

retirees who choose single life annuities versus joint life annuities. Column (5) includes a sepa-

rate fixed effect for each calendar year, to capture average changes in macroeconomic conditions


19
   In Table 5, we exclude 251 retirees because we lack data on the location of their most-recent employer. Without
these data, we are unable to control for the local unemployment rate. Our inferences are unchanged when we in-
clude these retirees and drop our control for the local unemployment rate.
20
   Our inferences are unchanged when we estimate linear probability models instead of logits.


                                                       21
or retiree preferences. Standard errors are clustered on each month in the sample (January 1990,

February 1990, …, June 2002) to capture the cross-sectional correlation in economic conditions

for retirees making choices in the same month. Inference is similar when we instead cluster

standard errors at the employer or county level.

5.2.1. Variation in Retiree Characteristics

       When we focus on cross-sectional variation in the value of the incremental life annuity

payments caused by differences in retiree characteristics, our findings are broadly consistent with

the predictions of life-cycle models. We test for adverse selection in two ways. First, we exploit

data on ex post mortality. Among retirees who choose a single life annuity, those who die 1-24

months after retirement are 17.7 percentage points more likely to choose the lump sum option (p-

value of 0.001), while those who die 25-48 months after retirement are no more likely to do so.

This suggests that single retirees’ choices are most sensitive to deaths occurring within 24

months of retirement. However, as expected, among retirees who choose a joint life annuity, and

are therefore more likely to be maximizing retirement income for both the retiree and spouse, we

find weaker evidence at both horizons (p-values of 0.065 and 0.091). Second, we find that de-

mand for the lump sum option is lower for female retirees; the difference ranges from 8.2 per-

centage points (p-value of 0.000) for those choosing single life annuities to 2.7 percentage points

(0.000) for those choosing joint life annuities.

       Consistent with longevity insurance being less valuable to retirees who are less risk

averse, we find that retirees that allocate a positive fraction of their employee contribution to the

riskier investment option are more likely to choose the lump sum option. The estimated margin-




                                                   22
al effect ranges from 1.7 to 2.1 percentage points.21 The fact that police and fire officers are less

likely to choose the lump sum option may reflect higher levels of financial risk aversion.

         To measure the impact of already-annuitized retirement benefits on the demand for the

lump sum option, we include the dollar value of the life annuity payment under the lump sum

option (measured in December 2003 dollars). The estimated coefficients are all statistically sig-

nificant at the 1-percent level. They are also economically significant, with a one-standard devi-

ation increase in monthly life annuity payments ($879) increasing demand for the lump sum be-

tween 3.0 and 5.2 percentage points. We obtain similar (unreported) results when we scale the

level of already-annuitized monthly income by the retiree’s pre-retirement monthly salary.

         An interesting exception to the positive relation between already-annuitized income lev-

els and demand for the lump sum option is that, in column (1), we find significantly lower de-

mand for the lump sum option by retirees who are old enough to be receiving Social Security

benefits (62+). One interpretation is that younger retirees are more likely to use the lump sum to

acquire new skills and re-enter the labor force, whereas older retirees are more likely to perma-

nently exit the labor force. This interpretation may help to explain why, in column (1), we find

that individuals retiring before the normal retirement age are 2.7 percentage points more likely to

choose the lump sum option. And, it may help to explain why Warner and Pleeter (2001) find

much higher demand for lump sum payments by personnel separating from the military (with an

average age of 31) than we find by public retirees (with an average age of 59).22

         As predicted, we find that retirees who spend a larger fraction of their careers with PERS


21
   Although higher demand for lump sum payments by male retirees is potentially consistent with gender-based dif-
ferences in risk aversion (Barber and Odean (2001)), the estimated marginal effect of the positive allocation to the
variable account dummy variable is similar when we restrict the sample to female retirees (2.0 percentage points).
22
   Warner and Pleeter (2001) study the choice between lump sum and non-life annuity payments in a sample of indi-
viduals separating from the military. Although the annuities in their sample are also quite valuable, they find strong
demand for the lump sum. This is especially true among enlisted personnel, who may need to invest in new skills to
re-enter the labor force.


                                                         23
employers have significantly lower demand for the lump sum option, and that the effect is ap-

proximately three times larger for retirees choosing the single life annuity.23 We also find that

retirees whose pre-retirement salary are in the top quartile of retirees are between 2.7 and 3.3

percentage points less likely to choose the lump sum option, which is consistent with the possi-

bility that higher salaries proxy for higher levels of financial literacy.

         While the arguments in Kotlikoff and Spivak (1981) and Brown and Poterba (2000) pre-

dict that single retirees will be less likely to choose the lump sum option, we find that retirees

choosing the single life annuity are 7.7 to 8.1 percentage points (p-values of 0.000) more likely

to choose the lump sum option. One possible explanation is that households respond to the fact

that PERS incremental life annuities are better than actuarially fair by having the spouse choose

not to annuitize her retirement assets, but we do not observe the annuitization choice of the

spouse. Another possible explanation is that retirees recognize that the joint life annuities avail-

able from PERS are even better deals than single life annuities.

         Overall, these findings lead us to conclude that PERS retirees understand how salient dif-

ferences in life expectancy, risk aversion, and the level of already-annuitized income impact the

value of the incremental life annuity.24 Given their consistency with other studies, these findings

help to allay concerns about the representativeness of our sample.

5.2.2. Variation in Life Annuity Pricing, Economic Conditions, and Investor Sentiment

         If retirees recognize and respond to variation in PERS life annuity pricing then demand

for the lump sum option should be lower when the value of the incremental life annuity pay-

ments is higher. Instead, we find that the natural logarithm of money’s worth has a positive and

23
   Controlling for whether the retiree is eligible for “Tier 2” benefits, because she did not contribute into PERS be-
fore January 1997, has no additional impact on demand for the lump sum option. Tier 2 members face higher nor-
mal retirement ages than other members (60 versus 58), but only account for 85 of the 31,809 retirees in our sample.
24
   Similarly, Barber, Odean and Zheng (2005) find that mutual fund investor flows respond most strongly to those
fees that are the most salient.


                                                         24
statistically significant impact on the demand for the lump sum option across all five specifica-

tions. In terms of economic significance, a one-standard deviation increase in money’s worth

increases the probability of choosing the lump sum option by approximately one percentage

point in the full sample. While the economic effect is modest, it is the opposite of what we pre-

dict. One interpretation is that retirees are confused by variation in the value of incremental life

annuity payments that is unrelated to variation in retiree characteristics.

       An alternative interpretation is that falling interest rates increase the expected utility of

the lump sum payment by even more than they increase the expected utility of the incremental

life annuity payments. We consider two possible mechanisms. The first is that lower interest

rates increase the expected present value of the life annuity payments under the lump sum option,

and that the resulting income effect decreases the relative value of the incremental life annuity.

To test this alternative, we estimate (but do not report) two additional versions of the specifica-

tion in column (2). When we replace the dollar value of the life annuity payment under the lump

sum option with the natural logarithm of its expected present value, we continue to find a posi-

tive and statistically significant impact on demand for the lump sum option. However, the eco-

nomic significance is reduced by approximately 20 percent. This suggests that the expected pre-

sent value is a noisy proxy for the dollar value, which is more salient. When we simultaneously

control for the dollar value and the expected present value, the estimated marginal effect on the

dollar value is positive and statistically significant while the estimated marginal effect on the ex-

pected present value is negative and statistically insignificant. Importantly, the estimated coeffi-

cients on the other independent variables—including money’s worth—are virtually identical to

those reported in column (2).

       The second possible mechanism is that lower interest rates proxy for greater economic




                                                 25
uncertainty and that greater economic uncertainty increases the relative value of the lump sum

payment. In Table 5, we include the level of VIX to control for macroeconomic uncertainty and

the unemployment rate in the county of the retiree’s former employer to control for local eco-

nomic conditions. While our point estimates suggest that demand for the lump sum increases

with VIX and decreases with the unemployment rate, the statistical evidence is weak. The more

important result is that including these proxies has no impact on the marginal effect associated

with money’s worth. When we exclude both of these proxies for economic conditions we find

(in an unreported specification) that the marginal effect on money’s worth remains 0.045. Fur-

thermore, in column (5), we continue to find a positive (albeit approximately 35 percent smaller)

relation between money’s worth and demand for the lump sum option. Because this specifica-

tion includes calendar year fixed effects it controls for the average impact of economic condi-

tions within each year.

       While it remains possible that low interest rates increase the value of the lump sum pay-

ment by more than they increase the value of the incremental life annuity payments, it is worth

emphasizing that these increases need to be large. Changes in the risk-free rate cause the pay-

ments available from PERS to fluctuate between being 25% and 73% more generous than those

available from TIAA.

       When we focus on our other proxies for market conditions and investor sentiment in Ta-

ble 5, we continue to find a strong and statistically significant relation between equity market

conditions and demand for the lump sum option. Within the full sample, a one standard devia-

tion increase in the level of NASDAQ is associated with a 2.6 percentage point increase in the

probability of choosing the lump sum option. Similarly, a one standard deviation increase in the

return on the S&P 500 index over the prior 12 months is associated with a 2.9 percentage point




                                               26
increase in this probability. In contrast, the return earned in the PERS retirement account over

the prior 12 months has no direct effect on the demand for the lump sum option.25 As we dis-

cussed above, the most provocative interpretation of these findings is that retirees are using re-

cent equity market returns—which are likely to be salient—to infer future equity market returns.

Unfortunately, because we do not observe whether the lump sum payment is invested in equity,

we cannot test for return chasing.

        The individual-level data do, however, allow us to test the alternative interpretation that

higher equity market returns increase household wealth outside of PERS retirement benefits,

which then increases demand for cash or consumption. Specifically, we identify subsamples of

retirees for whom the PERS retirement account is likely to be a larger fraction of their total

wealth, and then test whether demand for the lump sum option by these retirees is less sensitive

to recent equity market returns. Since retirees choosing single life annuities are more likely to be

single, they should have fewer sources of outside wealth than retirees choosing joint life annui-

ties. Yet, the marginal effects associated with equity market returns are similar for retirees

choosing a single life annuity or a joint life annuity (0.145 versus 0.164). We find similar effects

when, in unreported specifications, we focus on the subsample of retirees with 20 or more years

of service within PERS (0.154), or the subsample of retirees with 20 or more years of service

who choose a single life annuity (0.147).26 The fact that different subsamples of retirees exhibit

similar sensitivity to recent equity market returns argues against an interpretation based on

changes in outside wealth.

5.2.3. Exploiting Cross-Sectional and Time-Series Variation in Life Annuity Pricing

25
   Chalmers, Johnson, and Reuter (2008) describe features of PERS that significantly reduce the correlation between
the returns on the S&P 500 index and those posted to PERS retirement account balances.
26
   Lusardi and Mitchell (2007) and Lusardi and Tufano (2008) find that financial literacy is lower among women.
When we estimate separate specifications for males and females, we find that the estimated sensitivity to lagged
equity returns is higher for males (0.174) than females (0.133), but the difference is not statistically significant.


                                                        27
       In Table 6, we decompose money’s worth into the three terms described by equation (3).

The first term is the money’s worth of the incremental life annuity that can be purchased from

TIAA. Because TIAA adjusts its actuarial equivalency factors each January, in response to

changes in the risk-free rate, the money’s worth of the life annuity available from TIAA exhibits

little variation. Not surprisingly, the estimated coefficient on this term is small and statistically

indistinguishable from zero.

       The second term, , captures plausibly exogenous cross-sectional variation in the dollar

value of the incremental life annuity payments arising from the use of multiple benefit formulae.

Because retirees always receive the maximum incremental life annuity payments for which they

are eligible, variation in money’s worth based on how PERS calculates life annuity payments

should be uncorrelated with retiree preferences for incremental life annuities versus lump sums.

While the predicted coefficient on  is negative, the estimated coefficient is positive and statisti-

cally significant. However, the economic magnitude is small. A one standard deviation increase

in  only increases the probability of choosing the lump sum option by 0.41 percentage points.

       Part of the variation in  arises from the fact that retirees who first contribute into PERS

after August 1981 are not eligible for the DCDB total life annuity benefit. Among the 21.1% of

retirees who are not eligible for DCDB, approximately half (10.1% of the full sample) face lower

incremental life annuity payments at retirement because of this ineligibility. In column (2), we

distinguish variation in the value of incremental life annuity payments due to other sources (1)

from variation due to ineligibility for DCDB (2). When we focus on 2, we finally find evi-

dence that lower money’s worth is associated with higher demand for the lump sum option. But,

here too, the economic magnitude is small. A one-standard deviation decrease in money’s worth

due to ineligibility for DCDB is associated with a 0.41 percentage point increase in demand for



                                                 28
the lump sum. The dummy variable indicating whether retiree k is ineligible for DCDB controls

for the possibility that individuals accepting jobs as public employees after a reduction in the ex-

pected retirement benefits attach less value to life annuities. However, none of the estimated

marginal effects are positive and statistically significant.

        The third term, , measures the money’s worth of the incremental life annuity payments

under DC relative to the money’s worth of life annuity payments available from TIAA—the

same source of plausibly exogenous time-series variation that we study in Table 4. The estimat-

ed coefficient is positive and statistically significant. In terms of economic significance, a one

standard deviation increase in the relative value of the incremental life annuities available from

PERS is associated with a 2.5 percentage point increase in demand for the lump sum.

        To summarize, the evidence that retirees respond to cross-sectional variation in money’s

worth driven by formulaic eccentricities of the PERS benefit calculations is weak. And, despite

our numerous controls for retiree characteristics, economic conditions, and investor sentiment,

we find no evidence that demand for the lump sum option responds in the predicted direction to

time-series variation in interest rates.

5.2.4. Robustness

        We perform robustness tests in the remaining columns of Table 6. In column (3) our goal

is to identify retirees whose choice of retirement date is driven more by retirement eligibility

than by the level of their retirement benefits, so we restrict the sample to retirees who are 58

years old and for whom the normal retirement age is 58. Our main results hold within this much

smaller sample, albeit in some cases with lower levels of statistical significance. They also hold

when, in column (4), we include the fraction of the retiree’s coworkers that chose the lump sum

option over the prior 12 months. We view this specification as controlling for employer-level




                                                  29
heterogeneity in the preference for incremental life annuities versus lump sums.27

        To explore the possibility that retirees rely on less sophisticated—but more salient—

measures than money’s worth, we include two additional dummy variables in column (5). The

first indicates whether the lump sum payment (measured in December 2003 dollars) is in the top

10% of those offered to PERS retirees; the second indicates whether the incremental life annuity

payments (measured in December 2003 dollars) are in the bottom 10% of those offered to PERS

retirees. The estimated coefficients on both variables are statistically and economically signifi-

cant. Retirees facing “large” lump sum payments are 4.6 percentage points more likely to

choose the lump sum option, and those facing “small” incremental life annuity payments are 4.6

percentage points more likely to choose the lump sum option.28 While these findings support the

idea that retirees rely on ad hoc rules when choosing between the total life annuity and lump sum

options, including them has little impact on the estimated coefficients on the other independent

variables. In particular, we continue to find that demand for the lump sum option increases (ra-

ther than decreases) with the money’s worth of the incremental life annuities, and with recent

equity market returns.

6. Conclusion

        To determine how retirees value life annuities, we compare the actual payout choices of a

large sample of Oregon public employees to the predictions of a life-cycle model. Because life

annuities provide stable income until death, and because the incremental life annuities available

from PERS are better than actuarially fair, we predict that average demand for the lump sum op-



27
   Chalmers, Johnson, and Reuter (2008) provide evidence of peer effects in the retirement timing decision. Here,
we have the more modest goal of using coworker behavior to capture otherwise unobservable heterogeneity in retir-
ee preferences.
28
   Based on a survey of 2,600 employees and 2,400 retirees in 2007, Watson Wyatt concludes that “Most employees
want a lump sum—if it's big enough.” The survey is summarized in “Who Prefers Annuities? Observations About
Retirement Decisions,” published in April 2008 issue of Watson Wyatt Insider.


                                                       30
tion will be low. Consistent with this prediction, we find that 85% of PERS retirees choose the

total life annuity option. This is much greater demand for incremental life annuities than has

been documented in other settings.

       Whether and how retirees respond to variation in the value of life annuity payments,

however, depends crucially on the source of variation. When we focus on salient and easily un-

derstood variation due to differences in retiree characteristics our findings are consistent with

both theory and the existing literature. When we focus on sources of plausibly exogenous varia-

tion in life annuity pricing that are unique to our setting, but arguably less salient, our findings

are difficult to reconcile with theory. The evidence that retirees respond to cross-sectional varia-

tion in life annuity pricing is limited to a single source of variation in the level of the incremental

life annuity payments, and the implied elasticity is small. Moreover, when we exploit exogenous

variation in life annuity pricing arising from time-series variation in the risk-free rate, we find no

evidence that demand for the lump sum option falls when interest rates are lower. Instead, we

find that demand for the lump sum option is higher when equity returns have been higher. We

believe that these last two findings are best explained by financial illiteracy.

       However, an alternative interpretation is that retirees are solving more complicated opti-

mization problems than we appreciate. For example, time-series variation in demand for the

lump sum option may be driven by time-series variation in the level of financial constraints.

Although it seems unlikely to us that the level of financial constraints increases with recent equi-

ty market returns and decreases with the interest rate, we cannot directly test this alternative.

Nor can we directly test the alternative that retirees understand that when interest rates fall, the

level of PERS underfunding rises, exposing retirees who choose the total lump sum option to

greater political risk. However, the level of financial constraints or perceived political risk




                                                  31
would need to increase significantly to justify forgoing life annuity payments with an expected

present value of $1.45 (or more) for $1.00 in cash. Finally, what we classify as retiree mistakes

may reflect self-interested advice from financial advisors seeking assets under management. It is

plausible that it is easier to convince retirees to choose the lump sum option and roll it over to an

IRA when recent equity returns are higher and current interest rates are low.

       Regardless of how we interpret the impact of interest rates and equity market returns on

demand for lump sums, our paper offers two lessons to policy makers interested in increasing

annuitization rates.   To the extent that we find any evidence that retirees respond rationally to

changes in annuity pricing, the effect is small. This suggests that small changes in annuity pric-

ing due, for example, to the introduction of tax subsidies or longevity bonds (Brown and Orszag

(2006)) are unlikely to increase annuitization rates by an economically significant amount. On

the other hand, the fact that we find high demand for the total life annuity option suggests that

retirees may respond strongly to large, salient changes in annuity prices. But, given the evidence

in Madrian and Shea (2001) and Bütler and Teppa (2007), we believe that policy makers should

explore the efficacy of more cost-effective solutions to low annuitization rates, such as making

life annuities the default retirement payout choice in retirement plans.




                                                 32
Appendix. Determinants of PERS Incremental Life Annuity Payments

       In this appendix, we describe the formulas used to calculate life annuity payments under

the total life annuity and lump sum options. There are four inputs. The first input, xDB, captures

the defined benefit aspect of PERS retirement benefits, while the second input, xDC, captures the

defined contribution aspect of PERS retirement benefits. Formally,

        x DB  Final Average Salary  Years of Service  Adjustment for Early Retirement
        x DC  Account Balance  AEFPERS

where xDB equals the retiree’s final average salary times years of service times a factor that re-

duces benefits when retiring before the normal retirement age, and xDC equals the retiree’s PERS

account balance times the actuarial equivalency factor that PERS uses to convert this account

balance into a (baseline) life annuity payment. AEFPERS depends on age but not gender. The

third input is a dummy variable, IPF, that indicates whether the retiree is eligible for police and

fire benefits, which are more generous than those available to normal members. The fourth input

is a dummy variable, IDCDB, that indicates whether the retiree contributed into PERS by August

1981; if so, the retiree is eligible for total life annuity payments calculated under DCDB.

       The level of the total life annuity payment is the maximum of three possible benefits:

                  x 2                                                   (DC)
                  DC
       TLA  max  (x DB  (0.0100  0.0035  I PF )  x DC )  I DCDB   ( DCDB)
                  
                   x DB  (0.0167  0.0035  I PF                       ( DB)

When the retiree is eligible for the DCDB benefit, it equals 50.0% of the DC benefit plus 59.9%

of the DB benefit for normal retirees (67.5% of the DB benefit for police and fire). Regardless of

which formula gives the maximum total life annuity payment, the level of the life annuity pay-

ment under the lump sum option is calculated as the maximum of two possible benefits:




                                                 33
                   x
                  
        PLA  max  DC
                   x DB  (0.0100  0.0035  I PF )

neither of which depend on eligibility for the DCDB total life annuity benefit.

       In Table A1, we calculate two ratios that summarize tradeoffs between the total life annu-

ity and lump sum options. One panel focuses on normal retirees; the other panel focuses on po-

lice and fire officers. The first ratio is the incremental life annuity payment divided by the total

life annuity payment. It ranges from 32.5% for police and fire retiring under DB, to 40.1% for

normal retirees retiring under DB, to 50.0% for anyone retiring under DC. In rows (b) and (c),

when DCDB offers the highest total life annuity payment, DCDB-eligible retirees face larger in-

cremental life annuity payments than DCDB-ineligible retirees.

       The second ratio, , is the money’s worth of the actual incremental life annuity payments

divided by the money’s worth of the incremental life annuity payments under DC. Because there

are values of DC and DB for which DCDB-ineligible retirees receive lower total life annuity

payments—but the same life annuity payments under the lump sum option—there are values of

xDC and xDB for which DCDB-ineligible retirees will find the lump sum option relatively more

attractive. For DCDB-eligible retirees,  equals one when the total life annuity payment is calcu-

lated under DC and DCDB, and is greater than one under DB. For DCDB-ineligible retirees,

however,  can be as low as 0.65. Note that when  equals one, variation in  is driven entirely

by retiree age. This reflects that fact that PERS does not adjusts its actuarial equivalency factors

during our sample period, and the fact that we estimate the expected present discount value of

the incremental life annuity payments available to each retiree using mortality tables from 2004.




                                                34
References

Barber, Brad, and Terrance Odean, 2001, Boys Will be Boys: Gender, Overconfidence, and
        Common Stock Investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 261292.
Barber, Brad, Terrance Odean, and Lu Zheng, 2005, Out of Sight, Out of Mind: The Effects of
        Expenses on Mutual Fund Flows, Journal of Business 78, 20952120.
Ben-Rephael, Azi, Shmuel Kandel, and Avi Wohl, 2010, Measuring Investor Sentiment with
        Mutual Fund Flows, Journal of Financial Economics (forthcoming).
Benartzi, Shlomo, 2001, Excessive Extrapolation and the Allocation of 401(k) Accounts to
        Company Stock, Journal of Finance 56, 1747–1764.
Benartzi, Shlomo, Alessandro Previtero, and Richard Thaler, 2011, Annuity Puzzles, Journal of
        Economic Perspectives 25, 143-164.
Berk, Jonathan, and Richard Green, 2004, Mutual Fund Flows and Performance in Rational
        Markets, Journal of Political Economy 112, 1269–1295.
Brown, Jeffrey, 2001, Private Pensions, Mortality Risk, and the Decision to Annuitize, Journal
        of Public Economics 82, 2962.
Brown, Jeffrey, 2009, Understanding the Role of Annuities in Retirement Planning, 178-206, in
        Overcoming the Saving Slump, (Ed: Annamaria Lusardi), University of Chicago Press:
        Chicago, IL, 2009.
Brown, Jeffrey, and Peter Orszag, 2006, The Political Economy of Government-Issued Longevi-
        ty Bonds, Journal of Risk and Insurance 73, 611631.
Brown, Jeffrey, and James Poterba, 2000, Joint Life Annuities and Annuity Demand by Married
        Couples, Journal of Risk and Insurance 67, 527554.
Brown, Jeffrey, Jeffrey Kling, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Marian Wrobel, 2008, Why Don't Peo-
        ple Insure Late-Life Consumption? A Framing Explanation of the Under-Annuitization
        Puzzle, American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings 98, 304309.
Bütler, Monika, and Federica Teppa, 2007, “The Choice Between an Annuity and a Lump-Sum:
        Results from Swiss Pension Funds,” Journal of Public Economics 91, 1944–1966.
Campbell, John, 2006, Household Finance, Journal of Finance 61, 15531604.
Chalmers, John, Woodrow Johnson, and Jonathan Reuter, 2008, Who Decides When You Re-
        tire? Peer Effects and Retirement, working paper.
Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1997. Risk Taking by Mutual Funds as a Response to In-
        centives, Journal of Political Economy 105, 11671200.
Davidoff, Tom, Jeffrey Brown, and Peter Diamond, 2005, Annuities and Individual Welfare,
        American Economic Review 95, 15731590.
Finkelstein, Amy, and James Poterba, 2004, Adverse Selection in Insurance Markets: Policy-
        holder Evidence from the U.K. Annuity Market, Journal of Political Economy 112,
        183208.
Finkelstein, Amy, James Poterba, and Casey Rothschild, 2009, Redistribution by Insurance Mar-
        ket Regulation: Analyzing a Ban on Gender-Based Retirement Annuities, Journal of Fi-
        nancial Economics 91, 3558.
Inkmann, Joachim, Paula Lopes, and Alexander Michaelides, 2011, How Deep is the Annuity
        Market Participation Puzzle?, Review of Financial Studies, 24, 279-319.
Kotlikoff, Laurence, and Avia Spivak, 1981, The Family as an Incomplete Annuities Market,
        Journal of Political Economy 89, 372391.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia Mitchell, 2007, Financial Literacy and Retirement Preparedness:


                                             35
        Evidence and Implications for Financial Education Programs, working paper.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Peter Tufano, 2008, Debt Literacy, Financial Experiences and
        Overindebtedness, NBER working paper #14808.
Madrian, Brigitte, and David Shea, 2001, The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participa-
        tion and Savings Behavior, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 11491187.
Milevsky, Moshe A., and Virginia R. Young, 2002, Optimal asset allocation and the real option
        to delay annuitization: It’s not now-or-never, working paper.
Mitchell, Olivia, James Poterba, Mark Warshawsky, and Jeffrey Brown, 1999, New Evidence on
        the Money's Worth of Individual Annuities, American Economic Review 89, 12991318.
Newey, Whitney, and Kenneth West, 1987, A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Heteroskedasticity
        and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix, Econometrica 55, 703–708.
Previtero, Alessandro, 2010, Stock Market Returns and Annuitization, working paper.
Sirri, Erik, and Peter Tufano, 1998, Costly search and mutual fund flows, Journal of Finance 53,
        15891622.
Sundaresan, Suresh, 2001, Fixed Income Markets and Their Derivatives (2nd edition), South-
        Western College Publishing.
Yaari, Menahem E., 1965, Uncertain lifetime, life insurance, and the theory of the consumer, Re-
        view of Economic Studies 32, 137150.
Yogo, Motohiro, 2009, Portfolio Choice in Retirement: Health Risk and the Demand for Annui-
        ties, Housing, and Risky Assets, NBER working paper #15307.




                                              36
Figure 1. Fraction of PERS Employees choosing lump sum option and lagged stock return, 1990-2002

Monthly time-series plot of the fraction of retirees in each month that choose the lump sum option (scale on the left axis) and the return on the S&P 500 index
over the prior 12 months (scale on the right axis). Our sample runs from January 1990 to June 2002.



                                                   40%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             60%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Return on S&P 500 index over prior 12 months
   Fraction of retirees choosing lump sum option




                                                   35%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             50%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   40%
                                                   30%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   30%
                                                   25%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20%
                                                   20%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10%
                                                   15%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0%
                                                   10%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -10%

                                                   5%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -20%

                                                   0%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -30%
                                                                  Jul-90


                                                                                    Jul-91
                                                                                             Dec-91
                                                                                                      Jun-92
                                                                                                               Dec-92
                                                                                                                        Jun-93
                                                                                                                                 Dec-93
                                                                                                                                          Jun-94
                                                                                                                                                   Dec-94
                                                                                                                                                            Jun-95
                                                                                                                                                                     Dec-95
                                                                                                                                                                              Jun-96
                                                                                                                                                                                       Dec-96
                                                                                                                                                                                                Jun-97
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dec-97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jun-98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dec-98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jun-99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec-99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jun-00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dec-00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jun-01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jun-02
                                                         Jan-90


                                                                           Jan-91




                                                                           Fraction choosing lump sum option                                                             Return on S&P 500 index over prior 12 months




                                                                                                                                                                       37
Table 1. Oregon PERS Retirees’ Characteristics – January 1990 – June 2002
This table reports summary statistics for individuals between the ages of 50 and 70 retiring from the Oregon Public Employees Retirement System (PERS), who
begin collecting retirement benefits immediately after leaving employment. Panels A, B, and C focus on retirees whose total life annuity benefits are calculated
under DC, DB, and DCDB, respectively. Age reports the average members’ age in the month of retirement; Years of Service reports the average number of years
that the member contributed into PERS; Monthly Salary is the average of members’ PERS salary averaged over the prior 36 months; Account Balance is the av-
erage value of the members’ PERS retirement account balances at the time of retirement, which determines the size of the lump sum payout; % Female measures
the fraction of retirees who are female; % Police or Fire measures the fraction of retirees who previously worked as police or fire officers; and % Retiring Early
measures the fraction of members who retire before reaching the normal retirement age. Total Life Annuity is the average level of the initial monthly payment
under the total life annuity option, while Partial Life Annuity is the average level of the initial monthly payment under the lump sum option. Monthly Salary,
Account Balance, Total Life Annuity, and Partial Life Annuity are converted into December 2003 dollars using the Consumer Price Index.

                                                               PERS
                                      Years of    Monthly     Account % Police &                            % Early      Total Life    Partial Life Incremental
          # Retirees      Age         Service     Salary      Balance    Fire     % Female                  Retiree       Annuity       Annuity Life Annuity
              (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)     (6)         (7)                      (8)           (9)           (10)          (11)
Panel A. Retirees for Whom Total Life Annuity Payment Determined by DC
1990               336        60.6          17.5      $4,555   $110,538      3.3%      35.7%                    30.4%         $1,921         $961         $960
1991               882        60.9          19.2      $4,309   $123,313      2.4%      40.0%                    23.4%         $2,153        $1,078       $1,075
1992               544        61.0          19.7      $4,452   $119,422      4.2%      35.1%                    27.6%         $2,093        $1,048       $1,046
1993               924        60.6          20.8      $4,519   $133,868      2.8%      36.6%                    27.6%         $2,317        $1,161       $1,157
1994             1,104        60.5          21.4      $4,574   $136,170      3.0%      41.6%                    28.5%         $2,354        $1,180       $1,175
1995             1,138        60.3          20.9      $4,265   $141,662      3.0%      49.0%                    25.3%         $2,434        $1,219       $1,215
1996             1,220        60.2          21.9      $4,315   $142,426      2.8%      47.5%                    23.2%         $2,443        $1,225       $1,217
1997             1,785        59.8          21.7      $4,359   $155,781      4.3%      52.8%                    23.9%         $2,667        $1,337       $1,330
1998             3,635        59.1          22.2      $4,469   $174,448      4.4%      53.6%                    33.6%         $2,941        $1,473       $1,467
1999             3,614        58.5          21.7      $4,528   $181,613      6.0%      54.8%                    38.0%         $3,020        $1,513       $1,507
2000             1,691        58.3          20.8      $4,484   $178,727      8.4%      55.5%                    38.6%         $2,954        $1,482       $1,472
2001             2,311        58.4          22.2      $4,603   $188,586      7.4%      55.6%                    32.2%         $3,126        $1,567       $1,558
2002             2,089        58.3          23.2      $4,726   $197,325      6.8%      57.1%                    34.3%         $3,268        $1,641       $1,627




                                                                               38
Table 1 – (continued)
                                                              PERS
                                    Years of     Monthly     Account % Police &              % Early     Total Life    Partial Life Incremental
         # Retirees      Age         Service      Salary     Balance    Fire    % Female     Retiree      Annuity       Annuity     Life Annuity
             (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)      (6)        (7)         (8)          (9)           (10)          (11)
Panel B. Retirees for Whom Total Life Annuity Payment Determined by DB
1990             299         58.8          22.6      $4,413     $73,329   17.1%      44.1%        4.0%        $1,829        $1,136         $693
1991             180         59.5          19.1      $4,203     $56,450   20.0%      45.0%        7.2%        $1,531         $956          $575
1992             272         59.9          17.7      $4,397     $57,921   19.1%      46.7%        7.0%        $1,468         $918          $551
1993             276         61.2          14.8      $4,080     $41,867   19.6%      43.5%        5.8%        $1,149         $725          $423
1994             496         60.5          16.0      $4,242     $51,231   16.1%      48.2%        7.3%        $1,303         $816          $487
1995             186         61.1          11.4      $3,507     $27,484   10.8%      52.7%       11.3%         $643          $392          $251
1996             316         60.8          12.1      $4,004     $37,218   13.9%      52.2%        5.1%         $891          $553          $338
1997             248         60.2          12.8      $4,063     $40,179   16.9%      57.3%       11.7%         $915          $566          $349
1998             197         60.1          13.4      $4,129     $41,022   19.3%      60.9%       17.8%         $977          $604          $373
1999             182         60.0          12.9      $3,766     $35,421   22.5%      54.4%       15.9%         $829          $514          $315
2000             106         60.1          11.2      $4,235     $36,803   20.8%      37.7%       14.2%         $842          $521          $322
2001             198         60.2          12.6      $4,303     $42,585   15.7%      48.5%       13.6%         $973          $599          $374
2002             198         60.5          11.5      $4,179     $36,480   15.2%      60.6%       14.6%         $827          $508          $319

Panel C. Retirees for Whom Total Life Annuity Payment Determined by DCDB
1990             986        60.5          20.3      $3,932     $78,888       6.3%   52.8%        13.2%        $1,523         $844          $679
1991             814        59.4          22.0      $4,007     $94,574      14.1%   54.1%         9.5%        $1,773         $984          $789
1992           1,059        59.7          22.4      $4,262     $97,160      13.4%   49.1%        12.5%        $1,855        $1,034         $822
1993             973        59.5          22.7      $4,284    $102,521      14.0%   57.8%        10.6%        $1,928        $1,065         $863
1994           1,575        58.9          23.5      $4,469    $110,164      15.6%   56.6%        11.1%        $2,066        $1,150         $916
1995             313        58.5          21.2      $4,247    $102,851      23.3%   65.2%         9.9%        $1,864        $1,025         $839
1996             537        57.9          23.0      $4,609    $120,323      24.6%   58.7%         8.8%        $2,187        $1,214         $973
1997             424        56.5          23.6      $5,205    $149,493      46.0%   46.5%        11.1%        $2,707        $1,515        $1,192
1998             338        55.8          23.9      $5,496    $174,017      59.5%   42.3%        16.9%        $3,039        $1,667        $1,372
1999             269        55.5          24.6      $6,078    $206,041      65.8%   33.1%        11.5%        $3,544        $1,923        $1,621
2000               86       54.6          24.9      $6,413    $228,500      74.4%   29.1%         8.1%        $3,905        $2,128        $1,777
2001             135        54.9          24.9      $6,385    $220,348      63.0%   38.5%        11.1%        $3,736        $2,019        $1,717
2002             124        55.9          24.6      $6,132    $204,709      55.6%   47.6%        16.9%        $3,514        $1,897        $1,617




                                                                       39
Table 2. Comparing Money’s Worth of Life Annuities available from PERS and TIAA, 1990-2002
We compare the money’s worth of life annuities based on PERS’ DC benefit to the money’s worth of TIAA’s life annuities. We assume that the retiree is 65
years 0 months old and male. The actuarial equivalency factor, AEF, determines the initial monthly life annuity payment per $1,000 spent to purchase the life
annuity. During our sample period, PERS does not adjust its AEFs, while TIAA adjusts its AEFs in January of each calendar year, to reflect changes in member
life expectancies or the risk-free rate. EPV is the expected present value of receiving an initial monthly life annuity payment of $1.00, beginning next month.
The nominal value of the life annuity payments to be received from PERS is assumed to grow at 2.0% per year, whereas the nominal value of life annuity pay-
ments to be received from TIAA is assumed to be constant. To calculate the probability that the retiree receives the life annuity payment t months from today,
we use life tables published by the U.S. Social Security Administration for 2004. To calculate the present value of the expected payments, we use the yield on
the 10-Year U.S. Treasury Note at the end of the prior month. The average annual yield is reported in column 10. We calculate money’s worth of each life an-
nuity as the expected present value of its life annuity payments relative to its price (i.e., as (AEF times EPV) divided by $1,000). In column (9), we calculate the
money’s worth of the PERS life annuity relative to the money’s worth of the TIAA life annuity (that is,  equals (AEFPERS times EPV2%) divided by (AEFTIAA
times EPV0%). When  equals one, PERS and TIAA allow retirees to purchase the same expected present value of life annuity benefits per dollar of initial out-
lay. Values greater than one, as observed in this table, imply that PERS sells more valuable life annuity benefits than TIAA. The bottom row reports the pair-
wise correlation between the yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury Note and AEF, EPV, and MW.

                             PERS                                   TIAA                            PERS relative to TIAA             Yield on 10-Year
 Year            AEF          EPV          MW           AEF          EPV          MW            AEF           EPV                        Treasury
                  (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)      (7) = (1)/(4) (8) = (2)/(5) (9) = (3)/(6)        (10)
 1990            9.79        115.94        1.14         8.82         99.39        0.88          1.11          1.17          1.30           8.43%
 1991            9.79        119.51        1.17         8.75        102.19        0.89          1.12          1.17          1.31           8.03%
 1992            9.79        126.22        1.24         8.52        107.41        0.92          1.15          1.18          1.35           7.31%
 1993            9.79        135.81        1.33         7.72        114.84        0.89          1.27          1.18          1.50           6.39%
 1994            9.79        145.37        1.42         7.10        122.20        0.87          1.38          1.19          1.64           5.64%
 1995            9.79        123.27        1.21         7.72        105.12        0.81          1.27          1.17          1.49           7.59%
 1996            9.79        145.37        1.42         7.10        122.20        0.87          1.38          1.19          1.64           5.58%
 1997            9.79        134.68        1.32         7.34        113.97        0.84          1.33          1.18          1.58           6.50%
 1998            9.79        146.64        1.44         7.03        123.18        0.87          1.39          1.19          1.66           5.51%
 1999            9.79        157.50        1.54         6.61        131.47        0.87          1.48          1.20          1.77           4.65%
 2000            9.79        132.48        1.30         7.39        112.27        0.83          1.33          1.18          1.56           6.67%
 2001            9.79        150.57        1.47         7.08        126.18        0.89          1.38          1.19          1.65           5.18%
 2002            9.79        153.28        1.50         6.77        128.25        0.87          1.45          1.20          1.73           5.03%
 Correl.         0.000       -0.998       -0.998        0.935       -0.998       -0.028        -0.945        -0.999        -0.955             —




                                                                                40
Table 3. Percent of PERS Retirees Choosing Lump Sum Option, by Retirement Calculation Method, 1990-2002
This table summarizes the demand for lump sum options across years and across retirees for whom the total life annuity benefit is calculated using DC, DB, or
DCDB. The sample is the same one that we summarized in Table 1. % Lump reflects the fraction of retirees choosing the lump sum option. MW is the money’s
worth of the total life annuity option relative to the lump sum option. It is defined as the expected present value of the life annuity payments under the total life
annuity option minus those under the lump sum option, divided by the lump sum payout. We report the median value of MW each year.

                        All Retirees                               DC                                      DB                                   DCDB
 Year      # Retirees       % Lump       MW        # Retirees      % Lump         MW        # Retirees     % Lump        MW        # Retirees    % Lump       MW
1990         1,621           8.6%       $1.16         336           7.1%         $1.12         299          9.4%        $1.24         986          8.8%      $1.15
1991         1,876           8.6%       $1.21         882           7.9%         $1.20         180         15.0%        $1.29         814          7.9%      $1.21
1992         1,875           6.9%       $1.30         544           7.2%         $1.28         272         11.0%        $1.38        1,059         5.7%      $1.31
1993         2,173           9.7%       $1.47         924           9.2%         $1.42         276         18.8%        $1.54         973          7.6%      $1.52
1994         3,175           10.4%      $1.26        1,104          11.4%        $1.24         496         14.3%        $1.31        1,575         8.5%      $1.27
1995         1,637           16.4%      $1.40        1,138          16.8%        $1.40         186         22.6%        $1.30         313         11.2%      $1.47
1996         2,073           18.1%      $1.39        1,220          18.2%        $1.37         316         20.6%        $1.32         537         16.4%      $1.40
1997         2,457           17.9%      $1.43        1,785          18.8%        $1.43         248         22.2%        $1.28         424         11.6%      $1.45
1998         4,170           20.5%      $1.59        3,635          21.0%        $1.59         197         23.9%        $1.48         338         12.7%      $1.60
1999         4,065           20.4%      $1.51        3,614          20.5%        $1.51         182         22.0%        $1.35         269         18.2%      $1.51
2000         1,883           21.7%      $1.48        1,691          21.4%        $1.50         106         28.3%        $1.29         86          19.8%      $1.47
2001         2,644           15.9%      $1.63        2,311          15.7%        $1.63         198         18.7%        $1.48         135         15.6%      $1.64
2002         2,411           10.6%      $1.67        2,089          10.4%        $1.67         198         11.6%        $1.58         124         12.1%      $1.68
Total        32,060          15.0%      $1.45        21,273         16.6%        $1.49        3,154        17.3%        $1.36        7,633         9.6%      $1.33




                                                                                41
Table 4. Predicting Average Monthly Demand for Lump Sum Option, 1990-2002
We report coefficients from time-series regressions estimated via weighted least squares. The sample consists of the 150 months between January 1990 and June
2002. The dependent variable is the fraction of PERS retirees who choose the lump sum option in month t. The weight in month t is the number of retiree choic-
es used to calculate this fraction. Independent variables include the ratio of the actuarial equivalency factor available from PERS (under the DC formula) to the
life annuity payment available from TIAA (i.e., column (7) of Table 2), the return on the S&P 500 index over the prior 12 months, the implied volatility on the
S&P 500 index option over the month t as measured by CBOE Volatility Index (VIX) at the end of month t-1, and the inflation-adjusted level of NASDAQ
measured at the end of month t-1. Variables in columns (1) through (4) are measured as levels. Variables in column (5) are measured as first differences, which
results in the loss of one observation. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and calculated as in Newey and West (1987), with a lag of 24 months. Signifi-
cance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are denoted by *, **, and ***.

Estimation:                                                   Levels           Levels           Levels           Levels       1st Differences
                                                               (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)

Relative Generosity of PERS Life Annuity                  0.268 ***        0.265 ***        0.206 ***        0.111 ***        0.322 *
                                                         (0.069)          (0.038)          (0.048)          (0.039)          (0.185)
Return on S&P 500 Index over prior 12 months                               0.160 ***        0.174 ***        0.144 ***        0.071 *
                                                                          (0.042)          (0.036)          (0.028)          (0.041)
Level of VIX index at end of prior month                                                    0.289 **         0.100            0.119
                                                                                           (0.131)          (0.092)          (0.124)
Inflation-adjusted level of NASDAQ index                                                                     0.005 ***        0.001
  at end of prior month                                                                                     (0.001)          (0.002)
Constant                                                  -0.182           -0.195 ***      -0.180 ***        -0.073           -0.009 **
                                                         (0.080)          (0.049)          (0.057)          (0.048)          (0.004)

Number of monthly observations                             150              150              150              150              149
F-Statistic                                               15.07    ***     37.55   ***      23.39   ***      31.64   ***       2.67   **




                                                                              42
Table 5. Predicting Individual Demand for Lump Sum Option, 1990-2002
We report marginal effects estimated via logit. The dependent variable equals one when retiree k chooses the lump sum option,
and zero when retiree k chooses the total life annuity option. Columns (1), (2), and (5) focus on the full sample of retirees; col-
umn (3) is restricted to retirees who choose a single life annuity; column (4) is restricted to retirees who choose a joint life annui-
ty. All specifications include a separate fixed effect for each year of service. Columns (2) through (4) include a separate fixed
effect for each year of age between 50 and 70. Column (5) includes a separate fixed effect for each calendar year. We include
dummy variables indicating whether retiree k: dies 1-24 months after retirement; dies 25-48 months after retirement; is female;
has a positive allocation to the variable investment vehicle in the PERS retirement account; is eligible for police or fire retirement
benefits; chooses a single life annuity; is retiring before the normal retirement age (55 for police and fire; 58 for almost everyone
else); has a pre-retirement salary in the top quarter of retirees; receives Tier 2 retirement benefits; or is old enough to collect So-
cial Security benefits (62+). We also control for the level of the life annuity payments under the lump sum option (measured in
December 2003 dollars), and the estimated fraction of retiree k’s career spent working with PERS employers. Ln Money’s Worth
is the natural logarithm of the expected present value of the incremental life annuity payments associated with choosing the total
life annuity option over the lump sum option, divided by the lump sum payout. Our proxies for economic conditions and investor
sentiment include the current unemployment rate in the county of retiree k’s most recent employer, the level of the CBOE Vola-
tility Index (VIX) at the end of month t-1, the inflation-adjusted level of the NASDAQ index at the end of month t-1, the return
on the S&P 500 index over the prior 12 months, and the return earned in the PERS retirement account over this same period.
Standard errors are clustered on calendar month (e.g., June 2002). Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are denoted by *,
**, and ***.

Sample:                                              Full              Full          Single Life       Joint Life           Full
                                                     (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)
Retiree Characteristics
 Dies 1-24 months after retirement?               0.085     ***     0.086     ***    0.177     ***  0.042       *        0.090     ***
                                                 (0.024)           (0.024)          (0.048)        (0.022)              (0.024)
  Dies 25-48 months after retirement?             0.014             0.016           -0.025          0.036       *        0.017
                                                 (0.017)           (0.017)          (0.029)        (0.021)              (0.017)
  Female?                                        -0.046     ***    -0.047     ***   -0.082     *** -0.027       ***     -0.049     ***
                                                 (0.007)           (0.007)          (0.011)        (0.007)              (0.008)
  Positive allocation to variable                 0.021     ***     0.020     ***    0.017     **   0.021       ***      0.019     ***
    investment vehicle?                          (0.005)           (0.005)          (0.008)        (0.005)              (0.005)
  Eligible for police or fire benefits?          -0.009            -0.021     ***   -0.018         -0.022       ***     -0.020     ***
                                                 (0.007)           (0.008)          (0.017)        (0.007)              (0.008)
  Level of partial life annuity                   0.035     ***     0.036     ***    0.052     *** 0.031        ***      0.030     ***
   ($000, Dec 2003)                              (0.003)           (0.003)          (0.008)        (0.004)              (0.004)
  Chooses single life annuity?                    0.077     ***     0.077     ***                                        0.081     ***
                                                 (0.005)           (0.005)                                              (0.004)
  Estimated fraction of career spent             -0.191     ***    -0.733     *** -1.228 *** -0.400 ***                 -0.737     ***
   Working for PERS employers                    (0.067)           (0.097)        (0.156)    (0.141)                    (0.093)
  Salary at or above 75th percentile             -0.031     ***    -0.032     *** -0.033 *** -0.032 ***                 -0.027     ***
   (within calendar year)?                       (0.005)           (0.005)        (0.010)    (0.006)                    (0.005)
  Retiring before normal retirement               0.027     ***     0.006          0.018      0.001                      0.005
    age?                                         (0.006)           (0.011)        (0.023)    (0.011)                    (0.010)
  Tier 2 retirement benefits?                    -0.033            -0.031         -0.051     -0.017                     -0.027
                                                 (0.027)           (0.028)        (0.034)    (0.048)                    (0.027)
 Old enough to collect Social Security           -0.038     ***
   benefits (62+)?                               (0.007)
Value of Incremental Life Annuity
 Ln Money’s Worth                      0.045 *** 0.044 *** 0.045 **     0.045 *** 0.029 ***
                                      (0.013)    (0.014)    (0.021)    (0.016)    (0.011)
 Retiree Not Eligible for DCDB?       -0.016 *** -0.016 *** -0.035 *** -0.007     -0.032 ***
                                      (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.012)    (0.007)    (0.007)
Economic Conditions and Investor Sentiment
 Local unemployment rate              -0.167     -0.174     -0.029     -0.271     -0.005
                                      (0.182)    (0.182)    (0.279)    (0.176)    (0.125)
 Level of VIX at end of month t-1      0.112        0.109        0.168        0.077        0.019
                                      (0.095)      (0.094)      (0.150)      (0.083)      (0.084)
 Inflation-adjusted level of NASDAQ    0.005 ***    0.005 ***    0.006 ***    0.005 ***    0.002
    index at end of month t-1         (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
  Return on S&P 500 index              0.155 ***    0.155 ***    0.145 ***    0.164 ***    0.064
    over prior 12 months              (0.034)      (0.034)      (0.052)      (0.030)      (0.050)
  Return in PERS retirement account   -0.060       -0.066       -0.025       -0.096        0.017
    over prior 12 months              (0.102)      (0.102)      (0.158)      (0.088)      (0.074)
Years-of-Service FEs?                     Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Age-in-Years FEs?                          ---         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Calendar Year FEs?                         ---          ---          ---          ---         Yes
Sample Size                              31,809       31,809       11,500       20,309       31,809
Pseudo R2                                0.0498       0.0534       0.0634       0.0432       0.0592




                                                   44
Table 6. Predicting Individual Demand for Lump Sum Option – Alternative Specifications
We report marginal effects estimated via logit. The dependent variable equals one when retiree k chooses the lump sum option
and zero when the retiree chooses the total life annuity option. Columns (1), (2), and (5) focus on the full sample of PERS retir-
ees; column (3) is restricted to retirees who are 58 years old and not eligible for police or fire benefits; column (4) is restricted to
retirees for whom we can calculate the fraction of co-workers who chose the lump sum option in the past 12 months. Our
measures of the value of the incremental life annuity payments are based on the following decomposition:
                                MWMax
                                    k
                                          MWDC k
                                                     
             k
           MWMax   MWTIAA
                         k
                             
                                                    MWTIAA       
                                                               k           k        k

                                MWDC   MWTIAA 
                                    k           k


where MWTIAA is the money’s worth of the incremental life annuity available from TIAA, MWDC is the money’s worth of the
incremental life annuity available from PERS assuming that the total and partial life annuity payments are both calculated under
DC, and MWMax is the money’s worth of the incremental life annuity available from PERS based on the maximum total and par-
tial life annuity payments that retiree k is eligible to receive. In column (2), we decompose  further:
                 MW Max
                     k
                               MWHyp.
                                   k              k
                                               MW Max     
          k                                            k   2k 
                                        Max
                      k 
                 MWDC       MWDC
                                      k
                                              MWHyp. Max   1
                                                k


where MWHyp. Max is the money’s worth of the incremental life annuity payments available from PERS assuming that retiree k is
eligible for total life annuity payments calculated under DCDB. In addition, we include dummy variables indicating whether
retiree k is ineligible for total life annuity payments calculated under DCDB, has access to a lump sum payment in the top 10% of
all lump sum payments during our sample period, or has access to incremental life annuity payments in the bottom 10% of all
incremental life annuity payments during our sample period. We also include the fraction of retiree k’s coworkers who chose the
lump sum option in the prior 12 months (set to missing when retiree k is the only retiree from the employer in the prior 12
months). All other variables are defined in the notes to Table 5. Standard errors cluster on the date of the payout choice (e.g.,
June 2002). Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are denoted by *, **, and ***.

Sample:                                               Full              Full            Age 58        Peer Choices           Full
                                                      (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)
Retiree Characteristics
 Dies 1-24 months after retirement?                0.090     ***    0.090      ***    0.140    **       0.079    ***      0.089     ***
                                                  (0.024)          (0.024)           (0.071)           (0.025)           (0.024)
  Dies 25-48 months after retirement?              0.017            0.017             0.037             0.005             0.019
                                                  (0.017)          (0.017)           (0.049)           (0.017)           (0.017)
  Female?                                         -0.053     ***   -0.053      ***   -0.051    ***     -0.052    ***     -0.055     ***
                                                  (0.010)          (0.010)           (0.016)           (0.010)           (0.010)
  Positive allocation to variable                  0.021     ***    0.021      ***    0.007             0.023    ***      0.022     ***
   investment vehicle?                            (0.005)          (0.005)           (0.013)           (0.005)           (0.005)
  Eligible for police or fire benefits?           -0.021     ***   -0.024      ***   -0.033            -0.022    ***     -0.016     **
                                                  (0.008)          (0.008)           (0.047)           (0.008)           (0.008)
  Level of partial life annuity                    0.031     ***    0.032      ***    0.025    ***      0.033    ***      0.019     ***
   ($000, Dec 2003)                               (0.004)          (0.004)           (0.009)           (0.004)           (0.005)
  Chooses single life annuity?                     0.080     ***    0.080      ***    0.053    ***      0.078    ***      0.080     ***
                                                  (0.005)          (0.005)           (0.013)           (0.005)           (0.005)
  Estimated fraction of career spent              -0.753     ***   -0.744      ***    0.563            -0.733    ***     -0.766     ***
   working for PERS employers                     (0.095)          (0.094)           (0.511)           (0.107)           (0.094)
  Salary at or above 75th percentile              -0.028     ***   -0.028      ***    0.001            -0.028    ***     -0.026     ***
   (within calendar year)?                        (0.005)          (0.005)           (0.015)           (0.005)           (0.005)
  Retiring before normal retirement                0.004            0.005             0.208             0.004             0.004
    age?                                          (0.010)          (0.010)           (0.419)           (0.011)           (0.011)
  Tier 2 retirement benefits?                     -0.037           -0.035                              -0.013            -0.039
                                                  (0.025)          (0.026)                             (0.036)           (0.025)
  Fraction of coworkers who chose                                                                       0.094    ***
    lump sum in prior 12 month                                                                         (0.014)




                                                                   45
Value of Incremental Life Annuity
 Ln MW of life annuity from TIAA     0.033      0.032        -0.018         0.033      0.029
                                    (0.061)    (0.061)       (0.115)       (0.062)    (0.061)
 Ln (MW DC / MW TIAA) = Ln          0.233 *** 0.232     *** 0.188 *        0.229 *** 0.232 ***
                                    (0.070)    (0.070)       (0.107)       (0.084)    (0.070)
 Ln (MW Max / MW DC) = Ln           0.029 **                -0.014         0.030 **   0.027 **
                                    (0.012)                  (0.055)       (0.015)    (0.011)
 Ln (MW Hyp. Max / MW DC)                       0.038    ***
   = Ln 1                                     (0.012)
 Ln (MW Max / MW Hyp. Max)                     -0.097    **
   = Ln 2                                     (0.044)
 Retiree Not Eligible for DCDB?     -0.027 *** -0.032    ***   -0.010      -0.021 *** -0.028 ***
                                    (0.007)    (0.007)         (0.015)     (0.007)    (0.007)
 Lump Sum in Top 10%?                                                                  0.046 ***
                                                                                      (0.012)
 Incremental Life Annuity Payments                                                     0.046 ***
   in Bottom 10%?                                                                     (0.011)
 Economic Conditions and Investor Sentiment
  Local unemployment rate            -0.222       -0.222       -0.311      -0.244       -0.235
                                     (0.178)      (0.179)      (0.280)     (0.183)      (0.181)
  Level of VIX at end of month t-1    0.021        0.021        0.115      -0.029        0.024
                                     (0.100)      (0.100)      (0.159)     (0.103)      (0.099)
 Inflation-adjusted level of NASDAQ   0.004 ***    0.004 ***    0.003 *     0.004 ***    0.004 ***
    index at end of month t-1        (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.002)     (0.001)      (0.001)
  Return on S&P 500 index             0.146 ***    0.145 ***    0.143 **    0.151 ***    0.149 ***
    over prior 12 months             (0.032)      (0.032)      (0.058)     (0.032)      (0.031)
  Return in PERS retirement account  -0.068       -0.065        0.058      -0.073       -0.068
    over prior 12 months             (0.091)      (0.091)      (0.166)     (0.098)      (0.090)
Years-of-Service FEs?                    Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Age-in-Years FEs?                        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Sample Size                             31,809       31,809       4,254       28,762       31,809
Pseudo R2                               0.0556       0.0559       0.0574      0.0540       0.0577




                                                  46
Table A1. Tradeoffs Between Total Life Annuity Option and Lump Sum Option
This table summarizes tradeoffs between the total life annuity and lump sum options for retirees for whom the life annuity
payments are calculated using different benefit formulas. IPF is a dummy variable that indicates whether the retiree is eligi-
ble for police and fire benefits. IDCDB is a dummy variable that indicates whether the retiree contributed into PERS by Au-
gust 1981, making her eligible for DCDB total life annuity benefits. Panel A focuses on normal retirees (IPF=0) and Panel
B focuses on police and fire (IPF=1). The four rows correspond to the different ways that full life annuities can be calculated
for DCDB-eligible and DCDB-ineligible retirees, where DC is the defined contribution retirement benefit, DB is the defined
benefit retirement benefit, and DCDB is half of the DC benefit plus more than half of the DB benefit. xDB is defined as final
average salary times years of service times a factor that reduces benefits when retiring before the normal retirement age.
xDC is defined as the PERS account balance times AEFPERS. For normal retirees, the four rows correspond to (a) xDC <
0.00670 xDB, (b) 0.00670 xDB ≤ xDC < 0.00835 xDB, (c) 0.00835 xDB ≤ xDC < 0.01 xDB, and (d) xDC ≥ 0.01 xDB. For police
and fire, the four rows correspond to xDC < 0.00650 xDB, 0.00650 xDB ≤ xDC < 0.01 xDB, 0.01 xDB ≤ xDC < 0.01350 xDB, and
xDC ≥ 0.01350 xDB. TLA is the level of the life annuity payment associated with the total life annuity option and PLA is the
level of the life annuity payment associated with the lump sum option. The term  (which appears in equation (3))
measures the money’s worth of the forgone life annuity payments associated with choosing the lump sum option relative to
case (d), when the total life annuity and lump sum life annuity are both calculated using DC.

Panel A: Normal Retirees (IPF = 0)

              TLA Benefit                         (TLA - PLA) / TLA                                      
      IDCDB   =1    IDCDB = 0             IDCDB   =1       IDCDB = 0                  IDCDB = 1              IDCDB = 0

(a)   DB                DB                0.401                 0.401                 >1                     >1
(b)   DCDB              DB                (0.401, 0.443)        0.401                 1                      [0.802, 1.000]
(c)   DCDB              DC                (0.443, 0.500)        (0.401, 0.500)        1                      [0.802, 1.000]
(d)   DC                DC                0.500                 0.500                 1                      1

Panel B: Police and Fire Retirees (IPF = 1)

              TLA Benefit                         (TLA - PLA) / TLA                                      
      IDCDB   =1    IDCDB = 0             IDCDB   =1       IDCDB = 0                  IDCDB = 1              IDCDB = 0

(a)   DB                DB                0.325                 0.325                 >1                     >1
(b)   DCDB              DB                (0.325, 0.426)        0.325                 1                      [0.650, 1.000]
(c)   DCDB              DC                (0.426, 0.500)        (0.325, 0.500)        1                      [0.650, 1.000]
(d)   DC                DC                0.500                 0.500                 1                      1




                                                             47
