NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INSIDER ECONOMETRICS:
EMPIRICAL STUDIES OF HOW MANAGEMENT MATTERS
Casey Ichniowski
Kathryn L. Shaw
Working Paper 15618
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15618

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2009

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Casey Ichniowski and Kathryn L. Shaw. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Insider Econometrics: Empirical Studies of How Management Matters
Casey Ichniowski and Kathryn L. Shaw
NBER Working Paper No. 15618
December 2009
JEL No. D2,J01,L2
ABSTRACT
This paper describes an approach for conducting empirical research into three interrelated questions
that are fundamental to the field of organizational economics:
1.Why do firms in the same industry adopt different management practices?
2.Does the adoption of a new management practice raise productivity?
3.If so, why does the new management practice raise productivity?
This research approach, which we term insider econometrics, addresses these questions by combining
insights from industry insiders with rigorous econometric tests about the adoption and productivity
effects of new management practices using rich industry-specific data. Understanding the selectivity
in the adoption and coverage of different management practices within a single industry is central
to this empirical research methodology. The paper considers a number of studies to illustrate persuasive
features of insider econometric research and summarizes a number of themes emerging from this line
of research.

Casey Ichniowski
Graduate School of Business
3022 Broadway Street, 713 Uris Hall
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
bei1@columbia.edu
Kathryn L. Shaw
GSB, Littlefield 339
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
kathryns@gsb.stanford.edu

I. Introduction
Survey data and casual observation suggest that there are striking differences in
management practices among firms and establishments that operate within the same
industry. Human resource management practices such as types of compensation,
teamwork, job design, or training activities vary across firms. Decisions about the scope
of the firm, such as extent of outsourcing or vertical integration, and about adopting new
technologies are among the many management policies that vary across firms. 1
Industries are not populated by homogeneous firms having a single set of optimal
management practices. Why do some firms within the same industry look so different
from one another? Are some management practices more productive than others? Do
differences in management practices help explain large differences in productivity that
exist among firms and establishments within the same industry? 2

Can one set of

management practices be the right choice for some firms, while a different set of
practices is appropriate for other firms that compete with them?
Researchers are now going inside firms and industries to answer these questions.
With firms increasing their use of new software to track productivity of their employees
and operations, managers in these firms are looking for new ways of using these data to
elevate the performance of their firms. As economists obtain access to these data, they
can identify more detailed determinants of productivity and test richer theories of the firm
than were previously possible. In this chapter, we describe an empirical research strategy
for investigating these questions about the effects of management practices on
productivity and the determinants of the choice of management practices. We refer to
this research strategy as insider econometrics. The term insider refers to the use of rich
micro-level data on workers or work groups inside firms that share a common production
function. The term insider also refers to the use of insights from insiders – from managers
or employees – that inform almost every facet of the research. The term econometrics
refers to the use of rigorous statistical tests of the effects of management practices on

1

See Osterman (1994, 2000), Lawler, Mohrman, and Ledford (1995), and Lawler, Medford, and Benson
(2001) for surveys on HRM practices. See Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2002) for data on computer
technologies and other management practices.
2
Haltwanger (2008) documents very large differences in productivity across establishments within
narrowly defined industry categories.

3

productivity, or tests of why some firms adopt one set of management practices rather
than an alternative set. In sum, insider econometrics research combines insiders’ insights
with econometrics techniques applied to the right data to reveal when and why
management practices matter.
II. The Distinctive Characteristics of Insider Econometrics Research
Five characteristics are common in insider econometric studies. We first list these
features and then describe them in more detail. Insider econometric studies:
1. Estimate a productivity regression in which productivity is a function of some
management practice.
2. Identify why management practices raise productivity and where the practice has
larger and smaller effects on productivity
3. Model the adoption of the management practices.
4. Analyze micro-level data on production units, such as individual employees,
teams of employees, or larger work groups such as establishments, that share a
common production process
5. Use field research and interviews from industry insiders to formulate testable
hypotheses and interpret results.
The first three features identify the objectives of insider research – what questions do
insider econometric studies try to answer?

The last two features are two defining

methodological features of insider econometric research – what are the main methods
used to answer these questions?
The first question insider econometric research tries to answer is does a new
management practice raise productivity. Thus, the first step is the estimation of the
treatment effect in a productivity regression, where the treatment is a new management
practice and the treatment effect is the impact of that practice on productivity. All insider
econometric research draws upon the literature of treatment effects. Treatment effect
literature in economics is often concerned with estimating the effects of changes in public
policies, such as the effect of an increase in unemployment compensation on labor
supply. 3 In insider econometric studies, the policy change is the adoption of a new
management practice. However, applying treatment effect methodologies to behavior of
firms and their workers offers new opportunities and new challenges to researchers.

3

For a discussion of the evolution of treatment effect research in economics, see Levitt and List (2008)

4

Throughout this chapter, we refer to the estimation of “productivity” regressions,
but this term is really a short hand for the estimation of performance regressions. The
performance outcome is more accurately defined as any variable that the firm monitors
and the worker controls that affects the firm’s profits. Therefore, performance is rarely
output per hour, but might instead be product quality, or production line downtime,
number of customers processed per hour, or worker absenteeism. The performance
variable is also rarely profits, because profits are measured at the level of the firm and
management practices are typically not the same across all workers in a firm. Production
workers are not covered by the same practices as managers, and employees in one site
may be covered by different practices than those at another site.
The second question addressed by insider econometric research is a natural
extension of the first. Why does the new management practice raise productivity? To
build richer theories of the firm, researchers must find out why a management practice is
or isn’t effective. One way insider studies address this question is by identifying reasons
why the treatment effect of a management practice varies across workers, work groups,
or establishments in the same industry. Productivity may increase considerably after a
new practice is adopted among some workers or work groups in the study while for
others the effect is negligible. This variation can help identify the mechanisms and
behaviors that explain the productivity increases. Insider studies allow workers and work
groups to respond differently to a management practice and therefore estimate the
production function with heterogeneity in the management treatment effect.
The third question that insider econometric research addresses is why is the new
management practice adopted? In insider studies that examine data from multiple firms,
the same management practices are not adopted by all firms for all work groups. One
reason for differences in the adoption of some management practice across workers or
establishments in an industry is that the productivity impacts vary. Insider econometric
studies also try to identify additional costs and benefits of adoption (beyond the expected
productivity gains) that explain differences in adoption. By modelling adoption
accurately, the researcher can identify any selection bias in the estimation of the
treatment effect in the productivity regressions. Even if the researcher does not have the
data to estimate the full adoption equation, reports on managers’ views of the reasons for

5

adoption can be very helpful in interpreting results from the productivity equations

4

These questions about the effects of management practices on productivity and the
reasons for adopting different management practices are the focus of insider econometric
research. The last two features in the list are distinctive methodological features of insider
econometric research.
The fourth element of insider econometric research is analysis of micro-level data
from one narrowly defined production process. The observations that form the data set
should be the natural “production units” for the single production process being studied.
These production units can be individual workers if employees work alone, small groups
of employees as in problem-solving or project-development teams, or relatively large
groups of employees such as retail stores or production lines in manufacturing plants.
This feature offers a number of obvious advantages in addressing the three questions
listed above. The focus on one specific production process helps isolate the productivity
effects of new management practices, reduces concerns about omitted variable bias in the
productivity regression, and allows the researcher to build and estimate an accurate
production function. For example, by modelling one specific production process, the
researcher can choose a logical dependent variable for that process – sales volume for
salesmen, calls for call center workers, flight delays for airline carriers, or downtime for a
production line – and also identify determinants for that specific measure of performance.
The last feature in the list is perhaps the defining feature of insider econometric
research – consultation with industry insiders who have direct experience in the
production process. These insider insights help identify: practices and policies that are
relevant to managers in the industry, the most appropriate measures of productivity, other
determinants of productivity that might be correlated with the management treatment,
reasons why a management practice was adopted for one work group or plant but not
another, how employees responded to the new management policy, and so on. Insiders
therefore are instrumental in identifying meaningful hypotheses about the effects of
practices on productivity outcomes and on worker behaviors, and about the determinants
of adoption of the practices. They also can help identify what factors need to be included
4

However, many insider studies reviewed below do try to add up the broader economic and welfare effects
of a given management practice beyond its effects on productivity outcomes, such as the effects on overall
firm profitability or the prospects for future growth in adoption of the management policies.

6

in an accurate model of productivity or adoption and therefore what kinds of data are
needed to estimate those models.
Insider studies usually cover four of the five steps listed above. Specifically,
insider data sets often do not permit the researcher to estimate both the productivity
regression and the adoption regression. As the examples below show, researchers will
often estimate the production function, but carefully describe the likely conditions for
adoption based on interview evidence. Other examples below show that researchers
estimate the adoption regression, and use interviews to describe the production function
underlying the adoption decisions. Overall, all insider studies aim to marshal micro-level
data and insights from industry insiders to study: the effects of management practices on
productivity; changes in worker behavior when new practices are adopted; the costs of
the practices; and ultimately, the reasons for the adoption of the practices.
III. Illustrating the Analytical Challenges of Insider Econometric Research
Researchers face several analytical challenges, and many unique opportunities, in
undertaking insider studies. Firms are making optimizing decisions when they choose
management practices, and workers are making optimizing decisions when they respond
to management practices. Therefore, our models of the effects of these practices on
productivity face all the traditional problems of using non-experimental data. There is
likely selection bias and endogeneity in the choices of workers and managers. There is
omitted variable bias in the production function. We can’t know the unobserved
counterfactuals about what would have happened if non-adopting firms adopted some
new management practice or if adopting firms had not adopted. However, many things
make insider studies quite different from other treatment effect studies. The quality of
the data, the information from industry insiders who adopt the practice or work under it,
and the types of comparisons the researcher wants to make with the data, all differ from
more traditional treatment effect research.
To illustrate the challenges that insider econometric research confronts, the
production functions and patterns of adoption are displayed graphically in Figure 1 for a
hypothetical insider study. Figure 1 shows two age-productivity profiles. For
convenience, we refer to these productivity profiles as the profiles for two groups of
establishments, such as plants in a manufacturing industry or stores in a retail industry.
7

However, insider data sets focus on single production function, and thus the data is
comprised of observations on workers, work teams, or parts of an establishment.
-----------------------FIGURE 1 HERE
-----------------------These two hypothetical productivity profiles in Figure 1 reflect several
assumptions that are made or tested in insider econometric studies. First, despite being in
the same industry and even having the same basic production process, differences still
exist between the two sets of plants; the Type 1 group has a higher level of productivity
than the Type 2 group. Second, both productivity profiles are upward sloping, reflecting
the effects of factors like learning-by-doing and experience. In this illustration, we let the
growth rate in productivity be the same for the two types of establishments. Third, at t*,
management in the high productivity Type 1 establishments adopts some new practice,
for example a new work practice or technological enhancement in their operations.
Management in the low productivity Type 2 establishments does not adopt. The new
management practice causes a one-time increase in productivity by an amount equal to
ΔPT. Finally, productivity continues to grow in both types of establishments after t* due
to continued effects of experience and learning.
Figure 1 also displays assumptions about two unobserved counterfactuals. First,
we assume that productivity among Type 2 non-adopting establishments had they
adopted (ΔPN) would have also been positive but smaller than what was observed for the
Type 1 adopters. Second, the post-t* profile for the adopters would have continued along
the same pre-t* trajectory but without the one time increase.
The hypothetical example in Figure 1 highlights the basic empirical challenges.
Consider two types of data that could be used to estimate the “treatment effect” of the
new management practice on productivity. First, consider the case where the researcher
obtains true experimental data – data from a sample of organizations with random
adoption of the new practice at time t*. Figure 1 does not depict this case but rather the
case of non-random adoption: organizations that would experience bigger productivity
gains are the adopters in the figure.
If adoption of the management practice were randomly assigned across both Type
1 and Type 2 establishments as part of an experiment, the estimated gain in productivity

8

from the new practice will be an average of ΔPT and ΔPN since the group of adopters in
an experimental design would include both types of establishments. As with any
experiment, this estimated gain is an unbiased estimate of the average effect of the
practice on productivity across all plants in this industry. However, in the real world, this
estimate of the change in productivity due to the management practice will never be
observed within any single establishment: a firm will never randomly adopt a new
management practice. From the perspective of a manager in any of the organizations in
the data set, the experimental estimate of the productivity gain due to the adoption of the
practice will not answer his exact question: what happens to productivity in my business
if I adopt this new management practice?
Managers, as well as the economists who study their firms, want to understand
three fundamental issues: (1) the economic reasons why competing organizations would
and would not adopt some productivity-altering practice; (2) what the differential impact
of the practice on productivity would be between organizations that do and do not adopt
the practice; and (3) why the practice was effective in raising productivity among the
adopters. Without additional attention to the factors that differentiate the Type 1 from the
Type 2 establishment, the experimentalist who calculates the average effect of the
management treatment across the full sample does not address this set of questions. An
experiment with random assignment of the “management treatment” to firms eliminates
selection bias, and tells the manager what he and his competitors could achieve on
average if all adopted. However, random assignment of the treatment does not offer all
the methodological advantages one desires in insider studies. 5 The manager wants to
know what the expected productivity gain is for his operations and why it will happen.
To address these questions, the researcher must rely on non-experimental data
generated by the actual selection process governing the adoption of the management

5

Management does not adopt practices randomly so insider studies typically confront cases like the
example shown in Figure 1 with selective adoption. However, the case of random adoption is relevant for
some insider applications, such as those studying personnel records for a single firm that adopts a new
work practice for all employees since universally applied practices are not applied selectively (for that
firm’s population). Also, in a recent example, Bloom and VanReneen (2007) have obtained management
permission to institute new HR practices in a sample of firms. By eliminating the question of selective
adoption of management practices, such a study can focus on the question of whether the various
management practices raise productivity for an average business in the sample. Doyle, Ewer and Wagner
(2009) examine the performance of different kinds of physicians through random assignment of patients.

9

practices. Figure 1 illustrates one possible kind of selection bias: Type 1 establishments
have higher levels of productivity and higher expected gains from the new management
practice than Type 2 establishments. The manager might not be concerned about this
selection bias. If the manager knows, for example, that his establishment belongs to the
group of establishments that matches the group that adopts, then with certain assumptions
(e.g., that the pre-t* productivity trend for Type 1 would continue in the post-t* period)
he could predict his expected gain in productivity with confidence by examining the
subsample of data for just the adopters.
While a manager with inside information about how his own operations differ
from others in his industry might know if his is a Type 1 or Type 2 establishment, the
practical difficulty that the outside researcher faces is that all establishments that compete
within an industry using a common production technology can look very similar. An
outside researcher is not likely to know the reasons why some establishments adopt new
practices and some don’t. Without the insights of industry insiders, he might not be able
to identify what characteristics differentiate Type 1 and Type 2 establishments, 6 which in
turn limits his ability to model the selectivity in adoption accurately.
What do we learn from Figure 1? It provides a clear picture of what insider
studies want to model – adoption of management practices and their varying effects on
performance outcomes. Figure 1 also highlights several assumptions we must make and
the econometric issues we face in conducting an insider study. In the next section, we
review six insider studies that confront these issues. As these examples will illustrate, the
two distinctive methodological features of insider studies – analysis of rich micro-level
data about one specific production process and access to insiders who are knowledgeable
about their management practices and operations – are instrumental in constructing
convincing empirical tests of the effects of management practices on productivity.

6

While we describe the Figure 1 as example involving data on establishments or other multiemployee production units, the structure of Figure 1 is also useful when the data describe
production by individual workers. Many of our examples are insider econometric studies with
worker-level data sets, and we will apply the structure of Figure 1 to interpret these worker-level
studies as well.

10

IV. Examples to Illustrate the Methods of Insider Econometric Research
In this section, we review six examples of insider econometric research to
illustrate the common features of this research and to give the new researcher a true feel
for both the methods and results from this body of work. After reading these examples, it
is much easier for the researcher to understand the econometric methods which we
describe next in section V and the key decisions about more specific elements of the
research design of an insider study (beyond the use of micro-level data on a single
production process) which we describe in section VII.
The review of each example follows a pattern: we describe the intra-industry
sample and the production process; the nature of the management practices; the basic
empirical findings about adoption of the practice and its effects on productivity; and the
results on why productivity does or doesn’t rise due to management practices. Variants
of the Figure 1 profiles are used to summarize each of these studies. We provide a
broader review of insider studies at the end of this section, where we categorize a large
number of insider studies according to the type of management practices analyzed.
A. Two Single-Firm Worker-Level Studies on the Productivity Effects of
Incentive Pay
The first two studies both use worker-level observations from a single firm. In
both, the new practice adopted by management is an incentive pay practice that covers all
employees in the firm. Despite these similarities, both confront their own unique
methodological issues and each shows the importance of different insider insights.
Incentive Pay at Safelite Glass. Lazear (2000) studies the productivity of workers
within one firm before and after the introduction of a new incentive pay plan. Lazear’s
study models automobile windshield installation for the Safelite Company. In this
company, each employee drives a truck to the homes of people who need a new car
windshield. The production function is worker-specific and measurable: employees work
alone installing about two or three windshields a day. The production unit is the worker.
The data are monthly productivity data for some 3000 workers for nineteen months.
During this period, the firm shifts from hourly pay to incentive piece rate pay, where pay
is a function of the number of windshields the worker installs that day. After the move to

11

piece rate pay, productivity per worker rises by 44%. Workers are highly sensitive to
monetary incentives.
Why is this interesting? The reader is not interested in windshield installation.
The management practice – piece rate pay – is interesting, because, even though few
firms use piece rate pay, many use some form of individual performance pay. Therefore,
the evidence that monetary incentives raise workers’ productivity is in itself valuable,
though perhaps not surprising. 7 What makes the result valuable is that the study identifies
why productivity goes up. First, as expected, some of the overall productivity increase is
due to the same worker increasing his or her effort and output. Second, about half of the
increase in the mean productivity of all workers comes from the self-sorting by workers:
those workers who have low productivity levels leave the firm (or are not hired by the
firm) after incentive pay is adopted. The more interesting result of the paper is that the
firm’s choice of its incentive pay practice induces sorting by workers, and the sorting
itself has a big productivity impact.
Figure 2a illustrates this. The productivity response to the incentive pay is
heterogeneous across workers. Analogous to Figure 1, the Safelite workers are classified
as types – here three types. The pay plan is changed at time t*. The response to the
treatment is heterogeneous across the three types. Type 1 workers are employed before
and after the new pay plan and these workers raise their productivity (by 22%). The
Type 2 workers quit in response to the new incentive pay because their expected pay gain
is less than the disutility of their extra effort to be more productive. The Type 3 worker
is hired after t*. He has higher productivity and earns more under incentives than those
who left would have earned had they stayed. Together, productivity rises by an additional
22 percent more from the effect of losing Type 2 and hiring of Type 3. 8
-----------------------FIGURE 2a HERE
------------------------

7

The adoption of the incentive plan of course cannot be considered exogenous. Safelite adopts the practice
because it expects productivity to increase. In section VI below, we consider the question of why “optimal
management practices” can change over time.

8

The figure is not drawn to scale to capture this size of gain. Shaw and Lazear (2007) displays

this figure using the actual Safelite data and offers more detail on differences between employees
who leave and join this firm after introduction of the new pay plan.

12

Obviously, not all firms would get this exact productivity gain. This is just one
firm that chose the practice probably expecting it to be effective. 9 While one cannot
expect the estimated productivity gains of this incentive pay plan to apply to other firms
and production processes, the design of this study has several advantages that make the
estimates especially convincing for this setting by avoiding typical econometric problems
associated with estimating treatment effects. Because the production function is very
simple with workers working alone, the unobserved counterfactual productivity paths are
very easy to model (based on the observed productivity paths, as shown in Figure 2a).
There is little likelihood of omitted variable bias, and thus typical selection bias and
endogeneity bias are not relevant to the study. In a study of the impact of management
practices on performance using a more heterogeneous sample of production units, we
would worry about the possibility of unmeasured factors causing a selection bias with
some firms choosing the practice while others do not.
At the same time, in this study, there is still a different source of selection “bias”
in the estimated treatment effects – workers decide whether to work at the firm or not
and that optimizing decision by workers affects the size of the productivity gain from
incentive pay. But the study identifies and measures this self selection, leading to the key
theoretical point of the paper. An overall change in productivity can be decomposed into
two components that are analogous to the intrinsic and extrinsic margins of each
employee’s labor supply decision. Some workers respond to the new incentive pay at the
intrinsic margin by increasing the amount of labor (in this case effort rather than hours)
they supply. Other workers respond at the extrinsic margin by leaving their jobs with
different workers taking their place. The broader point for economic theory applies
beyond the scope of the single firm in this study. When the firm selects its HR practices,
it must consider not only their effects as a motivation device but also their effects as a
signaling device to sort specific kinds of workers into and out of the firm.

9

Note that the reason that the firm chose to adopt incentive pay at this time is that the firm had introduced
new information technology software that kept computerized records of each employee’s productivity.
Thus, Lazear is estimating the joint impact of a change in the HR practice given that the firm made a
change in its IT infrastructure. Other firms that introduce piece rate pay may have lower performance gains,
and not find the use of piece rate pay optimal (see Freeman and Kleiner, 2005, for evidence from shoe
manufacturing).

13

Incentive Pay Among Fruit Pickers. Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul (2005)
analyze productivity of employees who pick fruit. The workforce in this study is hired
only during the summer harvest season. The firm in this study undertakes a series of
experiments that change the payment schemes for these employees. 10 In one experiment,
the firm introduces new piece rate pay, as in the Lazear paper above. However, in
Lazear, the move was from hourly pay to piece rate pay; here the move is from a
performance pay plan based on workers’ relative performance to the piece rate pay. In
the relative output pay plan, the firm fixes the average pay for the field ex ante, but pays
each worker based on how much he or she does relative to other workers in his or her
group (but keeping the mean pay fixed). In the second half of the picking season, the
farm switches to simple piece rates in which pay per unit of output is fixed ex ante and
does not vary as a function of how co-workers perform. The panel data in this study
cover 142 workers for 108 days spanning the periods in which different compensation
plans are in place. After the switch to simple piece rates, the average productivity of
workers rises by 58%. Nearly all workers increase their effort, and the variance of output
also rises markedly with a jump in the number of high performers.
-----------------------FIGURE 2b HERE
-----------------------Figure 2b illustrates the unique results of this study. The productivity response to
the incentive pay is heterogeneous across workers. Analogous to Figure 1, there are
Type 1 and Type 2 workers with a new incentive policy adopted at t*. Unlike Figure 1,
both types of workers are covered by the new incentive pay. Type 1 workers exhibit a
bigger productivity jump after t* than do Type 2 workers. The study identifies who the
Type 1 workers are – employees who had been working with their friends under the
initial relative pay plan. Prior to the piece rate pay plan, these workers withheld effort
because they knew that if they worked hard, they would lower their friends’ pay. The
Type 2 workers have lower productivity gains because they were not working with their
friends and thus had been more productive than the Type 1 workers, when they were
working under the initial relative pay plan. The researchers reach this conclusion about

10

For papers on their other experiments, on managerial pay or on teamwork, see Bandiera, Barankay, and
Rasul (2007, 2009).

14

why productivity increases because they gather additional data on friendships among
workers.
What makes this study interesting? The readers of this paper are not intrigued by
either the occupation of fruit picking or even this specific case of piece rate pay. Unlike
the setting for Lazear (2000) where workers came and went, all workers in this study stay
for the short fruit picking season covered in the data. Thus, we are looking only at
workers who are employed before and after the change in pay policy (in the Figure 2a
illustration of the Safelite study, these would all be Type 1 workers). Here however, we
are examining the heterogeneity in productivity responses among these workers. The
more fundamental economic insight in this study of fruit pickers is that workers with
certain characteristics internalize an externality – the externality that their effort harms
others – during the relative payment scheme. Thus social relationships determine
productivity. More broadly, this example identifies the importance of peer effects and
social networks in the determination of worker productivity. Other insider style studies
make related points about peer and network effects including: Ichino and Maggi (2000)
for banking; Mas and Moretti (2009) for grocery stores; Giorgi, Pellizzari and Woolston
(2009) for classrooms in education; and Bartel, Phibbs, Beaulieu, and Stone (2009) for
nursing; and Ingram and Roberts (2000) for hotels.
In this study, there is no selectivity within the firm in the adoption of the practice
since all employees are covered by the change in pay policy at t*. 11 As in Lazear (2000)
the treatment effects estimated are effects conditional on being employed in this firm.
But the design of this study is illuminating because it solves other econometric problems
associated with estimating treatment effects.

In the econometrics treatment effects

literature, it is well acknowledged that treatment effects should vary across people. In
managing a firm, managers know that not all workers respond equally to a treatment.
Often, a study would conclude that the variance in the treatment effects is from some
unobserved abilities of the workers, but here the authors go inside the company and
11

Even though the management policy change covers all employees in the data set, there are still important
unobserved counterfactuals; but in this case, these are outside the scope of the study’s data. The workers’
productivity profiles in Figure 2b come from only a subset of farms. As in the case of Figure 1, there are
other farms, not in this particular study’s data set, that did not introduce incentive pay, and these farms are
analogous to the “untreated” establishments in the bottom half of Figure 1. The fruit-pickers study shows
us what would happen to the farming fields that adopt; we don’t know anything about the non-adopters that
are not covered in this study’s data.

15

gather the data on friendships to identify the source of variance displayed across Type 1
and Type 2 workers. While the data pertain to the limited setting of one industry and
firm, the logic of the economic model applies more broadly. In settings where workers
might withhold their effort because that effort can harm their co-workers, managers need
to consider these peer effects in the design of compensation plans.
B. Two Cross-Company Within-Industry Studies of the Productivity Effects of
Innovative HR Practices
In the next two examples, we contrast two studies that both examine the
productivity effects of new HR practices inside the steel industry. In both, the production
process is a production line involving multiple employees. Despite these similarities,
these studies analyze different segments of the steel industry and reach different
conclusions about why these HRM treatments are adopted or not.
Human Resource Systems in Integrated Steel Mills. In a third example of insider
econometrics research, two companion studies by Ichniowski, Shaw, and Prennushi
(1997) and Gant, Ichniowski, and Shaw (2002) analyze productivity of finishing lines
within integrated steel mills. The management innovation is the adoption of entire sets of
new human resource management practices in integrated steel mills, where the new HR
practices

cover

recruiting

and

selection

policies,

compensation,

teamwork,

communication, and employee training. The authors model production of one specific
type of production line that finishes steel. These steel lines take a coil of very thin steel
sheet, unwind it, and then chemically treat and coat the steel for use in products like auto
bodies. In the 1997 study, the authors collect panel data on productivity outcomes for the
finishing lines. The monthly productivity data for the rolling mill work groups within 36
steel mills cover several years for each line. The researchers identify four “systems” of
HR practices, ranging from the most innovative HR system to the most traditional system
with no innovative HR practices.
The authors show that the mills with complete systems of highly innovative HR
practices have the highest productivity levels. Yet, some mills adopt highly innovative
HR systems and some don’t. What accounts for the difference in adoption among a set of
finishing lines that are competitors within a very narrowly defined industry and that are

16

making very homogeneous products using the same machinery? Site visits to the
finishing lines did not reveal any differences in product attributes, technologies, or
demographic characteristics of the workers. Site visits did reveal that, even though older
and newer vintage lines adopted the innovative practices, the only kind of older lines that
adopted the innovative practices were old “reconstituted” lines – lines that had been
temporarily shut down and restarted by new owners. Based on this subtle distinction, the
authors hypothesize that the difference in the adoption of innovative HRM systems was
transition costs. Older continuously operating lines had higher transition costs; newer
lines and those older mills that were restarted after a purchase by new owners did not
have transition costs associated with changing their HRM systems (Ichniowski and Shaw,
1997). The authors argue that the productivity of older continuously operating lines
would also increase were they to adopt innovative HRM systems, but the high transition
costs that only these lines would experience produce lower profits from innovative HR
practices compared to the newer or reconstituted mills.
What makes this insider study interesting? Once again, readers of the paper do
not have to be interested in steel production. The authors show that HRM practices
matter – that innovations in HR practices produce tangible performance gains. However,
even more interesting is that the authors show how HR practices matter and why
productivity goes up.

Productivity increases only when a firm adopts a set of

complementary HR practices that together reinforce productive worker behaviors. Insider
insights about why HRM practices are complementary lead the researchers to measure
the “management treatment” as a set of practices rather than a single HRM practice.
Moreover, research inside the finishing lines revealed why these bundles of HRM
practices improve productivity. The innovative systems of HR practices lead to very
different behaviors of the workers themselves. Gant, Ichniowski, and Shaw (2002) collect
and analyze data on the communications patterns of workers within these lines and show
that workers interact much more with each other as part of problem-solving activity in the
high productivity lines with innovative HR practices. The lines with innovative HR
practices have much denser social networks and worker interactions, or higher levels of
“connective capital” in the firm (Ichniowski and Shaw, 2009). This difference in worker
behavior provides another type of evidence that helps explain why the treatment effect

17

due to innovative HRM systems exists. Firms need to think about the right bundle of HR
practices and not just the individual HR practices. Firms also need to provide workers
with opportunities to change their behavior and form the networks and teams needed for
problem solving when new incentives are adopted. The costs of switching practices and
of changing patterns of worker behavior are transition costs that startups do not incur, and
thus the startups are more likely to have the innovative HR systems.
Problem Solving Teams in Steel Minimills. Boning, Ichniowski, Shaw (2007)
also study productivity in the steel industry, but within production lines in the minimill
sector that use electric arc furnaces. Minimill lines produce steel bar products, like re-bar
used in construction and highways or large beams used in constructing buildings.
Minimills all belong to one narrowly defined industrial classification, and all have the
same production process and technologies. The mills melt steel scrap and cast it into the
bar products. As in Ichniowski, Prennushi, Shaw (1997), the data here also come from
one particular type of rolling line in these mills, and thus pertain to very homogeneous
production processes. The management innovation in this study is the adoption of
problem-solving teams. Workers use problem solving skills to increase the quality of the
bars coming out of the mill by watching the production process as the bars roll through
the mills, and correcting problems as they arise. The authors collect panel data: monthly
productivity data for the rolling mill work groups within 34 steel mills followed over
about five years. In the beginning of the data, about 10 percent of the rolling mills had
problem-solving teams; by the end, about half of the mills had teams.
Productivity regressions show that there are significant productivity gains after
teams are adopted in minimills. However, some mills adopt teams and some don’t.
Again, without insider insights, the reasons for the differences in adoption are not
obvious.

Each minimill has the same production machinery, and the demographic

characteristics of workers like education, experience, and occupation are also very
comparable. However, once inside the mills, the reason for the difference was apparent.
Some lines producing basic commodity bar products, like rebar steel, have fewer
problems to solve compared to other lines making more complex products like thin steel
wire or steel with intricate shapes. Using measures of product complexity, the authors
show that 100% of the lines producing the most complex products adopt teams, and 23%

18

of the lines producing the least complex products adopt teams. The productivity
regression results reinforce this conclusion: the productivity impact of teams is greater in
the complex lines than it is among commodity lines (where teams are rarely adopted).
What makes this insider study interesting is that it identifies two broader
economic principles. First, the study shows that product strategy decisions dictate the
appropriate HR or organizational design decisions. A strategy of making customized
complex products requires HR practices that foster more problem solving than does a
strategy of making standardized products. The firm’s product strategy determines its HR
practices. Second, firms do not benefit equally from teamwork. Here, it is complex
production lines that gain the most; while lines making simpler commodity products do
not benefit from problem solving. 12 Economic theory suggests that teams will not be
adopted by all firms. Without the insider insights about the importance of differences in
product complexity, one could have erroneously concluded that “the team effect”
observed among complex production lines applied to other lines that seemed to be
identical, and that teams were equally valuable across all manufacturers.
We contrast the findings of these two establishment-level studies of the effects of
similar HRM practices within the same industry in Figures 3a and 3b.

Figure 3a

summarizes the conclusions reached by Ichniowski, Shaw and Prennushi (1997) for lines
in integrated steel mills.

The adoption of innovative HRM systems at t* raises

productivity in these lines. But unlike the selection bias shown in Figure 1 in Section III,
the authors here argue that the productivity gains would be the same if non-adopters
instituted the new HRM practices. The authors conclude that non-adoption is explained
by differences in the transition costs of adopting the practices rather than by any
differences in the expected productivity gains for non-adopters relative to the
adopters. 13 Despite studying similar HRM practices in a different part of the same

12

The conclusion that ‘complex’ production processes value teamwork is also generalizable. Recent
researchers emphasize that firms in developed countries have a comparative advantage at producing
sophisticated products, rather than commodities, so organizational innovations like teamwork are more
likely to be adopted in the U.S. than in other countries across all firms (Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007;
Bloom, Draca, and Van Reenen, 2008). Bartel, Ichniowski, Shaw and Correa (2009) document a similar
conclusion in the valve making industries of the U.S. and U.K.
13
See Ichniowski and Shaw (1995) for evidence on the transition costs of non-adopters. An alternative
way to think about the productivity profiles in this study is to return to Figure 1 as a relevant summary, but
instead of considering “HRM systems” as the managerial treatment, let a single HRM practice like

19

industry, the minimill study of Boning, Ichniowski and Shaw (2007) reaches different
conclusions that the study of integrated mills by Ichniowski, Shaw and Prennushi (1997).
Figure 3b shows the selection bias in the adoption of teams at t*. Complex lines have
larger productivity gains from teams than do the commodity lines.
-----------------------FIGURE 3a HERE
----------------------------------------------FIGURE 3b HERE
-----------------------In both steel studies, an understanding of selectivity in adoption of the
management treatment is critical.

For the finishing lines, Ichniowski, Shaw and

Prennushi (1997) conclude that the new HR innovation would raise productivity among
non-adopters but differences in costs of adoption are higher in older continuously
operating lines. For minimills, Boning, Ichniowski and Shaw (2007) conclude that teams
have fundamentally different productivity effects in different kinds of lines since the
benefits of problem solving activity differ. The careful insider econometric analyses
uncover different economic insights. In one segment of the industry, complementary HR
practices raise productivity but the costs of adopting these practices differs for startups
and continuously operating lines. In the other segment of the steel industry, teamwork is
more valuable for manufacturers of complex products. There is no one single “team
effect.” Differences in productivity benefits across the two types of lines explain
adoption.
C. Two Within-Industry Studies of the Adoption of Management Practices
that Affect Productivity
In the previous examples, the production processes were relatively well
understood.

The examples of fruit pickers and windshield installers were individual-

level production processes, and the manufacturing processes in steel, while highly

incentive pay be the treatment. Type 1 lines could be the lines that adopt incentive pay as part of a larger
system of practices and thus experience a large increase in productivity like the Type 1 establishments in
Figure 1. In contrast, lines that adopt incentive pay without other elements of the innovative HRM system
experience a smaller post-t* increase in productivity like the Type 2 establishments in Figure 1. Viewed
this way, it is the existence of other HRM System policies that differentiate Type 1 and Type 2 lines.

20

technical, are relatively well understood by engineers. In some sense, these settings were
the laboratories in which to study the effects of incentive pay, problem solving teams, or
new HRM systems on productivity outcomes. In other settings, such as the productivity
of many research activities, the outcomes from the production process are much less
predictable even by the expert insiders. Yet innovations from basic research are
fundamental to economic growth.

The next two examples of insider econometric

research are studies that shed light on determinants of productivity in research activity in
the pharmaceutical industry. The focus of these papers examine fundamental issues in
industrial organization economics related to the size and boundaries of the firm –
managerial decisions about the number of projects to pursue and about contracting out
work versus doing the tasks in house. 14
The Effects of Scale and Scope on Productivity in Pharmaceuticals. Henderson
and Cockburn (1996) study productivity of early stage research activity in the
pharmaceutical industry. Research personnel in this phase try to find a chemical
compound that has a desirable effect within a laboratory process that mimics aspects of a
human disease. In this study, productivity is measured by patents and the management
treatments are changes in the scale of the firm’s research activity (expenditures per
project, per firm, etc.) and scope of research (extent of other research projects in similar
classes of compounds in the firm, in other firms, etc.). The authors analyze 5,000 yearly
observations on research projects. The data come from ten firms with up to 38 projects
per year and up to 30 annual observations on any one project. The authors describe the
data set assembly as an extensive iterative process with knowledgeable scientists in the
firm that results in accurate and detailed measures of research outputs and inputs.

14

Industrial organization research offers many other examples of empirical studies that follow an insider
econometrics approach going deeply inside firms in one industry. In this chapter, we define insider
econometrics by its focus on the internal management practices of the firm within the context of a single
production process. Some empirical IO research that examine firms in a single industry would not fit this
description; for example, studies of a change in firms’ pricing policies (Chu, Leslie, and Sorensen, 2009) or
in how information is revealed to customers (Bollinger, Leslie, and Sorensen, 2009; Leslie, 2004), or
studies using data on products rather than production processes. See other chapters in this volume (Gibbons
and Roberts, forthcoming) for research on these topics using micro-level data. Other examples of empirical
industrial organizational research would fit this chapter’s description of insider econometrics more closely;
for example, whether the internal management practices of stores in an industry look different if the store is
run by a franchisee versus an owner-operator (Lafontaine and Shaw, 1999; 2005).

21

The authors find that knowledge spillovers across research projects within the
same firm are critical determinants of productivity in any single project. The scope of the
firm, as measured by the number of large research projects, improves the chances of
success in a research project. More specifically, spillovers across research on similar
classes of drugs within a single firm and spillovers between firms working on the same
drug class both raise research productivity. The authors also document a positive affect
of the scale of the research project, as measured by research expenditures on the given
project, on research productivity. 15
What makes this insider study interesting? The authors document how “firm
size” matters for research productivity. The authors aggregate their project-level data
back up to the level of the firm, and replicate a common result in prior firm-level
pharmaceutical studies – that measures of firm size have little impact on patenting. When
they then analyze the project-level data set they constructed after extensive field
investigations of research productivity in these firms, they show just how misleading the
conclusion based on firm-level analysis is. New insights surface only when you correctly
model a specific research production function at the level of individual projects.
Furthermore, their insider insights allow them to identify what aspects of “firm size”
matter most – not simply the total amount of research expenditures on a project but the
amount of knowledge on related projects. Finally, this study puts the micro-level
productivity results into the larger public policy discussion for regulation of the industry.
Allowing larger firms in the industry may in fact lead to concerns about monopoly
power, but these concerns must be balanced with efficiency gains that only come with the
increase in size that comes with running more projects. 16
Vertical Integration Decisions in the Pharmaceutical Industry. There are still
many steps left in the production process that generates a new drug after basic research
15

In this study, the authors do not model why the treatment varies – that is, why the firms have different
numbers of projects or different expenditures per project. However, the authors do use detailed insider
insights about the causal nature of the link between the scale and scope measures and research productivity.
While their panel data estimates document increased patenting productivity when measures of scope
change, they acknowledge that the question of what is the optimal research portfolio for any single firm in
the data set is beyond what the scope of their analysis.
16
Other insider studies listed below provide insights about the determinants of productivity in other
knowledge-based or research-intensive industries such as bio-technology, education, health care, law, and
finance services and venture capital.

22

identifies promising new chemical compounds. Several stages of clinical trials take place
after a promising drug compound is identified but prior to FDA approval of a new drug.
Azoulay (2004) offers insider econometric research about management policy decisions
in this phase of drug research.
In this study, the treatment is the drug company’s decision whether to outsource
clinical trials to contract research organizations (CRO’s) or not. The hypothesis is that
clinical trials that are very data intensive are likely to be outsourced, while those that are
knowledge-intensive are allocated to internal teams. In-house trials will involve more
subjective performance evaluations and less sensitive pay for performance, while the
trials contracted to CRO’s will involve a narrower set of more-easily monitored tasks that
can be covered by explicit pay-for-performance contracts. The data are project-level data
from 6826 projects spanning all pharmaceutical firms from 1991-1999. Coupling these
rich micro-level data with insider insights from extensive field work and interviews,
Azoulay estimates models predicting the firm’s outsourcing decisions and finds strong
support for the main hypothesis. Outsourcing is the better decision when the testing tasks
can be reduced to standardized data collection tasks, while testing that involves the
generation of new findings and knowledge are more likely kept in-house.
Why is this paper interesting? First, the results of the Azoulay study deepen our
understanding of a basic economic question – what determines the boundaries of the
firm’s activities. Here, rich industry-specific insight identifies specific characteristics
that tend to keep work tasks inside or outside the firm’s boundaries. Furthermore, this
industry-specific example lends strong support to the broader economic theory that multitask jobs (ones involving both knowledge generation and data generation) where at least
one task is not easily monitored are better managed with low-powered incentives and
more intensive monitoring. Conversely, when the work involves only data-generation
tasks that are easier to monitor, explicit high-powered incentive arrangements (that can
be outsourced) are more appropriate (Holmstrom, 1999; Holmstrom and Milgrom, 1994).
This vertical integration decision in pharmaceuticals is therefore similar to franchising:
the in-house contractors will have more subjective performance evaluations and less
sensitive pay for performance, while the outside contractor will have more explicit pay
for performance (or high powered incentives) based on a narrow set of easy-to-monitor

23

tasks. Thus, the results from a single-industry study provide results for a theoretical
proposition that can be applied more broadly.
In this insider study, data are not available on the success, or productivity, of tests
done under alternate treatment regimes. Here, the empirical analysis focuses exclusively
on the determinants of the “treatment” – the decision to outsource or not. The conclusion
that knowledge-generating tests would be less successful and productive were they to be
outsourced to firms using high powered incentive contracts is implicit. While we cannot
contrast the patterns of the productivity profiles of these two pharmaceutical industry
studies, the two studies taken together make important points about insider research.
Even inside the same industry, production processes are highly varied. Henderson and
Cockburn (1996, p. 35) show aggregating data on different research projects up to the
level of the firm produces misleading results. Insider insights suggested that productivity
in this part of the pharmaceutical industry be studied at the level of individual projects so
that cross-project productivity could be identified. Azoulay’s (2004) study then goes on
to reveal important sources of heterogeneity even within the drug testing activities in this
industry with different tests leading to different decisions about whether to keep the work
in-house or not. Thus, one reason for heterogeneity in practices within a single industry is
the fact that firms are managing many different production processes at the same time.
D. Additional Insider Studies
The previous six examples are designed to illustrate some of the differences in
research designs that can occur in insider studies because management treatments are or
are not applied universally in the sample, observations are for one firm or many firms in
an industry, longitudinal data on the choice of practices is or is not limited, and so on. To
illustrate a broader range of topics, practices, and data analyzed with this kind of
methodology, we present a longer list of studies in Table 1. This table summarizes the
management practices studied, the nature of the data set, and a short description of
conclusions about the economic mechanisms that explain why productivity changes when
the practice is adopted. The six studies reviewed above include several early examples
that helped develop the field of insider econometrics. The studies reviewed in Table 1
suggest that the methods of these studies have been followed in studies of many other
industries. We will refer to details of the studies of Table 1 in several additional sections

24

below on emerging themes from insider econometric research (Section XIII) and sources
of data (Section IX).
-----------------------TABLE 1 HERE
-----------------------V. Estimation of Treatment Effects and the Econometrics of Insider Studies
The kinds of productivity profiles shown in Figures 1-3 are typically estimated by
analyzing panel data on workers or work teams. In this section, we consider issues that
arise in applying econometric methods to obtain accurate estimates of treatment effects.
Start with the simplest possible regression for estimating the impact of some management
policy on productivity:
(1)

Yit = αDit + βxit + ηi + θt + εit

where i and t are subscripts for the worker- or work-group-specific observations and for
time, Yit is productivity, xit is a set of production function control variables, Dit is a
dummy variable equal to 1 for the presence of the management practice, ηi is the workerspecific (or work-group) fixed effect, θt is the common time period effect, and ε it is the
transitory worker-specific effect. How should the insider econometrician elaborate on this
simple model to estimate treatment effects of management practices on productivity?
A hallmark of insider econometric research is that it models the heterogeneity in
workers’ responses to the managerial practice. Even for workers within one occupation,
there is heterogeneity in workers’ responses to managerial treatments; e.g., not all
workers respond the same to incentive pay. This differential response drives the reasons
why management practices are or are not effective. Translating this into the productivity
regression, rewrite equation (1) to allow the treatment effect to vary across observations:
(2)

Yit = αiDit + βxit + ηi + θt + εit

The adoption of the management treatment, Dt, at the time t* is determined by its
profitability according to:
(3) Dit = 1 if π it > 0 and t > t *
= 0 otherwise
(4) π it = ΓZit + vit

25

where the index π it measures the expected profits from adopting the new practice which
is a function of observables Zit and an error term.
Equations (3) and (4) imply that at time t*, the treatment, some new management
policy, is introduced. The treated group adopts (D=1) when expected profits from
adoption exceed zero. The non-treated group (D=0) does not adopt since expected profits
after adoption are not sufficiently high. The treated group either has a different
underlying production function, or different underlying transition costs, than the nontreated group. Since the adoption of the treatment is not random, selection bias arises.
A. Estimating Treatment Effects
Insider econometricians typically estimate productivity regression (2) – a panel
data regression with worker and time fixed effects – but what are the properties of the
treatment effect estimated in this regression?

To answer this question, rewrite the

production function in a more general functional form, in a switching regression
framework. 17 The treated group, D=1 has production function (5a), with superscript 1 to
indicate D=1 for treatment. The non-treated group has production function (5b), with
superscript 0 to indicate D=0 for non-treatment.
(5a) Yit1 = g1t (x i ) + u1it
(5b) Yit0 = g 0t (x i ) + u it0
where xi are basic production function variables that are not affected by the treatment and

are uncorrelated with error term uit .
Define the “treatment effect” as the productivity gain due to treatment, defined as

α it ≡ Yit1 − Yit0 . Given the productivity functions (5a) and (5b), the treatment effect is
defined as.
(6)

αit (x i ) ≡ g1t (x i ) − g 0t (x i ) + (u1it − u it0 ).

Intuitively, the treatment effect is the shift up in the production function after adoption,
relative to before adoption. The estimated treatment effect, given real world data with

17

This structure for the specification of treatment effects follows Blundell and Dias (2002). For further
discussions of treatment effects and their estimation, see Heckman, Lalonde and Smith (1999), Imbens
(2004), List, Sadoff, and Wagner (2008) and Meyer (1995) and citations therein.

26

non-random adoption of the treatment, is biased if the difference in the residual in (6) is
not zero.
Now, rewrite the productivity equations to identify types of selection biases in the
treatment effect. To form one productivity equation across the treated and non-treated
groups, combine (5a) and (5b) by weighting them by the treatment dummy Dit to get
Yit = DitYit1 + (1 − Dit )Yit0

Then, substitute into this equation, the definition of the treatment effect as the expected
value of (6),

E(αit (x i )) ≡ g1t (x i ) − g 0t (x i ),

and obtain:

(7) Yit = g 0 ( xit ) + α it Dit + [uit0 + Dit (uit1 − uit0 )]

Equation (7) identifies the potential selection biases in the estimated treatment effect.
The expected value of the treatment is:
(8) E (αˆ t ) = α t + E (ut1 | xt , Dt = 1) + ( E (ut0 | xt , Dt = 0) with t>t*

And the two expected error terms are non-zero due to selection bias into the treatment—
only those firms that gain the most from treatment will adopt.
Equation (8) and Figure 1 can be combined to easily picture the three types of
treatment effects that the insider econometrician might want to estimate with insider data.
1. The “treatment of the treated effect” (TTE) is the expected treatment effect
among treated observations; or the mean value of the observation-specific
treatment effects across all observations conditional on treatment occurring (i.e.,
D=1) and on the production function control variables xit.
(9) α TTE ≡ E (α it | x = xit , Dt = 1) with t>t*s
In the Figure 1, this hypothetical treatment effect is αTTE = ΔPT.
2. The “treatment of the non-treated effect” (NTE) is expected value for those
groups who are never treated.
(10) α NTE ≡ E (α it | x = xit , Dt = 0) with t>t*
In the Figure 1, this hypothetical treatment effect, is represented by αNTE = ΔPN.
To illustrate potential selection bias, we assumed in Figure 1 that the treated
group has bigger expected gains than the non-treated group would have.
3. The “average treatment effect” (ATE) is the average gain in productivity if the
treatment were applied randomly across all i.
27

(11) α ATE ≡ E (α it | x = xit )
In Figure 1, it is the weighted average (with weights equal to the percentages of
treated and non-treated) of αTTE and αNTE.
Thus, the TTE, NTE, and ATE treatment effects are mean effects among the ever-treated
observations, never-treated observations, or randomly treated observations respectively.
B. The Estimation of Treatment Effects with Panel Data in Insider Studies

How do insider studies typically estimate the alternative treatment effects using
panel data? First, we describe the estimation methods for alternative treatment effects,
and then provide examples from the literature for research using these alternative
estimators.
Rewrite the production function (7) as:
(12) Yit = g 0 ( xit ) + α it Dit + ηi + θ t + ε it
where ηi is the worker-specific fixed effect, θi is the common time period effect, and

ε it is the transitory worker-specific effect. Equation (12) matches the typical panel data
regression presented above as (2).
Depending on the exact nature of the panel data set and the specific details of the
treatment effect the researcher wants to estimate, three common options for estimating
treatment effects in panel data are:
1. First Differences: Here, the researcher estimates the treatment of the treated, αTTE,

using data on only the treated group, before and after the treatment, or the top
productivity-profiles in Figure 1.

Estimate the production function (12) in first

differences, by introducing controls for the worker-fixed effects using only the beforeafter data for the treated group to produce α TTE (for the Type 1 top panel in Figure 1).
This is equal to
1
1
(13) αˆ TTE = [Ypost
− t * − Y pre − t * ]

which states that the treatment of the treated effect is the difference in the conditional
means of the treated group before (the “pre-t*” period), and after (the “post-t*”
period), the treatment. Assuming we know the right functional form and specification
of g1(xi), the unobserved counterfactual for the treated group in the post-t* time period
28

can be estimated. Avoiding the use of the non-treated sample eliminates the need to
make assumptions about that subsample – about why it was not treated and about its
unobserved counterfactuals. An obvious drawback is that there is less data when
lacking the information on the non-treated data, and we assume that time effects θt are
uncorrelated with treatment Dit .
2. Difference-in-Differences Estimator: Researchers estimate the αTTE effect using

difference-in-differences when the treatment is random for a subpopulation of
workers, plants, or stores, or the assumption that the only difference between the
control group and the treated group lies in the fixed effect ηi . 18

Given this

assumption, the researcher has data on both the treated group, before and after the
treatment, and on the non-treated group in Figure 1. Equation (12) is estimated with
both samples, over time, so this is double differencing, or “difference-in-differences”
because we difference over time (before-after treatment) and cross-sectionally (for the
treated and non-treated groups). This double differencing amends the estimated
treatment effect (13) to be:
1
1
0
0
(14) αˆ ATE ( x ) = [Ypost
− t * − Y pre − t * ] − [Y post − t * − Y pre − t * ]

which states that the treatment of the treated effect is the difference in the conditional
means of the treated group before (the “pre-t*” period), and after (the “post-t*”
period), the treatment, relative to that difference for the non-treated group. The
estimation method is the same as for first differences – we are differencing out the
fixed effect ηi , and then differencing out the effect θt , but here the differencing
occurs over a different sample, of treated and non-treated workers.
The basic advantage of this double-differencing compared to the first
differencing, is that we now have a control group, the non-treated group. Adding the
control group adds information in two ways. First, if we can assume that the time
shocks θt are common between the two samples, then the non-treated control group
lets us control for any time effects that altered productivity after t* but are not due to

18

Examples of this given above are Lazear (2000), Ichniowski, Shaw, and Prennushi (1997), and Griffith
and Neely (forthcoming).

29

the treatment. Second, the control group gives us more information on which to
estimate the underlying production function g 0t (x i ) .
3. Difference-in-differences with matching estimator: Here, the analyst again uses a

difference-in-differences estimator, and has the same data as in Figure 1 for
difference-in-differences, but the matching estimator is estimating the production
function non-parametrically. Each treated outcome, g1t (x i ) , is paired with a non-

treated outcome, g 0t (x i ) , and the difference is the treatment effect. Given the extra
data needed for non-parametric estimation, few insider econometrics studies use this
approach.
4. Instrumental Variables or Semi-parametric Methods of Correcting for Selection
Bias.

If there are non-random (selection bias) differences between control and

treatment – or between the Type 1 and Type 2 panels in Figures 1 – then the
researcher must address these differences. If there is selection bias, then the ε it is
correlated with Dit , and we need to add IV- or matching- estimator techniques that
model the selection of the treatment. We do not review these methods here.
Under the assumption of selective adoption of the treatment (as modeled in equation (8)
above), these alternative estimators that all include controls for observation-specific fixed
effects generate estimates of the treatment of the treated (TTE) effect – the effect of some
new management practice on productivity given that firms chose to adopt.
C. Types of Insider Data Sets and Treatment Effects Estimated

The answers to the questions about which treatment effects can be estimated and
which estimation methods can be applied depend on the nature of the insider data sets.
An important distinction here is the difference between insider that use worker-level data,
often personnel records from one firm, versus those that use work-group level data on
employee teams, project groups, production lines, stores or establishments, often from
several firms. When the data are worker-level observations from one firm, the treatment
is randomly assigned to the worker (since all relevant workers in the firm are covered), so
the estimator is a “conditional average treatment effect” or conditional ATE. It is an
ATE effect because assignment is random. We also refer to it as “conditional” since it
30

depends on being in the firm adopting the practice. Estimates of productivity effects of
incentive pay in Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul (2005) that do not make any distinction
in the size of the treatment effect for different types of workers is one such example.
When the data is work-group level from several firms where some groups have
the treatment and others don’t, the estimator is a treatment of the treated effect. In these
cases, we want to know the expected treatment effect for the specific type of firm that
adopts the treatment, not for a random firm 19 The steel mill studies of Ichniowski, Shaw
and Prennushi (1999) and Boning, Ichniowski, and Shaw (2007) are examples. In these
studies where some observations are adopters and others are not, the researcher may add
the estimation of the adoption equation (3) as in Boning, Ichniowski and Shaw (2007) to
model and explain adoption.
Table 1 gives many more examples, classified according to the management
practices being studied. However, the table also describes the type of data, and thus
implies the likely type of estimator of the treatment effect. For example, Griffith and
Neely (forthcoming) have data on an incentive pay treatment, before and after the
treatment and for a treated and control group of retail stores, so they use difference-indifferences with a matching estimator to estimate at TTE effect.
D. Estimating Heterogeneous Treatment Effects in Insider Studies
Insider researchers aim to estimate heterogeneity in the treatment effect, as shown in
equation (2). In some insider studies, this feature is reflected in the idea that the
productivity impact of some management treatment among adopters (the TTE effect)
differs from the productivity impact that non-adopters would be expected to experience
(the NTE effect). In worker-level studies within a single firm that covers all workers
under a new policy, this feature of insider studies is reflected in analyses that identify
specific subgroups of workers with relatively large and small productivity effects; for

19

Some studies analyzing randomly assigned managerial treatments are being conducted in developing
countries. Bloom, Eifert, Mahajan, McKenzie and Roberts (2009) are randomly imposing lean
manufacturing practices on a random set of small manufacturing firms in India who don’t currently have
those practices. Thus, they are estimating the average treatment effect of lean manufacturing, but not the
reasons why some firms adopt and some don’t. Duflo and Rema (2005) introduces incentive pay for
teachers randomly across a set of teachers and a control group. Presumably, in studies using random
assignment of a management practice across workers or plants, identifying observations that enjoy
relatively large and small treatment effects could offer clues about where adoption makes more economic
sense. See Levitt and List (2008) for a review of the new field experiment literature.

31

example, the productivity effects of incentive pay among employees who are (or are not)
working with friends in Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul (2005), or the productivity effects
of piece rate pay among employees who stay (or leave) the Safelite firm in Lazear (2000).
In introducing heterogeneity in treatment effects, there are two econometric issues.
First, when permitting the treatment effect to vary across subgroups of the population,
extrapolation beyond those subgroups is impossible. When there are multiple treatment
effects, we cannot extrapolate to say what the treatment would be for other types of
worker subgroups that are not considered. 20 The second econometric point is that when
researchers permit the treatment effect to vary across workers, they often need to gather
more data beyond the production function inputs and outputs. Examples illustrating this
point include:
•

Bandiera, Barankay, Rasul (2005) gather data on friendships among the work
crew members, so that they can estimate the effect of piece rate for employees
who do (and do not) have friends in their work crew.

•

Mas and Moretti (2009) gather data on the physical location of workers in the
grocery store, so they can specify when the checkout clerks are (and are not) in a
position to observe the co-worker to test how monitoring by high and low
performing clerks affects co-worker productivity.

•

Gant, Ichniowski and Shaw (2007) collect detailed data on workers’
communications networks in steel production lines to show that production lines
with denser social networks are more likely to be the lines with innovative
management practices and higher levels of productivity.
In sum, this section highlights how insider econometric studies must be careful

not to assume that untreated observations would respond the way that treated
observations responded to a practice. TTE effects are not the same as (unobservable)
NTE effects, and this difference can be the simplest explanation for lack of adoption
among the untreated. Second, the magnitude of the treatment effect can vary
systematically across treated observations and this variation can provide important
economic insights. The insider researcher might be able to identify certain subgroups of
20

In econometric terms, we cannot extrapolate beyond the “common support,” which is the subspace of
worker characteristics that are in the treated and non-treated samples.

32

adopters with relatively small productivity treatment effects, and these patterns can offer
clues that help explain the non-adoption among other observations. Third, the crosssectional variation in insider panel data sets is still important. In studies where some
observations are covered by the treatment and others are not, the data on non-adopters is
required to construct difference-in-differences estimators with or without a matching
estimator. In worker-level studies about a single firm that introduces a new management
policy for all workers at one time, the cross-section variation is again important. Here, the
cross-section variation is needed to test for differences in the magnitude of the treatment
effects across observations.
VI. Why Do Firms Adopt New Management Practices?

The treatments in insider econometric studies are new management practices. In
the examples in section IV, these management decisions include changes in:
compensation plans, teamwork and related HRM practices, the scope and size of research
projects, and decisions to outsource certain work. An important question to acknowledge
is why firms would ever change their management practices? For example, why didn’t
Safelite adopt incentives for their windshield installers, or minimills with complex
products put in their problem solving teams sooner than they did? Shouldn’t these firms
have always had their optimal practices? To answer these questions, we must know what
causes the adoption of a new ‘treatment’ to occur among real firms.
Several sources of disequilibrium are likely to cause ‘shocks’ to optimal
management practices. First, there can be shocks to the prices of capital inputs in the
production process. If management practices are complements with these capital inputs,
the management practices too would change. Rapidly declining prices in information
technologies offer one obvious recent example of such a shock. Several studies illustrate
how, as information technology and processing become cheaper in firms, HRM and other
management practices need to change to complement the changing way work gets

33

done. 21 The adoption of new information technology in one industry may also cause
changes in management practices in related industries. 22
Second, there are technology shocks to management knowledge as best practices
in management improve over time. It takes time for firms to learn about these changes
and before they adopt new best practices. For example, the success of a distinctive set of
management practices – like problem solving teams, other innovative HR practices, and
lean manufacturing practices – among large Japanese manufacturers was a source of
productivity and quality improvements in these firms prior to their broader adoption in
the U.S. and elsewhere.

These management practices in Japanese firms were then

“imported” to other developed countries as the lessons about how and why these
practices worked spread throughout manufacturing in developed countries. 23 Developing
countries are beginning to introduce these kinds of management practices, though
adoption in these countries still lags behind the adoption in developed countries. 24
Third, there are shocks to firms’ internal labor markets or firms may decide to
experiment with new practices. For example, stock options may no longer be paying off,
or an aging workforce within the firm may need different incentives, such as pensions.
The external labor market may have an inflow of workers with different levels of human
capital. For example, if immigration offers the firm an increased supply of workers with
higher (lower) levels of human capital than the existing workforce, training needs may
therefore decline (increase).
Fourth, the firm’s product market strategy may change, causing needed
adjustments to optimal management practices for the firm. When firms enter an industry
with new entrepreneurial ideas about the industry’s products or processes, existing firms
within their industry may need to change product market strategies or processes. For
example, as imports from Chinese firms enter U.S. markets, the U.S. firms may move
21

For evidence, see Breshnahan, Brynjolffson and Hitt (2001) and Lemieux, MacLeod and Parent (2009).
Jorgenson, Ho and Stiroh (2003) and Oliner and Sichel (2000) present macro-level evidence that
productivity has risen over time in industries are computer-using industries.
22
When large retailers adopted information technologies that tracked product sales and sent those sales data
directly to suppliers, the suppliers adopted new team-based HR practices that allowed them to restock the
retailer with smaller batches on shorter notice. (Dunlop and Weil, 2000)
23
For more on the notion of “HR technology shocks,” see Lazear and Shaw (2007) and Bloom and
VanReenen. For more on the transfer of Japanese HR practices to U.S. firms and the effects of these
practices on productivity among manufacturers in the two countries, see Ichniowski and Shaw (1999).
24
See Bloom and VanReenen (2007) and Bloom, Eifert, Mahajan, McKenzie, and Roberts (2009).

34

from the production of commodity-like products to customized products. 25 If
management practices are complementary with the new business strategies, firms would
need to adjust their practices. These changes in product market strategy can require
changes in management practices, such as an increased use of problem-solving skills for
producers of customized products as in the case of minimills. 26 These within-industry
shocks arise from new product development or new research by firms over time.
Section VII. A Practical Roadmap for Designing Insider Econometric Studies

The insider econometrician is, in many ways, designing his empirical experiment.
Few insider econometricians are conducting an experiment with random assignment of
treatments, but the insider econometrician like the experimentalist must craft the research
design carefully. He must choose the right firm to study, the questions to ask, hypotheses
to test, the type of data and the variables to collect, and then the specific econometric
methods to test the hypotheses.
A. Key Research Design Decisions for Insider Econometric Studies

In this section, we provide advice about how to answer some of the more specific
methodological questions that naturally arise when designing and executing an insider
econometric study. At the outset of this paper, we offered a list of five features that
characterize insider econometrics studies. These five features tell us that insider studies
use micro-level data on individual workers or groups of workers to study the productivity
effects of a new management practice and the reasons for the adoption of the practice.
Still, many more decisions must be made about specific features of an insider study.
What management practices should I study? What should be the structure of the data set?
What can I do to address the concern that the data are specific to only one particular
production process? This section on key research design decisions delves more deeply
into these decisions about research design to describe the features of studies that will
produce the most convincing insider econometric results.

25

Bloom, Draca and Van Reenen (2008) offer empirical evidence that reduced trade barriers increased the
adoption of new HR practices.
26
Bartel, Ichniowski, and Shaw (2007) document the effects of product market strategy on HRM practice
adoption in another industry.

35

Key Design Decision 1: Identify a Treatment and Measure It Accurately

Identifying a management treatment is the first necessary condition for an insider
study. The researcher must identify a treatment variable that changes. Most firms that
have interesting management practices never change their practices, and thus there is no
variation for the treatment to test its effects. The treatment must also be interesting
economically because of its potential effects on productivity outcomes, and the effects of
the practice on workers must be modeled. The researcher may have a theory in mind and
been searching for data to test it, or the researcher may be offered access to interesting
data and explores possible hypotheses by talking to insiders. Whether discussions with
insiders spark ideas about relevant theoretical models, or a theoretical idea sparks interest
in having discussions with insiders, there must be an economic logic as to why the
treatment would impact performance outcomes.
How does the researcher get the treatment data? Many data sets have information
on the productivity of workers or work groups, but these data sets do not link information
on management practices to the productivity data. However, as in most examples of
insider studies considered in Table 1, management practices are discrete events that
change infrequently within firms. The researcher can therefore interview insiders and
build a data set on the time path of management practices within or across firms.
The treatment needs to be specified accurately. First, insider studies have several
advantages over traditional surveys, and one is that the researcher can use interviews to
measure exactly what the management practices are. In contrast, respondents to a survey
question that asks, “do you have teamwork,” may interpret the meaning of the question in
many different ways. Insiders’ insights help measure treatments accurately.
Second, the researcher needs to measure all the dimensions of the management
treatment. An important contribution of existing insider studies is that “management
treatments” often involve the simultaneous adoption of multiple complementary
management practices. Insider econometricians who have been inside the firms often
find that the firm is changing not just one practice to improve productivity, but is instead
adopting a cluster of complementary practices. 27

27

MacDuffie (1995) finds that productivity is higher in auto plants that adopt several new HRM practices
together with lean manufacturing methods and just-in-time inventory policies. Ichniowski, Shaw and

36

Finally, the “treatment” need not always be a change in a formal management
policy. Clever researchers are finding “natural experiments” within firms involving other
kinds of “treatments.” For example, Mas and Moretti (2008) model the importance of
peer effects on productivity.

They identify the peer effects not from a change in

management practices surrounding peer groups, but instead from a change in which
employees are assigned to peer groups. That is, because workers are assigned randomly
to different peer groups, the authors can test whether peers influence productivity. 28
Key Design Decision 2: Test a Generalizable Principle by Modeling Economic Behavior

The economist’s approach to studying organizations has its own distinctive set of
building blocks that form the foundation for empirical studies in personnel or industrial
economics (Lazear and Shaw, 2007). Central to these building blocks is the idea that
workers, managers and firms are optimizing agents. While insider studies are carefully
crafted empirical tests of hypotheses about management practices, the hypotheses
emanate from models of a more general economic principle about how these optimizing
agents really behave when they are at work inside their firms. The data may come from
one firm or from several companies within one industry, but the theoretical model
generating the hypotheses is not specific to the single industry context. This means that
ultimately the broader goal of the insider study is to test a more general economic
principle that will enhance our understanding of the theory of the firm.
As examples, in our review of six insider studies in Section III, we asked the
question, “why is this study interesting” for each study. The answer was always that the
results test a model of fundamental economic principle about the behavior of workers in
firms. Certainly, the principle will not be relevant for all firms in all industries, but in
settings where the key features of the more general model are relevant, the principle may

Prennushi (1997) document improvements in productivity only when lines adopt entire systems of
innovative HRM practices. Bartel, Ichniowski and Shaw (2007) find that new computer-aided production
equipment that raises productivity among customized valve manufacturers coincides with the adoption of
complementary HRM practices. Azoulay (2004) identifies how the management decision to outsource drug
trials always means the firm is putting the trial under a different compensation policy. See Milgrom and
Roberts (1995) for discussions of complementarity.
28
Mas and Moretti (2009) find that any individual checkout clerk in their study of grocery stores is more
productive when he works with faster co-workers, and argue that differences in shift composition are not
endogenous and that changes in shift composition cause changes in co-worker productivity.

37

also be at work. That is, even though only one firm or industry is studied, the testable
hypothesis and results appear to be applicable to a wider set of workers or firms because
the paper models fundamental optimizing behavior. 29
Put differently, without insider data sets with rich details about the workers and
production processes in a specific industry setting, convincing econometric tests of these
kinds of models would not be possible. The insider studies reviewed in this chapter
document important productivity effects of many factors that are routinely neglected in
standard specifications of a firm’s production function: friendship among co-workers, coworker monitoring, complementarities among multiple HRM practices, interactions of
HR practices and product attributes, knowledge spillovers across workers and projects,
and many more. Insider data sets that describe rich details about the context for a single
production process are precisely the kind of data that one needs to construct a convincing
test of these novel hypotheses. An insider study cannot on its own identify the boundary
conditions that determine exactly where the model does and does not apply. However,
the models of optimizing behavior by firms and workers in insider studies is
generalizable, and one needs detailed firm- or industry-specific data to conduct
convincing econometric tests of whether the predictions of the more general model are
supported. 30
Key Design Decision 3: Balance Homogeneity and Heterogeneity in the Sample

Prior to insider studies, production functions would be estimated with aggregate
industry-level data or with firm-level data or establishment-level data in broad crossindustry samples. While these data might be appropriate for estimating the effects of
29

In the examples we review in Section IV, we find models in which: friendship can affect worker utility
(Bandiera, Baranky and Rasul, 2005); HR practices are sorting devices (Lazear, 2000); HR practices have
complementary effects on productivity (Ichniowski, Shaw and Prennushi, 1997); the value of work on
production activities versus problem-solving activities can vary across plants (Boning, Ichniowski and
Shaw, 2007); the ability to measure and monitor work determines decisions about incentives and
outsourcing (Azoulay, 2004); and knowledge gained in one area of the firm increases productivity
elsewhere (Henderson and Cockburn, 1996).
30
Consider the paper of Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul (2005) in which friendships influence a worker’s
response to incentive pay (Example 2 of Section III). Their conclusion is not simply that friends influence
people’s behavior, but that when economists write a model of incentive pay, that model should include an
externality – that when I maximize my utility in response to incentive pay, my response internalizes the
externality of my friends’ feelings. Economic theorists have introduced peer pressure and social norms into
their theories of the firm (Kandel and Lazear, 1992; and Akerlof and Kranston, 2000; 2005).

38

factors like capital-labor ratios on productivity, they will be less helpful for identifying
the effects of management practices on productivity, for isolating the economic reasons
why similar organizations or workers are covered by different practices, or for identifying
factors that cause the productivity effects of a management practice to vary across
workers. (see the discussion in Syverson, Goolsbee and Levitt, 2009). With more
aggregate data, there is not one common production process that generates the data, and
therefore the number of variables that might be correlated with the management treatment
variable is exceptionally large. 31 . 32
To mitigate the issues of unmeasured heterogeneity, insider studies seek data from
production units – whether workers or work groups – that are very homogeneous. The
homogeneity of these workers is that they all share one common production function that
the research can model empirically -- on-site car windshield installation, fruit picking in
an orchard, finishing lines or rolling lines in steelmaking, and research projects or clinical
testing processes in pharmaceuticals.
While sample homogeneity is therefore important in insider studies, the insider
data set cannot have perfect homogeneity of the production units. The adoption of the
treatment must vary to investigate why, how and how much management practices affect
productivity. The researcher wants a homogeneous production function, but also subtle
differences in the workers or organizations that leads to heterogeneity in the adoption of
the treatment or heterogeneity in the response to a common treatment. Overall, the goal
of sample design decisions in insider studies is to strike a purposeful balance between

31

Differences in production equipment, worker and manager quality, occupational mix, and many other
factors all could be correlated with differences in management practices and thus confound any attempts to
use such industry-level data to generate a convincing estimate of a treatment effect due to any management
practices.
32
The methodological issues in generating a persuasive estimate of the effect of some management practice
on productivity of course extend well beyond issues of unmeasured heterogeneity and omitted variables.
While measurement error in the dependent variable does not have to introduce bias in the estimated
treatment effect in a production function, production functions estimated with more aggregate data
typically must rely on value added data for the dependent variable, even though value added contains
product mix changes that are not part of ‘production’ per se, and thus can differ dramatically from the
variable the researcher hopes to be measuring. See Syverson, Foster, and Haltiwanger (2008) for a
discussion of this point.

39

homogeneity in the production function and heterogeneity in either the adoption of the
treatments or the magnitudes of the treatment effects. 33
Key Design Decision 4: Collect Information on Why the Treatment Was Adopted

Once the researcher identifies a management innovation that varies across
observations, he must understand why the treatment was adopted. Perhaps the most
fundamental point about understanding and modeling the adoption process is that,
because the management treatments are rarely natural experiments, the researcher needs
to collect information about the determinants of the adoption of the management practice
being studied. While this point is perhaps obvious, unless it is fully appreciated prior to
data collection efforts, the researcher may focus only on data related to the production
function and management practices, and miss opportunities to obtain data on the factors
that cause adoption of the practices.
The researcher can also explore whether the treatment should be considered
exogenous or endogenous with respect to productivity outcomes. Even though most
researchers do not have data from natural experiments in which the adoption is randomly
and exogenously imposed, there are some cases in which the treatment is exogenous.
When data come from a single firm, the management innovation is likely to be
exogenous with respect to productivity outcomes when productivity is measured at the
worker level. In these cases, the new management treatment is imposed by the firm on all
of its workers or establishments. In the Safelite (Lazear, 2000) and fruitpickers studies
(Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul, 2005), the productivity data are on workers, and
adoption is clearly exogenous to the worker. This is true for other studies of retail stores
in a single firm (Lafontaine and Srinivasan, 2008; Griffith and Neely, forthcoming), or
for teams of workers within an apparel firm (Hamilton, Jackson, and Owan, 2003). At
the same time, as described in Section IV, there are still potential sources of selectivity in
the application of the exogenous management practice: workers can leave or join the firm
(and enter or leave the sample) after the firm imposes the practice (as in Lazear, 2000); or

33

List, Sadoff, and Wagner (2008) make this point about the tradeoff between homogeneity and
heterogeneity in designing optimal field experiments.

40

workers might be the ones who decide to opt in or out of the new practice (as in the study
of work teams by Hamilton, Jackson, and Owan, 2003).
The management innovation can also be exogenous with respect to productivity
outcomes across plants, but endogenous to the firm.

In the integrated steel mills,

Ichniowski, Shaw and Prennushi (1997) conclude that expected productivity gains for
non-adopters are about the same as those observed for adopters, and adoption differences
across lines are not a function of expected productivity differences. Rather, they are
determined by differences in the costs to the firm of transitioning to new HR practices. 34
In other insider studies that use panel data across firms, the analysts conclude that
the adoption is endogenous to productivity outcomes, and the authors gather data on the
adoption regression. In the study of minimills by Boning, Ichniowski, and Shaw (2007),
productivity gains from teamwork are greater when a mill produces complex instead of
commodity products. The authors show that adoption is more likely among firms making
complex products. In Bartel, Ichniowski, and Shaw (2007), the authors also show that
adoption of information technologies in valve industry plants is driven by the complexity
of the product mix. As described in Section V, in these cases where adoption is
endogenous, the treatment effect estimated in the productivity regression is the “treatment
of the treated” – the expected gain conditional on optimal adoption of the treatment. By
understanding and documenting the reasons for adoption, the researcher can more clearly
identify the nature of the treatment effect he is estimating.
Key Design Decision 5: Collect information on how behavior changes and why the
treatment was successful

Even though insider econometrics researchers use many different types of data
sets and methodologies, all insider econometric studies document why the treatment was
effective. In the broader treatment effect literature, this is typically not the case. When
researchers study the effects of tax cuts on labor supply, researchers rarely collect data to
explain why people increase their labor supply. However, in working with workers or
establishments of firms, evidence on why the management practice is or is not effective is
34

With detailed observation-specific data, it is possible to examine other reasons that could account for
differences in the adoption of new HR practices in this study. In the study of steel lines for example,
explanations related to differences in managerial quality, or plant age, or prior productivity, are tested and
rejected, thus lending greater support to the conclusion about transition costs.

41

both available and essential. Models of the effects of management practices on
productivity routinely model why a practice is effective. Insiders can get the data to test
these more detailed mechanisms and provide additional tests of the underlying model.
Consider some examples of the data researchers gather to test why management
practices are effective. Bandiera, Baranky and Rasul (2005) gather data on friendships
among employees to show that a large gain in productivity after the firm switches from
relative pay to piece rate pay is concentrated among employees who worked with friends
and who were holding back their effort under the old pay plan. Mas and Moretti (2009)
gather data on where checkout clerks stand (relative to each other in the store) to show
that the large gain in the speed of grocery checkout clerks when a high-performing clerk
joins the clerk’s shift occurs when the new high-performing co-worker watches the lower
performer. Gant, Ichniowski, and Shaw (2002) gather data on the communications social
networks of all employees to show that inter-worker communication and problem-solving
activities are much more pronounced among steel production lines with new HRM
practices and higher productivity than they are in other lines. Many recent studies in
behavioral economics are aimed precisely at showing how people behave in response to
incentives or other HR practices, and some of the most convincing evidence in insider
econometric research describes the behavior of workers in treated and untreated
conditions.
In sum, one advantage of doing insider research is that data are often available on
why the treatment is effective, and these data allow the researcher to identify specific
behavioral mechanisms that explain the connection between the management policy and
the productivity outcomes. Insider studies are more convincing if they go beyond the
estimation of a treatment effect. If additional data are collected about why the treatment
is effective, the empirical work is more persuasive.
B. Detailed Steps to Take When Faced with Data

When faced with potential data from one or more firms, what should the
researcher do? The following list offers some guidance.
1.

Interview managers, workers, and others to learn about the mode of
production and the management issues faced by and addressed by the
firm. Ask them to tell you, what determines productivity? Learn the
production process.

42

2.
3.
4.

5.

6.

Identify a research question based on these interviews. Most
researchers would not know the questions or potential hypotheses
without the plant visits. Rule out some potential hypotheses.
Identify why this firm (or firms) have adopted these management
practices and other firms have not.
Gather additional data needed for better tests of the hypotheses.
Determine your econometric methods and how you will identify the
appropriate treatment effect. If data describe the adoption of one new
treatment within a single firm, can you collect data on factors that
explain heterogeneity in observed treatment effects? If data describe
the adoption of the treatment across multiple firms or locations, can
you collect data on the reasons for adoption versus non-adoption?
Decide what is endogenous versus exogenous, and where there might
be measurement error or omitted variable bias.
Evaluate and interpret your results. Empirical researchers typically test
the robustness of their models by introducing functional form changes.
Insider econometrics studies go a step further by asking the insider
informants if the results make sense.
Collect additional data for more comprehensive and convincing tests.
For example, though the primary model is a production function, it
could be very persuasive to interview workers to gather other evidence
to interpret or retest the results.

Insider studies identify what is most likely to affect productivity, and also identify
what can be ruled out as a determinant of productivity. Ruling out potential hypotheses
can be as important as formulating new testable hypotheses.

Across all firms,

productivity may grow due to learning curves, teamwork, new product development, or
new management practices.

In cross-industry studies of firm-level data, the list of

possible productivity determinants is endless. In insider studies, many possible reasons
for productivity growth can be ruled out (or controlled for in the regressions) given the
narrow focus on a single production process, so the economist can focus on testing the
hypotheses that are most relevant to that firm or industry or theoretical model.
Initial discussions with experienced insiders about how the production operations
work can lead naturally to other steps. For example, the researcher may end up exploring
managers’ opinions about why some workers, work groups, or establishments are
covered by the management treatment, while elsewhere the treatment is absent. He must
then translate the real world experience of the industry insiders into a research design that
tests hypotheses about the fundamental questions that define insider econometric research

43

reviewed at the outset of this chapter. Why do some employees or organizations that
appear to be competing in the same narrowly defined industry work under one set of
managerial practices while others work under other practices? When new practices are
adopted, did productivity change? How do changes in productivity vary across workers
or establishments? Are there any changes in employee behavior that can help explain the
changes in productivity?
Section VIII. Economic Lessons Learned from Insider Econometric Research

Each insider study provides its own insights for firm- and industry-specific
settings, and each tests different economic models. At the same time, many of the
empirical findings from one study to the next echo common themes. These broader
economic themes emerging from insider studies can, we believe, provide guidance about
the most promising avenues for developing richer theories of competing firms and their
employees. In this section, we review several broader themes emerging from multiple
insider studies.
1. Management matters. Effects of management practices on productivity can be big.

The fundamental conclusion emerging from insider econometric research reviewed in
this chapter is that management matters, and that it matters in several ways. First, insider
studies routinely document substantial productivity effects from the adoption of new
management practices. As examples, the magnitudes of the overall productivity effects
among windshield installers in Lazear (2000) or fruit harvesters in Barankay, Bandiera,
Barankay, and Rasul (2005) are substantial – 44% and 58% respectively. Studies in many
other industry settings reviewed above also show dramatic productivity increases after
adoption of other new practices. If, as seems likely, the productivity benefits of the new
practices among the adopters exceed the costs of adopting to them, then managers’ search
for optimal practices is critical for firm performance. While it is beyond the scope of this
study, one can speculate that the large magnitudes of the “treatment of the treated”
productivity effects reviewed in this chapter imply that the economy-wide impact of
management practices on productivity is also large.
Second, the large productivity increases that occur after the adoption of some new
management practice are still not universal within a given industry setting. Insider
44

studies also routinely document heterogeneity in the magnitude of productivity benefits
among workers and plants using the same basic production process.

Management

therefore matters in another way. Managers need to understand subtle within-industry
differences to decide if a new management practice will increase productivity for their
specific operations.
Third, a wide array of management practices impact productivity of workers, work
groups, and plants in different industries.

The number of management practices

considered in insider studies, as reviewed in the list of studies in Table 1, is very large. 35
Thus, managers must evaluate a very wide range of policy areas when deciding what
practices would be the optimal ones for their workers, their technologies, and their
industries.
2. The productivity of individual workers is determined by his or her work group.
Several insider studies demonstrate that work groups matter. An individual’s
productivity is a function of his co-workers’ productivity. Two work group effects stand
out. First, productivity spillovers due to peer effects matter. When an employee is
working next to a high performer, the employee works harder. This is a sense of peer
pressure, not teamwork. We discussed this above regarding the Mas and Moretti (2009)
paper showing that when a faster check-out clerk replaces a slower clerk on a shift, the
shift becomes more productivity not simply because the new clerk is faster than the old
one, but because the other clerks also become faster (Mas and Moretti, 2009).
The second work group effect is that employees are complements in production
when they work as teams, and teams can be much more productive than individuals.
Teamwork implies that workers do not have identical skills and thus workers can
complement one another. In a team-based production function, output is not the sum of
individual output, but instead is a function of the multiplicative interaction between

35

Even within the area of compensation policies, there are many other types of compensation plans that we
have not reviewed. For example, tournaments are readily modeled in laboratory experiments, so there is
extensive experimental evidence showing that tournaments can motivate individuals better than other kinds
of incentive pay in some settings (see Bull, Schotter, and Weigelt, 1987). See the insider studies of Knoeber
and Thurman (1994) for producers of broiler chickens; Drago and Garvey (1998) for Australian firms,
Ehrenberg and Bognanno (1990) for professional golfers. Different methods for determining CEO or other
top executive pay would be yet another set of management practices that impact firm performance.

45

employees. Several insider papers reviewed above delve into the details of what makes
work teams productive. 36
3. Employees respond to management practices at both the extensive margin of
whether to work for the firm and the intensive margin in deciding how hard to work
at their jobs.

When firms introduce a new incentive pay plan, we expect workers to work harder
and to target their efforts towards the output that is rewarded. This increase in effort
operates on the worker’s “intensive margin” – on workers effort “within” the firm. Other
management practices, like teamwork or innovative job design, also aim to increase effort
at the intensive margin. However, management practices also have a big effect on
workers at the “extensive margin” – on workers’ decision to join the firm or the work
group that offers the particular practice. Workers that don’t like incentive pay avoid
firms that pay for performance (Lazear, 2000). In other cases, within the firm,
management can put a policy such as teamwork in place, but then leave it to the
employees to join teams. Workers can remain employed even when they choose not to be
covered by the new practice. In these cases, insider studies again find there is selectivity
in who joins teams (Hamilton, Nickerson, and Owan, 2003). The key result is that when
a firm chooses its management practice, it will cause worker sorting. Thus, the
productivity gains that firms experience from management practices result from a
combination of effort (the intensive margin) and optimal sorting (the extensive margin).
4. Firms compete using different product market strategies, and these different
strategies require internal organizational structures to match the strategies.

The idea that businesses in an industry compete in different product niches has
long been recognized in the business strategy literature. Low cost mass producers coexist in industries alongside other businesses that serve customers who prefer higher cost
36

In steel finishing lines, problem-solving teams raise productivity because worker interactions become
richer and more frequent. Problem solving requires interaction among the co-workers (Gant, Ichniowski,
and Shaw, 2002). In apparel manufacturing, the productivity of work teams depends on the mix of skills
and productivity levels of the team’s members (Hamilton, Nickerson, and Owan, 2003) In insider studies of
orchards, the existence or absence of friendships among co-workers determines the extent to which effort
of the fruit pickers changes after various kinds of incentive pay plans are adopted (Bandiera, Barankay, and
Rasul, 2005). In pharmaceuticals, the productivity of research on one project depends on knowledge
spillovers from other related projects (Henderson and Cockburn, 1996). In many settings then, the true
production function specifies not just an aggregate amount of workers but must capture the interactions
among the individual workers.

46

specialty versions of the products. Several insider econometric studies document this link
between product market strategy and internal management practices. 37 This link is an
important result. It explains, in part, why some firms within an industry adopt certain
human resource management practices and other similar firms don’t. It also explains
why traditional output-per-manhour productivity measures will be higher for some firms
than others in the same industry.
5. Management innovations often require the adoption of multiple practices that are
complements with each other.

Complementarities among management practices are pervasive.

That is, the

productivity gain from one management practice, like problem solving teams, interacts
with the gain from other practices, such as training, selection or compensation practices.
Therefore, managers who are considering adopting one new management innovation
cannot calculate the marginal gain from that practice independent of the set of other
practices (Milgrom and Roberts, 1990). There is extensive evidence from insider papers
that choosing the right system of complementary practices increases productivity more
than choosing individual practices in isolation. 38
This review of broader themes emerging from the empirical findings of insider
econometric research highlights how diverse and complex the determinants of
productivity really are. Managers who want to achieve high levels of productivity from
their workforces must consider a wide array of factors. Which employees are working
together? What are the skill differences across co-workers and what are their personal
37

Minimills that make complex steel products adopt problem-solving teams more often than minimills
making commodity products (Boning, Ichniowski, and Shaw, 2007). Valve manufacturers making more
customized valve products adopt more innovative information technologies within their capital equipment
and adopt more innovative training and teamwork (Bartel, Ichniowski and Shaw, 2007). Software
companies operating in market segments that have big upside gains to innovative software development
pay higher wages and offer more performance pay than software companies operating in more traditional
product market niches (Andersson, Freedman, Haltiwanger, Lane, and Shaw, 2009). Southwest Airlines,
targeting low-price airline customers, uses different hiring and training and pay plans than does Singapore
Airlines that targets high-price customers.
38
Ichniowski, Shaw and Prennushi, (1997) document this result in the steel industry. In auto assembly
plants, innovative HRM systems are typically adopted along with lean manufacturing methods and just-intime inventory procedures (MacDuffie, 1995). In apparel manufacturing, new HRM systems are adopted
when new information technologies that tie the manufacturer directly to large retailers are adopted (Dunlop
and Weil, 2000; Appelbaum, Bailey Berg, and Kalleberg, 2000). Decisions to adopt new information
technologies are also linked together with decisions to adopt a series of new HRM policies in valve
manufacturing (Bartel, Ichnowski, and Shaw, 2007). Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson, and Hitt, (2001) also find
that HR practices and new information technologies are complementary.

47

realationships like? When I adopt a new policy, am I likely to attract the kind of
employee I really want, or will the better performers leave my firm? Is the new practice I
am considering consistent with other practices I have in place, or do I need to change
multiple practices?

If I change my competitive business strategy, will I need to

reconfigure how I manage my workforce? Insider econometric research paints a picture
of the manager’s job as one that is extremely challenging. As the first theme above states,
management certainly matters.
IX. Data Sources for Insider Econometric Studies

In the insider studies reviewed above, researchers worked with firms to obtain
data. That is not always necessary. As described next, researchers can use publically
available data and augment it with data from other sources or from their own survey.
Data sets may contain information on productivity or on management practices, but not
both: researchers must combine data from several sources to get both. Many insider
studies are now being conducted in education and health care, and in firms in developing
economies. As researchers obtain data in these or other sectors, new insider studies will
be possible. In this list of possible data sources, we include lengthy footnotes with
references to papers that have used data from these kinds of sources. However, authors
of these papers have also been creative in their use of data that spans these categories.
1. Insider data from within one firm. Here, the firm provides the data. 39
2. Insider data from multiple firms within the same industry. Researchers obtain
data from the firms (through visits) or conduct surveys of the firms to learn
HR practices. 40 For surveys, the researchers use insider guidance to develop
39

Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003). Bandiera, Barankay and Rasul (2009). Bandiera ,Barankay and Rasul
(2007). Bandiera ,Barankay and Rasul (2005). Bartel (2004). Batt (1999). Bhattacherjee (2005). Encinosa,
Gaynor and Rebitzer (2007). Freeman and Kleiner (2005). Griffith and Neely (2007). Hamilton Nickerson
and Owan (2003). Jones and Takao. (2007), Kalmi and Kauhanen (2006). Knoeber and Thurman (1994),
Lazear (2000). Lo,Ghosh and Lafontaine (2006).
40

Bartel, Ichniowski and Shaw (2007). Bloom, Eifert, Mahajan, McKenzie and Roberts (2009). Bloom,
Genakos, Sadun and Van Reenen (2009). Bloom and Van Reenen (2007). Boning, Ichniowski, and Shaw
(2007). Dunlop,and Weil (2000). Fernie and Metcalf (2003). Huselid and Becker (1996). Ichniowski and
Shaw (2003). Ichniowski and Shaw (1995). Kruse (1993). Kruse, Blasi and Park (2006). MacDuffie (1995).
Oyer (1998). VanReenen and Bloom (2007). Van Biesebroeck (2006), Berg, Appelbaum, Bailey, and
Kalleberg (1996), Dunlop and Weil (2000).

48

and administer their own survey, and the challenge is to get productivity data
from the survey (or match it from a different data set, like census data).
3. Insider analysis using data from regulated industries. 41 Regulated and
government-funded industries – such as education, health care, trucking, and
electricity generation – often have data available. The researcher may need to
conduct surveys to obtain the HR information to match to the productivity
data.
4. Insider analysis is also done using Census data or data sets from consulting
firms or industry associations. 42 Some industries are followed by the U.S.
Census Department, such as trucking, retail trade, and manufacturing
industries. Some industries have consulting firms that follow the industry – as
in venture capital. And some industries have industry associations or the
desire to publicize their firm’s attributes – as in franchising and law. These
data sets might follow HR practices, or productivity, or both.
5. Insider analysis using employer-employee matched data sets that are available
for entire countries. In Europe, the U.S., and some developing countries, the
census departments are matching data on individual workers to data from the
firm. These data sets span all workers in all industries. But it may be wise to
take subsets of the data sets, for certain industries or occupations, and delve
deeper into the production function. Though the data sets do not match HR
information to these data, researchers can use the wages and mobility of all
the workers in the firm to infer the sorts of HR practices that firms are
adopting. 43
6. Insider analysis using data from developing countries is now emerging. There
are now studies where firms are allowing researchers to randomly assign new
management practices to plants in a single industry (e.g., Bloom, Eifert,
Mahajan, McKenzie and Roberts, 2009). Such studies that measure average
treatment effects offer some unique opportunities to identify observations that
enjoy relatively large or small productivity impacts, which in turn could help
identify the causes for any observed heterogeneity in the treatment effects.
41

Asch (1990). Baker and Hubbard (2003). Dee and Keys (2004). Dranove, Kessler, McClellan and
Satterthwaite (2003). Eberts, Hollenbeck, and Stone (2000), Graciano and Heaton (2006). Hoxby (2002).,
Jacob and Levitt (2003). Kreuger (1999). Lavy (2008). Lavy (2002). Lim (2007). Rivkin, Hanushek and
Kain (2005). Hall, VanReenen, and Propper (2008). Rosenthal, Song and Landon (2004). Imberman,
Kugler and Sacerdote (2009). Duflo, Hanna and Ryan (2007). Kalnins and Wilbur (2006).
42
Autor and Scarborough (2008). Black and Lynch(2004). Black and Lynch (2001). Baker and Hubbard
(2003), Hubbard (2000), Garicano and Hubbard (forthcoming). Lafontaine and Shaw (1999). Lafontaine
and Shaw (2005). Landers, Rebitzer and Taylor (1996). Oyer and Schaefer(2007).
43
See Andersson, Freedman, Haltiwanger, Lane and Shaw (2009) for work using employer-employee
matched data for the software industry. See Lazear and Shaw (2007) for examples of other papers and the
range of possible data sets.

49

In sum, to obtain data on both productivity outcomes and management practices,
the researcher will often need to merge several datasets.

Helper (2000) discusses

additional issues and ideas on working with firms and their data. When working with
firms, it is important for the researchers to show what they can do for the firm, while
acknowledging the importance of the firm’s generosity in these efforts aimed at
furthering our knowledge of how businesses really operate.

X. Conclusion

Insider econometric research has goals at two different levels. First, insider
econometric research analyzes information from inside the firm with modern econometric
tools to estimate the impact of organizational practices on performance. Second, the
broader goal of insider research is to use these estimated performance results to improve
our understanding and theories of the firm, and where possible, to offer suggestions to
managers for improved organizational practices within their firms.
We describe insider econometric studies as research that focuses on three basic
questions:
1. Does a new management practice raise productivity?
2. Why does the new management practice raise productivity?, and
3. Why is the new management practice adopted?

Ultimately, designing and executing a study that develops persuasive answers to these
questions in part art and part science. Judgments about which management practices to
study and how to measure them, how to balance homogeneity and heterogeneity in the
design of the sample and data set, and about the many aspects of modeling the
determinants of productivity and adoption are critical parts of the research.
The approach that insider econometric research takes to address these questions
combines qualitative field research and quantitative econometric research, with the
insights from interviews and field research informing the econometric analysis in
important ways. Thus, the insider econometrician must be an expert translator. The
researcher must translate the real world experience of the industry insiders into a data set

50

and research design that addresses these fundamental questions about worker and firm
behavior. The research designs of insider econometric research rely on rich micro-level
data on workers or work groups from a single industry and production process. While the
empirical tests pertain to one industry setting, it is precisely this kind of detailed
information about new management practices, worker characteristics, the production
process, product characteristics, and other aspects of the industry setting that allows the
researcher to test new theories about what makes workers and firms more productive.

51

References

Akerlof, George A. and Rachel Kranton, (2000) “Economics and Identity,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 15(3): 715-753.
Akerlof, George A. and Rachel Kranton, (2005) “Identity and the Economics of
Organizations,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(1): 9-32.
Andersson, Fredrik, Clair Brown, Benjamin Campbell, Hyowook Chiang and Yooki
Park, (2006), “The Effect of HRM Practices and R&D Investment on Worker
Productivity,” Working paper.
Andersson, Fredrik, Matthew Freedman, John C. Haltiwanger, Julia Lane and Kathryn
L. Shaw, (2009), "Reaching for the Stars: Who Pays for Talent in Innovative
Industries?," Economic Journal, Royal Economic Society, 119(538) :F308-F332.
Appelbaum, Eileen, Thomas Bailey, Peter Berg, and Arne Kalleberg (2000),
Manufacturing Advantage: Why High-Performance Work Systems Pay Off Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Appelbaum, Eileen, and Rosemary Batt (1994), “The New American Workplace:
Transforming Work Systems in the United States,” Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Arthur, Jeffrey (1992), “The Link between Business Strategy and Industrial Relations
Systems in American Steel Minimills,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 45: 488506.
Arruñada, Benito, Luis Garicano and Luis Vázquez (2001), “Contractual Allocation of
Decision Rights and Incentives: The Case of Automobile Distribution.” Journal of Law,
Economics, and Organization, 17(1):256-283.
Asch, Beth J. (1990), “Do Incentives Matter—The Case of Navy Recruiters.” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, 43(3): 89-106.
Athey, Susan and Scott Stern (1998), “An Empirical Framework for Testing Theories
about Complementarity in Organizational Design,” NBER working paper 6600. Revise &
Resubmit, Management Science.
Autor, David H. and David Scarborough (2008), “Does Job Testing Harm Minority
Workers? Evidence from Retail Establishments” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(1)
February: 219-277.
Autor, David (2003), “Why Do Temporary Help Firms Provide Free General Skills
Training?” Quarterly Journal of Economics November 116(4): 1409-1448.
Autor, David, Frank Levy, and Richard Murname (2003), “The Skill Content of Recent
Technological Change: An Empirical Investigation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
November 118(4): 1279-1333.

52

Autor, David, Frank Levy, and Richard Murname (2002), “Upstairs Downstairs:
Computers and Skills in Two Floors of a Large Bank.” Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, April, 55(3): 432-447.
Azoulay, Pierre (2004), “Capturing Knowledge within and across Firm Boundaries:
Evidence from Clinical Development.” American Economic Review, December, 94(5):
1591-1612.
Azoulay, Pierre and Joshua Graff Zivin (2005), “Peer Effects in the Workplace: Evidence
from Professional Transitions for the Superstars of Medicine.” Working paper.
Baker, George P. and Thomas N Hubbard (2003), “Make Versus Buy in Trucking: Asset
Ownership, Job Design, and Information,” American Economic Review, 93(3): 551-572.
Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay and Imran Rasul (2009), “Social Connections and
Incentives in the Workplace: Evidence from Personnel Data” Econometrica, Econometric
Society, 77(4): 1047-1094.
Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul (2007), “Incentives for Managers and
Inequality among Workers: Evidence from a Firm Level Experiment” Quarterly Journal
of Economics May, 122(2): 729-773.
Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul, (2005), “The Evolution of
Cooperative Norms: Evidence from a Natural Field Experiment,” CEPR Discussion
Paper No. 5358.
Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul, (2005), “Social Preferences and the
Response to Incentives: Evidence from Personnel Data,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 120(3): 917-962.
Bartel, Ann, Ciaran Phibbs, Patricia Stone, and Nancy Beaulieu, (2009), “Human Capital
and Productivity: The Case of Nursing Teams,” Working paper.
Bartel, Ann (2004), “Human Resource Management and Organizational Performance:
Evidence from Retail Banking” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 57(2): 181-203.
Bartel, Ann, Casey Ichniowski, and Kathryn Shaw (2007), “How Does Information
Technology Affect Productivity? Plant-Level Comparisons of Product Innovation,
Process Improvement, and Worker Skills” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4):
1721-1758.
Bartel, Ann, Casey Ichniowski, Kathryn Shaw, and Ricardo Correa (2009), “International
Differences in the Adoption and Impact of new Information Technologies and New HR
Practices: The Valve Making Industry in the U.S. and U.K.” in International Differences
in the Business Practices and Productivity of Firms, eds. Richard Freeman and Kathryn
Shaw, University of Chicago, National Bureau of Economic Research.

53

Baron, James and Michael Hannan (2002), “Organizational Blueprints for Success in
High-Tech Start-Ups: Lessons From The Stanford Project On Emerging Companies.”
California Management Review, 44(3): 8-36.
Batt, Rosemary (1999), “Work Organization, Technology, and Performance in Customer
Services and Sales,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, July 52: 539-64.
Bayo-Moriones, Alberto, José Enrique Galdón Sánchez and Maia Güell (2004), “Is
Seniority-Based Pay Used as a Motivation Device? Evidence from Plant Level Data.” No
4606, CEPR Discussion Papers.
Berg, Peter, Eileen Appelbaum, Thomas Bailey, and Arne L. Kalleberg (1996) “The
Performance Effects of Modular Production in the Apparel Industry.” Industrial
Relations, 35(3): 356-74.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo,and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004), “How Much Should
We Trust Difference-in-Differences Estimates?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
119(1): 249-75.
Bhattacherjee, Debashish (2005), “The Effects of Group Incentives in an Indian Firm:
Evidence from Payroll Data,” Labour, 19(1): 147-173.
Black, Sandra and Lisa Lynch (2004), “What’s Driving the New Economy?: The Benefits
of Workplace Innovation”, The Economic Journal, 114(493): 97-116.
Black, Sandra and Lisa Lynch (2001), "How to Compete: The Impact of Workplace
Practices and Information Technology on Productivity", Review of Economics and
Statistics, August 83(3):434-445.
Bloom, Nick, Mirko Draca, and John Van Reenen (2008), “Trade Induced Technical
Change? The Impact of Chinese Imports on IT and Innovation,” November.
Bloom, Nick, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie and John Roberts (2009),
“Management as a Technology: Evidence from Indian firms,” working paper.
Bloom, Nick, Christos Genakos, Raffaella Sadun and John Van Reenen (2009),
“Management Practices Across Asia, Europe and the US,” Working paper.
Bloom, Nick and John Van Reenen (2007), “Measuring and Explaining Management
Practices Across Firms and Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November
122(4): 1351-1408.
Blundell, Richard and Monica Costa Dias (2002), “Alternative Approaches to Evaluation
in Empirical Microeconomics,” Portuguese Economic Journal, 1, 91-115.
Bollinger, Bryan, Phillip Leslie and Alan Sorensen (2009) "Calorie Posting in Chain
Restaurants" Working paper.

54

Boning, Brent, Casey Ichniowski, and Kathryn Shaw (2007), “Opportunity Counts:
Teams and the Effectiveness of Production Incentives,” Journal of Labor Economics,
25(4): 613-650.
Breshnahan, Timothy, Erik Brynjolfsson and Loren Hitt (2002), “Information
Technology, Work Organization and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-Level
Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1): 339-376.
Cappelli, Peter, and David Neumark (2001), “Do High-Performance Work Practices
Improve Establishment-Level Outcomes?” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, July
54(4): 737-775.
Caroli, Eve and John Van Reenen (2001), "Skill biased Organisational Change? Evidence
from British and French Establishments" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 171(4): 14491492.
Chan, Tat, Jia Li and Lamar Pierce (2009), “Compensation and Peer Effects in
Competing Sales Teams,” Working paper.
Chevalier, Judy and Glenn Ellison (1999), “Career Concerns of Mutual Fund Managers,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 114(2): 389-432.
Chu, Sean, Phillip Leslie and Alan Sorensen (2009) "Bundle-Size Pricing as an
Approximation to Mixed Bundling" forthcoming in American Economic Review.
Clark, Kim B. (1980), “The Impact of Unionization on Productivity: A Case Study,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 33(4): 451-469.
Clark, Kim B. (1980), “Unionization and Productivity: Micro-Econometric Evidence,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 95(4): 613-639.
Clark, Kim B. (1984), “Unionization and Firm Performance: The Impact on Profits,
Growth, and Productivity,” The American Economic Review, 74(5): 893-919.
Dee, Thomas and Benjamin Keys (2004), “Does Merit Pay Reward Good Teachers?
Evidence form a Randomized Experiment,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
23(3): 471-488.
Doyle, Joseph J., Ewer, Steven and Wagner, Todd, (2008), “Returns to Physician Human
Capital: Analyzing Patients Randomized to Physician Teams” NBER Working Paper No.
14174.
Drago, Robert and Gerald T. Garvey (1998), “Incentives for Helping on the Job: Theory
and Evidence” Journal of Labor Economics, 16(1): 1-24.
Dranove, David, Daniel Kessler, Mark McClellan and Mark Satterthwaite (2003), “Is
More Information Better? The Effects of “Report Cards” on Health Care Providers,”
Journal of Political Economy, 111(3): 555-588.
55

Duflo, Esther, Rema Hanna and Stephen Ryan (2007), “Monitoring Works: Getting
Teachers to Come to School,” BREAD Working Paper No. 103.
Dunlop, John T. and David Weil (2000), “Diffusion and Performance of Modular
Production in the U.S. Apparel Industry,” in The American Workplace: Skills,
Compensation and Employee Involvement, eds. Casey Ichniowski, David Levine, Craig
Olson, and George Strauss (Cambridge University Press).
Eberts, Randall, Kevin Hollenbeck, and Joe Stone (2000), “Teacher Performance
Incentives and Student Outcomes,” The Journal of Human Resources, 37(4): 913-927.
Ehrenberg, Ronald G. and Michael L. Bognanno (1990), "The incentive effects of
tournaments revisited: Evidence from the European PGA tour," Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, 43(3): 74-88.
Elfenbein, Daniel W and Josh Lerner (2003), “Ownership and Control Rights in Internet
Portal Alliances, 1995-1999.” RAND Journal of Economics, 34(2): 356-69.
Encinosa, William E. III; Martin Gaynor and James B. Rebitzer (2007), “The Sociology
of Groups and the Economics of Incentives: Theory and Evidence on Compensation
Systems,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, Elsevier, 62(2): 187-214.
Fernie, Sue and David Metcalf (2003), “Its Not What You Pay It’s the Way That You
Pay It and that’s What Gets Results: Jockeys’ Pay and Performance.” Review of Labour
Economics and Industrial Relations, 13(2): 385-411.
Forbes, Silke J. and Mara Lederman (2009), “Does Vertical Integration Affect Firm
Performance? Evidence from the Airline Industry.” Working paper.
Freeman, Richard B. and Morris M. Kleiner (2005), “The Last American Shoe
Manufacturers: Decreasing Productivity and Increasing Profits in the Shift from Piece
Rates to Continuous Flow Production,” Industrial Relations, 44(2): 307-330.
Galizzi, Monica, Petra Miesmaa, and Craig Slatin (2006), “Occupational Injuries,
Workers’ Reporting and Firms Policies in the Health Care Industry: The Challenges and
Rewards of Combining Qualitative and Quantitative Research Methodologies,” Working
paper.
Gant, Jon, Casey Ichniowski and Kathryn Shaw (2002), “Social Capital and
Organizational Change in High-Involvement and Traditional Work Organizations,”
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 11(2): 289-328.
Garicano, Luis and Tom Hubbard (forthcoming), “Specialization, Firms and Markets:
The Division of Labor Within and Between Law Firms.” Journal of Law, Economics and
Organization.
Garicano, Luis and Paul Heaton (2009), “Information Technology, Organization, and
Productivity in the Public Sector: Evidence from Police Departments.” Journal of Labor
Economics forthcoming.
56

Garicano, Luis and Tom Hubbard (2007), “The Returns to Knowledge Hierarchies.” US
Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies Paper no CES-WP-07-01.
Garicano, Luis and Paul Heaton (2006), “Computing Crime: Information Technology,
Police Effectiveness, and the Organization of Policing,” CEPR Discussion paper no 5837.
Garicano, Luis and Thomas N. Hubbard (2005), “Managerial Leverage is Limited by the
Extent of the Market: Hierarchies, Specialization, and the Utilization of Lawyers’ Human
Capital,” CEPR Discussion Papers 4924.
Gaynor, Martin, James B Rebitzer and Lowell J. Taylor (2001), “Incentives in HMOs”
Macroeconomics 0111001, EconWPA.
Gibbons, Robert and J.Roberts (forthcoming), Handbook of Organizational Economics
Princeton University Press, forthcoming 2010.
Gil, Ricard (2009), “The Interplay of Formal and Relational Contracts: Evidence from
Movies.” Working paper.
Griffith, Rachel and Andy D. Neely (2007), “Incentives and Managerial Experience in
Multi-Task Teams: Evidence from within a Firm” CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP6107.
Griliches, Zvi.(1994), “Productivity, R&D, and the Data Constraint,” American
Economic Review, 84(1): 1-23.
Haltiwanger, John, Fredrik Andersson, Matthew Freedman, Julia Lane and Kathryn Shaw
(2009), “Reaching for the Stars: Who Pays for Talent in Innovative Industries?”
Economic Journal Royal Economic Society 119(538): F308-F332.
Haltiwanger, John (2008), "Top Ten Questions for Understanding Firm Dynamics and
Productivity Growth" Keynote address at CAED.
Hall, Emma, John Van Reenen and Carol Propper (2008), “Can Pay Regulation Kill?
The Impact of Labor Markets and Skills on Hospital Productivity” CEPR Discussion
Paper 843.
Hamilton, Barton, Jack Nickerson, and Hideo Owan (2003), “Team Incentives and
Worker Heterogeneity: An Empirical Analysis of the Impact of Teams on Productivity
and Participation,” Journal of Political Economy, 111(3): 465-497.
Heckman, James J. (1990), “Varieties of Selection Bias,” American Economic Review,
80(2): 313-18.
Heckman, James J., Hidehiko Ichimura, Jeffrey Smith, and Petra Todd (1999),
“Characterizing Selection Bias Using Experimental Data,” Econometrica, 66(5): 10171098.
Heckman, James J., Robert Lalonde, and J. Smith (1999), “The Economics and
Econometrics of Active Labor Market Programs,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, vol.
3, eds. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (Elsevier Science: Amsterdam), chapter 31:
1865-2097.

57

Helper, Susan (2000), “Economists and Field Research: ‘You Can Observe a Lot by Just
Watching.” American Economic Review. May. 90(2): 228-232.
Henderson, Rebecca, and Iain Cockburn, (1996) "Scale, Scope, and Spillovers:
Determinants of Research Productivity in the Pharmaceutical Industry." RAND Journal
of Economics, Spring, 27(1), pp. 32-59.
Hoxby, Caroline (2002), “Would School Choice Change the Teaching Profession?”
Journal of Human Resources, 37(4): 846-891.
Hubbard, Thomas N. (2003), “Information, Decisions, and Productivity: On-Board
Computers and Capacity Utilization in Trucking,” American Economic Review, 93(4):
1328-1353.
Hubbard, Thomas N. (2000), “The Demand for Monitoring Technologies: The Case of
Trucking.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, 115(2): 533-560.
Huselid, Mark and Brian Becker (1996), “High Performance Work Systems and Firm
Performance: Cross-Sectional Versus Panel Estimates,” Industrial Relations, 35(3): 635672.
Ichino, Andrea and Giovanni Maggi (2000), “Work Environment and Individual
Background: Explaining Regional Shirking Differentials in a Large Italian Firm” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(3): 1057-1090.
Ichniowski, Casey and Kathryn Shaw (2003), "Beyond Incentive Pay: Insiders' Estimates
of the Value of Complementary Human Resource Management Practices" Journal of
Economic Perspectives, winter, 17(1): 155-180.
Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn Shaw and Giovanna Prennushi (1997), “The Effects of
Human Resource Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing
Lines,” American Economic Review, 86: 291-313.
Ichniowski, Casey and Shaw, Kathryn (1995), “Old Dogs and New Tricks: Determinants
of the Adoption of Productivity-Enhancing Work Practices” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity: Microeconomics: 1-65.
Ichniowski, Casey and Shaw, Kathryn (1999), “The Effects of Human Resource Systems
on Productivity: An International Comparison of U.S. and Japanese Plants,” Management
Science, 45: 704-722.
Imbens, Guido (2004), “NonParametric Estimation of Average Treatment Effects Under
Exogeneity: A Review,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(1): 4-29.
Imbens, Guido and Thomas Lemieux (2007), “Regression Discontinuity Designs: A
Guide to Practice,” Journal of Econometrics, February 142(2): 615-635.
Imberman, Scott, Adriana Kugler, and Bruce Sacerdote (2009) “Katrina’s Children: A
Natural Experiment in Peer Effects from Hurricane Evacuees,” Mimeo, April.

58

Ingram, Paul and Peter Roberts (2000) “Friendships Among Competitors in the Sydney
Hotel Industry,” American Journal of Sociology, 106(2): 387-423.
Jacob, B. and S. Levitt (2003), “Rotten Apples: An Investigation of the Prevalence and
Predictors of Teacher Cheating,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3): 843-877.
Jones, Derek C. and Kato, Takao (2007), “The Impact of Teams on Output, Quality and
Downtime: An Empirical Analysis Using Individual Panel Data,” IZA Discussion Papers
2917.
Jones, Derek C., Panu Kalmi, and Antti Kauhanen (2006), “Teams, Performance-Related
Pay, Profit Sharing and Productive Efficiency: Evidence from a Food-Processing Plant,”
Working paper.
Jorgenson, Dale W., Mun C. Ho and Kevin Stiroh (2003) “Growth of U.S. Industries and
Investments in Information Technology and Higher Education,” in NBER/CRIW
Conference on Measurement of Capital in the New Economy.
Jorgenson , Dale W. and Kevin J. Stiroh (2000), "U.S. Economic Growth at the Industry
Level," American Economic Review, American Economic Association, 90(2) :161-167.
Joskow, Paul (1985), “Vertical Integration and Long-Term Contracts: The Case of CoalBurning Electric Generation Plants.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 1:
33-80.
Joskow, Paul (1987), “Contract Duration and Relationship-Specific Investment:
Empirical Evidence from Coal Markets.” American Economic Review, 77: 168-85.
Kalnins, Arturs and Wilbur Chung (2006), “Social Capital, Geography, and Survival:
Gujarati Immigrant Entrepreneurs in the U.S. Lodging Industry,” Management Science,
52(2): 233-247.
Kandel, Eugene and Edward Lazear, (1992), “Peer Pressure and Partnerships,” Journal of
Political Economy , 100(4 ): 801-17.
Knoeber, Charles R. and Walter N. Thurman (1994), “Testing the Theory of
Tournaments: An Empirical Analysis of Broiler Production,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 12(2):155-79.
Kortum, Samuel S. and Josh Lerner (2000), “Assessing the Contribution of Venture
Capital to Innovation.” RAND Journal of Economics, 31(4): 674-692.
Kreuger, Alan (1999), “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2): 497-532.
Kreuger, Alan and Alex Mas (2004), “Strikes, Scabs and Tread Separations: Labor Strife
and the Production of Defective Bridgestone/Firestone Tires,” Journal of Political
Economy 112(2): 253-289.
Kruse, Douglas (1993), Profit Sharing: Does it Make a Difference? Kalamazoo, MI:
W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
59

Kruse, Douglas, Joseph Blasi, and Rhokeum Park (2008), “Shared Capitalism in the U.S.
Economy: Prevalence, Characteristics, and Employee Views of Financial Participation in
Enterprises”Working paper, presented at NBER-Russell Sage conference on shared
capitalism October.
Lafontaine, Francine and Margaret Slade (2008), “Inter-Firm Contracts: Evidence”,
Journal of Economic Literature.
Lafontaine, Francine (1992), “Agency Theory and Franchising: Some Empirical Results”
Rand Journal of Economics, 23: 263-83.
Lafontaine, Francine and Kathryn Shaw (1999), “The Dynamics of Franchise
Contracting: Evidence from Panel Data,” The Journal of Political Economy, October,
107(5): 1041-1080.
Lafontaine, Francine and Kathryn Shaw (2005), “Targeting Managerial Control:
Evidence from Franchising,” Rand Journal of Economics, Spring 36(1): 131-150.
Landers, Renee M., James B Rebitzer, and Lowell J. Taylor (1996), “Rat Race Redux:
Adverse Selection in the Determination of Work Hours in Law Firms,”American
Economic Review, 86(3): 329-348.
Lavy, Victor (2008), “Gender Differences in Market Competitiveness in a Real
Workplace: Evidence from Performance Based Pay Tournaments among Teachers,”
NBER Working paper.
Lavy, Victor, and Joshua Angrist (2009), “The Effects of High Stakes High School
Achievement Awards: Evidence from a Group-Randomized Trial,” American Economic
Review, 99(4): 1384-1414.
Lavy, Victor (2002), “Evaluating the Effect of Teachers’ Group Performance Incentives
on Students Achievements,” Journal of Political Economy, December, 110(6): 12861317.
Lazear, Edward and Kathryn Shaw (2007), “Personnel Economics: The Economist’s
View of Human Resources” Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(4): 91-114.
Lazear, Edward (2000), “Performance Pay and Productivity,” American Economic
Review,90(5):1346-1361.
Lazear, Edward and Paul Oyer (2007), "Personnel Economics," NBER Working Papers
13480.
Lazear, Edward (1995), Personnel Economics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lazear, Edward (1999), “Personnel Economics: Past Lessons and Future Directions,”
Journal of Labor Economics, 17(2): 199-236.

60

Lazear, Edward (1999), “Globalization and the Market for Teammates,” The Economic
Journal, 109(454): 15-40.
Ledford, G. E. Jr., Lawler, E. E., III, and Mohrman, S. A., (1995), “Reward Innovation in
Fortune 1000 Companies.” Compensation and Benefits Review, 76-80.
Lemieux, Thomas, Bentley MacLeod, and Daniel Parent (2009), “Performance Pay and
Wage Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February, 124(1): 1-49.
Lerner, Josh and Julie Wulf (Forthcoming), “Innovation and Incentives: Evidence from
Corporate R&D.” Review of Economics and Statistics.
Lerner, Josh and Robert P. Merges (1998), “The Control of Technology Alliances: An
Empirical Analysis of the Biotechnology Industry.” Journal of Industrial Economics,
June, 46(2): 125-156.
Leslie, Phillip (2004), "Price Discrimination in Broadway Theatre," RAND Journal of
Economics, 35(3): 520-41.
Levitt, Steven D. and John List (2008) “Field Experiments in Economics: The Past, the
Present, and the Future,” NBER Working Paper no. 14356.
Lim, Claire (2007), “Turnover and Accountability of Appointed and Elected Judges”
(Ph.D. Dissertation), University of Pennsylvania.
List, John, Sally Sadoff and Mathis Wagner (2008) “So You Want to Run an Experiment,
Now What? An Introduction to Optimal Sample Arrangements,” September, working
paper.
Lo, Desmond, Mrinal Ghosh and Lafontaine, Francine (2006), “The Role of Risk,
Incentives, and Selection in Salesforce Compensation Contracts,” Working paper.
MacDuffie, John Paul (1995), “Human Resource Bundles and Manufacturing
Performance: Organizational Logic and Flexible Production Systems in the World Auto
Industry,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 48: 197-221.
McMillan, John and Christopher Woodruff (1999), “Interfirm Relationships and Informal
Credit in Vietnam.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, March, 114(4): 1285-1320.
Mas, Alexandre (2006), “Pay, Reference Points, and Police Performance,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 121(3): 783-821.
Mas, Alexandre and Enrico Moretti (2009), “Peers at Work,” American Economic
Review, September, 99(1): 112-145.
Mas, Alexandre (2008), “Labor Unrest and the Quality of Production: Evidence from the
Construction Equipment Resale Market,” Review of Economic Studies 75(1): 229-258.

61

Mas, Alexandre (2004), “Do Disappointing Pay Raises Lower Productivity? Final-Offer
Arbitration and the Performance of New Jersey Police Officers”. Princeton University.
Masten, Scott E (1984), “The Organization of Production: Evidence from the Aerospace
Industry”, Journal of Law and Economics, 27: 403-17.
Meyer, Bruce (1995) “Natural and Quasi-Experiments in Economics,” Journal of
Business and Economic Statistics, April, 13 (2): 151-161.
Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts (1995), “Complementarities and Fit: Strategy, Structure
and Organizational Change in Manufacturing,” Journal of Accounting and Economics,
19(2-3): 179-208.
Monteverde, Kirk, and David Teece (1982), “Supplier Switching Costs and Vertical
Integration in the Automobile Industry.” Bell Journal of Economics, 13: 206-12.
Nagin, Daniel S., James B. Rebitzer, Seth Sanders, and Lowell J. Taylor (2002),
“Monitoring, Motivation, and Management: The Determinants of Opportunistic Behavior
in a Field Experiment,” American Economic Review, 92(4): 850-873.
Misra, Sanjog and Harikesh Nair (2008), “A Structural Model of Sales-Force
Compensation” Working paper, Stanford University.
Neumark, David, Roy J. Bank and Kyle D. Van Nort (1996), “Sex Discrimination in
Restaurant Hiring: An Audit Study,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, August,
111(3): 915-941.
Nickerson, Jack A. and Brian S. Silverman (2003), “Why aren’t all Truck Drivers
Owner-Operators? Asset Ownership and the Employment Relation in Interstate for-Hire
Trucking.” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 12(1): 91-118.
Oliner, Stephen D. and Daniel E. Sichel (2000). “The Resurgence of Growth in the Late
1990s: Is Information Technology the Story?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14
(4):3-22.
Osterman, Paul (1994), “How Common is Workplace Transformation and Who Adopts
It?” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 47(2): 173-188.
Osterman, Paul (2000), “Work Reorganization in an Era of Restructuring: Trends in
Diffusion and Effects on Employee Welfare” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
53(2): 179-196.
Oyer, Paul and Scott Schaefer (2007), “Personnel-Economic Geography: Evidence from
Large US Law Firms,” 2nd Annual Conference on Empirical Legal Studies Paper.
Oyer, Paul (1998), “Fiscal Year Ends and Non-Linear Incentive Contracts: The Effect on
Business Seasonality,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 113: 149-185.

62

Perez-Gonzalez, Francisco (2006), “Inherited Control and Firm Performance,” American
Economic Review, December, 96(5):1559-1588.
Philippon, Thomas and Ariell Reshef (2007), “Skill Biased Financial Development:
Education, Wages and Occupations in the U.S. Financial Sector,” NYU Working Paper.
Prendergast, Canice (1999), “The Provision of Incentives in Firms,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 37(1): 7-63.
Rivkin, Steven, Eric Hanushek, and John Kain (2005), “Teachers, Schools, and
Academic Achievement,” Econometrica 73(2): 417-458.
Rosenthal, Meredith, Rushika Fernandopulle, HyunSook Ryu Song, and Bruce Landon
(2004), “Paying for Quality: Providers’ Incentive for Quality Improvement,” Health
Affairs 23(2): 127-141.
Shaw, Kathryn Adam Jaffe, Josh Lerner and Scott Stern (2003), “The Human Resources
Revolution: Is it a Productivity Driver?” Innovation, Policy and the Economy, eds
Chicago: University of Chicago, National Bureau of Economic Research 69-114.
Shaw, Kathryn Donna Ginther, and Madeline Zavodny (2003), “Technology Shocks and
Problem-solving Capacity,” in Technology, Growth, and the Labor Market, eds Boston:
Kluwer Academic Publishers 235-258.
Shaw, Kathryn Nathalie Greenan, Yannick L’Horty, and Jacques Mairesse (2002), “By
What Means Does Information Technology Affect Employment and Wages?”
Productivity, Inequality, and the Digital Economy: A Transatlantic Perspective, eds
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Schotter C. Bull, A. and K. Weigelt. (1987), “Tournaments and piece rates: An
Experimental Study,” Journal of Political Economy . 95 :1-33.
Syverson, Chad, Lucia Foster and John Haltiwanger (2008), “Reallocation, Firm
Turnover, and Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?” American
Economic Review, March.
Syverson, Chad (2004), “Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example.”
Journal of Political Economy, 112(6): 1181-1222.
Syverson, Chad, Austan Goolsbee and Steven Levitt (2009), “What Determines
Productivity at the Micro Level?” Microeconomics. Working Paper.
Van Biesebroeck, Johannes (2006), “Complementarities in Automobile Production,”
Journal of Applied Econometrics 22(7): 1315-1345.
Blundell, Richard and Monica Costa Dias (2002), “Alternative Approaches to Evaluation
in Empirical Microeconomics,” Portuguese Economic Journal, 1, 91-115.

63

List, John, Sally Sadoff and Mathis Wagner (2008) “So You Want to Run an Experiment,
Now What? An Introduction to Optimal Sample Arrangements,” September, working
paper.
Meyer, Bruce (1995) “Natural and Quasi-Experiments in Economics,” Journal of
Business and Economic Statistics, April, 13 (2): 151-161.

64

TABLE 1

A Partial List of Additional Insider Econometric Studies,
By Management Practices Analyzed
Sets of Complementary
Management Practices
Ichniowski, Shaw and
Prenusshi (1997)
Data: Team Monthly productivity,
team-level five years, 36 steel
production lines (17 companies).

Griffith and Neely
(forthcoming)
Data: retail stores, monthly sales,
months, one company.

Tat Chan, Jia Li and Lamar
Pierce
Data: daily sales for 85 cosmetics
sales workers, 791 days, eleven
companies.

Baron and Hannon (2002)
Data: 200 technology startup
companies in Silicon Valley, annual
data, 1995 and 1997.

MacDuffie (1995)
Data: 62 auto assembly plants.

Performance Outcome

Productivity rises by 10%
due to combined use of
incentives, teamwork,
careful hiring and other
practices.
Productivity rises when the
multi-dimensional.
Balanced Scorecard
performance evaluation is
introduced.
Individual incentive pay
raises individual
productivity, but lowers
within- team cooperation
and lowers group
productivity.

Sets of innovative “star”
HR practices raise growth
140%, and reduce the
probability of firm failure
210%, relative to autocratic
HR practices.

Productivity and quality
outcomes are higher in
plants that have systems of
innovative HR practices.
Effects are larger if plant
also has management
practices for flexible
production systems.

Why?

When firms implement
multiple human resource
management practices, the
complementarities between
the practices raises
performance.
When Balanced Scorecard
incentive pay is adopted,
productivity rises only if
managers are experienced.
Individual incentive pay
raises personal productivity,
reduces cooperation and
reduces overall productivity.
Team-based incentive pay
increases cooperation within
team and increases
competition across teams
(or firms).
The initial set of human
resources practices that the
startup firm chooses has a
large affect on all measures
of firm success: “star” firms
“recruit only top talent, pay
them top wages, and give
them resources and
autonomy. In “autocratic”
firms “you work, you get
paid.”
The “organizational logic”
of lean manufacturing
production processes is no
supported by individual HR
practices but by multiple
HR practices that are
elements of a system.

65

Sets of Complementary
Management Practices
Dunlop and Weil (2000)
Data: 42 business units in the men’s
suit, shirt and pants sector and in the
women’s jeans and undergarment
sectors of the apparel making
industry.

Berg, Appelbaum, Bailey,
and Kalleberg (1996)
Data: Production records and worker
surveys from over 100 workers in 4
plants of 2 apparel making
companies.

Performance Outcome

Why?

Lead times are substantially
shorter when team-based
systems of HR practices in
modular assembly
production processes are
used.

The adoption of team-based
HR systems in modular
production processes is
driven by the adoption of
new complementary salestracking information
technologies by large
retailers who required
apparel makers to fill
smaller orders more rapidly.
The effects of new HR
practices on performance
outcomes are not
independent of the effects of
the use of new information
technologies.

Systems of HR practices
associated with the
“module system of
manufacturing” exhibit
lower production costs,
reduced throughput
production times, reduced
work-in-process
inventories, and increased
variety of clothing styles
than HR practices under the
“bundle system.”

Team-based HR practices
under module production
allows greater coordination
of workers’ activities that
eliminate production
bottlenecks and solve
production problems.

66

Incentive Pay
Lazear (2000)
Data: monthly measures of average daily
output for 3000 workers who install car
windshields, 19 months, one company.

Bandiera, Barankay and Rasul
(2005)
Data: daily output for 142 workers, 108
days, picking fruit, one company.

Nagin, Rebitzer, Sanders and
Taylor (2002)
Data: daily data, 16 call centers, one
company

Misra and Nair (2009)
Data: monthly sales, 87 sales agents for
contractors for 38 months, one company.

Lavy (2008)
Data: student test scores, one year, 629
teachers in Isreali school system

Lerner and Wulf (2007)
Data: 140 firms, 700 firm years,
compensation for R&D heads, matched
to patent data.

Performance Outcome
The Productivity of individual
workers rises 44% due to a
switch to piece rate pay, from
hourly pay.

Why?
Higher effort by workers due
to incentive pay raises
productivity by 22%. Better
sorting or selection of workers
to the job raises productivity
by 22% more.
Productivity of workers rises
Higher Effort of workers rises
58% when switch to piece rate due to piece rate pay, because
pay from a relative pay
workers were withholding
scheme.
effort when friends were on
their work teams.
Daily productivity of workers
Monitoring reduces instances
rises by about 3% when pay is of workers reporting
tied to call monitoring.
unsuccessful sales calls as
successes. Perceptions of a
“fair work culture” also reduce
this unproductive behavior.
Total revenues rose 9%
A pay plan that is highly nonfollowing an incentive pay plan linear and pays out over long
that has a linear incentive (no
intervals (quarters rather than
quotas) and that pays out more months) results in gaming the
frequently.
system and lower productivity
for current employees.
Productivity of students rose
Students’ test scores in English
3% after new tournament
and Math rose due to a change
bonus pay for teachers, and
in teaching methods and
rose 1 to 6% in other similar
increase in teachers’ effort in
plans: see Angrist and Lavy
response to incentives.
2002; Lavy, 2002.
R&D group productivity rises
Use of long-term incentives for
by 26%, as measured by
corporate heads of R&D
citations or patents, when long departments rose 50% from
term incentives (measured as a 1988 to 1998 and is likely to
percent of pay) rise by 50%.
have improved R&D project
selection.

67

Peer Effects

Azoulay and Zivin (2005)
Data: Total publications by 4764 star
scientists and their co-workers,

Ichino and Maggi (2000)
Data: retail bank employees, 28642
employees, 442 branches, 20 years, one
company.

Mas and Moretti (2009)
Data: all supermarket transactions, 6
stores, 2003-2006. One company for the
checkout clerks,

Teamwork

Hamilton, Nickerson and
Owan (2003)
Data: weekly productivity, 132 workers,
156 weeks, apparel sewing, one
company.

Bartel, Phibbs, Beaulieu and
Stone (2009)
Data: 431 hospital intensive case units,
monthly productivity, 48 months one
company.

Boning, Ichniowski and
Shaw(2007)
Data: 2355 monthly productivity, teamlevel, observations for 34 steel minimills,
five years,19 companies.

Bandiera, Barankay and Rasul
(2009)
Data: 407 fruit picking teams, 15 fields,
109 days

Performance Outcome
Productivity rises 17% when a
scientist is co-located near a
star scientist.

Productivity (measured by
absenteeism) rises by over
15% when employees are
located with peer employees
who work harder.
Within a 10 minute work
interval, personal productivity
rises 1.7% when working near
a peer who is 10% more
productive than average.

Performance Outcome
Team-based pay increased
productivity 14% compared to
individual piece rate pay.

Hospital units with more “unitspecific” human capital have a
1.5% reduction in patients’
length of stay.
There is a 11 to 20% reduction
in defective output when mills
move to team-based problem
solving.
Productivity rises 24% when a
team based tournament reward
system is introduced.

Why?
Collaboration with a star raises
personal productivity, but
when a star is geographically
nearby it raises productivity
further.
Worker productivity is
strongly influenced by
personal background and
culture, but these influences
are reduced when workers are
paired with more productive
peers.
The productivity gains from
peer effects show that low
productivity workers work
harder when a high
productivity worker watches
them work.
Why?
Team-based pay increases
team output through
collaboration among workers
with complementary skills.
Highly productive workers
raise team productivity more.
Teamwork within nurses’ work
area combines nurses’ human
capital which raises
productivity.
Team-based problem solving is
more valuable to the firm when
the steel mill produces
complex products than when it
produces commodities.
Workers of similar ability form
teams in response to
incentives; teams are not
formed on the basis of
friendship.

68

Social Networks and
Information Sharing
Kalnias and Chung (2006)
Data: 2800 hotels, annual data 1991-1999
on revenues, exit, and entry

Bandiera, Barankay and Rasul
(2007)
Data: daily worker output, 94 days, picking
fruit, one company.

Gant, Ichniowski and Shaw
(2002)
Data: Daily communication ties among
workers, 642 workers, 7 steel production
lines.

Hiring Practices

Autor (2001)
Data: Workers employed by 1033
temporary help firms in 1994.

Autor and Scarborough (2008)
Data: 1363 retail stores, one company.

Goldin and Rouse (2000)
Data: orchestra auditions for 7065
individuals, 508 audition rounds, 14,121
person-rounds

Lazear (2000)
Data: monthly measures of average daily
output for 3000 workers who install car
windshields, 19 months, one company.

Performance Outcome

Why?

Close social ties from same
demographic group lowers
the failure rate of hotels.

Employees from the same
demographic group (Gujarati
immigrants) share more
information about management
practices that work.
Productivity rises by about
When the firm switches to
9% when workers are
incentive pay for managers,
socially connected to
overall firm productivity rises,
managers who are paid
as managers allocate jobs to
incentives.
the most efficient workers
rather than to their friends.
Direct communications for
Problem-solving activity, as
problem-solving is five times measured by amount of direct
greater for workers on
communications on operational
production lines with a set of issues, rises when workers are
innovative management
employed by firms using a set
practices.
of management practices, like
teamwork, incentive pay, and
careful hiring.
Performance Outcome
The match quality of
workers and firms is higher
when workers self-sort in
response to the firms’ offers
of general training.

Productivity rises due to
switch from informal
screening to test-based
screening.
Promotion of women at each
round of audtions increases
by 50% when auditions are
blind, and hiring of women
increases substantially.
Productivity rises 22% when
the most productive workers
are hired and stay at the auto
windshield installation firm.

Why?
Providing general human
capital training includes
worker to self sort so the most
able are hired by firms offering
the greatest amount of general
training. (The temporary help
firms then sell this workerquality information to firms).
Testing yields more productive
hires resulting in a 10%
increase in workers’ average
tenure.
Better hiring techniques, such
as reviewing orchestral
auditions with a blind shield,
substantially raises the percent
of women employed.
Human resources management
practices like incentive pay,
cause workers to self select to
the firms at which the workers
are most productive.

69

Boundaries of the Firm

Forbes and Lederman (2009)
Data: 2 million flights from 72 U.S. airports
over 260 days.

Performance Outcome
Flight delays at the same
airport on the same day are
significantly shorter for
airlines that are vertically
integrated – those who have
an owned, rather than
independent, regional partner
with which it connects.

Why?

Direct ownership of partner
airlines promote more efficient
decision making when airlines
need to adapt to non-routine
conditions.

70

Figure 1:

The Productivity Effects of Adopting a New Management Practice
Hypothetical Age-Productivity Profile for Treated and Non-treated Groups
Productivity

Treated
ΔPT

ΔP

T
OLS

Treated
counterfactual

Type 1
ΔPN

Non-treatedcounterfactual
Non-treated-actual

Type 2
t*

Time

Where t* is the time that the treatment, such as an organizational change, occurs.

71

Figure 2a:
Incentive Pay Introduced Within One Firm (Safelite)
(Lazear, 2000)

Productivity
Worker Type 3: Those hired
after piece rate pay.

ΔPT

Worker Type 1:
Those observed
before and after
piece rate pay.

ΔPN

Worker Type 2: Those hired before piece rate pay, and who
leave the firm after piece rate pay.

t*

Time

Piece rate pay
introduced

t* is the time of the treatment: the introduction of piece rate pay. The solid lines
represent the observed productivity profiles, for the workers Type 1, Type 2, and
Type 3. The dotted lines represent unobserved productivity profiles for different
worker types.

72

Figure 2b:
Incentive Pay Introduced Within One Firm (Fruit-pickers)
(Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul, 2005)

Productivity

Worker Type 2: Those who do
not work with friends.

Workers Type 1: Those who
do work with friends.

t*

Time

Piece rate pay
introduced

The t* is the time of the treatment: incentive pay plan changes from a
relative pay plan before t* to a per unit piece rate plan after t*. Insider
information identifies Type 1 workers as those with friends as coworkers; Type 2 are workers without friends as co-workers.
The solid lines represent the actual productivity profiles for workers Type
1 and Type 2; the dashed lines represent the unobserved counterfactuals
for these worker types.

73

Figure 3a:
Innovative HRM Systems Introduced in Steel Finishing Lines
(Ichniowski, Shaw, and Prennushi, 1997)

Productivity
Steel Mill Type 1: Changers
Steel Mill Type 2:
Counterfactual

ΔPT =ΔPN

Type 1 and Type2
Steel Mill, pre‐t*

Steel Mill Type 2: Non-Changers
Steel Mill Type 1 Counterfactual.

t*

Time

Note: t* is the date of the treatment: the introduction of new HRM
systems. Type 1 lines are changers; Type 2 lines are non-changers. Type
1 and Type 2 lines are identical in their underlying production processes:
there is one learning curve for both types. Because these lines are
identical, the counterfactual for the changers is equal to the observed ageproductivity profiles for the non-changers; the counterfactual for the nonchangers is equal to the observed post-t* profile for the changers.

74

Figure 3b:
Problem Solving Teams Introduced in Steel Minimills
(Boning, Ichniowski and Shaw, 2007)

Productivity

Type 1: Complex mills

Type 2: Commodity mill

ΔPT

N

ΔP

Type 2: Commodity mills
(observed)
Type 2: Commodity mills
(counterfactual)
Type1: Complex mills
(counterfactual)

Type 1: Complex mills

t*

Time

Note: t* is the date of treatment: the adoption of teams. Type 1 lines
make more complex products that therefore have lower levels of
productivity pre-t* relative to Type 2 lines that make simpler products.
Complex lines are more likely to adopt teams since complex lines have
large gains from teamwork and problem solving.

75

