                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE GREENNESS OF CHINA:
      HOUSEHOLD CARBON DIOXIDE EMISSIONS AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

                                            Siqi Zheng
                                            Rui Wang
                                         Edward L. Glaeser
                                         Matthew E. Kahn

                                        Working Paper 15621
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15621


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2009




We acknowledge the financial support of the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy. Siqi Zheng also thanks
the CIDEG Center of Tsinghua University. We thank seminar participants at the September 2008 CIDEG
Conference at Tsinghua University for helpful comments. We thank Yi Huo, Yue Liu and Rongrong
Ren for their valuable assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Siqi Zheng, Rui Wang, Edward L. Glaeser, and Matthew E. Kahn. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Greenness of China: Household Carbon Dioxide Emissions and Urban Development
Siqi Zheng, Rui Wang, Edward L. Glaeser, and Matthew E. Kahn
NBER Working Paper No. 15621
December 2009
JEL No. Q5

                                             ABSTRACT

China urbanization is associated with both increases in per-capita income and greenhouse gas emissions.
This paper uses micro data to rank 74 major Chinese cities with respect to their household carbon
footprint. We find that the “greenest” cities based on this criterion are Huaian and Suqian while the
“dirtiest” cities are Daqing and Mudanjiang. Even in the dirtiest city (Daqing), a standardized household
produces only one-fifth of that in America’s greenest city (San Diego). We find that the average January
temperature is strongly negatively correlated with a city’s household carbon footprint, which suggests
that current regional economic development policies that bolster the growth of China’s northeastern
cities are likely to increase emissions. We use our city specific income elasticity estimates to predict
the growth of carbon emissions in China’s cities.


Siqi Zheng                                          Edward L. Glaeser
Institute of Real Estate Studies                    Department of Economics
He Shanheng Building, Tsinghua University           315A Littauer Center
Beijing 100084, P. R. China                         Harvard University
zhengsiqi@tsinghua.edu.cn                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                    and NBER
Rui Wang                                            eglaeser@harvard.edu
3250 School of Public Affairs Building
UCLA Department of Urban Planning                   Matthew E. Kahn
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1656                          UCLA Institute of the Environment
ruiwang@ucla.edu                                    Department of Economics
                                                    Department of Public Policy
                                                    Box 951496
                                                    La Kretz Hall, Suite 300
                                                    Los Angeles, CA 90095-1496
                                                    and NBER
                                                    mkahn@ioe.ucla.edu
   I. Introduction




   Today, per capita carbon emissions in the United States are about five times per capita

emissions in China, which implies that if China’s per capita greenhouse gas emissions rose to

U.S. levels, then global carbon emissions would increase by more than 50 percent. While forty

percent of U.S. emissions are associated with residential and personal transportation, a much

smaller share of Chinese emissions come from these sectors, which suggests that Chinese

household carbon emissions could rise dramatically China’s urban population has grown by 300

million since 1990, and China is investing in the infrastructure needed for hundreds of millions

of future urbanites. China’s urban development policies could have large potential impacts on

global carbon emissions.


   Knowing a nation’s per-capita income and total population size is not sufficient for judging

its household sector’s greenhouse gas production. The spatial distribution of this population

across diverse cities is key determinant of the size of the aggregate emissions. In this paper, we

estimate the carbon emissions associated with the development of different Chinese cities. The

more dramatic these differences are, the larger the impact that urban policy can have on Chinese

and global carbon emissions.


   Using U.S. data, Glaeser and Kahn (2010) found that places with moderate temperatures, like

coastal California, have significantly lower emissions than places with extreme temperatures,

like Texas: a standardized household’s carbon emissions are 78 percent higher in Memphis than

in San Diego. Denser places have lower carbon emissions than sprawling car-oriented locales.

If these relationships hold in China as well, denser development in the more temperate locales of

that country will lead to lower carbon emissions.


                                                2
    In this paper, we calculate household carbon emissions using several data sources including

the Chinese Urban Household Survey. This survey provides information on energy usage for

25,000 households across 74 cities. Relative to U.S households, transportation represents a

smaller share of Chinese urban household emissions and household heating represents a much

larger share. A poorer country can do without air conditioning and cars, but not without winter

warmth.


    As in Glaeser and Kahn (2010), we are not attempting to estimate an average carbon

“footprint,” but rather the marginal emissions associated with the movement of a typical new

family to a particular locale. For that reason, we calculate a predicted level of carbon emissions

in different places for a standardized household with a fixed size and level of income. We do not

follow Glaeser and Kahn (2010) and look at disproportionately newer housing to get a better

sense of the impact of the latest housing. But given how new most Chinese cities are, an average

home in Shanghai is far more likely to be relatively new than an average home in Detroit.


    Even though we attempt to hold individual income constant, we find that richer cities have

significantly higher household carbon emissions, which was not true in the U.S. One possible

explanation for this fact is that richer cities may have invested more in infrastructure that

complements energy use. In China, carbon emissions are particularly high in places with cold

Januarys, because of centralized home heating. For example, Shanghai (without centralized

home heating) is much greener than Beijing (with centralized home heating). The prominent

role played by central production of heat indicates that carbon emissions could fall significantly

if greener sources of energy were used by the government for that purpose, as argued by Almond

et al. (2009).




                                                  3
      China currently has three significant regional policies, which support growth in the

Northeast, the Western hinterland and the Beijing-Tianjin-Bohai Sea region. Relative to the

average city household, carbon emissions are 69 percent higher in the Northeast, 40 percent

higher in the Beijing-Tianjin-Bohai Sea region and 17 percent lower in the West. These findings

suggest that regional development policies that favor growth in the Northeast and in the greater

Beijing areas are likely to increase China’s overall carbon emissions.


      The range of emissions across China’s cities today does not capture the diversity of possible

long run outcomes. We use our cross-sectional estimates to predict the increase in Chinese

household emissions by 2026 if Chinese incomes increase by 200 percent. We find that the

increases predicted by current cross-sectional relationships are quite modest, relative to the

current gap between the U.S. and China. Yet to us, this only serves to illustrate the range of

possibilities for Chinese emissions.


      If Chinese households in 2026 behave like richer versions of Chinese households today, then

emissions will grow only modestly. New energy efficiency policy initiatives, such as China’s

recent announcement of its intent to reduce its carbon intensity (CO2/GNP) by 40 percent by the

year 2020, can offset some of the pollution consequences of growth. 1              But if China invests in

infrastructure and changes its urban forms so that China looks more like the United States, then

emissions of both China and the world will increase dramatically.              Some of the most important

environmental decisions in the 21st century may concern the development patterns of Chinese

cities and it surely worth better understanding the environmental consequences of those

decisions.



1
    http://www.nytimes.com/reuters/2009/11/26/world/international-uk-climate-china-copenhagen.html.


                                                         4
   II. Household Carbon Production and Urban Development in a Developing Country


   Urban infrastructure is long lived, and decisions made decades ago still shape older cities like

London and New York. In declining areas, like Detroit, where there is little new construction,

history is even more important. Today, China is making choices over investments in roads,

public transit, electricity generation and housing that will have implications for resource

consumption and greenhouse gas production for decades. The combination of irreversibility of

investment, and China’s vast size, makes its current development decisions relevant for long-

term global carbon emissions.


   No nation, including China, has a unilateral incentive to tax carbon emissions so that actions

internalize global consequences of greenhouse gases. As Glaeser and Kahn (2010) note, in the

absence of an appropriate carbon tax, there will be lower social costs created when urban activity

locates in a low emissions place rather than a high emissions place. There may also be

distortions that come from other public policies, like subsidizing highways or homeownership,

that encourage energy intensive lifestyles.


   The size of the externality associated with a household locating in place A rather than place

B equals the increase in carbon emissions in place A minus the decrease in emissions in place B

times the social cost of carbon emissions minus the current carbon tax. We will provide new

estimates of these externality costs for 74 major Chinese cities. These estimates will allow us to




                                                 5
evaluate the unintended environmental consequences of China’s current regional development

policies. 2


    Throughout this paper, we will focus solely on carbon dioxide emissions as our measure of

city “greenness.” In recent work (see Zheng, Kahn and Liu 2010), we have examined how

ambient particulate levels and sulfur dioxide levels vary across 35 major Chinese cities as a

function of city per-capita income and FDI. Unlike carbon emissions, these other forms of

pollution typically decline with income after a certain point, known as the peak of the

Environmental Kuznets Curve turning point. For that reason, we expect that further increases in

Chinese per-capita income will be associated with local pollution reductions. For example,

China is now phasing in Euro IV new vehicle emissions standards in Beijing, which seems likely

to reduce smog, because of improved transit service and more effective travel demand

management.


    In this paper, we focus on household energy consumption. In the U.S., the household carbon

emissions account for 40 percent of total carbon emissions, while in China this share is less than

twenty percent. However, the household’s share of total per-capita carbon emissions will surely

grow as China transitions from being a manufacturing economy to being a service economy. As

domestic households become richer they will consume more electricity and the demand for




2
 Assessing the size of the environmental externality from migration requires us to know the
marginal impact of an extra household on carbon emission, but we will only be able to measure
average emissions. Marginal and average emissions may differ because of increasing or
decreasing returns in the production of energy. We have no way of addressing this problem and
cannot even be sure of the direction of the bias. Average and marginal emissions may also
diverge because new households are more likely to live in larger or more energy-efficient homes
or homes on the urban edge.



                                                 6
private transportation services will increase. 3       The industrial sector is a major consumer of

energy in China. Several studies have examined the industrial sector using decomposition

techniques to study the role of industrial scale, composition and technique effects in explaining

trends over time (see Huang 1993, Sinton and Levine 1994, Sinton and Fridley 2000, Shi and

Polenske 2006).




    III. Measuring Household Greenhouse Gas Emissions in China’s Major Cities


    We estimate how much carbon dioxide emissions a standardized Chinese household

produces per year if it resides within one of China’s 74 cities, including all the 35 major cities

(all municipalities directly under the federal government, provincial capital cities, and quasi-

provincial capital cities) plus some cities that have enough sample observations. We focus on

four major household sources of carbon dioxide emissions; transportation, residential electricity

consumption, residential heating and domestic fuel. The following equation provides an

accounting framework for organizing our empirical work.


Emissions = γ1*Transportation +γ2*Electricity + γ3*Heating +γ4*Domestic Fuel                            (1)


        Our main goal is to estimate equation (1) for each Chinese major city for a standardized

household. In this equation, transportation represents energy use from a vector of activities

including liters of annual gasoline consumed for households that own a car. Transportation also

includes miles traveled on cabs, and the energy use of buses and subways. All forms of energy



3
 Our study will focus on transportation, and household consumption of energy to provide heating and cooling
services. We recognize that households consume other products (such as what they eat) that have carbon
consequences.


                                                        7
use are multiplied by an emissions factor vector defined as γ1. For example, each liter of # 93

gasoline consumed produces 2.226 Kg of carbon dioxide.


       The second term in this equation represents carbon dioxide emissions from residential

electricity consumption. In the U.S., Glaeser and Kahn (2010) found a tight link between

electricity consumption and hot summers, presumably because of extensive use of air

conditioning. To convert electricity usage into carbon emissions, we must use the regional area

power plants’ average emissions factor, denoted by γ2, defined as carbon dioxide emissions per

megawatt hour of power generated. Coal fired power plants have a higher emissions factor than

natural gas fired power plants or power plants that run on renewable power such as wind, hydro,

or solar power.


       Major Chinese cities differ with respect to their geography and available natural

resources that can be used for energy. For instance, some are located in regions that receive more

of their power from power plants with a lower emissions factor. In our calculations we report

below, we will use recent regional emissions factors for power plants as an input in ranking cities

with respect to household carbon emissions based on equation (1). It is important to note that

today’s average emissions factor may not be an accurate estimate of future regional emissions

factors if China were to sign a global carbon reduction treaty.


       China’s cities differ greatly with respect to their winter temperatures. Northern cities are

much colder than southern cities. In northern Chinese cities, heat is provided publicly through a

system that provides a fixed amount of heating between November 15 and March 15. Prior to the

1980s, heating was considered a basic right and the government provided free heating (which is




                                                 8
called the “centralized heating system”) for homes and offices, either directly or through state-

owned enterprises. The legacy of this system remains today.


       The cities north of the Huai River and Qinling Mountains continue to receive subsidized

heating in winter months, while the southern cities are not entitled to centralized heating.

Individual households are unable to control the indoor temperature when centralized heating is

provided. Given these points, we assume that energy usage for heating is proportional to the

floor area of the home. This sector creates high level of emissions because heating’s main

energy source is coal (Almond et. al., 2009).

       The fourth term in the equation is emissions from domestic fuels, which are also used, in

some cases, to heat homes. This term includes three components; coal, liquefied petroleum gas

(LPG), and coal gas. Coal is inexpensive, but it is carbon intensive. A byproduct of using it is

elevated ambient air pollution level such as sulfur dioxide, and particulates. LPG and coal gas

are extracted from petroleum oil and coal, and are much cleaner and less carbon intensive.




Data Description


       Our first source of data is the Chinese Urban Household Survey (UHS) in the year 2006.

This survey is conducted annually by the Urban Survey Department of the State Statistic Bureau

of China. The survey targets households living in cities and towns for more than half a year. The

data collected from the survey is primarily used for estimating the urban consumer expenditure

component in GDP and CPI. The annual UHS that we use in this paper includes approximately

25,300 observations across the 74 cities. We compute the carbon emissions from electricity use,

private car, taxi, and three domestic fuels based on this micro data set. The survey also provides



                                                 9
information on city economic and demographic variables such as per household income,

household size, and age of household head. Since many households in northern cities still

receive free heating services, there is no record of heating expenditure in the UHS.


       Given the current relatively low private vehicle ownership level in China, it is important

to measure public transportation’s contribution to the average household’s carbon emissions.

The China Urban Statistic Yearbooks provide us with city level information, such as energy

consumption information on buses and subways. We have the electricity consumption in 2006

for each of the ten cities with a subway system. In the case of buses, converting fuel use into

carbon emissions is straightforward. For electricity-powered subways, the conversion of energy

use into carbon requires additional information about power production.


       To construct common units measured in tons of carbon dioxide, we need access to carbon

emissions factors associated with both electricity production and public home heating. The data

for these items comes from various sources. The carbon emission factors of regional power grid,

γ2, come from the Department of Climate Change of the National Development Research Center

of the State Council. The energy consumption involved in centralized heating comes from the

Department of Environmental Engineering and Department of Building Science in Tsinghua

University.


       Table One lists the names, definitions, means and standard deviations of our key

variables. Table Two reports the summary statistics. The average household in our sample has

an annual income of 40 thousand Yuan, or 5.7 thousand dollars. It consumes 1,700 kWh of

electricity and spends 130 Yuan on taxis in 2006. Across our 74 city sample, 16.4% of the

25,300 households own cars. Auto ownership in Chinese cities is growing rapidly as incomes




                                                10
escalate. Between 2002 and 2007, the number of private cars in Beijing increased from 1.5 to 3

million.




Pooled Cross-City Regressions Results


       To estimate the components of equation (1), we will estimate separate city specific

regressions for relevant carbon producing activities such as electricity and gasoline consumption.

These city specific regressions allow us to predict energy consumption for a standardized

household in each of the 74 cities. This procedure generates an unwieldy number of regression

coefficients, but generally these regression coefficients are similar in magnitude across places.


       We first use the household micro data to estimate the determinants of Chinese household

energy use. We regress travel behavior, household electricity use, heating consumption and

domestic fuel consumption on city fixed effects and basic demographics. In the case of

household electricity consumption, we estimate:


Log(Electricity)= City Fixed Effects + b1*Log(Income) + b2*Household Size + b3*Age of

Household Head + U                                                    (2)


The unit of analysis is household j in city k. Note that the regression coefficients do not have

city specific subscripts. In the results reported in Table Three, we include city specific fixed

effects but impose the constraint that household demographics have the same marginal effects on

energy consumption across cities. Our final estimates relax this assumption, but since this

produces an enormous number of coefficients, we report the more consolidated estimates.




                                                 11
       With the exception of electricity consumption and taxi gas consumption, we estimate the

other energy consumption regressions using a Heckman two-step procedure.        Many households

in our sample have literally zero consumption of a specific fuel. For example, in Beijing, we

estimate the car ownership rate to be 23 percent. Thus, in this relatively wealthy city 77 percent

of households are consuming zero gasoline and the remaining 23 percent are consuming a

positive quantity of gasoline. In Shanghai, the vehicle ownership rate is even lower (16.4

percent) due to higher population density and a license plate quota policy. The same issue arises

for household consumption of three domestic fuels (coal, coal gas and LPG), where many

households consume none of particular fuel.


       In implementing the Heckman two-step estimator for each of these categories of energy

consumption, we use a first stage probit of the form:


Prob(consume fuel j) = f( b1*Log(Income) + b2*Household Size + b3*Age of Household Head)

(3)


In the second stage, we estimate Log(consumption| consumption>0) = c1*Log(Income) + e (4)


       We have no theoretical reasons for including variables in the participation equation but

not the consumption equation, but small sample sizes led us to exclude age and household size

from the second stage regression. Our sample sizes conditional on positive energy consumption

(especially when we stratify by city) are small so age and household size effects were extremely

imprecisely measured. This procedure therefore corrects for the tendency of places with

differently aged or larger households to have more cars or more strictly positive amounts of LPG

consumption, but it does not correct for any connection between age or household size and

consumption, conditional upon consumption being positive.



                                                12
        The results in Table 3 indicate that taxi use is a luxury good with an income elasticity

greater than one. Car ownership and gasoline consumed have high income elasticities. The

income elasticity of electricity consumption is 0.29. Richer urban Chinese households are

moving up the energy ladder by substituting away from dirty home heating fuels such as coal and

increasing consumption of cleaner fuels such as electricity and coal gas. These urban China

results are in accord with past household Environmental Kuznets Curve (EKC) work by Pfaff et.

al. (2004). Richer people consume cleaner energy sources and this can reduce local air

pollution despite a rising quantity of consumption. Coal and LPG are both inferior goods, whose

use declines with income (but if a household uses coal, the coal consumption rises with income),

while the use of coal gas, the cleanest of these energy sources, increases with income. Coal gas

is transmitted through pipes directly into households, while LPG is less convenient and coal is

far dirtier.




City-Specific Income Elasticities


        We use the UHS data to estimate city specific regressions for household consumption of

gasoline, electricity, coal, LPG and coal gas that allow the coefficients to vary by city. Each of

these regressions has the same form as those reported in Table Three but in this case, we now

have 222 (74 cities and three explanatory variables) separate coefficient estimates for income,

household size and age. We report only the income coefficients in Table Four. Economic

growth will surely continue in China; these income coefficients suggest which cities may be

particularly likely to increase energy consumption over time.




                                                 13
       There are sizable differences in the relationship between household income and energy

consumption across cities. The table highlights the cross-city heterogeneity with regards to

income effects. Shanghai’s income elasticity of private car fuel consumption (conditioning on

ownership) is two times larger than the income elasticity in Beijing. The income elasticity of

electricity consumption is 0.163 in Beijing, 0.171 in Shanghai and 0.445 in Zibo. Assuming that

these year 2006 cross-sectional income elasticities do not change over time, we use the estimates

reported in Table Four to forecast how ongoing urban growth will affect energy consumption in

different Chinese cities. For example, economic development in Zibo will lead to greater

electricity consumption than in Beijing.




   IV. Measuring Household Carbon Emissions across Chinese Cities


       To measure the carbon emissions of our 74 Chinese cities based on carbon dioxide

emissions, we use the estimated city-specific energy consumptions for seven energy types for a

standardized household and then convert that energy use into carbon dioxide emissions. The

standardized household is defined as a household with an annual income of 40,000 Yuan or

5,714 dollars, 3 members and a household head of 45 years old, which are the means of these

three variables of the whole sample. By predicting the carbon dioxide emission of a standardized

household, we are able to answer; “if a household moved from city I to city j, would aggregate

carbon emissions rise or fall?”


       In estimating the regression equations (2, 3,4), we control for demographics but not for

housing characteristics. After all, we are not attempting to estimate emissions assuming that

people in Beijing live in Huaian’s “Southern-Huai -River” small town style homes. If



                                               14
households live in smaller homes in more expensive areas, then the resulting reduction in carbon

emissions should be attributed to that location.


       Household Electricity


       Based on equation (2), we estimate 74 city specific electricity consumption regressions.

To provide one salient example, in equation (5) we report our estimates based on the Shanghai

sample of 1,018 households.


Log(Electricity Use)= 3.58 + 0.33*Log(Income) + 0.10*Household Size - 0.0005*Age             (5)
                    (0.29) (0.03)               (0.02)               (0.001)


       Standard errors are reported in parentheses. In this regression, the R-squared is 0.199. We

take these regression coefficients and predict the annual electricity consumption for a household

living in Shanghai, with an income of 40,000 Yuan, 3 members and a household head of 45 years

old. The result is 1494.9 kilowatt hours (kWh). We then multiply this number by the electricity

conversion factor in Shanghai (0.8154 tCO2/mWh), which is γ2 in Equation (1). This yields a

prediction for the standardized household equal to 1.219 tons of carbon dioxide emissions.

These steps yield an estimate of γ2*Electricity (see equation 1) for each city.


       The electricity conversion factor (power plant emission factor, γ2) is a key parameter that

varies by region across China. Seven electricity grids (six regional grids on the Mainland plus

one on the Hainan Island) support most of China’s power consumption. The baseline emission

factors (at both operating margin and build margin) for regional power grids are estimated for

recent years by the Office of National Coordination Committee on Climate Change, a department

within the National Development and Reform Commission.


       Car and Taxi Usage


                                                   15
          For private cars, we use the city-specific two-stage Heckman model to predict a

standardized household’s fuel consumption (fuel consumption taken to be 0 when unobserved).

In the case of car usage in Beijing, for example, the selection equation is:


          Prob(Owning a car) =


          f (-8.84 + 0.81*Log(Income)-0.003*Household Size - 0.015*Age of household head) (6)


            (0.861)   (0.079)                (0.051)        (0.003)


Standard errors are in parentheses. The consumption equation, given the household owns a car, is:


          Log( Car Fuel Use| Car ownership =1)= 4.52+ 0.27*Log(Income)                        (7)
                                               (6.599) (0.519)


          Standard errors are in parentheses. In the above Heckman two-step estimation, there are

2,081 observations. From the first step regression we predict that the standardized household has

a 18.4% probability of owning a car. Using both equations, we predict that the standardized

household’s expected fuel consumption is 292.2 liters per year. We then convert fuel

consumption into carbon emissions using standard gas conversion measures. We employ a

similar procedure to predict a standardized household’s emissions from taxi use in each of the 74

cities.


          Bus and Subway Emissions


          The UHS expenditure data do not provide us with reliable estimates of the mileage and

energy consumed by households using public transit. To overcome this problem, we use




                                                 16
aggregate data in China Urban Statistic Yearbooks and additional sources. 4 The Yearbooks

provide data on the total numbers of standard buses, LPG buses and CNG buses. We assume that

the bus operating rate is 90 percent, and every bus travels approximately 150 kilometers per day.

The fuel consumption of a standard bus is 25 liters per 100 km. A LPG (or CNG) bus consumes

three-fourths of the fuel that a conventional bus consumes for an equal distance. We then

calculate each city’s total bus fuel consumption and divide by the total number of households in

the city. Standard conversion factors transform per household fuel consumption to per

household carbon emission.


         There are only 10 Chinese cities that have subway lines: Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou,

Shenzhen, Tianjin, Dalian, Changchun, Nanjing, Wuhan, and Chongqing. There is no public data

available on the electricity usage of subways, so we must rely on private governmental data. We

follow the same procedure as we followed for estimating bus emissions by city. For each city,

we calculate total electricity consumption by the subway system and then divide this by the

city’s household count. This yields an estimate of a city’s per-household average electricity

consumption from subway use. We then use region-specific conversion factors to estimate the

carbon emissions associated with subway electricity usage in each city. The total carbon

emission from transportation sector is the sum of the above four sub-categories: private car, taxi,

bus, and subway.


         Fuel and Heating Emissions


         We apply the Heckman two-stage procedure (see equations 4 and 5) to predict a

standardized household’s carbon emissions from home fuel use. For three types of fuel, coal,

4
 Glaeser and Kahn (2010) follow the same strategy in their United States study ranking cities with respect to their
household carbon footprint.


                                                         17
LPG and coal gas, we first estimate the probability the standardized household uses this fuel type,

and then predict the consumption quantity conditional upon using the fuel. We calculate

expected fuel consumption for each source and then multiply this by standard conversion factors

to predict total carbon emissions.


        Since many households in northern cities still receive free heating services, there is no

record of heating expenditure in the UHS, beyond the three fuel types discussed above. In

markets where there is centralized heating, there is no heating meter since heat is provided by the

state for free in fixed quantities.   The best predictor of energy usage in such households, that we

know of, is floor area. Tsinghua University’s Department of Building Science and Department

of Environmental Engineering provided us with conversion factors that indicate how much

carbon dioxide is emitted when heating a square meter of living space in each province for a

given outside temperature .


        We then multiply this conversion factor times the predicted amount of floor space for an

average household. Using UHS information on each household’s housing unit size, we estimate

a city specific regression (similar to equation 2) where home unit size is regressed on income and

demographics. Using this regression, we predict expected square footage for a standardized

house and then multiply this by the province-specific home heating conversion factors to predict

total carbon emissions in each of our 74 cities.


China’s Greenest Cities Based on the Household CO2 Metric


        Combining the components in equation (1) then enables us to rank China’s 74 major

cities with respect to total carbon emission per standardized household. The results are shown in




                                                   18
Table Five. Table Five’s first 9 columns report our sectoral estimates for this standardized

household in each of the 74 cities. The units are tons of CO2.


        China’s major cities’ household carbon emissions are dramatically lower than in the U.S.

Glaeser and Kahn (2010) report that in the cleanest cities (San Diego and San Francisco), a

standardized household emits around 26 tons of CO2 per year. 5 Shanghai’s standardized

household produces 1.8 tons of carbon and Beijing’s standardized household produces 4.0 tons.

Even in China’s brownest city, Daqing, a standardized household emits only one-fifth of the

carbon produced by a standardized household in America’s greenest cities. Table Five presents

our ranking in order from Greenest to Brownest. The top ten cities are: Huanian, Suqian, Haikou,

Nantong, Nanchang, Taizhou, Zhengjian, Shaoxing, Xining, and Xuzhou. The bottom ten sorted

from worst to relatively cleaner are; Daqing, Mudanjiang, Beijing, Qiqihaer, Yingchuan,

Shenyang, Haerbin, Dalian, Baotou, and Liaoyang.


         Figure 1 shows the per household carbon dioxide emissions in each of the 74 cities on a

GIS map. High levels of carbon emissions are particularly common in the north, which reflects

the cold temperatures and government heating policy. Coastal cities also have higher emissions,

perhaps because they are somewhat more developed. Eight of the ten greenest cities in our

sample are located just south of the centralized heating border in the coastal provinces. These

cities are not entitled to winter heating services and their summers are not exceptionally hot.

Daqing, China’s oil capital, has dramatically higher carbon emissions than any other city.


        The Chinese heating system is coal-based and highly-subsidized. Most of the heat is

derived from coal-fired heat-only boilers or combined heat and power generators, which are

5
 Glaeser and Kahn’s standardized U.S urban household has an income of $62,500. Obviously, this is a much
higher income level than for the standardized Chinese urban household.


                                                     19
inefficient in energy usage compared to electric, gas and oil heating systems in industrial

countries (T.J. Wang et al., 2000; Yi Jiang, 2007). If China’s home heating system were to be

dramatically changed, perhaps using far less carbon intensive energy sources, then this could

certainly change the rankings of cities.


         The results reported in Table Five are measured in tons of carbon dioxide per household.

We use an estimate of $35 per ton as the marginal social cost of one ton of carbon dioxide. This

is a conservative estimate relative to the Stern report (2008), which suggests a cost of carbon

dioxide that is twice this amount. This value lies in the middle of the range reported by Metcalf

(2007). 6


         Given our estimates of the spatial differences in household carbon emissions across,

China’s cities we find that moving the average household from the greenest city to the brownest

would cause a social externality of $136.5 (35*(5.1-1.2)) per year. This is roughly 2.5 percent

of a year’s income. If the northern cities substitute away from coal for home heating, or if the

richer cities invest more in subways or other forms of transit, this gap could narrow. 7

Conversely, increases in income could cause some of the differences in consumption to widen.

We will explore these possibilities in Section VI.


         A city’s carbon emissions is just one indicator of its “greenness,” but it the component of

greenness that seems most likely to have an impact outside the city and country of residence.

Zheng, Kahn and Liu (2009) use hedonic methods to rank China’s major 35 cities. A major
6
  It is relevant to note that carbon tax policy proposals have suggested taxes per ton of carbon dioxide roughly in this
range. Metcalf (2007) proposes a bundled carbon tax and a labor tax decrease. As shown in his Figure Six, he
proposes that the carbon tax start at $15 per ton (in year 2005 dollars) now and rise by 4% a year. Under this
proposal, the carbon tax per ton of carbon dioxide would equal $60 per ton (in year 2005 dollars) by 2050.
7
  Northern cities should be aware of the local ambient pollution problems caused by household coal use. After the
horrific deaths in the great 1952 London Fog, the city banned home coal use. While households have little incentive
to curb their greenhouse gas emissions, the cost of local pollution (caused by coal burning) provides a direct
incentive to consider encouraging substitution to cleaner fuels.


                                                          20
component in their quality of life index calculation is city air quality, measured by small

particulate matter, PM10. We calculate the correlation between the 35 cities’ PM10 levels and our

per-household carbon emission. These two sets of rankings have a positive correlation

coefficient of 0.33. In the colder northern cities, people burn coal to produce home and office

heating creating both particulates and carbon dioxide emissions.


Understanding Cross-City Differences in Carbon Emissions


       Table Six reports the correlation between our carbon emissions estimates and city-level

attributes including population, population growth, income, temperature and urban form.

Population is positively correlated with emissions from use of taxis, buses and electricity.

Unsurprisingly, larger cities tend to be more transit oriented and less dependent on cars.

Population density is associated with lower levels of emissions from taxi use and buses. An

increase of 1,000 people per square km (about 19% of the sample standard deviation) on average

is associated with a reduction of carbon dioxide emissions per household of 0.424 ton from use

of taxis and 0.837 ton from the use of buses. This may indicate shorter average travel distance or

much more effective urban public transportation. Just as in the U.S., compact development leads

to lower carbon emissions.


       There is a positive correlation between city-level income and carbon emissions, even

holding individual income constant. Higher income cities have higher emissions from

electricity, driving, and subways but lower emissions from taxis. One explanation for the link

between city-level income and emissions for a standardized household is that there is

mismeasurement in individual income and that city-level income is correlated with unobserved

household prosperity. A second explanation is that there is a social multiplier in certain types of




                                                21
energy use. A third explanation is that higher income cities have built infrastructure that is

complementary with greater use of energy. When we form our projected energy use in a richer

China, we will combine both the income effects suggested by the individual regressions and the

city-level income elasticities.


       Figure 2 shows the strong correlation between January temperature and carbon emissions,

which reflects both the natural tendency of colder places to require more heat and the home

heating rules that provide heat only to northern cities. A one standard deviation increase in

January temperature (8.66 degrees) is associated with a 0.29 ton decrease in carbon dioxide

emissions.     The temperature effect of January comes primarily from its impact on household

heating emissions – one degree higher in January temperature corresponds to 0.111 ton less CO2

emissions from heating. There are offsetting effects from the other energy sources.




   V. The Environmental Consequences of China’s Regional Development Policy


   Unlike the United States, China’s government is pursuing a well defined set of regional

growth policies. If successful, these policies will impact China’s overall carbon emissions. In

China, there are at least three significant programs that are intended to bolster the growth of

particular regions.   The Western Development Program launched in 1999 gives infrastructure

aid and support for industrial adjustment to western and inland provinces. The program attempts

to help heavy and defense industries convert to consumer goods production (Chow (2002: 174)).

China’s Northeast once benefited from the emphasis on heavy industry during the Mao years

(Liaoning, Jilin and Heilongjiang). Since then, like the American Rustbelt, the Chinese northeast

has struggled with high unemployment, aging industry and infrastructure, and social welfare bills



                                                 22
(Saich 2001: 149). While the Western Development Program targets both urban and rural areas,

the Northeast Revitalization Program focuses on reinventing the declined cities.


        A third program is targeted at the development of Beijing-Tianjin- Bohai Sea region. This

program intends to expedite the development of this northern mega-region to catch up the

Yangtze and Pearl River Deltas in the south. The 2008 Olympics caused a massive public

investment in infrastructure and environmental improvement. Centralized political power will

surely continue to attract physical and human capital to the region (Ades and Glaeser, 1995). 8


        To assess the carbon production consequences of these programs would require a detailed

model of how each of these programs will influence the spatial distribution of Chinese urban

growth. To begin to address this topic, we calculate the regional household carbon emissions

factor by taking population weighted averages of our household carbon production measures

reported in Table Five. The weighted average of residential emissions in the Western region is

1.9 tons per household relative to 2.3 tons in the rest of the country. The weighted average

residential emissions in the cities impacted by northeastern regional development are 3.5 tons per

household. Emissions are 2.0 tons per household outside that region. Finally, the weighted

average emissions in the cities inside the Beijing-Tianjin-Bohai Sea region are 2.9 tons per

household, as opposed to 2.1 tons outside that region. The Northeast Revitalization Program and

the development program of Beijing-Tianjin- Bohai Sea region seem to be trying to bolster

growth in areas that have particularly high levels of carbon emissions. The Western

Development Program is encouraging the developments in the areas with slightly low levels of

carbon emissions.


8
 There is the fourth regional development program called “Rise of Central China”, aiming to support the
development of central provinces. However, very few real policies came out since the launch of this program.


                                                        23
         These results highlight how the environmental costs of regional policies can be

incorporated into a type of “green accounting” for estimating the full consequences of spatial

policies. Such externalities need to be put in the context of other policy objectives. Our

estimates just suggest that there are environmental consequences of regional policy. 9




    VI. Future Carbon Emissions


    China is changing so rapidly that current Chinese emissions only offer the vaguest sense of

what emissions will be like 20 years in the future. In this admittedly speculative section, we use

our income elasticity estimates to project household carbon emissions across Chinese cities 20

years in the future. We make the same assumptions about incomes and population levels in

2026. The assumptions are from authoritative research institutes in China: (1) Chinese urban per

capita incomes will increase 200 percent over 20 years, which would occur if urban incomes

grew at a 5.6 percent annual real rate. (source: Institute of Quantitative & Technical Economics,

Chinese Academy of Social Sciences); (2) Chinese urbanization rate will increase from 43.9% in

2006 to 62% in 2026, thus urban population growth is about 40 percent over 20 years. (source:

China Academy of Science)




9
  Such hidden cost may be further increased if urbanization leads to more reliance on local and regional energy
sources. Fossil fuels are predominantly in the north, which has 90% of the oil and 80% of the coal reserves.
Hydropower remains the vast majority of renewable power (roughly 17% of the total electricity) generated in China.
Roughly two thirds of the hydropower is located in the south west region of China. In contrast to the distribution of
fossil and hydro energy, the east and south coastal areas have very little energy resources. Of course, the northern
part of the country has some potential in increasing its small but increasing share of renewable energy. Wind power
is concentrated in the northern provinces and the east and south coasts. The seasonal fluctuation of wind power is
complementary to hydropower, but the geographical distribution of land areas with rich wind power potential is to a
large extent different from that of the demand for power. In addition, international energy trade may help reduce the
northern cities’ carbon footprint. If the northern cities can import natural gas from Russia to substitute their coal use
to a significant level, the geography of urban carbon foot print will be different.


                                                           24
       We then use our China-specific data to estimate emissions for 2026. To do this, we

create a composite regression that includes our predicted emissions for every household in the

UHS, including emissions from fuel, subways, cars and so forth. We then perform the following

regression:


Emissions=ai*Log(Income)+bi*Household Size+ci*Age+d* Log(City Population)+e *January

Temperature                                                                            (8)


Coefficients ai, bi and ci all differ by city. We first use this equation to predict the standardized

household’s carbon emissions in each of the 74 cities in 2006. We then predict for each city in

2026, the predicted emissions for a household with three members earning 120,000 Yuan, or

17,500 dollars in today’s currency (a 200% increase from 40,000 Yuan), assuming that the city’s

population has also risen in the manner discussed above. The predicted 2026 per-household

carbon emissions are listed in Column (3) in Table Seven. They essentially predict household

energy use assuming that China in 20 years looks essentially like a richer and more urbanized

version of China today. All cities have higher emission levels in 2026. On average, per

household carbon emission grows by 26% from 2006 to 2026. This extremely modest change

suggests that a richer China will have only a modest impact on global emissions.


       But there are good reasons to be skeptical about that optimistic projection, which

essentially assumes that China in 2026 will look like a richer version of China today, not a

poorer version of the United States. Glaeser and Kahn (2010) calculated the emissions for a

household that earns 62,500 dollars, which is about 10.66 times richer than the Chinese

household investigated in this study. The median city in their United States sample had

household carbon emissions that are 20 times higher than the median city found here in China.




                                                  25
To explain this difference with income alone, the income elasticity of carbon emissions would

have to be 1.3, which is far higher than any of our estimates within China, or Glaeser and Kahn’s

estimates within the United States.


       In other words, a comparison of the United States and China suggests that increases in

national income may be associated with far greater increases in carbon emissions increases in

income across country. Presumably, this greater cross-national difference adopts infrastructure

choices that are made at the city, region or national level and that would cause the aggregate

effects of income to be higher than the individual effects of income. Such effects may explain

why there was a correlation between emissions and city-income in China, holding individual

income constant.


       If China’s middle class in the future starts uses energy like China’s wealthiest citizens

today, then China will have a modest impact on global emissions. If China’s middle class in the

future starts to use energy like the poorer Americans today, then global emissions will rise quite

significantly. The wide range between those alternatives suggests the large impact that different

investments in Chinese infrastructure will have on the world’s carbon emissions.




VI. Conclusion


       China’s economic growth has profound environmental implications. Past research has

examined the greenhouse gas implications of this growth using an Environmental Kuznets Curve

framework either using national panel data (see Schmalensee, Stoker and Judson 1998) or using

regional aggregate data. Auffhammer and Carson (2008) create a panel data set for 30 Chinese




                                                26
provinces covering the years 1985 to 2004. They also find that the relationship between

greenhouse gas emissions and per-capita income is increasing and concave.


          In this paper, we find that some of the patterns of carbon emissions within China replicate

findings that hold in the United States and elsewhere. If economic growth takes place in

compact, public transit friendly, cool summer, warm winter cities, then the aggregate carbon

emissions will increase less than if economic growth takes place in “car dependent” cities

featuring hot summers and cold winters and where electricity is produced using coal fired power

plants.


          Recognizing that diverse cities differ with respect to these characteristics, we have used

individual and institutional data to measure household carbon emissions across a sample of 74

Chinese cities. We have found that the “greenest” cities based on this criterion are Huaian and

Taizhou while the “dirtiest” cities are Daqing and Mudanjiang. However, even in China’s

brownest city, Daqing, a standardized household emits only one-fifth of the carbon produced by

a standardized household in America’s greenest city (San Diego).


          The cross city differential in the carbon externality is “large”. At $35 per ton of damage

from carbon dioxide, moving a standardized household from Daqing to Huaian would reduce the

externality by roughly $136.5 per year, which is reasonably high relative to household per capita

income of 40,000 Yuan, or about 5800 dollars. This differential is mainly generated by cross

city differences in climate, centralized heating policy, regional electric utility emissions factors,

and urban form. Unlike the United States, China is pursuing major regional growth initiatives.

Our results highlight the presumably unintended adverse carbon consequence of encouraging

growth in the North.




                                                   27
       Our study relies on cross-sectional data, and changes over time may not resemble

differences at a point in time. New technologies may radically reduce the carbon emissions

associated with certain types of energy production. Alternatively, China may invest more in

infrastructure, like highways, that complement heavy energy use. China will surely grow richer,

and the country is likely to use more energy. But the actual impact on carbon emissions, which

may be either modest or large, will depend on infrastructure and new technologies.




                                               28
References

Ades, Alberto F & Glaeser, Edward L, 1995. "Trade and Circuses: Explaining Urban Giants,"
   The Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, vol. 110(1), pages 195-227
Almond, Douglas, Yuyu Chen, Michael Greenstone and Hongbin Li. 2009. Winter Heating or
   Clean Air? Unintended Impacts of China’s Huai River Policy. American Economic Review
   vol. 99(2), pages 184-90

Auffhammer, M., Carson, R T. 2008. Forecasting the Path of China's CO2 Emissions Using
   Province Level Information, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 55(3):
   229-247.
Brown, M. A., Logan, E., 2008. The Residential Energy and Carbon Footprints of the 100
   Largest Metropolitan Areas, Georgia Institute of Technology School of Public Policy,
   Working Paper 39.
Chow, Gregory C. 2002. China’s Economic Transformation. Malden, Mass: Blackwell.
Glaeser, Edward L, and Matthew E. Kahn. The Greenness of Cities: Carbon Dioxide Emissions
   and Urban Development. Journal of Urban Economics, forthcoming.
Golob, T. F., Brownstone, D., 2005. The Impact of Residential Density on Vehicle Usage and
   Energy Consumption, University of California Energy Institute, Policy & Economics Paper
   EPE-011.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas and Thomas M. Selden. Stoking the Fires? CO2 Emissions and Economic
   Growth. Journal of Public Economics 57.1 (1995): 85-101.
Huang, J-P. 1993. “Industry Energy Use and Structural Change: A Case Study of the People’s
Republic of China,” Energy Economics 15(2): 131-136.


Jiang, Yi. 2007. “Promoting Chinese Energy Efficiency.” China and the World Discuss the
Environment. 25 Jun 2007 <http://www.chinadialog.net>.
Kahn, Matthew. E., 2006 Green Cities: Urban Growth and the Environment, Brookings
   Institution Press, Washington, DC.
Metcalf, G., 2007. A Proposal for a U.S. Carbon Tax Swap. Brookings Institution. Hamilton
   Project Working Paper.
Naughton, Barry. 2007. The Chinese Economy: Transition and Growth. Cambridge, Mass: the
   MIT Press.
Pfaff, Alexander. S. P., Shubham. Chaudhuri, and H. Nye. 2004. “Household Production and
    Environmental Kuznets Curves: Examining the Desirability and Feasibility of Substitution.”
    Environmental and Resource Economics 27.2: 187–200.
Saich, Tony. 2001. Governance and Politics of China. New York: Palgrave.


                                              29
Shi, Xiaoyu and Karen R. Polenske, Energy Prices and Energy Intensity in China A Structural
Decomposition Analysis and Econometrics Study

Sinton, J.E. and Levine, M.D. 1994. “Changing Energy Intensity in Chinese Industry: The
Relative Importance of Structural Shift and Intensity Change,” Energy Policy 22(3): 239-258.

Sinton, J.E. and Fridley, D.G. 2000. “What Goes Up: Recent Trends in China’s Energy
Consumption,” Energy Policy 28: 671-687.

Stern, N., 2008. The Economics of Climate Change. American Economic Review 98(2): 1-37.
Wang, T.J., L.S. Jin, Z.K. Li, and K.S. Lam. 2000. “A modeling study on acid rain and
  recommended emission control strategies in China.” Atmospheric Environment 34(26): 4467-
  4477.
Zheng, Siqi, Matthew E. Kahn and Hongyu Liu. Towards a System of Open Cities in China:
Home Prices, FDI Flows and Air Quality in 35 Major Cities. Regional Science and Urban
Economics, forthcoming.




                                              30
Table One: Summary Statistics and Definitions
 Variable Name                             Definition                                 Unit   Mean    Std.dev.

                                            Household level variables

ELECQ            Household’s electricity consumption in 2006                  kWh            1,699   1,089

CAR_USE          Binary: 1=own a car, 0=otherwise. In 2006.                                  0.164   0.370

CARQ             Household’s fuel consumption by driving car in 2006          Liter          178.8   202.9

TAXIQ            Household’s fuel consumption by taking taxi in 2006          Liter          13.2    21.2

COAL_USE         Binary: 1=use coal as domestic fuel, 0=otherwise. In 2006.                  0.092   0.289

COALQ            Household’s coal consumption in 2006                         kg             760.4   654.7

LPG_USE          Binary: 1=use LPG (liquefied petroleum gas) as domestic                     0.419   0.493
                 fuel, 0=otherwise. In 2006.

LPGQ             Household’s LPG consumption in 2006                          kg             82.9    55.4

COALGAS_USE Binary: 1=use coal gas as domestic fuel, 0=otherwise. In                         0.582   0.493
            2006.

COALGASQ         Household’s coal gas consumption in 2006                     m3             252.9   189.5

HHSIZE           Household size                                               person         2.9     0.8

AGE              Household head’s age                                         year           50.5    11.9

INCOME           Annual household income                                      yuan/household 39,639 23,056

HSIZE            Housing unit size                                            square meter   74.271 33.789

                                               City-level variables

CINCOME          City average household income                                yuan           37977 10273

POP              City population                                              1000 persons   2,556   2,652

DENSITY          City population density                                      1000           13.4    5.3
                                                                              persons/km2

JAN_TEMP         Average temperature in January                               ℃              0.46    8.66

JULY_TEMP        Average temperature in July                                  ℃              27.21   2.65




                                                        31
Table Two: City Level Summary Statistics for Year 2006


City        Obs    Avg.     Avg.        Car         Avg.  Avg. taxi Std. bus LPG/         Rail          Heated    coal    Avg.     LPG    Avg.    Coal     Coal    House
                   income   electricity ownership   gas   expenditure mileage CNG         electricity   floor     use     coal     use    LPG     gas      gas     unit
                   (Yuan)   use         (%)         use   (Yuan)      (1e3 km) bus        use           space     rate    use      rate   use     use      use     Size
                            (kWh)                   (L)                        mileage    (1e3 kWh)     ( m2)     (%)     (kg)     (%)    (kg)    rate     (m3)     (m2)
                                                                               (1e3 km)                                                           (%)
All         25330 40,058     1699.0    16.4         178.8 130          99,926                                      9.2    760.4    41.9   82.9     58.3    252.9   64.9
Beijing     2081   55,718    2286.2    23.0         309.3   255       758,835   174,926    244,907      222,180    7.4    1159.9   22.1   97.2     74.8    233.6   65.8
Tianjin     1554   40,441    2151.4    11.0         204.1   176       356,505   2,119      54,741       109,680    8.8    808.2    7.9    73.9    90.9     148.5   76.1
Shijiazhuang 301   32,201    1470.7    7.3          126.5   120       75,785    29,466                  38,280     5.3    1150.6   53.2   85.4     53.2    340.0   68.4
Tangshan    200    37,647    1137.7    16.0         199.4   165       117,915                           21,640     0.0    0.0      0.0             100.0   406.6   68.9
Qinhuangdao 200    29,472    1132.1    23.5         141.5   103       39,075                            9,120      4.5    1411.1   65.0   76.2     39.0    368.3   73.4
Handan      200    28,633    1121.4    12.0         88.3    75        63,023                            10,030     9.5    396.4    10.0   28.8     95.0    361.8   93.0
Cangzhou    150    30,080    1152.5    18.0         69.8    134       19,217                            5,830      4.0    1200.0   92.0   83.1     38.0    112.0   70.4
Taiyuan     310    32,039    1293.2    8.1          159.7   102       99,683                            37,850     3.2    528.0    7.1    83.8    92.9     447.6   85.3
Shuozhou    150    31,747    853.6     26.0         74.4    95        4,977                             2,470      22.0   1597.0   48.7   60.2     57.3    131.1   72.9
Huhehaote   400    37,383    1293.2    11.8         188.8   189       10,200    44,200                  12,030     9.0    1377.0   45.8   72.4    53.0     247.3   75.5
Baotou      400    40,109    1361.4    19.0         111.9   209       39,962    13,945                  23,680     10.8   1215.0   37.5   67.2     42.5    242.3   85.9
Wuhai       150    34,596    1162.8    65.3         64.4    135       20,548                            2,600      31.3   1567.9   27.3   54.4    13.3     214.8   75.9
Chifeng     200    26,572    1141.7    16.5         59.2    103       16,803    1,183                   12,210     8.5    1386.5   89.0   46.5     1.5     42.7    72.9
Tongliao    150    28,275    1680.5    26.7         75.7    193       7,983                             4,660      8.7    1923.8   78.0   85.1     5.3     60.8    65.8
Shenyang    502    31,190    1343.2    4.0          241.7   180       196,410   54,695                  117,776    0.4    175.0    5.8    69.3    95.6     175.7   68.8
Dalian      508    37,514    1242.8    3.0          147.2   239       207,842              17,987       60,350     0.2    1275.0   11.4   56.9     94.1    344.0   71.2
Liaoyang    200    27,259    1182.8    5.5          60.7    124       18,774                            12,630     3.5    62.7     56.0   102.7    63.0    87.6    77.5
Changchun   322    33,444    1224.8    6.8          206.8   210       86,823    100,028    14,680       49,480     5.3    1517.6   5.6    58.4     92.5    236.8   78.7
Jilin       300    29,074    1366.9    3.0          196.4   226       289,195   138,364                 21,610     0.7    177.0    88.0   92.6     17.7    159.8   65.7
Haerbin     541    31,125    1571.0    3.9          132.7   162       124,666   102,837                 55,750     1.3    426.9    16.5   108.2    88.5    403.5   64.8
Qiqihaer    300    22,989    1012.3    7.7          62.1    108       46,466                            20,300     1.0    1666.7   18.3   106.1    90.3    198.8   86.1
Daqing      200    37,427    1708.0    4.0          72.1    228       91,011                            29,610     0.0    0.0      74.0   133.9    7.5     80.2    64.6
Mudanjiang 200     22,349    1254.9    6.5          100.3   165       6,701     15,226                  13,590     6.0    1612.5   74.0   48.9     3.5     104.1   61.1
Shanghai    1018   56,717    1778.3    16.4         183.6   242       818,852   13,846     427,302                 0.0    0.0      3.4    64.1    97.0     403.6   69.9
Nanjing     821   47,448   1960.7   15.1   197.9   116   207,349   45,234   67,180            1.3    462.7    54.8   77.6    50.5   204.0   75.2
Wuxi        301   48,705   2057.3   18.9   194.8   127   130,283   8,968                      2.7    259.4    35.2   76.0    65.4   350.0   66.0
Xuzhou      301   35,331   1278.4   9.6    93.1    82    84,162                               28.6   583.8    33.2   66.9    61.1   288.4   81.0
Changzhou   301   42,536   1746.6   42.5   142.8   104   65,240    13,994                     7.0    458.8    52.8   81.4    59.8   161.6   83.1
Suzhou      300   49,096   1960.2   22.3   173.6   117   101,309                              4.0    581.3    32.7   86.1    69.3   231.9   82.3
Nantong     205   38,890   1524.7   5.4    179.0   61    37,498                               3.4    284.0    29.3   81.4    82.4   311.7   79.6
Huaian      200   29,379   1289.0   16.0   51.2    60    28,974                               42.0   403.5    70.5   56.6    27.0   87.4    91.9
Yangzhou    200   36,080   1655.5   27.5   70.1    71    36,562                               10.5   250.5    49.0   64.5    58.0   278.7   81.4
Zhenjiang   200   40,896   1593.5   10.0   52.1    98    36,119                               24.0   532.0    40.5   54.2    69.0   149.6   87.9
Taizhou     200   33,580   1468.5   40.5   88.8    49    11,727                               22.5   539.0    60.5   62.1    28.0   71.7    117.9
Suqian      207   26,626   1038.6   21.3   54.0    42    16,162                               43.5   503.0    87.4   48.3    1.4    26.0    78.4
Hangzhou    614   51,432   2286.5   18.1   243.7   96    234,795                              4.6    262.1    66.9   81.1    42.3   128.3   69.2
Ningbo      406   48,805   1768.0   15.0   262.4   90    130,776                              2.2    351.7    78.1   112.3   27.6   60.9    87.3
Wenzhou     204   54,042   2836.0   43.1   335.7   195   83,620                               0.5    50.0     84.8   115.4   16.2   34.4    76.0
Jiaxing     150   44,866   1716.0   38.0   186.4   87    32,374                               5.3    197.3    80.0   98.0    25.3   55.0    80.7
Huzhou      200   42,087   1727.5   21.0   97.4    90    29,910                               5.5    456.4    87.0   89.9    18.5   163.5   74.2
Shaoxing    200   49,815   1568.6   9.0    150.6   68    36,119                               27.5   224.7    42.5   77.5    71.0   119.5   86.5
Jinhua      153   43,932   1514.1   37.3   137.5   119   33,162                               24.2   238.2    85.0   71.7    16.3   37.3    96.4
Quzhou      150   37,848   1415.4   16.7   128.1   88    26,461                               10.7   753.4    76.0   101.8   28.7   389.7   104.5
Taizhou     150   52,123   1914.5   39.3   263.3   86    17,591                               12.7   88.9     84.0   118.3   18.0   50.8    88.1
Lishui      150   44,803   1881.5   48.7   152.8   50    4,583                                14.0   187.5    92.7   90.8    4.0    30.1    71.1
Hefei       410   31,293   1624.5   5.6    106.4   222   96,776    21,927                     27.8   417.3    58.8   83.7    48.5   177.6   68.3
Huainan     411   31,410   1255.3   6.3    84.9    232   42,623                               28.0   575.4    46.7   51.5    64.7   325.6   82.0
Fuzhou      303   44,596   2804.7   24.8   144.8   76    91,750                               0.3    30.0     68.6   117.8   36.3   120.3   87.0
Xiamen      201   52,711   2776.8   25.9   172.1   121   126,883                              6.5    584.3    67.7   93.1    34.8   106.3   70.8
Nanchang    300   28,905   1537.2   1.7    50.0    38    108,159                              0.3    150.0    75.0   85.4    38.3   250.8   75.6
Jinan       416   43,605   1573.0   31.3   133.2   185   138,561   46,269            23,680   25.7   1140.4   52.9   50.3    39.4   143.8   67.6
Qingdao     407   43,263   1668.9   10.3   236.3   172   177,291   20,646            18,370   20.4   1050.2   48.6   55.9    63.9   222.6   93.9
Zibo        150   38,050   1299.7   42.7   79.6    149   82,339    4,977             18,300   11.3   1205.3   66.7   81.2    29.3   148.9   72.8
Yantai      200   40,448   1248.6   26.0   72.6    184   73,962    296               15,970   8.5    1273.5   55.0   61.4    52.0   205.5   81.0
Rizhao      102   31,736   1412.1   60.8   136.6   139   35,527                      5,670    22.5   1163.2   59.8   47.9    8.8    67.3    80.4
Zhengzhou   462   35,124   1508.3   7.4    97.6    52    87,857    70,365            10,610   14.7   991.9    30.3   87.2    79.9   241.4   82.6




                                                                   33
Luoyang     307   32,683   1402.5   22.5   87.7    72    40,948                        3,200    25.1   612.3    75.9   82.4    22.5   325.2   78.2
Wuhan       531   34,558   2092.8   5.5    222.0   135   201,091   83,225    11,284             7.7    503.4    50.5   109.9   63.8   253.7   79.5
Changsha    409   38,758   1918.3   16.4   207.9   227   131,564   2,562                        8.6    604.3    81.4   97.1    31.5   258.3   77.2
Guangzhou   304   59,751   2361.1   27.0   242.3   166   209,271   316,444   185,417            0.7    66.0     69.1   112.6   50.3   260.7   95.5
Shenzhen    101   82,429   2893.5   42.6   466.6   219                       100,485            0.0    0.0      53.5   140.4   59.4   79.2    87.8
Zhuhai      101   55,577   2039.5   36.6   295.0   162   57,504                                 5.0    118.8    97.0   137.3   12.9   48.4    74.2
Nanning     202   32,663   1591.5   39.1   136.2   65    107,567                                12.4   319.3    92.6   107.4   6.4    70.0    94.8
Haikou      306   35,693   1580.0   33.7   193.4   64    42,377                                 4.2    577.3    85.6   97.3    15.0   139.4   75.5
Chongqing   308   35,571   2051.0   3.2    155.7   119   40,504    349,113   26,120             1.0    783.3    2.6    67.9    98.4   341.2   76.4
Chengdu     430   36,138   1821.8   20.9   262.3   116   3,597     32,669                       2.1    1596.7   5.1    103.9   94.4   348.4   80.6
Mianyang    200   27,587   1394.5   9.5    188.8   100   2,661     33,556                       0.5    150.0    4.5    71.3    97.5   279.6   63.5
Guiyang     316   33,034   2155.4   15.5   128.0   99    77,559                                 29.1   848.1    19.0   58.7    69.0   292.2   92.4
Kunming     600   30,445   1522.3   14.3   181.1   45    123,582   77,756                       10.3   372.8    41.7   74.9    51.3   399.0   62.5
Xi'an       366   31,172   1396.1   6.6    50.2    108   135,309   131,466             18,390   20.8   678.6    38.5   58.2    53.3   247.2   61.9
Lanzhou     321   25,819   911.7    3.1    47.4    74    4,139     91,159              22,140   6.5    667.2    44.9   61.6    59.5   166.5   73.8
Xining      300   27,781   1507.6   4.7    111.8   113             86,379              130      17.0   1273.6   14.3   63.7    5.0    392.7   72.0
Yinchuan    314   27,870   1334.8   15.3   71.7    191   40,455    12,713              21,230   10.5   467.9    66.2   42.7    20.7   233.5   69.4
Wulumuqi    402   29,294   1053.5   4.0    37.4    136   12,812    196,755             29,000   0.7    500.0    26.9   54.1    61.7   233.5   64.9




                                                                   34
Table Three: Energy Consumption Regressions Using 2006 Micro Data
                                             Heckman Two Step            Heckman Two Step            Heckman Two Step                 Heckman Two Step
Dependent        log(ELEC      log(TAXI      CAR_USE        log(CARQ     COAL_U        log(COAL      LPG_USE             log(LPGQ     COALGAS_U       log(COALGASQ   log(HSIZE)
                                                                                                                                                                          c
variable         Q)            Q)                           |CAR_US      SE            Q                                 |LPG_USE     SE              |COALGAS_USE
                                                            E=1)                       |COAL_U                           =1)                          =1)
                                                                                       SE=1)
Model               OLSa         OLSa         Probitb            a
                                                                          Probitb           a
                                                                                                        Probitb               a
                                                                                                                                         Probitb                a
                                                                                                                                                                        OLSa
log(INCOME) 0.289             1.929         0.630          0.768        -0.448        0.169          -0.240              -0.082       0.354           -0.070         0.265
            (39.21***)        (54.95***)    (34.16***)     (9.40***)    (-23.83***)   (2.17**)       (-17.46***)         (-2.08**)    (25.46***)      (-0.59)        (61.36***)
HHSIZE      0.06              -0.287        0.044                       0.153                        0.039                            -0.030                         0.025
            (11.77***)        (-11.83***)   (3.39***)                   (11.23***)                   (3.82)                           (-2.91)                        (8.26***)
AGE         0.0009            -0.018        -0.021                      0.011                        -0.004                           0.008                          0.0003
            (2.62***)         (-11.37***)   (-23.90***)                 (11.69***)                   (-6.14**)                        (11.48***)                     (1.53)
constant    3.988             -13.642       -6.702          -2.689      2.288          5.283         2.389               3.829        -3.789          5.184          1.367
            (51.1***)         (-36.75***)   (-34.90***)     (-2.59**)   (11.71***)     (9.39***)     (16.33***)          (16.44***)   (-25.54***)     (3.01***)      (29.83***)
City fixed  yes               yes                         --                          --                            --                               --                  yes
effects
Obs             25328            25328                  25328                          25328                       25328                            25328              25328
Significance      R2: 0.22     R2: 0.234           rho: -0.558                 rho: -0.398                    rho: 0.961                         rho: -0.364          R2: 0.222
                                                  sigma: 1.764                sigma: 1.330                   sigma: 1.314                       sigma: 0.917
                                                 lambda: -0.984              lambda: -0.529                 lambda: 1.262                      lambda: -0.335
a
  t-statistics in parentheses.
b
  z-statistics in parentheses.
c
  for estimating heating. * indicates significance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level.




                                                                                           35
   Table Four: Income Effect Estimates Based on the Household Level Regressions Estimated for Each City

Dependent      log(elecq)   log(taxiq)    Car_use        log(carq)    log(hsize)         coal_use        log(coalq)      lpg_use      log(lpgq)   coalgas_use   log(coalgasq)
variable
Model          OLS          OLS                      Heckman          OLS                           Heckman                     Heckman                   Heckman
Beijing        0.163        1.432         1.463          0.269        0.218                -0.344          -0.037          -0.447        0.705       0.514          0.068
               (3.631***)   (10.230***)   (8.213***)     (0.518)      (11.158***)         (-1.806)        (-0.180)      (-3.679***)    (0.897)    (4.415***)      (0.650)
Tianjin        0.402        1.499         1.526          0.160        0.416                -1.427           0.519          -0.959       -0.080       0.516          0.058
               (9.811***)   (8.470***)    (6.044***)     (0.281)      (19.992***)       (-7.558**)        (0.840)       (-5.155***)   (-0.358)    (3.018***)      (0.461)
Shijiazhuang   0.321        -0.493        1.894          1.197        0.312                -1.361           0.028          -0.387       -1.889       0.552         -0.097
               (2.605**)    (-1.011)      (3.155***)     (0.796)      (6.087***)        (-2.523**)        (0.015)         (-1.424)    (-0.161)      (1.996)       (-0.313)
Tangshan       0.197        2.227         1.53           -0.053       0.328
               (2.147**)    (4.043***)    (2.915***)     (0.00)       (6.456***)
Qinhuangdao    0.138        0.532         1.174          0.753        0.137                                                  -1.095     -0.492         1.023        -0.833
               (1.59)       (1.542)       (2.396)        (1.446)      (4.175***)                                        (-3.385***)   (-1.506)    (3.296***)      (-0.887)
Handan         0.144        -0.657        1.792          1.184        0.356                 -0.3           -1.202            -1.192     0.501         -0.109        0.146
               (0.944)      (-0.986)      (1.486)        (1.077)      (6.546***)          (-0.42)         (-1.093)        (-1.692*)   (0.668)       (-0.129)      (0.521)
Cangzhou       0.333        1.013         0.567          0.341        0.162                                                  -0.444      0.160         0.335        -0.141
               (2.734***)   (1.820*)      (0.879)        (0.605)      (3.139***)                                           (-0.632)    (0.338)       (0.882)      (-0.233)
Taiyuan        0.08         1.681         1.194          0.984        0.110                                                  -0.225     -0.366         0.093        -0.011
               (1.221)      (3.365***)    (1.929*)       (0.745)      (4.948***)                                           (-1.108)   (-1.000)       (0.361)      (-0.212)
Shuozhou       0.312        0.476         1.054          0.756        0.038                -1.816           -0.102           -0.934      0.154         1.646         0.478
               (1.857*)     (1.195)       (2.398**)      (1.472)      (0.706)           (-4.031***)       (-0.203)      (-2.630***)    (0.269)    (4.030***)       (1.577)
Huhehaote      0.163        1.173         2.521          2.647        0.221                -0.978            0.448           -0.223      0.177         0.235        -0.118
               (1.636)      (3.398***)    (4.780***)     (2.708***)   (7.348***)        (-2.986***)        (0.744)         (-1.164)    (1.164)       (1.236)      (-0.183)
Baotou         0.167        1.215         0.574          -0.374       0.191                 -0.51           -0.204           -0.105      0.007         0.98         -0.372
               (1.488)      (3.253***)    (1.218)        (-0.535)     (5.684***)          (-1.421)        (-0.666)         (-0.442)    (0.041)    (3.788***)      (-1.247)
Wuhai          0.507        0.411         0.719          0.594        0.487                -0.963           -0.026            1.593      0.427         1.604        -0.339
               (1.835*)     (0.804)       (1.712*)       (1.292)      (6.074***)          (-1.803)        (-0.075)        (2.498**)    (1.093)       (1.923)      (-0.361)
Chifeng        0.243        1.354         2.023          1.889        0.247                 -0.88           -0.881           -0.619     -0.234
               (1.487)      (2.375**)     (3.581***)     (2.703***)   (4.507***)          (-1.456)        (-0.431)         (-1.016)   (-0.472)
Tongliao       0.427        0.696         1.172          1.915        0.325                -1.846           -0.207            0.276      0.102
               (3.540***)   (2.089**)     (3.082***)     (1.377)      (8.107***)        (-3.529***)       (-1.097)           (0.85)    (0.928)
Shenyang       0.242        2.004                                     0.322                                                  -0.733      0.072
               (3.925***)   (3.945***)                                (10.696***)                                         (-1.834*)    (0.067)
Dalian         0.344        1.571                                     0.264                                                  -0.525      0.348       0.744           -0.136
               (6.375***)   (2.905***)                                (8.803***)                                          (-1.775*)    (0.866)      (1.89)         (-0.361)
Liaoyang       0.041        1.675         1.908          0.790        0.247                                                   0.811      0.116      -0.803            0.231
               (0.512)      (2.132**)     (1.551)        (0.488)      (5.762***)                                          (2.381**)    (0.314)     (-2.288)         (0.538)
Changchun      0.274        2.026         1.454          2.268        0.135                -3.219              4.182         -1.463     -0.095      -0.406            0.271
               (2.814***)   (3.938***)    (2.830***)     (3.058***)   (3.718***)        (-4.001***)           (0.825)    (-2.386**)   (-0.121)     (-0.876)      (2.299***)
Jilin          0.239                                                  0.127                                                   0.007      0.017       0.216           -0.056
               (3.641***)                                             (5.168***)                                            (0.031)    (0.012)     (0.682)         (-0.072)
Haerbin        0.373        0.269                                     0.358                                                  -0.213     -0.139       0.51             0.231
               (4.859***)   (0.648)                                   (12.992***)                                          (-0.977)   (-0.865)     (2.002)        (1.719*)
Qiqihaer       0.119        1.14          -0.105         1.270        0.123                                                    0.1       0.166      -0.317            0.074
               (2.471**)    (2.385**)     (-0.127)       (0.715)      (5.649***)                                            (0.406)    (0.817)     (-0.811)         (0.690)




                                                                                   36
Daqing       0.219                                               0.097                                    -0.454         0.407        0.769        0.299
             (1.379)                                             (3.881***)                              (-1.453)       (0.403)      (1.323)      (1.013)
Mudanjiang   0.346        0.823        1.253        0.677        0.193           -0.879       0.635       -0.142         0.095
             (3.151***)   (1.697*)     (2.245**)    (0.619)      (5.898***)     (-1.721)     (1.077)     (-0.533)       (0.885)
Shanghai     0.171        1.34         1.983        0.850        0.485
             (4.932***)   (6.738***)   (8.036***)   (1.152)      (15.975***)
Nanjing      0.242        1.388        0.839        -0.201       0.282                                       -1.143         0.569      1.368         0.548
             (5.548***)   (6.707***)   (2.810***)   (-0.242)     (16.963***)                            (-8.306***)     (1.610*)    (9.538***)   (2.322***)
Wuxi         0.279        1.382        2.328        1.618        0.304                                       -1.332         1.577      1.435         -0.838
             (4.084***)   (4.137***)   (4.884***)   (2.191***)   (7.811***)                             (-5.051***)       (0.552)   (5.319***)     (-0.771)
Xuzhou       0.251        1.182        -0.31        -0.695       0.264            -1.174      0.137          -0.836         0.406      1.149          0.126
             (3.674***)   (3.339***)   (-0.473)     (-0.251)     (7.468***)    (-4.481***)   (0.578)    (-3.809***)    (2.308***)   (5.090***)      (0.682)
Changzhou    0.376        0.597        0.321        0.201        0.191            -0.819      0.701          -0.045         0.081      0.113         0.249
             (4.943***)   (2.466**)    (1.306)      (0.679)      (4.728***)      (-1.551)    (1.184)          (-0.2)      (0.668)      (0.5)     (2.240***)
Suzhou       0.32         0.927        0.968        0.179        0.416                                       -1.057         0.945      0.861         -0.935
             (4.264***)   (3.089***)   (2.899***)   (0.245)      (9.257***)                             (-3.905***)       (0.671)   (3.221***)     (-0.707)
Nantong      0.213        1.291        3.545        6.984        0.214                                       -1.124        -0.059      1.741         0.689
             (2.156**)    (2.053**)    (2.282**)    (0.617)      (5.536***)                             (-3.401***)      (-0.105)   (3.996***)    (1.749*)
Huaian       0.127        0.869        1.269        0.608        0.242            -1.206        0.408        -0.614        -0.010      1.281         -0.585
             (1.159)      (2.392**)    (2.181**)    (0.597)      (5.290***)    (-4.156***)    (1.172)    (-2.212**)      (-0.062)   (3.913***)     (-0.884)
Yangzhou     0.355        1.342        0.642        -0.139       0.284            -0.601       -0.203        -0.044        -0.107      0.522         0.221
             (3.224***)   (3.468***)   (1.302)      (-0.198)     (5.234***)      (-1.202)    (-0.456)      (-0.149)      (-0.627)     (1.696)      (1.288)
Zhenjiang    0.375        1.438        -0.007       -0.668       0.396            -2.182       -0.153        -0.935        -0.153      1.923         0.162
             (3.895***)   (2.750***)   (-0.008)     (-0.595)     (9.079***)    (-4.894***)   (-0.292)   (-3.089***)      (-0.510)   (4.942***)     (0.590)
Taizhou      0.29         0.431        0.928        0.763        0.254            -1.017        0.462        -0.416         0.306      1.356         0.350
             (2.835***)   (1.551)      (3.182***)   (2.263)      (4.479***)    (-2.912***)   (1.529*)      (-1.609)       (1.192)   (4.090***)     (0.880)
Suqian       0.238        1.473        0.22         -2.082       0.093             -0.43       0.232         0.436         0.019
             (2.071**)    (4.453***)   (0.458)      (-0.578)     (2.006**)       (-1.836)    (1.504*)       (1.305)      (0.018)
Hangzhou     0.336        1.228        1.122        -0.453       0.285                                       -0.512         0.123      0.563        0.357
             (7.124***)   (5.246***)   (3.579***)   (-0.417)     (10.060***)                            (-3.047***)       (1.217)   (3.530***)    (1.786*)
Ningbo       0.13         1.231        0.678        0.490        0.217                                       -0.233        0.085       0.617        0.027
             (2.942***)   (4.391***)   (2.368**)    (0.852)      (8.958***)                                (-1.168)      (0.532)    (3.119***)     (0.181)
Wenzhou      0.241        1.362        0.853        -0.081       0.340                                       -1.692         0.211      2.086        1.613
             (2.984***)   (4.383***)   (5.133***)   (-0.127)     (5.679***)                             (-3.741***)       (1.034)   (4.302***)     (0.389)
Jiaxing      0.222        1.381        0.383        -0.317       0.227                                       -1.222        0.483       0.466        0.349
             (2.463**)    (3.214***)   (1.056)      (-0.521)     (4.645***)                              (-2.580**)      (0.926)      (1.102)      (1.243)
Huzhou       0.232        1.313        1.121        0.954        0.321             -0.992       0.675           -1          0.511      1.318        -2.622
             (2.726***)   (3.412***)   (2.991***)   (1.966***)   (7.426***)       (-1.725)    (0.732)    (-2.366**)       (0.644)   (3.440***)    (-0.430)
Shaoxing     0.348        1.445        0.684        1.711        0.326             -1.319       0.341        -1.258        -0.184       1.61        -0.032
             (3.754***)   (2.435**)    (0.471)      (0.607)      (6.775***)    (-3.346***)    (0.688)   (-3.664***)      (-0.300)   (4.102***)    (-0.050)
Jinhua       0.276        1.133        0.128        -0.438       0.256              -1.34      -0.395        -0.935        0.077       1.285        0.282
             (3.316***)   (2.998***)   (0.351)      (-0.962)     (4.802***)    (-3.299***)   (-1.284)    (-1.981**)      (0.693)    (2.686***)     (0.201)
Quzhou       0.2          0.165        1.323        1.477        -0.043            -2.381      -0.525        -0.198         0.197      0.507        0.085
             (2.214**)    (0.422)      (3.180***)   (3.254***)   (-0.620)      (-3.706***)   (-0.433)      (-0.589)       (1.668)     (1.562)      (0.233)
Taizhou      0.326        0.992        1.028        0.922        0.242             -1.281      0.631         -2.094         0.406      1.695        2.347
             (3.100***)   (2.519**)    (2.783***)   (2.234***)   (3.676***)     (-2.207**)   (0.833)    (-3.520***)       (1.172)   (3.186***)     (0.485)
Lishui       0.235        1.676        1.03         0.725        0.202             -0.054      -0.734        -0.276        -0.029
             (2.536**)    (4.326***)   (3.196***)   (1.859**)    (4.431***)       (-0.138)   (-1.657)      (-0.525)      (-0.133)




                                                                          37
Hefei       0.097        2.597        0.439        2.800        0.225             -1.16       -0.050          -0.693       -0.369      1.081        0.701
            (1.308)      (4.425***)   (0.42)       (1.010)      (6.235***)    (-3.776***)    (-0.189)    (-2.737***)     (-1.488)   (4.151***)    (1.341)
Huainan     0.221        0.922        0.75         -0.230       0.245            -0.922       -0.328           0.363       -0.042      0.305       -0.431
            (2.425**)    (1.598)      (0.686)      (-0.185)     (5.470***)    (-2.872***)    (-1.224)        (1.322)     (-0.171)     (1.062)    (-1.534*)
Fuzhou      0.151        1.275        0.645        0.237        0.250                                         -0.594       0.174       0.877        0.362
            (2.390**)    (3.781***)   (1.511)      (0.411)      (6.845***)                                (-2.112**)     (0.838)    (3.148***)    (1.439)
Xiamen      0.161        0.538        1.638        1.348        0.328            -2.627       5.956           -0.575        0.105      1.162        0.483
            (2.415**)    (1.623)      (3.406***)   (1.443)      (5.836***)    (-4.191***)    (0.422)       (-1.871*)      (0.507)   (3.509***)    (1.108)
Nanchang    0.022                                               0.205                                         -0.397       -0.082      0.367        0.118
            (0.197)                                             (5.044***)                                  (-1.297)     (-0.524)      (1.29)     (0.501)
Jinan       0.122        0.894        1.494        1.165        0.303            -1.398          0.353        -0.865        0.244      0.954       -1.139
            (1.433)      (4.157***)   (5.489***)   (2.757***)   (8.586***)    (-5.927***)     (1.715*)   (-4.379***)   (2.045***)   (4.666***)    (-0.766)
Qingdao     0.374        2.168        1.56         -1.863       0.275            -1.023          0.224        -0.262       -0.138      0.528       -0.054
            (4.117***)   (4.960***)   (2.666***)   (-0.943)     (8.525***)    (-4.018***)      (0.900)      (-1.295)     (-0.990)     (2.486)     (-0.246)
Zibo        0.445        0.062        0.521        0.500        0.302             -2.06          1.612        -1.163        1.160      0.879        0.155
            (2.112**)    (0.14)       (0.842)      (0.774)      (4.871***)    (-3.002***)      (0.710)    (-2.509**)      (1.083)     (1.892)      (0.047)
Yantai      0.563        -0.135       1.549        1.603        0.198             -1.97         0.903         -0.685       -0.436      0.789       -0.089
            (4.053***)   (-0.28)      (2.338**)    (2.731***)   (4.663***)     (-2.470**)      (0.487)     (-1.662*)     (-0.369)     (1.884)     (-0.162)
Rizhao      0.403        0.951        1.578        1.113        0.190            -1.598         -1.235        -0.587        0.662
            (2.511**)    (2.236**)    (4.102***)   (2.039***)   (5.014***)    (-3.044***)    (-1.766*)      (-1.519)      (0.591)
Zhengzhou   0.259        0.975        0.457        -1.476       0.219            -0.876          0.192        -0.298        0.207        0.055        0.171
            (3.951***)   (2.391**)    (0.742)      (-0.770)     (6.540***)    (-3.072***)      (0.769)      (-1.363)      (1.230)      (0.221)   (2.007***)
Luoyang     0.127        1.268        1.28         1.201        0.315            -0.945          0.704        -0.554        0.089        0.747        1.318
            (1.314)      (3.527***)   (2.845***)   (2.305***)   (6.934***)    (-3.033***)   (2.240***)     (-1.727*)      (0.450)      (2.237)      (0.471)
Wuhan       0.246        2.823        1.779        0.628        0.269            -1.425         -0.106         -0.39        0.051        0.91        -0.685
            (5.273***)   (5.385***)   (2.882***)   (0.380)      (8.347***)    (-4.245***)     (-0.143)    (-2.158**)      (0.320)      (4.638)     (-0.951)
Changsha    0.345        1.206        1.226        0.215        0.322            -1.538          0.805         -0.98       -0.088        1.06         0.718
            (5.948***)   (4.120***)   (3.336***)   (0.346)      (10.448***)   (-4.916***)      (1.003)   (-3.860***)     (-0.577)   (5.001***)   (2.167***)
Guangzhou   0.185        1.853        0.935        0.511        0.333                                         -1.357        0.922        1.007        0.476
            (2.213**)    (4.645***)   (1.963**)    (0.584)      (6.615***)                               (-3.870***)      (0.679)   (3.298***)      (0.915)
Shenzhen    0.275        1.581        0.144        0.078        0.158                                         -1.275       0.515         2.16         0.064
            (4.076***)   (2.691***)   (0.682)      (0.147)      (3.364***)                                (-2.439**)     (0.781)    (3.567***)      (0.196)
Zhuhai      0.098        1.711        1.416        1.860        0.085                                          1.839       0.098        -0.341       -0.570
            (1.001)      (3.263***)   (3.761***)   (1.750**)    (1.747*)                                    (1.585)      (0.494)      (-0.518)     (-1.342)
Nanning     0.167        0.829        0.653        0.492        0.316            -1.796       2.628           -1.292       -0.085        2.161       -0.822
            (2.916***)   (3.300***)   (2.232**)    (1.097)      (9.342***)    (-3.884***)    (1.044)     (-2.712***)     (-0.350)   (3.491***)     (-0.380)
Haikou      0.256        1.388        1.145        -0.391       0.294                                         -0.546       0.134        1.456        0.486
            (3.917***)   (5.474***)   (4.332***)   (-0.437)     (5.875***)                                 (-1.842*)     (0.931)    (4.305***)    (1.845**)
Chongqing   0.229        1.255                                  0.336
            (4.134***)   (1.705*)                               (7.458***)
Chengdu     0.291        1.635        1.915        2.726        0.340                                        -1.5        0.147         1.442        0.156
            (8.148***)   (6.881***)   (6.694***)   (1.300)      (12.646***)                              (-3.574***)    (0.302)     (3.612***)   (2.412***)
Mianyang    0.287        2.458        2.837        1.288        0.296
            (3.775***)   (3.610***)   (2.349**)    (0.998)      (6.634***)
Guiyang     0.203        1.868        1.344        0.276        0.358            -0.859         0.314       -0.813        0.162        0.909       0.454
            (3.138***)   (5.220***)   (3.588***)   (0.090)      (10.284***)   (-3.374***)     (0.984)    (-2.896***)     ()0.371    (3.707***)    (1.140)
Kunming     0.307        1.077        0.599        -0.144       0.315            -0.025        -0.113       -0.576        0.176        0.355       0.027
            (5.270***)   (4.538***)   (2.531**)    (-0.322)     (8.327***)      (-0.105)     (-0.334)    (-3.668***)    (1.674*)      (2.343)     (0.354)




                                                                         38
Xi'an               0.395              1.238              1.134            -0.222           0.300                     -1.659              0.075           -1.651           0.924            1.706            0.069
                    (5.133***)         (2.894***)         (1.677*)          (-0.094)        (8.616***)            (-5.612***)           (0.136)      (-6.504***)      (1.918***)         (6.720***)        (0.307)
Lanzhou             0.249              0.322                                                0.218                     -1.116             -0.208           -0.382          -0.182            0.127           0.006
                    (3.051***)         (0.553***)                                           (6.831***)             (-2.581**)          (-0.279)        (-1.855*)        (-1.066)            (0.62)        (0.031)
Xining              0.285              1.419                                                0.140                     -1.281              0.873            0.24            0.073            1.664           -2.106
                    (2.423**)          (2.323**)                                            (5.254***)            (-4.680***)           (1.008)          (0.796)         (0.165)         (2.687***)       (0.265)
Yinchuan            0.167              0.473              0.804            0.341            0.137                     -0.334             -0.206           -0.652           0.641            0.703           0.225
                    (2.045**)          (1.641)            (2.019**)        (0.625)          (6.053***)               (-1.298)          (-0.448)      (-2.973***)         (0.997)           (2.605)        (0.445)
  Wulumuqi          0.349              0.965                                                0.136                                                         -0.002          -0.340            0.494           -0.200
                    (3.068***)         (1.684*)                                             (5.441***)                                                  (-0.007)        (-1.398)           (2.196)        (-1.187)
   Notes: When estimating city-level regressions for car use, coal, LPG and coal gas, we did not employ Heckman two-step estimations when the use rate of the corresponding energy type is less than 5%
   or larger than 95% in a city. For the former case, we set the corresponding energy use in that city to be zero; for the latter case, we use OLS estimations. T-statistics are reported in parentheses.




                                                                                                        39
Table Five: Overall 2006 Green City Ranking
                                                 Coal                                              Total   Standard
Rank     City      Electricity   Coal    LPG             Car     Taxi    Bus     Rail    Heating
                                                  gas                                               CO2      error
 1      Huaian       0.879       0.098   0.082   0.016   0.120   0.011   0.023                     1.230    0.090
 2      Suqian       0.865       0.218   0.117           0.000   0.006   0.026                     1.231    0.073
 3      Haikou       0.983       0.007   0.176   0.015   0.000   0.006   0.065                     1.252    0.124
 4      Nantong      1.062               0.036   0.164   0.000   0.007   0.012                     1.281    0.080
 5     Nanchang      0.978               0.141   0.048   0.000   0.007   0.130                     1.305    0.138
 6      Taizhou      1.069       0.041   0.076   0.016   0.094   0.006   0.005                     1.307    0.142
 7     Zhenjiang     1.098       0.067   0.036   0.064   0.030   0.009   0.027                     1.331    0.118
 8     Shaoxing      1.170       0.048   0.066   0.052   0.002   0.006   0.021                     1.365    0.115
 9      Xining       0.878       0.250   0.020   0.012   0.000   0.019   0.175            0.016    1.371    0.198
 10     Xuzhou       0.946       0.070   0.046   0.112   0.172   0.010   0.040            0.006    1.401    0.172
 11    Shuozhou      0.594       0.255   0.046   0.060   0.083   0.016   0.015            0.357    1.426    0.113
 12    Yangzhou      1.123       0.033   0.063   0.083   0.113   0.009   0.019                     1.443    0.325
 13     Quzhou       1.115       0.030   0.189   0.068   0.006   0.007   0.037                     1.452    0.278
 14     Luoyang      0.905       0.155   0.127   0.027   0.040   0.010   0.038            0.189    1.491    0.169
 15    Chengdu       1.243       0.016   0.005   0.232   0.007   0.012   0.007                     1.522    0.097
 16     Nanning      1.079       0.001   0.220   0.002   0.117   0.009   0.097                     1.524    0.073
 17    Mianyang      1.157               0.001   0.209   0.153   0.012   0.027                     1.558    0.135
 18    Changzhou     1.224       0.009   0.106   0.053   0.131   0.010   0.041                     1.574    0.100
 19     Jinhua       1.154       0.046   0.167   0.002   0.233   0.008   0.016                     1.626    0.094
 20     Huzhou       1.330       0.014   0.194   0.008   0.026   0.007   0.059                     1.638    0.100
 21      Lishui      1.308       0.018   0.197           0.110   0.005   0.013                     1.651    0.108
 22     Ningbo       1.328       0.004   0.213   0.011   0.058   0.006   0.050                     1.670    0.142
 23    Chongqing     1.396                       0.229   0.000   0.014   0.039   0.004             1.681    0.342
 24     Zhuhai       1.197               0.345   0.002   0.026   0.010   0.148                     1.726    0.027
 25      Wuxi        1.461               0.071   0.123   0.023   0.010   0.060                     1.748    0.044
 26    Zhengzhou     0.984       0.185   0.053   0.109   0.000   0.006   0.057            0.363    1.757    0.071
 27     Taizhou      1.359       0.008   0.256   0.004   0.117   0.007   0.009                     1.761    0.157
 28      Hefei       1.360       0.069   0.101   0.064   0.000   0.044   0.138                     1.776    0.064
 29     Lanzhou      0.573       0.029   0.047   0.067   0.000   0.016   0.077            0.976    1.785    0.081
 30    Shanghai      1.219               0.007   0.235   0.130   0.014   0.118   0.074             1.796    0.066
 31    Guangzhou     1.315               0.213   0.052   0.056   0.008   0.127   0.055             1.827    0.138
 32     Rizhao       1.060       0.092   0.065           0.222   0.013   0.060            0.318    1.831    0.102
 33      Zibo        0.998       0.169   0.119   0.024   0.034   0.021   0.062            0.441    1.870    0.120
 34     Jiaxing      1.286               0.187   0.009   0.373   0.007   0.028                     1.890    0.088
 35     Huainan      1.008       0.144   0.056   0.085   0.480   0.063   0.058                     1.895    0.091
 36     Nanjing      1.293       0.003   0.097   0.051   0.318   0.009   0.096   0.032             1.899    0.045
 37    Hangzhou      1.650       0.006   0.132   0.026   0.000   0.006   0.087                     1.907    0.045
 38     Wuhan        1.526       0.016   0.133   0.092   0.065   0.011   0.069   0.003             1.915    0.100
 39      Yantai      0.969   0.142   0.069   0.067    0.017   0.019   0.022           0.629   1.934   0.066
 40    Wulumuqi      0.509           0.027   0.086    0.000   0.024   0.177           1.128   1.951   0.091
 41     Handan       0.998   0.029   0.008   0.222    0.004   0.013   0.068           0.633   1.974   0.215
 42     Guiyang      1.433   0.201   0.016   0.118    0.141   0.010   0.073                   1.993   0.076
 43     Qingdao      1.205   0.248   0.060   0.067    0.000   0.020   0.053           0.388   2.041   0.123
 44      Xi'an       0.871   0.072   0.037   0.101    0.605   0.018   0.104           0.246   2.055   0.101
 45    Changsha      1.204   0.028   0.193   0.044    0.505   0.021   0.088                   2.083   0.095
 46    Shenzhen      1.491           0.261   0.012    0.263   0.010           0.112           2.149   1.601
 47    Kunming       1.003   0.033   0.068   0.106    0.814   0.005   0.138                   2.167   0.133
 48      Jinan       1.099   0.373   0.062   0.030    0.084   0.017   0.085           0.436   2.185   0.060
 49    Tangshan      0.865                   0.232    0.405   0.017   0.058           0.625   2.203   0.076
 50    Cangzhou      0.868           0.185   0.020    0.023   0.029   0.014           1.087   2.226   0.080
 51     Suzhou       1.424   0.016   0.068   0.077    0.718   0.008   0.033                   2.344   0.167
 52    Wenzhou       2.057           0.286   0.001    0.000   0.015   0.051                   2.410   0.090
 53      Wuhai       0.536   0.632   0.045   0.017    0.089   0.014   0.093           1.008   2.435   0.155
 54   Qinhuangdao    0.841   0.096   0.076   0.089    0.253   0.017   0.096           0.977   2.447   0.157
 55     Taiyuan      0.939   0.027   0.012   0.237    0.027   0.013   0.086           1.107   2.449   0.171
 56     Fuzhou       2.124           0.201   0.025    0.060   0.006   0.054                   2.470   0.076
 57    Huhehaote     0.747   0.105   0.066   0.073    0.014   0.034   0.077           1.468   2.584   0.115
 58     Xiamen       2.035   0.001   0.152   0.021    0.326   0.007   0.171                   2.713   0.069
 59     Tongliao     1.448   0.063   0.162            0.000   0.058   0.019           0.972   2.722   0.073
 60   Shijiazhuang   1.110   0.044   0.091   0.099    0.000   0.019   0.048           1.313   2.724   0.069
 61       Jilin      0.983           0.198   0.016    0.000   0.030   0.204           1.512   2.944   0.126
 62     Chifeng      0.873   0.161   0.085            0.025   0.020   0.031           1.802   2.998   0.089
 63     Tianjin      1.551   0.063   0.014   0.070    0.553   0.018   0.087   0.017   0.690   3.063   0.071
 64    Changchun     0.914   0.010   0.003   0.126    0.004   0.024   0.056   0.006   1.938   3.080   0.069
 65    Liaoyang      0.962           0.139   0.024    0.173   0.026   0.028           1.885   3.237   0.052
 66     Baotou       0.698   0.102   0.054   0.053    0.174   0.021   0.072           2.134   3.309   0.084
 67      Dalian      0.904           0.015   0.191    0.000   0.040   0.071   0.007   2.143   3.371   0.068
 68     Haerbin      1.157           0.027   0.236    0.000   0.021   0.057           2.009   3.508   0.285
 69    Shenyang      0.974           0.009   0.099    0.000   0.028   0.082           2.337   3.528   0.060
 70    Yinchuan      0.675   0.019   0.059   0.036    0.338   0.034   0.095           2.287   3.543   0.146
 71     Qiqihaer     0.765           0.054   0.115    0.000   0.018   0.041           2.620   3.614   0.085
 72     Beijing      1.558   0.145   0.049   0.084    0.650   0.018   0.138   0.049   1.306   3.997   0.192
 73   Mudanjiang     1.047   0.136   0.081            0.353   0.040   0.017           3.154   4.827   0.107
 74     Daqing       0.998           0.233   0.003    0.000   0.026   0.137           3.719   5.115   0.056


         Mean        1.122   0.093   0.102   0.077    0.135   0.016   0.067   0.036   1.228   2.177   0.134



The units are tons of carbon dioxide per household per year.



                                                     41
Table Six: Explaining Cross-City Variation in the Standardized Household’s Carbon Production


                           Electricity      Heating         Car            Taxi            Rail          Bus       TOTAL
                             0.439           1.065         1.420          -1.377          3.188        -0.455       0.440
     Log(CINCOME)          (3.40***)         (1.08)       (1.88*)      (-4.96***)        (2.00*)       (-1.22)    (3.24***)
                             0.067          -0.028        -0.083          0.153           0.535         0.491       0.054
     Log(POP)               (1.95*)         (-0.13)       (-0.36)        (1.79*)          (1.08)     (4.47***)      (1.46)
                                            -0.111                                                                  -0.033
     JAN_TEMP                             (-4.41***)                                                              (-8.8***)
                             0.031
     JULY_TEMP             (2.64***)
                                                           0.257         -0.424           -0.66        -0.837
     DENSITY                                               (0.61)      (-2.75***)         (-0.7)     (-4.01***)
                                                          -17.822
                             -5.898         -11.72       (-2.21**)       10.085           -41.273      0.238        -4.291
     constant              (-5.06***)       (-1.22)                    (3.41***)         (-2.58**)     (0.06)     (-3.08***)
     obs                       74             35             74            74                10          73            74
     R2                       0.436          0.394          0.05          0.27              0.91       0.317         0.598
* The dependent variable is measured in tons of carbon dioxide emission of standardized
household. The unit of analysis is one of the 74 cities. T-statistics are reported in parentheses.
* indicates significance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level.
Table Seven: Predictions of CO2 emissions per Standard Household in the Year 2026
                        CO2 emission                 CO2 emission                 CO2 emission
             City                          City                         City
                        in 2026 (tons)               in 2026 (tons)               in 2026 (tons)
            Beijing         5.250           Wuxi         2.425           Jinan        4.931
            Tianjin         5.272          Xuzhou        1.601         Qingdao        4.720
         Shijiazhuang       5.282        Changzhou       2.083           Zibo         5.234
           Tangshan         4.439          Suzhou        2.250          Yantai        4.103
         Qinhuangdao        5.018         Nantong        1.574          Rizhao        5.331
            Handan          5.473          Huaian        1.595        Zhengzhou       5.851
          Cangzhou          5.776        Yangzhou        1.808         Luoyang        6.110
            Taiyuan         4.496        Zhenjiang       1.634          Wuhan         2.921
          Shuozhou          4.701         Taizhou        1.555        Changsha        2.656
          Huhehaote         6.526          Suqian        1.461        Guangzhou       2.711
            Baotou          6.681        Hangzhou        2.738        Shenzhen        3.062
             Wuhai          8.136          Ningbo        2.263          Zhuhai        2.546
            Chifeng         7.361         Wenzhou        3.708         Nanning        2.289
           Tongliao         8.050          Jiaxing       2.267          Haikou        2.171
          Shenyang          4.249          Huzhou        2.260        Chongqing       2.629
             Dalian         4.461         Shaoxing       1.899         Chengdu        2.367
           Liaoyang         4.694          Jinhua        2.040        Mianyang        1.853
          Changchun         5.863          Quzhou        1.907         Guiyang        2.542
              Jilin         6.184         Taizhou        2.474         Kunming        2.056
            Haerbin         6.672          Lishui        2.292           Xi'an        4.123
           Qiqihaer         5.976           Hefei        2.381         Lanzhou        3.705
            Daqing          7.973         Huainan        1.841          Xining        6.627
         Mudanjiang         6.474          Fuzhou        3.572         Yinchuan       4.702
           Shanghai         2.361          Xiamen        3.592        Wulumuqi        3.429
            Nanjing         2.238        Nanchang        1.946
Figure 1: Carbon Dioxide Emissions per Household in 74 Chinese Cities
                                  2


                                             Daqing
Log Household Carbon Emissions




                                         Mudanjia
                                 1.5

                                         Qiqihaer
                                         Haerbin          Shenyang
                                                           Dalian                         Beijing
                                                                         Yinchuan
                                                                     Baotou
                                                      Changchu
                                                            Liaoyang Chifeng
                                                        Jilin
                                                                     Tongliao               Shijiazh
                                  1                                 Huhehaot            Tianjin               Wenzhou
                                                                      Wuhai          Taiyuan                                    Fuzhou
                                                                                                                                Xiamen
                                                                                           Qinhuang
                                                                                           Cangzhou
                                                                                                 Jinan
                                                                                                Qingdao                                Shenzhen
                                                       Wulumuqi                             Handan
                                                                                                 Yantai       Hangzhou
                                                                                                  Zibo
                                                                                           Tangshan        Guiyang
                                                                                                           Wuhan
                                                                           Lanzhou              Zhengzho  Hefei Taizhou                Guangzho
                                                                                                                                        Zhuhai
                                                                                                Rizhao     Wuxi      Chongqin
                                                                                                              Shanghai
                                                                                                          SuzhouNingbo
                                                                                                                Huzhou
                                  .5                                                                            Jiaxing
                                                                                                                 Lishui
                                                                                                            Changsha
                                                                                                          Nanjing
                                                                                                              Chengdu
                                                                                                Luoyang  Changzho
                                                                                                                Quzhou              Nanning
                                                                                                 Xi'an          Jinhua
                                                                                                              Mianyang
                                                                                                        Huainan
                                                                              XiningShuozhou                  Shaoxing      Kunming
                                                                                                         Yangzhou                              Haikou
                                                                                                         Zhenjian
                                                                                                          Nantong
                                                                                                          TaizhouNanchang
                                                                                                          Suqian
                                                                                                          Xuzhou
                                                                                                       Huaian

                                  0
                                       -20                           -10                0                                10                         20
                                                                            January Temperature (Celcius)


Figure 2: The Cross-City Relationship between Winter Temperature and Household Carbon Emissions




                                                                                           45
