                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE MICRO-MACRO DISCONNECT OF PURCHASING POWER PARITY

                                          Paul R. Bergin
                                          Reuven Glick
                                           Jyh-Lin Wu

                                       Working Paper 15624
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15624


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2009




We thank Andrew Cohn and Alec Kennedy for research assistance and Oscar Jorda for comments.
The views expressed herein do not represent those of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Paul R. Bergin, Reuven Glick, and Jyh-Lin Wu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Micro-Macro Disconnect of Purchasing Power Parity
Paul R. Bergin, Reuven Glick, and Jyh-Lin Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 15624
December 2009, Revised March 2012
JEL No. F4

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper reconciles the persistence of aggregate real exchange rates with the faster adjustment of
international relative prices in microeconomic data. Panel estimation of an error correction model
using a micro data set uncovers new stylized facts regarding this puzzle. First, adjustment to purchasing
power parity deviations in aggregated data is not just a slower version of adjustment to the law of one
price in microeconomic data, as arbitrage occurs in different markets, in response to distinct macroeconomic
and microeconomic shocks. Second, when half-lives are estimated conditional on macro shocks, micro
relative prices exhibit just as much persistence as aggregate real exchange rates. These results challenge
theories of real exchange rate persistence based on sticky prices and on heterogeneity across goods,
and support an explanation based on the presence of distinct macro and microeconomic shocks.


Paul R. Bergin                                       Jyh-Lin Wu
Department of Economics                              Institute of Economics
University of California, Davis                      National Sun Yat-sen University
One Shields Ave.                                     70 Lien-hai Rd.
Davis, CA 95616                                      Kaohsiung, Taiwan
and NBER                                             ecdjlw@ccu.edu.tw
prbergin@ucdavis.edu

Reuven Glick
Economic Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
reuven.Glick@sf.frb.org
I. Introduction

        The persistence of aggregate real exchange rates as they converge back to a form of
purchasing power parity is a longstanding puzzle. This is especially so, since research using
microeconomic data sets has demonstrated that convergence to the law of one price by
disaggregated international relative prices occurs at a much faster rate. Work by Imbs et al.
(2005) has documented this puzzle, as well as proposed one explanation in which heterogeneity
in the convergence speeds among goods can produce an aggregation bias.
        This paper presents additional new stylized facts regarding the adjustment of aggregate
real exchange rates and micro prices, and we argue that any explanation for the greater
persistence of real exchange rate movements should be consistent with these additional facts.
Our new evidence comes from estimating panel vector error correction models jointly on macro-
level and micro-level price data drawn from the Economist Intelligence Unit’s Worldwide Cost
of Living Survey. This approach enables us to decompose the real exchange rate adjustment
mechanism into a nominal exchange rate component and a local currency price component as
well as to identify distinct macro and micro shocks. We argue that the inconsistency between
studies of aggregate real exchange rates and studies of micro prices can be reconciled if one
properly conditions on the distinct types of shocks driving the aggregated and disaggregated
data.
        The first new stylized fact of the paper is that adjustment to the law of one price in the
micro data is not just a faster version of the same adjustment process to purchasing power parity
for aggregate data, but instead works through a qualitatively distinct adjustment mechanism. The
theory of purchasing power parity is ambiguous as to whether parity is achieved through
arbitrage in the goods market inducing goods prices to adjust, or through forces in the foreign
exchange market inducing the nominal exchange rate to adjust. For aggregate data, a number of
papers applying time-series analysis to aggregate real exchange rates have found that most of the
adjustment takes place through the nominal exchange rate.1 But if one wishes to investigate the
role of arbitrage in the goods market, one should use price data on individual goods, where the
arbitrage between home and foreign varieties of a good primarily plays out. Accordingly, a
vector error correction model is estimated for each good, as well as for an aggregate price index

1
 See Fisher and Park (1991) who employ cointegration analysis, Engel and Morley (2001) who use a
state-space analysis, and Cheung, Lai and Bergman (2004) who use vector error-correction analysis.
                                                  1
constructed over the goods in the sample. We find that in disaggregated data, local goods prices
actively adjust to restore the law of one price. However, when the micro-level data are
aggregated into a synthetic representation of an aggregate real exchange rate, all adjustment to
restore PPP takes place through nominal exchange rates, not through local goods prices.
       The qualitatively distinct channels of adjustment in disaggregated and aggregated data
can be attributed to distinct microeconomic and macroeconomic shocks driving price deviations.
These shocks can be identified in the context of a vector error correction model nesting together
aggregated and disaggregated data and equations in a single system. Variance decompositions
indicate that the idiosyncratic goods shocks are volatile, and the responses to them dominate the
aggregate shocks in the disaggregated data. But the idiosyncratic shocks cancel out upon
aggregation, since some shocks to price differentials are positive while others are negative. So
the responses to exchange rate shocks dominate in the aggregated data.
       The second stylized fact of the paper is that when half-lives are estimated in this system
conditional on macroeconomic shocks, microeconomic prices are found to be just as persistent as
aggregate real exchange rates. In contrast with the impression given by recent studies on
microeconomic price dynamics, there is actually significant persistence contained within micro
price data. We conclude that properly conditioning on shocks can resolve the inconsistency
between aggregate real exchange rate studies and micro price studies. This result also implies
that conventional estimates of the speed of adjustment that do not allow for the distinct responses
to micro and macro shocks are subject to an omitted variable bias: the single estimated half-life
is a conflation of those specific to micro and macro shocks, with that of the more volatile shock
dominating.
       The finding that proper estimates of persistence require conditioning on the underlying
shocks cautions against an explanation for the persistence puzzle relying primarily upon
aggregation bias arising from heterogeneity among goods. In particular, a significant portion of
the overall heterogeneity in adjustment speeds among goods is found here to be associated with
their response to macroeconomic shocks rather than to idiosyncratic goods shocks. Because
macroeconomic shocks are common to goods, aggregation over heterogeneous response
coefficients to macroeconomic shocks does not introduce aggregation bias. Aggregation bias
applies only to the responses to idiosyncratic shocks. So a significant portion of the



                                                 2
heterogeneity detected in past studies may be of an innocuous type when it comes to aggregation
bias.
          Another implication of this finding regards the usefulness of sticky price models to
explain real exchange rate behavior. A conventional understanding in this theoretical literature is
that PPP deviations gradually decline as firms are able to reset prices in response to the
macroeconomic shocks that created the PPP deviation. But our error correction results show that
prices respond quite quickly to deviations from the law of one price, and our study of the
resulting impulse responses show that price adjustment accounts for a large share of corrections
to these deviations. One model that perhaps could coincide better with the evidence would be a
rational inattention story, where firms adjust more to shocks specific to their industry rather than
to common macroeconomic shocks. For example, Mackowiak and Wiederholt (2009) show in a
closed-economy rational inattention model, when idiosyncratic conditions are more variable or
have larger impacts on a firm’s profits and the firm has limited resources to process information
about shocks, it is optimal for firms to allocate more attention to track and respond to
idiosyncratic conditions than to aggregate conditions.
          Carvalho and Nechio (forthcoming) present a theoretical model where aggregation over
many goods with heterogeneous price stickiness generates an aggregate real exchange rate that is
persistent. While this theory is a powerful explanation consistent with the empirical regularity of
greater persistence in the aggregate data, it is inconsistent with the additional new facts
uncovered in our empirical analysis. First, their theory implies that the qualitative mechanism of
adjustment is the same in the aggregated and disaggregated sectoral data, working through goods
prices; in contrast, our empirical evidence shows that aggregate adjustment is qualitatively
different, working through the nominal exchange rate rather than prices. Secondly, their theory
includes only aggregate shocks, so its explanation implies that micro sectoral prices adjust
quickly conditional on macro shocks. In contrast, our evidence shows that the persistence of
price gaps in micro data is just as high as in aggregated data when conditional on macro shocks.
We conclude that their explanation for persistence cannot be the whole story, and that our
evidence calls for a different type of explanation rooted in the parallel roles of micro and macro
shocks.
          Our work is related to recent research by Crucini and Shintani (2008), who also use EIU
price data to study law-of-one-price dynamics. Our paper differs in that it decomposes deviations

                                                   3
and adjustment by the type of shock and studies the mechanism of adjustment via local goods
prices and the nominal exchange rate with an error correction mechanism. Andrade and
Zachariadis (2010) also decompose micro price dynamics by shock, but their focus is on the
distinction between geographically global versus local shocks rather than the macro versus micro
shocks we find to be important. Further, they restrict their focus to microeconomic prices, rather
than drawing implications for aggregate real exchange rates as we do. Our findings are also
complementary to Broda and Weinstein (2008), who speculate that nonlinear convergence rates
lead to faster adjustment among disaggregated price deviations because they are dominated by
large outliers. Our findings suggest an alternative mechanism, based not on outliers, but on the
distinction between idiosyncratic industry shocks and macroeconomic shocks.
        The next section discusses the data set and data characteristics, including stationarity and
speeds of convergence. Section 3 presents the main results in several subsections. The first
compares error correction dynamics estimated separately for disaggregated and aggregated data,
with the second part providing robustness checks. The third subsection estimates a combined
error correction model nesting together aggregated and disaggregated data, and uses this to
identify the separate roles of aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks. The last subsection revisits the
autoregressive estimation of the past literature while taking different shocks into consideration,
and discusses the diminished role of aggregation bias in this context. Section 4 summarizes
implications for the broader literature on real exchange rates.


II. Data and Preliminary Analysis
II.A Dataset
        The data are obtained from the Worldwide Cost of Living Survey conducted by the
Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU), a proprietary service which records local prices for
individual goods and services in cities worldwide.2 The EIU data begin in 1990, and while
historical data are available to subscribers at an annual frequency, data collection actually takes
place twice annually. To facilitate analysis of the time-series dynamics of the panel, we were




2
 The EIU survey is used to calculate cost-of-living indexes for multinational corporations with employees located
around the world. The data set is described in more detail at http://eiu.enumerate.com/asp/wcol_HelpAboutEIU.

                                                         4
able to obtain from the EIU semi-annual historical observations through 2007 on a one-time
basis.3
           There are distinct advantages of the EIU data that make it appealing for our time-series
study. It is the most extensive survey of retail prices conducted by a single organization on a
global scale that is ongoing over a long period. Most existing micro-price surveys are too
infrequent to be useable for addressing time series issues, whereas the EIU data set has a
sufficient length to make possible application of our time series techniques.
           Another advantage of the EIU data set is that goods categories are narrowly defined, e.g.
apples (1 kg), men’s raincoat (Burberry type), and light bulbs (2, 60 watt). For many goods in the
survey, prices are sampled separately from two different outlets, a “high-price” and “low-price”
outlet. For example, food and beverage prices are sampled from supermarkets and convenience
stores. We use prices from the supermarket type outlets, which are likely to be more comparable
across cities. The data set also includes many service items such as telephone and line, moderate
hotel (single room), and man’s haircut, which would most naturally be classified as non-tradable.
The degree of comparability across locations is generally high, but varies with the general
availability of goods in a given city. Our sample focuses on the major city in each of 20
industrial countries, where availability might be expected to be more consistent.
           Surveyors visit only outlets where items of internationally comparable quality are
available. The EIU explicitly has held the aim from the beginning of its survey of maintaining
ongoing consistency of its surveys across time. It has worked to keep the same stores and the
same brands and sizes in obtaining the price for each item. Given that the survey takes place
simultaneously in 140 cities worldwide over a two decade period, there may be substitutions or
changes in the data sample. This may occur for example if a change in management leads to a
correspondent being refused entrance to a store. It may occur as certain brands or sizes replace
others in stores. See the data appendix of Andrade and Zachariadis (2011) for a detailed
discussion of the survey methods employed by the EIU.
           Documentation from the EIU website notes that there can be significant variation in
prices from one survey to the next. Most of the reasons cited by the EIU for this variation
correspond to economic factors of the type we model in this paper, such as exchange rate
fluctuations affecting the price of imported goods, or the fact that some countries have periods of

3
    The semi-annual observations made available to us do not extend beyond 2007.

                                                         5
high aggregate inflation. Other factors reflect economic shocks specific to an industry of the type
we try to model, such as increased competition from new entrants in the market, or local
shortages of supply of a good. However, a few of the reasons provided include difficulties in
maintaining consistency in an ongoing survey if goods are not consistently available, as noted in
the preceding paragraphs. The EIU notes that data availability is more serious for emerging
markets, especially in Chinese cities. Because our sample uses only 20 industrialized countries,
it is hoped that this sampling issue will be less severe for our case. Further, we check for this
problem with tests of measurement error later in the paper. We also confirm later in the paper
that our results are robust to use of an alternative data sample of that from Imbs et al (2005).
         We focus on bilateral prices between the major city in each of 20 industrial countries
relative to the United States. The choice of countries reflects those used in past work on price
aggregates (such as in Mark and Sul (2008)), and the choice of cities reflects that in Parsley and
Wei (2002).4 For these locations, the data set has full coverage for 98 tradable goods and 30
nontraded goods, as identified by Engel and Rogers (2004) in their study of price dispersion in
Europe.5 Data Appendix Tables A1, A2 and A3 list the cities and goods included in the analysis.


II.B. Preliminaries
                 k
         Define qij ,t as the relative price of good k between two locations i and j, in period t, in

logs. This may be computed as qij ,t  eij ,t  pij ,t , where eij ,t is the nominal exchange rate (currency
                               k                 k



j per currency i), and pij ,t  pi ,t  p j ,t is the log difference in the price of good k in country i from
                        k        k       k



that in country j, both in units of the local currency. As preparation for the main analysis later,
we first establish that the international relative prices are stationary. We apply the cross-
sectionally augmented Dickey-Fuller (CADF) test provided by Pesaran (2007) to examine the



4
  Mark and Sul (2008) use the Eurostat data from Imbs et al. (2005) for 19 goods in 10 European countries and the
U.S.; we augment the data with more industrial countries to increase the power with which to reject unit roots in
panel estimation. We show below that our results are robust to using Eurostat, rather than EIU, data.
5
  Engel and Rogers (2004) included only goods for which a price is recorded in every year for at least 15 of the 18
European cities in their analysis. The dataset used by Parsley and Wei (2002) contains 95 traded goods. Their set is
virtually identical to that of Engel and Rogers (2004), with the difference that Parsley and Wei include yogurt,
cigarettes (local brand), cigarettes (Marlboro), tennis balls, and fast food snacks, but exclude butter, veal chops, veal
fillet, veal roast, women’s raincoat, girl’s dress, compact disc, color television, international weekly newsmagazine,
paperback novel, and electric toaster.

                                                            6
stationarity of variables. The advantage of this test is that it controls for contemporaneous
correlations across residuals. Consider the following regression:
                          qijk ,t  aijk  bijk (qijk ,t 1 )  cijk (qtk1 )  dijk (qtk )   ijk,t
                                                                                                               (1)
                                 ij  1,..., N , k  1,..., K , and t  1,..., T
                 N
where qtk   qijk ,t is the cross-section mean of qij ,t across country pairs and qtk  qtk  qtk1 .
                                                                     k

                ij 1


The purpose for augmenting the cross-section mean in the above equation is to control for
contemporaneous correlation among  ijk,t . The null hypothesis of the test can be expressed as

H0 : bijk  0 for all ij against the alternative hypothesis H1 : bijk  0 for some ij. The test statistic
provided by Pesaran (2007) is given by:
                                                           N
                          CIPS k ( N , T )  N 1  tijk ( N , T )
                                                          ij 1

        k                                   k
where tij ( N , T ) is the t statistic of bij in equation (1). (CIPS stands for the cross-sectionally

augmented Im, Pesaran, and Shin statistic.)
        The top panel of Table 1 indicates rejection of nonstationarity at the 5% significance
level for the large majority of traded goods, 72 at 10%, 63 at 5%, out of 98 traded goods in the
sample. Among nontraded goods, rejection at the 5% level is supported for 11 at both 5% and
10% out of the 30 goods-- less strong than for tradeds. In addition to studying the behavior of
the individual goods prices, we can also study aggregate prices, constructed as a simple average
                           K
over the goods: qij ,t   qijk ,t . This constructed aggregate provides a useful comparison to the
                          k 1

large body of past studies of persistence in real exchange rates.6 The bottom panel of Table 1
shows that nonstationarity can be rejected at the 1% level for the average over all traded goods.
For an average over just nontraded goods, nonstationarity cannot be rejected. In the remainder
of the paper, we will focus on the set of traded goods, for which there is stronger evidence of
stationarity.




6
 In principle, we could also assign weights to the goods derived loosely from weights in a country’s CPI. However,
Crucini and Shintani (2008) find that alternative weighting schemes do not affect results for this test.

                                                                    7
         Next, we check the speed of convergence toward stationarity by estimating a second-
order autoregressive model of real exchange rates with panel data.7 To control for
contemporaneous correlation of residuals, we apply the common correlated effects (CCE)
regressor of Pesaran (2006) to estimate the autoregressive coefficients of real exchange rates. In
other words, we estimate the equation:
                                               2
                              qijk ,t  cijk   ijk,m (qijk ,t  m )   ijk,t for k  1,..., K                  (2)
                                              m 1

for disaggregated data and
                                               2
                              qij ,t  cij   ij ,m ( qij ,t  m )   ij ,t .                                   (3)
                                              m 1

for aggregated data, each augmented with cross-section means of right and left hand side
variables. Two different CCE estimators are proposed by Pesaran (2006). One is the mean group
estimator, CCEMG, and the other is the standard pooled version of the CCE estimator, CCEP.
Pesaran’s (2006) Monte Carlo simulation results show that, under the assumption of slope
heterogeneity, CCEP and CCEMG have the correct size even for samples as small as N = 30 and
T = 20. Pesaran concludes that CCEP does slightly better in small samples, so we adopt the
CCEP estimator in our empirical analysis. Both methods deliver broadly similar results here.
CCEP estimates are obtained by regressing equations (2) and (3) with augmented regressors
( qtk , qtk1 , qtk2 ) and ( qt , qt 1 , qt 2 ), respectively.8
         Results in Table 2 indicate quick convergence speeds for disaggregated goods, with an
average half-life among the goods of 1.25 years. Half-lives are computed on the basis of
simulated impulse responses9. Adjustment for the aggregate data is distinctly slower, with a half-
life of 2.10 years. While this half-life estimated for aggregate prices is lower than the values
often found in previous literature for more standard aggregate data sets, it nonetheless does
reproduce the finding that the aggregate half-life is longer than that for microeconomic data. 10


7
  Inclusion of additional lags is precluded by the short time-span of the data set.
8
  STATA code created by the authors to conduct CCEP estimations used throughout the paper are available upon
request.
9
  The half-life is computed as the time it takes for the impulse responses to a unit shock to equal 0.5, as defined in
Steinsson (2008). We identify the first period, t1, where the impulse response f(t) falls from a value above 0.5 to a
value below 0.5 in the subsequent period, t1+1. We interpolate the fraction of a period after t1 where the impulse
response function reaches a value of 0.5 by adding (f(t1) - 0.5))/ (f(t1) - f(t1+1)).
10
   Previous literature has tended to find even larger half-lives in aggregated data, commonly exceeding 3 years. The
somewhat smaller half-life in our aggregated data is the direct result of the particular sample period, starting in

                                                                    8
Since the second order autoregressive coefficients are not statistically significant, we also
estimate a first-order autoregression, with results in the table. The conclusion is similar, with the
half-life about double in aggregated data compared to the average among disaggregated data,
2.13 years compared to 1.15. The fact that half-lives at the disaggregated level are faster than for
aggregates matches the finding of Imbs et al. (2005) with their data set. They hypothesize an
explanation, based on the idea that speeds of adjustment are heterogeneous among goods, and
that aggregation tends to give too much weight to goods with slow speeds of adjustment and
hence long half-lives. The implications of our data for this hypothesis will be discussed at greater
length in the following section.


III. Results
III.A. Benchmark Estimates and the Error Correction Puzzle
         This section investigates the engine of convergence to the law of one price and identifies
a new stylized fact. The stationarity of micro real exchange rates implies the cointegration of
                                                        k
nominal exchange rates (eij ,t ) and relative prices ( pij ,t ) with the cointegrating vector being (1, 1).

The adjustment process of nominal exchange rates and relative prices can be studied using the
following panel error-correction model (ECM):
         eij ,t  ijk,e  ek,ij (qijk,t 1 )  ek,ij (eij ,t 1 )  ek,ij (pijk,t 1 )   ije,,tk              (4a)

         pijk,t  ijk, p   pk ,ij (qijk,t 1 )   pk ,ij (eij ,t 1 )   pk ,ij (pijk,t 1 )   ijp,t,k .11

This two- equation system decomposes the good-specific real exchange rate, qijk ,t , into its two

components, the nominal exchange rate, eij , and the relative price level, pijk . It regresses the first

difference of each of these components on the lag level of the good-specific real exchange rate,
which summarizes the degree to which the law of one price is being violated in the data. Other


1990, and the broader set of countries, 20 industrial. When we compute standard CPI-based real exchange rates
using the standard macroeconomic data from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics for our sample of
countries and years, the half-life is estimated at 2.05 years, very close to that of the synthetic aggregate constructed
over our set of goods reported above. Extending the sample back to 1975, results in a half -life estimate of 3.34. So
the aggregate half-life familiar from past real exchange rate studies is specific to the post-Bretton Woods data
sample typical in these studies, and the relevant half-life is somewhat lower when the sample is limited to a more
recent sample, as is necessary to compare to our micro data.
11
   Because this error correction model incorporates lags of first differences to capture short-run dynamics, this
specification is analogous to the second-order autoregression estimated previously. Inclusion of additional lags is
impossible due to the short time-span of the data set.

                                                                             9
regressors in (4a) control for level effects and short run dynamics of the variables. The
coefficients e,ij and  p ,ij reflect how strongly the exchange rate and prices respond to
              k          k



deviations from the law of one price. Because negative movements in these variables work to
reduce deviations from the law of one price, they provide a measure of the speed of adjustment
of nominal exchange rates and relative prices, respectively. To allow for possible cross section
dependence in the errors, we computed CCEP estimators of the parameters by including as
regressors the cross section averages of all variables (( et , qtk1 , et 1 , and ptk1 ) and

( ptk , qtk1 , et 1 , and ptk1 ) for the eij ,t and pij ,t equations, respectively). This pair of ECM
                                                             k



equations is estimated for our panel of city pairs, for each of the 98 traded goods.
         We also estimate the following aggregate version of the two equation system, where the
good-specific relative price for good k , pk, is replaced by the average across all goods, p:
         eij ,t  ij ,e  e,ij (qij ,t 1 )  e,ij (eij ,t 1 )  e,ij (pij ,t 1 )   ije,t             (4b)

         pij ,t  ij , p   p,ij (qij ,t 1 )   p,ij (eij ,t 1 )   p,ij (pij ,t 1 )   ijp,t .
         As a basis of comparison with past research, consider first the constructed aggregate
prices. Fisher and Park (1991) found for aggregate CPI-based real exchange rates that the speed
of adjustment is significant for exchange rate and insignificantly different from zero for price,
concluding that adjustment takes place primarily through the exchange rate. Our method of
estimating the error correction mechanism differs from theirs, pooling across countries with
panel data for each equation in (4), but our conclusion for aggregate data agrees with theirs. As
reported in panel a of Table 3, the speed of adjustment for price,  p , is just 0.04, while that for

the exchange rate, e , is much larger at 0.13. 12
         The result is entirely different at the disaggregated goods level. Now we estimate the
error correction regression (4) as a panel over city pairs, once for each of the traded goods in the
sample. Table A4 in the data appendix shows results for each good separately, and Table 3
summarizes by reporting mean values over all goods. The role of the two variables is reversed


12
  Due to our panel methodology, both coefficients are statistically significant, so we cannot conclude that the price
coefficient equals zero as found in past work. But the much larger coefficient (in absolute value) in the exchange
rate equation indicates that the exchange rate responds much more strongly than does price. Because the two
equations in (4) are estimated individually, we do not have the joint distribution of response coefficients needed to
conduct a formal F test.

                                                                          10
from that with the aggregate data: the mean speed of adjustment for the price ratio,  pk , is large,

0.20, while that for the exchange rate, ek , is much smaller, 0.03.
       Judging by speeds of adjustment, the dynamic adjustment appears to be very different at
the disaggregated level than at the aggregated level. While at the aggregate level it is nominal
exchange rate movements that facilitate dynamic adjustment to restore PPP, at the disaggregated
level it is movements in the price in the goods market that does the adjustment. It probably
should not be surprising that the nominal exchange rate cannot serve the function of adjustment
for individual goods, given Crucini et al. (2005) has showed that for European country pairs
there are many goods overpriced as well as underpriced. The same appears to be true for our
country pairs. Given that adjustment requires movements in opposite directions for these two
groups of goods, there is no way that the exchange rate component of these relative prices can
make them move in the necessary directions simultaneously. However, what is surprising is that
goods prices do facilitate adjustment at the goods level, and in fact adjustment is faster than for
aggregate prices that have the exchange rate to move them.


III.B. Robustness Checks
       In a dynamic panel model with cross-sectional dependence, conventional estimators, such
as fixed effect estimators, generalized method of moment estimators, instrumental-variable
estimators, and CCEP estimators are inconsistent for finite T even as N becomes infinite, but
they are consistent when both T and N become infinite (Philips and Sul, 2007; Sarafidis and
Robertson, 2009; Groote and Everaert, 2011). The Technical Appendix provides a detailed
Monte Carlo study showing this conclusion applies also to a panel VECM specification. Two
main findings are as follows. First, the mean biases of the estimated responses to the error
correction term, the parameters of most interest to us, are positive, indicating that the CCEP
estimates tend to be biased upward, implying they overstate the true speed of adjustment (in
absolute value). Second, an increase in N, for a given T, has only limited effect on mean bias but
it decreases the standard deviation and root mean squared error of estimates. However, an
increase in T for a given N decreases the magnitude of the bias as well as that of the other above-
mentioned statistics.
       In addition, we also conduct an experiment with simulated data that closely resembles our
actual data set. Data were generated using the coefficient estimates together with the residuals

                                                  11
from the CCEP estimation of the two-equation system (4b) for aggregated data, including
allowing for heterogeneous error correction adjustment coefficients. In each of 1000 replications,
a sequence of innovations for 20 country pairs covering 34 periods was drawn from the residuals
of the exchange rate and price equations, and these were used to generate simulated series for
price and exchange rate (as well as real exchange rate), using actual observations as starting
values. The generated data were then used to estimate the model by CCEP. Results in Table 4
indicate that CCEP tends to overstate the true speed of adjustment parameter (in absolute value),
but it is somewhat smaller than in the Monte Carlo study described above.
        To show that our results are robust to controlling for potential bias in our estimates, we
will employ the standard double bootstrap procedure of Kilian (1998) with 1000 replications to
obtain the bias-adjusted estimates. Results for the VECM system are reported in panel (b) of
table 3. While the estimates of the speed of adjustment are somewhat lower under the bias
correction, all conclusions are the same as for the unadjusted CCEP results: for aggregated data
the speed of adjustment for the nominal exchange rate is much larger than that for the price level;
for disaggregated the speed of adjustment in prices is faster.
        To check the sensitivity of our result to our particular data set, we conduct the same error
correction estimation using the data set used by Imbs et al. (2005).13 While the values of
adjustment parameters reported in Table 5 are lower across the board, the pattern of relative
rankings is the same. In disaggregated industry level data the speed of adjustment for prices is
more than twice that for the nominal exchange rate; for aggregated data the reverse is true, with
the speed of adjustment for prices being half of that for the nominal exchange rate.
        We here rule out two potential explanations for the puzzle. The first thing to rule out is
measurement error in the disaggregated price observations. This would seem plausible, given
that the price ratio data rely upon survey takers to subjectively choose representative goods
within some categories. If the measurement error is corrected or reversed in subsequent
observations of prices, it might appear as if prices are adjusting to correct the price deviation. (Of
course, the exchange rate data would not be subject to the errors of survey collection.) To test
this explanation, a Hausman test is conducted, estimating a first-order autoregression of qijk ,t for


13
  The Imbs et al. (2005) benchmark dataset we use consists of monthly observations extending from 1981 to 1995
for the U.S. and 10 European countries (we exclude Finland in order to maintain a balanced panel, as required for
our estimation methodology).

                                                        12
each cross-sectional item (country-goods) by two methods, OLS and two stage least squares
using lagged values as instruments, and testing the hypothesis of no measurement error. Among
the 1843 country-good series, only 233 reject consistency at the 5% level. This indicates that
measurement error is not a problem for most of our observations.
           Another potential explanation for our result is that the type of aggregation bias Imbs et al.
(2005) described for autoregressions, like our equation (2), could have an analog for our error
correction equation (3). Imbs et al. (2005) argued that heterogeneity in the speeds of convergence
in the real exchange rate among disaggregated goods can lead to an overestimate of the
persistence in the aggregate real exchange rate, under conditions where those goods with slow
speeds of adjustment receive too much weight in computing the aggregate price level.14 To
translate this argument into an explanation for our error correction estimation, aggregation would
need to lead to a bias underestimating the aggregate adjustment speed in one variable, the prices,
but at the same time an overestimate of the speed of adjustment in another variable, the nominal
exchange rate. On one hand, we can confirm that there is heterogeneity among the goods k in
terms of the size of ek and  kp , so larger weights on some goods could lead to estimates of the

aggregate that are different from the average among the goods. However, there is no
heterogeneity among goods in terms of the fact that ek   pk ; this is true for all 98 of the goods

in the sample. We can conceive of no weighting of goods when aggregating that could reverse
this inequality in the aggregate.


III.C. The Role of Distinct Shocks
            The finding above, that aggregated and disaggregate price deviations have qualitatively
distinct adjustment mechanisms, suggests that the two types of price deviations may have
qualitatively different origins. We conjecture that there are idiosyncratic shocks at the good
level that are distinct from macroeconomic shocks occurring at the aggregate level. Accordingly,
we apply the CCEP estimator to a modified three-variable vector error correction model, which
takes the novel step of nesting together aggregate and disaggregated price data series:
                    eij ,t   ijk,e  ek,1ij (qijk ,t 1  qij ,t 1 )  ek,2ij (qij ,t 1 )
                                                                                                                              (5)
                                 ek,ij ,1 (eij ,t 1 )  ek,ij ,2 (pijk ,t 1 )  ek,ij ,3 (pij ,t 1 )   ek,ij ,t

14
     This argument has been critiqued by Chen and Engel (2005) among others.

                                                                            13
                       pij ,t   pk ,ij   pk1,ij (qijk ,t 1  qij ,t 1 )   pk ,2ij (qij ,t 1 )
                                      pkij
                                        k
                                             ,1 ( eij ,t 1 )   p ,ij ,2 (pij ,t 1 )   p ,ij ,3 (pij ,t 1 )   p ,ij ,t
                                                                   k           k              k                          k



                       pijk ,t   pk
                                    k
                                       ,ij   pk ,ij ( qij ,t 1  qij ,t 1 )   pk ,ij ( qij ,t 1 )
                                               k1        k                          k2


                                      pk
                                        k
                                           ,ij ,1 ( eij ,t 1 )   pk ,ij ,2 ( pij ,t 1 )   pk ,ij ,3 ( pij ,t 1 )   pk ,ij ,t
                                                      k              k             k              k                            k



There are two cointegrating vectors in this system over the variables e, pk, and p: [1 0 1] and [0 1
-1]. This system allows for a distinct response to the aggregate price deviation qij ,t 1 , which is the

average across all goods, and a distinct response to the purely idiosyncratic price wedge,
specified as qij ,t 1  qij ,t 1 , the difference between the price wedge for one good and the average
              k



wedge across all goods. Given the definition of q and qk, the latter difference alternately may be
written: qij ,t 1  qij ,t 1  pij ,t 1  pij ,t 1 .
          k                       k



           Estimates of the response parameters in the expanded VECM, reported in Table 6,
support and extend the results found earlier when estimating separate VECM systems for
aggregates and disaggregated data. Again pk responds to qk –q (pk –p) deviations, and now we
see explicitly that it does not respond to q deviations. We see that e responds to aggregate q
deviations but not to qk –q (pk –p) deviations. And finally, p responds only to q deviations. These
conclusions are the same for the bias-corrected estimates reported in panel b of table 6, which
were computed using the method of Kilian (1998).
           The main benefit of estimating equation (5) is that it provides a way to identify
idiosyncratic shocks as separate from macroeconomic shocks. We use a Cholesky ordering of the
variables e, p, and pk, which defines an industry shock as an innovation to pk for a particular good
that has no contemporaneous effect on aggregate p (or e). We believe this is a case where a
Cholesky identification of shocks is particularly well suited. An aggregate shock is one that
makes both pk and p move contemporaneously, as it affects goods prices on average. If desired,
these aggregate shocks may be divided into shocks to the foreign exchange market, identified as
all innovations to e, or shocks to the aggregate goods market, identified as innovations to p with
no contemporaneous effect on e. This estimation is run for each of the 98 goods, and variance
decompositions and impulse responses are generated for each.
           Figures 1 and 2 report the variance decompositions of the variables by shock, where the
numbers reported for disaggregated data are the averages among the 98 goods. Not surprisingly,


                                                                                14
variation in the aggregate real exchange rate, q, is due mainly to nominal exchange rate shocks,
accounting for over 80% of variation, with a secondary role played by aggregate price shocks,
and virtually no role at all played by idiosyncratic shocks. In contrast, variation in LOP
deviations in disaggregated data, qk, are due largely to idiosyncratic industry price shocks to pk,
accounting for about 80% of variation, with exchange rate shocks playing a much lesser role.
         Impulse responses reported in Figures 3-5 help identify the mechanisms of adjustment.
The figures report impulse responses from simulations of the system (5), where parameter values
are the averages of the estimates derived for the 98 goods. Recall from the variance
decompositions above that most movements in qk appear to be due to idiosyncratic shocks. The
bottom panel of Figure 3 shows that the dynamics of qk resemble that for pk, whereas the nominal
exchange does not move. Since qk = e + pk, this observation suggests that the goods price does
most of the adjusting to restore LOP. Next, recall from variance decompositions that most of the
movements in the real exchange rate, q, were due to nominal exchange rate shocks, with
aggregate price shocks in a secondary role. The top panel of Figure 4 shows that the response of
q to exchange rate shocks looks like that of the e component; this indicates the nominal exchange
rate does the adjusting. Interestingly, for an aggregated price shock, the top panel of Figure 5
shows that the response of q looks like e; again, the nominal exchange rate does most of the
adjusting, even though the shock was an innovation to p orthogonal to innovations to e.
         These conclusions regarding adjustment dynamics are formalized in Table 7 following
the methodology of Cheung et al. (2004). Defining the impulse response of variable m to shock
n as  m,n (t ) , note that  qk ,n (t )   e,n (t )  pk ,n (t ) for disaggregated data and

 q,n (t )   e,n (t )  p,n (t ) for aggregated data. Then geq,n (t )   e,n (t ) /  q ,n (t ) measures the
                                                                   k
                                                                                             k


proportion of adjustment in LOP deviations explained by nominal exchange rate adjustment, and
g qpkk ,n (t )   pk ,n (t ) /  qk ,n (t ) measures the proportion explained by price adjustment, such that

geq,kn (t )  g qpkk ,n (t )  1. The analogs for decomposing adjustment for aggregated data are

geq,n (t )   e,n (t ) /  q,n (t ) and g qp,n (t )   p,n (t ) /  q,n (t ) . The values in Table 7 support the
conclusions above. Adjustment of aggregated data takes place mainly via adjustment in the
nominal exchange rate regardless of shock. Adjustment of disaggregated data depends upon the




                                                           15
shock; for aggregate shocks (e and p), adjustment takes place mainly via nominal exchange rate
adjustment, but for idiosyncratic shocks adjustment takes place via price adjustment.
         Overall, we conclude that price deviations at the aggregated and disaggregated levels are
very different. First they differ in terms of the shocks that drive them. Further, the dynamic
responses differ according to shock: movements in disaggregated qk are dominated by
movements in the pk component as it adjusts in response to pk shocks, while movements in the
aggregate q are dominated by movements in e adjusting in response to e and p shocks. This
indicates to us that the apparent inconsistency in adjustment dynamics observed for aggregated
and disaggregated data comes from the distinction between the particular shocks that dominate at
different levels of aggregation.


III.D. Implications for the Convergence Speed Puzzle
         The hypothesis that different shocks and adjustment mechanisms are at work at different
levels of aggregation also offers a promising explanation for the persistence puzzle popularized
in Imbs et al. (2005) and others. Why does the half-life of aggregated real exchange rates appear
to be longer than for disaggregated data? The error correction models estimated in the previous
section provide an answer. Figures 3-5 indicates that the half-lives of disaggregated real
exchange rates vary by the shock to which they are adjusting. Table 8 computes the half-life of
adjustment of the aggregate and disaggregated real exchange rates, conditional on the shock.15
The half-lives for aggregated real exchange rates, q, and disaggregated, qk , are quite similar to
each other when conditioned on aggregate e and p shocks, with values in the neighborhood of 2
years. But when conditioned on idiosyncratic shocks, the half-life of disaggregated real exchange
rates falls dramatically, to a value about half of that for aggregate shocks. 16 The main lesson is
that when conditioned on aggregate shocks, there is no longer a contrast in persistence between
aggregate and disaggregated real exchange rates. Instead, the contrast is between aggregate and
disaggregate shocks; disaggregated data respond slowly to the first and quickly to the latter. This

15
   Half-lives are generated from simulated impulse responses. System (5) was simulated 1000 times using random
draws of system parameters, where the mean and standard errors of the distribution are the average estimates among
the goods. Half-lives are computed for aggregated and disaggregated data in each simulation, and the table reports
the mean of these. Confidence intervals are not reported for the half lives because the impulse responses for the 3-
equation system involve a large number of parameters, each with their own confidence band, leading to an
accumulation of uniformly very wide confidence intervals for statistics related to the impulse responses.
16
   No half-life is reported for the aggregate real exchange rate, since idiosyncratic shocks have essentially no effect
on this variable.

                                                          16
indicates that once half-lives are conditioned on shocks, there appears to be no micro-macro
disconnect puzzle. The finding in past work estimating half-lives that disaggregated real
exchange rates adjust faster can be attributed to the dominance of a different composition of
shocks for disaggregated data.
           Panel (b) of the table reports halflives computed from the bias-corrected estimates from
panel (b) of table 6, using the method of Kilian (1998). The bias-corrected halflives are longer
due to the lower estimates of the speed of adjustment parameters reported in panel (b) of table 6.
This implies that our model is actually closer to explaining the high degree of persistence
reported in past studies than it may have appeared when using uncorrected estimates. These
results continue to support our main conclusion, that when conditional on aggregate shocks,
there is no longer a contrast in the persistence between aggregated and disaggregated real
exchange rates.
           This basic lesson can be translated from terms of error corrections into the more familiar
terms of autoregressions estimated in most past research. Consider the following aggregation
                                                   k
exercise. Given that qij ,t is the aggregation of qij ,t 1 over goods, it is viewed as a puzzle that

estimates of their adjustment speeds are so different. Aggregating an AR(1) version of equation
(2) over goods:

                                                            c                                                
                                      K                      K
                                 1                     1
                                 K
                                      qijk ,t 
                                     k 1              K     k 1
                                                                        ij
                                                                             k
                                                                                  ijk qijk ,t 1   ijk,t


                                                                                ijk qijk ,t 1  
                                                K                                 K                                K
                                            1                           1                                      1
                                qij ,t                                                                           
                                                             k                                                             k
                                                       cij                                                                ij ,t   (6)
                                            K   k 1                    K        k 1                          K   k 1

Work by Imbs et al. (2005) has focused on the role of heterogeneity of adjustment speeds among
the goods. If we allow for heterogeneity in the autoregressive coefficient ij among goods,
                                                                             k



equation (6) differs from an AR(1) version of the aggregate equation (3) because

                   
    K
1
                 qijk ,t 1  ij qij ,t 1 . If there is a correlation between the variation in ij and qij ,t 1 among
             k                                                                                     k      k
            ij
K   k 1

goods, so that slowly adjusting goods have larger price deviations, then this will bias upward
estimates of the average speed of adjustment.
           However, the vector error correction exercise demonstrated that the mechanism by which
a good’s price deviation is eliminated differs in response to the component of the price deviation
that is common across goods and the component that is idiosyncratic to the particular good. If
                                                                                        17
this distinction in adjustment mechanism affects the speed of adjustment, this suggests that the
specification of the autoregression should be expanded as follows to allow for this distinction:

                                                                                           
                             qijk ,t  cqkk ,ij   qkk1,ij qijk ,t 1  qij ,t 1   qkk 2,ij qij ,t 1   qkk ,ij ,t                                       (7a)

or equivalently

                                                                                                           
                             qijk ,t  cqkk ,ij   qkk1,ij qijk ,t 1   qkk 2,ij   qkk1,ij qij ,t 1   qkk ,ij ,t .                                     (7b)

Here qk ,ij captures the adjustment in relative price of good k to aggregate macroeconomic price
       k2



deviations, and ij captures the response to price deviations that are specific to the good k. For
                  k1



completeness, an analogous expansion of an AR(1) version of the aggregate equation (3) can be
defined (for each k).

                                                                                       
                             qij ,t  cqk,ij   qk,1ij qijk ,t 1  qij ,t 1   qk,2ij qij ,t 1   q ,ij ,t .                                              (8)

       Now aggregate up equation (7a):

                                             c                                                                                      
                       K                    K
                  1                     1
                  K
                       qijk ,t 
                      k 1              K   k 1
                                                    k
                                                    qk ,ij     qkk1,ij qijk ,t 1  qij ,t 1   qkk 2,ij qij ,t 1   qkk ,ij ,t


                                                                                                   
                                  K
                             1                     1 K k1                                           1 K k2            1                     K
                  qij ,t 
                             K
                                  cqkk ,ij             qk ,ij
                                                   K k 1 
                                                                  q k
                                                                   ij ,t 1  qij ,t 1  qij ,t 1   
                                                                                                    K
                                                                                                            qk ,ij                             k
                                                                                                                                                   qk ,ij ,t    (9)
                                 k 1
                                                                                              k 1
                                                                                                               K                           k 1

                                                                     Term A                                       Term B

One observation is that, while heterogeneity in qk ,ij can lead to a heterogeneity bias in Term A
                                                 k1



in the same way as seen in equation (6), in contrast, heterogeneity in qk ,ij has no impact on
                                                                        k2



aggregation of Term B, as the common component qij ,t 1 passes through the summation operator.

So part of the heterogeneity among goods in terms of adjustment speed documented by Imbs et
al. (2005) may be of an innocuous type, depending on how much applies to adjustment to
                                                                          k
aggregate qij ,t deviations, and how much to good specific deviations to qij ,t .

       Table 9 shows the results of estimating equations (7a) and (8). The first result is that the
apparent inconsistency of the equations (2) and (3) has disappeared, when estimated in the
augmented form of equations (7a) and (8). If we focus on the response to aggregate deviations
qij ,t 1 , the average response coefficients in the two equations are nearly the same. In the
                                                                                                K
                                                                                        1
disaggregated equation the average coefficient is
                                                                                        K
                                                                                            
                                                                                            k 1
                                                                                                        k2
                                                                                                        qk ,ij   =0.79, and in the aggregate


                                                                                   18
                                                                   K
                                                             1
equation the average coefficient is
                                                             K
                                                                   
                                                                   k 1
                                                                           k2
                                                                           q ,ij   =0.80. So if one focuses just on responses to

aggregate deviations, the aggregation puzzle disappears.
           Further, Table 9 indicates the degree of heterogeneity in the coefficients in terms of the
standard deviation of the estimates across goods. By this measure, the heterogeneity for the
coefficient on the aggregated real exchange rate (q) appears to be of similar magnitude to that for
the idiosyncratic deviation (qk-q). Recall that it is only heterogeneity in the latter coefficient that
fails to cancel out upon aggregation and thereby could lead to aggregation bias of the type
described by Imbs et al.
           Equation (7a) also suggests that the estimations by Imbs et al. (2005) of an equation like
(2) are subject to a potentially large omitted variable bias. Write equation (7b) as
                                     qijk ,t  cqkk ,ij   qkk1,ij qijk ,t 1  qkk 3,ij qij ,t 1   qkk ,ij ,t
                                                                                                                                   (10)
                                     where qkk 3,ij  qkk 2,ij  qkk1,ij

Estimating equation (2) ignores the second term. Generalizing the standard omitted variable bias
formula to the case of our panel data, the bias would be:
                                         N                                     N
            E      k 1  ( Qijk,1M wQijk,1 ) 1 ( Qijk,1M wQ1 ) 
                 k1

                           ij 1                      ij 1
                              N                                      N
                                                                                                                                   (11)
                           ( Q         k
                                       ij , 1   M wQ  k
                                                            ) ( Q
                                                      ij , 1
                                                              1             k
                                                                            ij , 1   M wQij ,1 )    k3

                             ij 1                                 ij 1


           where
            Qijk,-1  (qijk ,1 , qijk ,2 ,...., qijk ,T 1 ); M w =I -W ( W W ) 1W ; W =(W2,W3,.....WT );
           Wt  (1, qtk , qtk-1 ); Q1 =(q2 , q3 ,....., qT ); Qij ,-1  (qij ,1 , qij ,2 ,...., qij ,T 1 ).

and  is the coefficient of the cross-sectional mean in the augmented equation of (10) (see the
appendix for the derivation).
          Our findings also bring evidence to bear on the conjecture by Broda and Weinstien (2008)
that lower persistence in disaggregated relative prices may be due to nonlinear adjustment.
Previous work has demonstrated significant nonlinearities in aggregate real exchange rate
adjustment, where convergence is faster for real exchange rate deviations that are large.17 This
may reflect the presence of costs of engaging in arbitrage, discouraging arbitrage responses to


17
     See Parsley and Wei (1996), Taylor et al. (2001), and Wu et al. (2009).

                                                                                       19
price deviations too small to generate sufficient profits to cover these costs. Broda and
Weinstein (2008) suggest that if there is heterogeneity among goods in terms of the volatility of
their price deviations, OLS estimates of convergence speed will place a heavy weight on the
observations where the absolute value of deviations is large, thereby tending to find fast
convergence. But as data are aggregated, they conjecture, large positive and negative price
deviations are likely to cancel, so the weight given to small price deviations will increase,
thereby tending to find slower convergence.
       Our empirical work supports the idea, in a general sense, that faster convergence in
disaggregated data is associated with greater volatility. When we compute the standard
deviations of real exchange rate deviations at the goods level for each of the 98 goods in our data
set, their average standard deviation is 4.8 times that of the aggregate real exchange rate (10.67%
and 2.22% respectively). However, we do not find much heterogeneity among goods in this
regard. For every one of our 98 goods, the standard deviation of price deviations exceeds that of
the aggregate real exchange rate; the heterogeneity among goods is small compared to the gap
between their average and the aggregate data. The same conclusion holds for convergence speeds:
even though there is some variation in the convergence speeds among the goods in our sample
when estimating equation (2), the price gap for every one of the 98 goods in our sample has a
faster convergence speed than does the aggregate real exchange rate.
       Instead of pointing to a distinction among goods, where certain goods with smaller
volatility and slower convergence do not cancel out upon aggregation, our results instead point to
distinct components of each good’s price deviation, due to aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks,
respectively, where the latter can reasonably be expected to have larger volatility and faster
convergence, as well as to cancel out upon aggregation. This would seem to be a helpful way of
reframing the role of nonlinearity conjectured in Broda and Weinstein (2008); the distinction
between aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks makes this conjecture operational.
       Finally, our findings have revealing implications for the use of sticky price models to
describe real exchange rate behavior. Cheung et al. (2004) argued against sticky price models,
emphasizing that the adjustment dynamics of the aggregate real exchange rate are dictated by the
adjustment dynamics of the nominal exchange rate, not those of gradually adjusting sticky
prices. On the one hand our result contrasts with this finding, showing that the adjustment in
disaggregated real exchange rates is dictated by the dynamics of prices in the goods market.

                                                 20
Nonetheless, our finding supports the overall conclusion of Cheung et al; it does not bolster the
case for conventional types of sticky price models. Our result indicates that prices actually adjust
quite quickly at the disaggregated level, indicating small menu costs or frequent Calvo signals to
reset price.


IV. Conclusions
        Past papers have been surprised that international price deviations at the goods level
adjust faster than do aggregate real exchange rates. The first contribution of the paper is to offer
a deeper understanding of this macro-micro disconnect. This paper shows that adjustment in real
exchange rates to purchasing power parity is not just a slower version of the adjustment in micro-
level prices back to the law of one price: while the nominal exchange rate does the adjusting at
the aggregate level, it is the price that does the adjusting at the disaggregated level. The reason is
that there are distinct shocks driving price deviations at these two levels of aggregation. The
disaggregated level is dominated by idiosyncratic shocks specific to the good, which cancel out
upon aggregation and have minimal impact upon aggregate dynamics.
        The second contribution of the paper is to offer a resolution to the micro-macro
disconnect. Once half-lives are estimated conditional on macroeconomic shocks, microeconomic
prices are found to be just as persistent as aggregate real exchange rates. In contrast with the
impression given by recent studies on microeconomic price dynamics, there is actually
significant persistence contained within micro price data.
        The third contribution is to caution against an explanation for the persistence puzzle
relying primarily upon heterogeneity among goods and aggregation bias. In particular, a
significant portion of the overall heterogeneity in adjustment speeds among goods is found here
to be associated with their response to the macroeconomic shocks rather than to idiosyncratic
goods shocks. Because the macroeconomic shocks are common to goods, heterogeneity in these
coefficients will cancel out upon aggregation. So a significant portion of the heterogeneity
detected in past studies may be of an innocuous type when it comes to aggregation bias
        Finally, the analysis has important implications for the widespread use of sticky price
models to explain real exchange rate behavior. We see evidence that there is rapid adjustment in
prices to arbitrage opportunities at the microeconomic level, indicating a fair degree of price
flexibility. However, these price movements selectively respond mainly to idiosyncratic shocks

                                                  21
at the goods level, and appear to cancel out upon aggregation with minimal implications for
aggregate variables like the aggregate real exchange rate. This finding does not coincide well
with standard sticky price models of real exchange rate behavior, where stickiness results from
the inability to reset prices rapidly and does not distinguish between shocks. A model that
potentially could coincide better with the evidence would be a rational inattention or sticky
information story, where firms adjust to shocks specific to their industry rather than common
macroeconomic shocks. If a firm has limited resources to process information about shocks, and
if industry specific shocks are more variable or have larger impacts on a firm’s profits, it can be
optimal for firms to allocate more attention to track and respond to idiosyncratic conditions than
to aggregate conditions. Our empirical result suggests the usefulness of future theoretical work in
this direction.




                                                 22
References

Andrade, Philippe and Marios Zachariadis, 2010. “Trends in International Prices,” mimeo.

Broda, Christian and David E. Weinstein, 2008. “Understanding International Price Differences
     Using Barcode Data,” University of Chicago mimeo.

Carvalho, Carlos and Fernanda Nechio, 2010. "Aggregation and the PPP Puzzle in a Sticky-Price
     Model," American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Chen, Shiu-Sheng and Charles Engel, 2005. “Does ‘Aggregation Bias’ Explain the PPP Puzzle?”
     Pacific Economic Review 10, 49-72.

Cheung, Yin-Won, Kon S. Lai and Michael Bergman, 2004. “Dissecting the PPP Puxxle: The
    Unconventional Roles of Nominal Exchange Rate and Price Adjustments,” Journal of
    International Economics 64, 135-150.

Crucini, Mario J. and Mototsugu Shintani, 2008. “Persistence in Law-of-One-Price Deviations:
     Evidence from Micro-data,” forthcoming in the Journal of Monetary Economics.

Crucini, Mario J., Chris I. Telmer and Marios Zachariadis, 2005. “Understanding European Real
     Exchange Rates,” American Economic Review 95, 724-738.

De Groote, Tom and Gerdie Everaert, 2011. “Common Correlated Effects Estimation of
    Dynamic Panels with Cross-Sectional Dependence,” Ghent University Working Paper
    2011/723.

Engel, Charles and Morley, J. C., 2001. “The Adjustment of Prices and the Adjustment of the
     Exchange Rate,” NBER Working Paper no.8550.

Engel, Charles and John H. Rogers, 2004. “European Product Market Integration after the Euro,”
     Economic Policy 39, 347-384.

Fisher, Eric. and Joon Y. Park, 1991. “Testing Purchasing Power Parity Under the Null
     Hypothesis of Co-integration,” The Economic Journal 101, 1467-1484.

Imbs, Jean, H. Mumtaz, Morten Ravn and Helene Rey, 2005. “PPP Strikes Back: Aggregation
     and the Real Exchange Rate,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 70, 1-43.

Kilian, Lutz, 1998. “Small-Sample Confidence Intervals For Impulse Response Functions,”
      Review of Economics and Statistics 80, 218-230.

Mackowiak, B. and Wiederholt, M., 2009. “Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational Inattention,”
    American Economic Review 99(3), 769-803.




                                              23
Mark, Nelson C. and Donggyu and Sul, 2008. “PPP Strikes Out: The Effect of Common Factor
    Shocks on the Real Exchange Rate.” Notre Dame working paper.

Parsley, David and Shang-jin Wei, 1996. “Convergence to the Law of One Price Without Trade
      Barriers or Currency Fluctuations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 1211-1236.

Parsley, David and Shang-jin Wei, 2002. “Currency Arrangements and Goods Market
      Integration: A Price Based Approach,” Working paper.

Pesaran, M. Hashem, 2006, “Estimation and Inference in Large Heterogeneous Panels with a
       Multifactor Error Structure,” Econometrica 7, 967-1012.

Pesaran, M. Hashem, 2007. “A Simple Panel Unit Root Test in the Presence of Cross-Section
       Dependence,” Journal of Applied Econometrics 22, 265-312.

Phillips, Peter C. B. and Sul, Donggyu, 2007. "Bias in Dynamic Panel Estimation with Fixed
       Effects, Incidental Trends and Cross Section Dependence," Journal of Econometrics,
       137(1), 162-188.

Sarafidis, Vasilis and Donald Robertson, 2009. “On the impact of Cross section Dependence in
      Short Dynamic Panel Estimation,” Econometric Journal, 12(1), 62-81.

Steinsson, Jon, 2008. “The Dynamic Behavior of the Real Exchange Rate in Sticky Price
       Models,” American Economic Review 98, 519-533.

Taylor, M. P., Peel, D. A. and Sarno, L., 2001. “Non-linear Mean Reversion in Real Exchange
       Rates: Toward a Solution to the Purchasing Power Parity Puzzles,” International
       Economic Review 42, 1015–1042.

Wu, Jyh-Lin, Chen, Pei-Fen and Lee, Ching-Nun, 2009. “Purchasing Power Parity, Productivity
      Differentials and Non-Linearity,” The Manchester School 77, 271-287.




                                              24
                                         Table 1: Stationarity of relative prices

                                      (mean)             (mean)         (mean)                       significance
      Sample                             b                t-stat        # obs.           1%           5%        10%
   Disaggregated data:

   Traded: (out of 98)                      -0.316       -2.434          621            47                63    72

   Nontraded (out of 30)                    -0.242       -2.121          636             8                11    11

   Aggregated data:

   Traded:                                  -0.284       -2.447          660           Yes                Yes   Yes

   Non-traded                               -0.220       -1.868          660            No                No    No


Note: For disaggregated data, the table reports estimates of b in the equation:
                          qijk ,t  aijk  bijk (qijk ,t 1 )  cijk (qtk1 )  dijk (qtk )   ijk,t
                                            ij  1,..., N , k  1,..., K , and t  1,..., T
                  N
where qtk      q
                 ij 1
                         k
                         ij ,t
                                                                   k
                                 is the cross-section mean of qij ,t across country pairs and qtk  qtk  qtk1 .The

null hypothesis of the test is H 0 : bijk  0 for all ij against the alternative hypothesis H1 : bijk  0 for
some ij. The b coefficients and t-stats are calculated as means over the individual goods results, and
significance results report the number of goods that reject nonstationarity at the specified
significance level. For aggregated data, the table reports estimates of the equation:
                             qij ,t  aij  bij (qij ,t 1 )  cij (qt 1 )  dij (qt )   ij ,t
                                            ij  1,..., N and t  1,..., T
                  N
where qt       q
                ij 1
                         ij ,t   is the cross-section mean of qij ,t across country pairs and qt  qt  qt 1 .




                                                                25
                                               Table 2. Half-lives in autoregressions of real exchange rates

                                           (Mean)                (Mean)           (Mean)           (Mean)          (Mean)          (Mean)
          Sample                             1                   t-stat            2              t-stat          #obs.          Half-life
AR(2):

Disaggregated data                           0.715               10.620            0.050            0.696            621              1.25

Aggregated data                              0.896               13.879           -0.054           -1.195            660              2.10

AR(1):

Disaggregated data                           0.739               14.250                                              621              1.15

Aggregated data                              0.850               20.399                                              660              2.13


Note: For disaggregated data, the table reports estimates of  in the equation
                    2
qijk ,t  cijk    
                   m 1
                          ij ,m ( qij ,t  m )   ij ,t
                           k       k                k
                                                           for k  1,..., K . The  coefficients and t-stats are calculated as mean values of

1k ,  2k and their associated t-statistics across all goods k. Estimates for aggregated data are based on the equation
                    2
qij ,t  cij      
                   m 1
                          ij ,m ( qij ,t  m )   ij ,t     Half-life in years are calculated from simulated impulse responses derived from

the parameter estimates.




                                                                                   26
                                                        Table 3: Vector error correction estimates

                                                                          (mean)               (mean)                 Heterogeneity #obs.
                                                                                               t-stat                 (Std.Dev.)

              a) CCEP Estimates:

              Disaggregated Data (for 98 traded goods):

              Exchange rate equation                                        -0.028               -2.260                  0.015       621

              Price ratio equation                                          -0.203               -4.074                  0.087

              Aggregated Data:

              Exchange rate equation                                        -0.126               -3.520                              660

              Price ratio equation                                          -0.044               -3.377


              b) Bias-Corrected CCEP Estimates:

              Disaggregated Data (for 98 traded goods):

              Exchange rate equation                                        -0.019               -1.458                  0.013       621

              Price ratio equation                                          -0.143               -3.049                  0.087

              Aggregated Data:

              Exchange rate equation                                        -0.096               -2.839                              660

              Price ratio equation                                          -0.035               -3.007


Note: The table reports estimates with disaggregated data for the equation system:
         eij ,t  ijk,e  ek,ij (qijk,t 1 )  ek,ij (eij ,t 1 )  ek,ij (pijk,t 1 )   ije,,tk
         pijk ,t  ijk, p   pk ,ij (qijk,t 1 )   pk ,ij (eij ,t 1 )   pk ,ij (pijk,t 1 )   ijp,,tk .
and with aggregate data for the system:
         eij ,t  ij ,e  e,ij (qij ,t 1 )  e,ij (eij ,t 1 )  e,ij (pij ,t 1 )   ije,t
          pij ,t  ij , p   p,ij (qij ,t 1 )   p,ij (eij ,t 1 )   p,ij (pij ,t 1 )   ijp,t .
For the disaggregated data, the  coefficients for the exchange rate and price equations are calculated as means
of ek, ,  pk across goods, respectively. The reported standard deviation of  estimates across goods is provided
as a measure of heterogeneity among goods. The bias correction is carried out via the Kilian (1998) bootstrap
method with 1000 iterations. The t-statistics are computed from standard errors derived using the double-
bootstrap method of Kilian (1998).




                                                                                          27
                                            Table 4: Monte Carlo experiment for CCEP estimator


                                                                                             Average
                                                                 Pesaran                    Monte Carlo
                                                                Coefficient                 Coefficient     5%      95%

      Exchange rate equation                                        -0.126                        -0.156   -0.216   -0.099

      Price ratio equation                                          -0.044                        -0.053   -0.073   -0.035


Note: Data were generated using the system:
         eij ,t  ˆe,ij (qij ,t 1 )  ˆe,ij (eij ,t 1 )  ˆe,ij (pij ,t 1 )   ije,t
         pij ,t  ˆ p,ij (qij ,t 1 )  ˆ p,ij (eij ,t 1 )  ˆ p,ij (pij ,t 1 )   ijp,t .
where the Pesaren coefficient values for  e and  p are taken from CCEP estimation of the two-
equation system (4b) with aggregated data, reported in Table 3, panel a. . In each of 1000 replications,
a sequence of innovations for 20 country pairs covering 34 periods were drawn from the (demeaned)
residuals of the estimated exchange rate and price equations, and these were used to generate series for
price and exchange rate (as well as for the real exchange rate), using actual observations as starting
values. The generated data were then used to re-estimate the model by CCEP. The “Monte Carlo
coefficients” denote the average coefficients across the 1000 replications, as well as the 5% and 95%
cutoffs of the distribution of estimates.




                                                                                       28
              Table 5: Vector error correction estimates using data set from Imbs et al. (2005)


                                                                                       (mean)              (mean)
                                                                                                           t-stat

                         Disaggregated Data:

                         Exchange rate equation                                         -0.016              -2.540

                         Price ratio equation                                           -0.036              -3.606

                         Aggregated Data:

                         Exchange rate equation                                         -0.025              -2.836

                         Price ratio equation                                           -0.016              -2.771


         Notes: The table reports estimates with disaggregated data for the equation system:
                   eij ,t  ijk,e  ek,ij (qijk,t 1 )  ek,ij (eij ,t 1 )  ek,ij (pijk,t 1 )   ije,,tk
                   pijk,t  ijk, p   pk ,ij (qijk,t 1 )   pk ,ij (eij ,t 1 )   pk ,ij (pijk,t 1 )   ijp,t,k .
         and with aggregate data:
                   eij ,t  ij ,e  e,ij (qij ,t 1 )  e,ij (eij ,t 1 )  e,ij (pijk,t 1 )   ije,t
                 pij ,t  ij , p   p,ij (qij ,t 1 )   p,ij (eij ,t 1 )   p,ij (pij ,t 1 )   ijp,t .18
         For disaggregated data, the  coefficients for the exchange rate and price equations are
         calculated as means of ek, ,  pk across goods, respectively




18
  Because this error correction model incorporates lags of first differences to capture short-run dynamics, this
specification is analogous to the second-order autoregression estimated previously. Inclusion of additional lags is
impossible due to the short time-span of the data set.

                                                                                      29
                                                  Table 6: 3-Equation vector error correction estimates

                                                          Response to qk-q                                                           Response to q
                                                                                            Hetero-                                                             Hetero-                Mean
                                                    Mean                 Mean                                            Mean                Mean
                                                                                           geneity:                                                           geneity:               #obs.
                                                                         t-stat                                                              t-stat
                                                                                            StdDev1                                                             StdDev
     a) CCEP estimates:

       Exchange rate
       equation                                     -0.002               -0.095                 0.017                     -0.163             -3.688              0.035                 621

       Aggregated
       Price equation                                0.001                0.006                 0.011                     -0.055             -2.614              0.012

       Disaggregated
       Price equation                               -0.301               -3.612                 0.117                     -0.065             -0.543              0.106

     b) Bias-corrected CCEP estimates:

        Exchange rate
        equation                                     -0.001               -0.050                 0.017                    -0.117             -2.433               0.040                 621

        Aggregated
        Price equation                                0.000               -0.090                 0.012.                   -0.040             -2.400              0.014.

        Disaggregated
        Price equation                               -0.208               -2.843                 0.120                    -0.048             -0.625               0.111


Notes: The table reports estimates with disaggregated data for the equation system:
eij ,t  ijk,e   ek,1ij ( qijk ,t 1  qij ,t 1 )   ek,2ij ( qij ,t 1 )  ek,ij ,1 ( eij ,t 1 )  ek,ij ,2 ( pijk ,t 1 )  ek,ij ,3 ( pij ,t 1 )   ek,ij ,t
pij ,t   kp,ij   kp1,ij ( qijk ,t 1  qij ,t 1 )   kp,2ij ( qij ,t 1 )   kpkij ,1 ( eij ,t 1 )   kp,ij ,2 ( pijk ,t 1 )   kp,ij ,3 ( pij ,t 1 )   pk ,ij ,t
pijk ,t   kpk ,ij   kpk1 ,ij ( qijk ,t 1  qij ,t 1 )   kpk2,ij ( qij ,t 1 )   kpk ,ij ,1 ( eijk ,t 1 )   kpk ,ij ,2 ( pijk ,t 1 )   kpk ,ij ,3 ( pij ,t 1 )   pk
                                                                                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                                                                                                          ,ij ,t


The  coefficients for exchange rate, aggregate price, and disaggregated price responses are
calculated as the means of e ,  e ,  p ,  p ,  pk  pk across goods, respectively. The reported
                               k1  k2    k1   k2    k1   k2


standard deviation of  parameter estimates provides a measure of heterogeneity across goods.
The bias correction is carried out via the Kilian (1998) bootstrap method with 1000 replications. The t-
statistics are computed from standard errors derived using the double-bootstrap method of Kilian
(1998).




                                                                                                   30
              Table 7: Relative contributions of nominal exchange rate and price adjustments
                                        to PPP and LOP Reversion

                                    With an exchange              with an aggregate           with a disaggregate
                                     rate shock                    price shock                 price shock
Disaggregated qk:       years        g eq,ke    g qp kk ,e         g eq,kp    g qp kk , p      g eq,kp k   g qp kk , p k
                          1           0.73         0.27             0.64          0.36          0.01           0.99
                          2           0.78         0.22             0.71          0.29          0.01           0.99
                          3           0.80         0.20             0.73          0.27          0.00           1.00
                          5           0.84         0.16             0.78          0.22          -0.02          1.02
                         10           0.93         0.07             0.88          0.12          -0.08          1.08
Aggregated q:           years          g eq,e      g qp ,e          g eq, p       g qp , p      g eq, p k      g qp , p k
                          1           0.77         0.23             0.76          0.24            ---            ---
                          2           0.79         0.21             0.79          0.21            ---            ---
                          3           0.79         0.21             0.79          0.21            ---            ---
                          5           0.79         0.21             0.79          0.21            ---            ---
                         10           1.79         0.21             0.79          0.21            ---            ---
Note: The columns g iq, kj indicates the proportion of adjustment in the relative price qk explained by adjustment in
variable i, conditional on shock j. The columns g iq, j indicate the same proportion for adjustment in the aggregated
real exchange rate q.




                                                             31
                                               Table 8. Estimates of half-lives conditional on the shock

                                                                         e shock                               p shock                                pk shock
                     CCEP Estimation:
                     Disaggregated qk                                       1.76                                   1.65                                      1.12

                     Aggregated q                                           1.57                                   1.71                                        ---

                     CCEP Bias-Corrected Estimation:
                     Disaggregated qk         2.61                                                                 2.72                                      1.70

                     Aggregated q                                           2.27                                   2.46                                        ---



Note: Half-lives in years, estimated from impulse responses of the equation system:
eij ,t  ijk,e   ek,1ij ( qijk ,t 1  qij ,t 1 )   ek,2ij ( qij ,t 1 )  ek,ij ,1 ( eij ,t 1 )  ek,ij ,2 ( pijk ,t 1 )  ek,ij ,3 ( pij ,t 1 )   ek,ij ,t
pij ,t   kp,ij   kp1,ij ( qijk ,t 1  qij ,t 1 )   kp,2ij ( qij ,t 1 )   kpkij ,1 ( eij ,t 1 )   kp,ij ,2 ( pijk ,t 1 )   kp,ij ,3 ( pij ,t 1 )   pk ,ij ,t
pijk ,t   kpk ,ij   kpk1 ,ij ( qijk ,t 1  qij ,t 1 )   kpk2,ij ( qij ,t 1 )   kpk ,ij ,1 ( eijk ,t 1 )   kpk ,ij ,2 ( pijk ,t 1 )   kpk ,ij ,3 ( pij ,t 1 )   pk
                                                                                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                                                                                                          ,ij ,t


The bias correction is carried out via the Kilian (1998) bootstrap method using 1000 replications.




                                                                                                   32
                                Table 9. Estimates of speeds of adjustment in expanded autoregression

                                                   Response to qk-q                                    Response to q
                                                                 Hetero-                                           Hetero-
                                              Mean     Mean                                       Mean    Mean
                                                                geneity:                                         geneity:   #obs.
                                                       t-stat                                             t-stat
                                                                StdDev1                                            StdDev1

   Disaggregated data                            0.678              9.552                 0.131    0.787    7.198    0.111     621

   Aggregated data                            -0.001             -0.042               0.018       0.803    16.860   0.039     621

Note: Estimates for disaggregated data from the equation:
qijk ,t  cqk ,ij k   qk
                        k1
                                
                                k
                                                       
                           ,ij qij ,t 1  qij ,t 1   qk ,ij qij ,t 1   qk ,ij ,t
                                                         k2                   k


and for aggregated data from:
                                                  
qij ,t  cq,ij k   qk,1ij qijk ,t 1  qij ,t 1   qk,2ij qij ,t 1   q,ij ,t
                                                   .
Standard deviation of parameter estimates are reported across goods.




                                                                                           33
Fig. 1 Variance decomposition of qk



         pk contribution




         e contribution

         p contribution




Fig. 2 Variance decomposition of q


            e contribution




            p contribution

            pk contribution




                34
           Fig. 3. Impulse response to pk shock

                                 aggregates
.24

.20

.16

.12

.08

.04

.00        q        e        p

-.04
       0                 5            10         15   20


                                 disaggregates
.24

.20

.16

.12            pk
.08
                    qk
.04
           e
.00

-.04
       0                 5            10         15   20




                                     35
           Fig. 4. Impulse response to e shock

                     aggregates

.08

.06

.04
                                       e
.02
                                       q
.00
                                       p
-.02

-.04
       0         5           10            15    20


                       disaggregates
.08

.06

.04
                                   e
.02
                                  qk
.00
                                  pk
-.02

-.04
       0         5           10            15    20




                           36
           Fig. 5. Impulse response to p shock

                      aggregates
 .04

 .03
                                   p
 .02

 .01
                                   q
 .00

-.01
                                   e
-.02

-.03
       0       5           10           15       20


                   disaggregates

.04

.03
                                   pk
.02

.01
                                   qk
.00

-.01
                                   e
-.02

-.03
       0       5           10           15       20




                         37
                       Data Appendix

Table A1. Cities in sample of 20 industrial countries and U.S.

              City          Country
              Amsterdam     Netherlands
              Athens        Greece
              Auckland      New Zealand
              Berlin        Germany
              Brussels      Belgium
              Copenhagen    Denmark
              Helsinki      Finland
              Lisbon        Portugal
              London        United Kingdom
              Luxembourg    Luxembourg
              Madrid        Spain
              Oslo          Norway
              Paris         France
              Rome          Italy
              Stockholm     Sweden
              Sydney        Australia
              Tokyo         Japan
              Toronto       Canada
              Vienna        Austria
              Zurich        Switzerland
              New York      United States




                             38
                                 Table A2. Traded items in sample, by category

Food and non-alcoholic              Food and non-alcoholic beverages: Alcoholic beverages
beverages: perishable               Non-perishable
White bread (1 kg)                   White rice (1 kg)                    Wine, common table (750 ml)
Butter (500 g)                       Olive oil (1 l)                      Wine, superior quality (750 ml)
Margarine (500 g)                    Peanut or corn oil (1 l)             Wine, fine quality (750 ml)
Spaghetti (1 kg)                     Peas, canned (250 g)                 Beer, local brand (1 l)
Flour, white (1 kg)                  Tomatoes, canned (250 g)             Beer, top quality (330 ml)
Sugar, white (1 kg)                  Peaches, canned (500 g)              Scotch whisky, six yrs old (700 ml)
Cheese, imported (500 g)             Sliced pineapples, can (500 g)       Gin, Gilbey’s or equivalent (700 ml)
Cornflakes (375 g)                   Chicken: frozen (1 kg)               Vermouth, Martini & Rossi (1 l)
Milk, pasteurised (1 l)              Frozen fish fingers (1 kg)           Cognac, French VSOP (700 ml)
Potatoes (2 kg)                      Instant coffee (125 g)               Liqueur, Cointreau (700 ml)
Onions (1 kg)                        Ground coffee (500 g)
Tomatoes (1 kg)                      Tea bags (25 bags)                   Recreation
Carrots (1 kg)                       Cocoa (250 g)                        Compact disc album
Oranges (1 kg)                       Drinking chocolate (500 g)           Television, colour (66 cm)
Apples (1 kg)                        Coca-Cola (1 l)                      Kodak colour film (36 exposures)
Lemons (1 kg)                        Tonic water (200 ml)                 Intl. weekly news magazine (Time)
Bananas (1 kg)                       Mineral water (1 l)                  Inttl foreign daily newspaper
Lettuce (one)                                                             Paperback novel (at bookstore)
Eggs (12)
Beef: filet mignon (1 kg)           Clothing and footwear                 Personal care
Beef: steak, entrecote (1 kg)        Business suit, two piece, med. wt.   Aspirins (100 tablets)
Beef: stewing, shoulder (1 kg)       Business shirt, white                Razor blades (five pieces)
Beef: roast (1 kg)                   Men’s shoes, business wear           Toothpaste with fluoride (120 g)
Beef: ground or minced (1 kg)        Mens raincoat, Burberry type         Facial tissues (box of 100)
Veal: chops (1 kg)                   Socks, wool mixture                  Hand lotion (125 ml)
Veal: fillet (1 kg)                  Dress, ready to wear, daytime        Lipstick (deluxe type)
Veal: roast (1 kg)                   Women’s shoes, town
Lamb: leg (1 kg)                     Women’s cardigan sweater             Household supplies
Lamb: chops (1 kg)                   Women’s raincoat, Burberry type      Toilet tissue (two rolls)
Lamb: stewing (1 kg)                 Tights, panty hose                   Soap (100 g)
Pork: chops (1 kg)                   Child’s jeans                        Laundry detergent (3 l)
Pork: loin (1 kg)                    Child’s shoes, dresswear             Dishwashing liquid (750 ml)
Ham: whole (1 kg)                    Child’s shoes, sportswear            Insect-killer spray (330 g)
Bacon (1 kg)                         Girl’s dress                         Light bulbs (two, 60 watts)
Chicken: fresh (1 kg)                Boy’s jacket, smart                  Frying pan (Teflon or equivalent)
Fresh fish (1 kg)                    Boy’s dress trousers                 Electric toaster (for two slices)
Orange juice (1 l)                                                        Batteries (two, size D/LR20)




                                                          39
                                 Table A3. Non-traded items

Laundry (one shirt)               Domestic cleaning help          Regular unleaded petrol
Dry cleaning, man’s suit          Maid’s monthly wages            Taxi: initial meter charge
Dry cleaning, woman’s dress       Babysitter                      Taxi rate per additional kilometre
Dry cleaning, trousers            Developing 36 colour pictures   Taxi: airport to city centre
Man’s haircut                     Daily local newspaper           Two-course meal for two people
Woman’s cut & blow dry            Three-course dinner             Hire car
Telephone and line                Seats at theatre or concert
Electricity                       Seats at cinema
Gas Tune-up                       Road tax or registration fee
Water                             Moderate hotel, single room
Business trip, daily cost         One drink at bar of hotel
Hilton-type hotel, single room    Simple meal for one person




                                                   40
                           Table A4: Error Correction results detailed by good


Product Description                                 e-coef       t-stat     p-coef    t-stat
Instant coffee (125 g) (supermarket)                -0.040      -2.779      -0.186   -3.799
Coca-Cola (1 l) (supermarket)                       -0.044      -3.520      -0.183   -2.376
Tonic water (200 ml) (supermarket)                  -0.031      -2.657      -0.144   -3.249
Mineral water (1 l) (supermarket)                   -0.037      -4.252      -0.179   -5.701
Orange juice (1 l) (supermarket)                    -0.020      -1.151      -0.169   -1.417
Ground coffee (500 g) (supermarket)                 -0.020      -1.671      -0.183   -4.995
Tea bags (25 bags) (supermarket)                    -0.034      -4.603      -0.170   -4.755
Cocoa (250 g) (supermarket)                         -0.023      -1.339      -0.163   -4.869
Drinking chocolate (500 g) (supermarket)            -0.056      -3.394      -0.204   -5.699
Peas, canned (250 g) (supermarket)                  -0.025      -2.861      -0.228   -5.175
Tomatoes, canned (250 g) (supermarket)              -0.024      -2.162      -0.117   -2.396
Peaches, canned (500 g) (supermarket)               -0.021      -1.422      -0.138   -1.041
Sliced pineapples, canned (500 g) (supermarket)     -0.017      -1.626      -0.205   -2.448
Potatoes (2 kg) (supermarket)                       -0.009      -1.704      -0.444   -7.576
Oranges (1 kg) (supermarket)                        -0.015      -3.529      -0.333   -2.421
Apples (1 kg) (supermarket)                          0.001       0.131      -0.339   -4.770
Lemons (1 kg) (supermarket)                         -0.018      -4.107      -0.249   -4.189
Bananas (1 kg) (supermarket)                        -0.020      -2.185      -0.535   -7.828
Lettuce (one) (supermarket)                         -0.035      -4.420      -0.373   -9.018
Eggs (12) (supermarket)                             -0.015      -1.128      -0.257   -5.424
Onions (1 kg) (supermarket)                         -0.022      -2.335      -0.471   -6.222
Tomatoes (1 kg) (supermarket)                       -0.017      -2.763      -0.379   -3.665
Carrots (1 kg) (supermarket)                        -0.010      -2.115      -0.457   -7.153
Beef: filet mignon (1 kg) (supermarket)             -0.014      -1.142      -0.208   -8.700
Veal: chops (1 kg) (supermarket)
Veal: fillet (1 kg) (supermarket)                   -0.017      -0.531      -0.255   -5.083
Veal: roast (1 kg) (supermarket)
Lamb: leg (1 kg) (supermarket)                      -0.011      -1.060      -0.196   -3.273
Lamb: chops (1 kg) (supermarket)                    -0.036      -3.273      -0.290   -6.405
Lamb: stewing (1 kg) (supermarket)                  -0.001      -0.238      -0.190   -2.115
Pork: chops (1 kg) (supermarket)                    -0.040      -4.236      -0.198   -3.149
Pork: loin (1 kg) (supermarket)                     -0.033      -4.955      -0.256   -4.581
Ham: whole (1 kg) (supermarket)                     -0.018      -1.214      -0.214   -2.596
Bacon (1 kg) (supermarket)                          -0.016      -1.649      -0.164   -3.255
Beef: steak, entrecote (1 kg) (supermarket)         -0.037      -1.996      -0.176   -2.396
Chicken: frozen (1 kg) (supermarket)
Chicken: fresh (1 kg) (supermarket)                 -0.038      -3.920      -0.237   -4.833
Frozen fish fingers (1 kg) (supermarket)            -0.010      -1.297      -0.317   -4.374
Fresh fish (1 kg) (supermarket)                     -0.009      -0.795      -0.135   -4.528
Beef: stewing, shoulder (1 kg) (supermarket)        -0.028      -3.092      -0.297   -4.657
Beef: roast (1 kg) (supermarket)                    -0.021      -2.197      -0.213   -3.500
Beef: ground or minced (1 kg) (supermarket)         -0.025      -1.973      -0.224   -4.567
White bread, 1 kg (supermarket)                     -0.023      -1.884      -0.114   -3.050
Flour, white (1 kg) (supermarket)                   -0.035      -2.292      -0.125   -2.533
Sugar, white (1 kg) (supermarket)                   -0.069      -2.698      -0.305   -7.383


                                                   41
Cheese, imported (500 g) (supermarket)               -0.026   -2.459   -0.249   -5.500
Cornflakes (375 g) (supermarket)                     -0.025   -2.054   -0.269   -3.390
Milk, pasteurised (1 l) (supermarket)                -0.054   -3.187   -0.183   -4.141
Olive oil (1 l) (supermarket)                        -0.017   -1.211   -0.272   -4.571
Peanut or corn oil (1 l) (supermarket)               -0.023   -2.999   -0.070   -1.757
Butter, 500 g (supermarket)                          -0.031   -1.728   -0.192   -3.022
Margarine, 500 g (supermarket)                       -0.050   -4.268   -0.229   -3.622
White rice, 1 kg (supermarket)                       -0.018   -1.854   -0.206   -3.101
Spaghetti (1 kg) (supermarket)                       -0.031   -3.122   -0.254   -4.769
Wine, common table (1 l) (supermarket)               -0.027   -1.653   -0.160   -1.770
Scotch whisky, six years old (700 ml)
(supermarket)                                        -0.055   -2.859   -0.179   -4.692
Gin, Gilbey's or equivalent (700 ml) (supermarket)   -0.040   -1.743   -0.096   -1.825
Vermouth, Martini & Rossi (1 l) (supermarket)        -0.028   -2.461   -0.096   -0.892
Cognac, French VSOP (700 ml) (supermarket)           -0.012   -0.583   -0.188   -4.332
Liqueur, Cointreau (700 ml) (supermarket)            -0.052   -1.915   -0.154   -5.943
Wine, superior quality (700 ml) (supermarket)        -0.021   -1.826   -0.179   -2.856
Wine, fine quality (700 ml) (supermarket)            -0.009   -0.497   -0.186   -3.406
Beer, local brand (1 l) (supermarket)                -0.039   -2.189   -0.126   -2.514
Beer, top quality (330 ml) (supermarket)             -0.038   -3.279   -0.237   -5.950
Soap (100 g) (supermarket)                           -0.006   -0.506   -0.129   -4.614
Light bulbs (two, 60 watts) (supermarket)            -0.018   -1.040   -0.228   -5.955
Batteries (two, size D/LR20) (supermarket)           -0.026   -2.007   -0.170   -2.952
Frying pan (Teflon or good equivalent)
(supermarket)                                        -0.053   -5.538   -0.242   -6.340
Electric toaster (for two slices) (supermarket)      -0.027   -1.076   -0.133   -4.644
Laundry detergent (3 l) (supermarket)                -0.016   -3.146   -0.137   -4.626
Toilet tissue (two rolls) (supermarket)              -0.034   -1.506   -0.283   -5.036
Dishwashing liquid (750 ml) (supermarket)            -0.025   -1.445   -0.136   -3.014
Insect-killer spray (330 g) (supermarket)            -0.029   -2.452   -0.219   -5.818
Aspirins (100 tablets) (supermarket)                 -0.022   -1.958   -0.150   -3.605
Lipstick (deluxe type) (supermarket)                 -0.019   -0.860   -0.108   -2.281
Razor blades (five pieces) (supermarket)             -0.022   -3.112   -0.067   -1.125
Toothpaste with fluoride (120 g) (supermarket)       -0.047   -3.687   -0.199   -4.768
Facial tissues (box of 100) (supermarket)            -0.009   -0.757   -0.171   -6.593
Hand lotion (125 ml) (supermarket)                   -0.025   -3.502   -0.154   -3.216
Child's jeans (chain store)                          -0.021   -1.928   -0.137   -2.101
Boy's dress trousers (chain store)                   -0.031   -1.810   -0.201   -3.214
Child's shoes, dresswear (chain store)               -0.044   -2.681   -0.153   -4.611
Child's shoes, sportswear (chain store)              -0.011   -0.913   -0.186   -6.483
Girl's dress (chain store)                           -0.018   -1.785   -0.222   -3.660
Boy's jacket, smart (chain store)                    -0.027   -3.380   -0.224   -5.385
Business suit, two piece, medium weight (chain
store)                                               -0.024   -2.776   -0.060   -1.856
Business shirt, white (chain store)                  -0.023   -2.336   -0.221   -2.951
Men's shoes, business wear (chain store)             -0.029   -2.679   -0.204   -3.372
Men's raincoat, Burberry type (chain store)          -0.018   -2.974   -0.158   -2.502
Socks, wool mixture (chain store)                    -0.024   -1.996   -0.165   -2.639
Dress, ready to wear, daytime (chain store)          -0.019   -1.404   -0.054   -0.855
Women's shoes, town (chain store)                    -0.048   -4.697   -0.152   -5.585
Women's cardigan sweater (chain store)               -0.029   -2.399   -0.301   -7.125

                                                     42
Women's raincoat, Burberry type (chain store)     -0.018   -1.885   -0.197   -4.698
Tights, panty hose (chain store)                  -0.016   -1.030   -0.163   -4.493
Compact disc album (average)                      -0.077   -2.059   -0.130   -5.062
Television, colour (66 cm) (average)              -0.024   -1.392   -0.102   -1.903
International foreign daily newspaper (average)   -0.055   -3.085   -0.141   -3.789
International weekly news magazine (Time)
(average)                                         -0.056   -1.948   -0.240   -2.022
Paperback novel (at bookstore) (average)          -0.028   -1.473   -0.084   -1.197
Kodak colour film (36 exposures) (average)        -0.056   -2.341   -0.158   -3.911

Averages: Mean                                    -0.028   -2.260   -0.203   -4.074
Averages: Median                                  -0.024   -2.057   -0.187   -4.026




                                                  43
                                                         Technical Appendix:

A. Monte Carlo Simulations


The purpose of this appendix is to evaluate the bias of CCEP estimates for parameter
configurations based on a VECM model. The data generating process (DGP) is given by the
following two-variable system of equations:

            yi ,1,t   i ,1  1,1 (eci ,t 1 )  1,1 (yi ,1,t 1 )  1,2 (yi ,2,t 1 )   i ft   i ,1,t ,
            yi ,2,t   i ,2   2,1 (eci ,t 1 )   2,1 (yi ,1,t 1 )   2,2 (yi ,2,t 1 )   i ft   i ,2,t ,   (A1)
             ft   ft 1  t
which can be represented in matrix form as
             Yi ,t  α i  ΨA Yi ,t 1  ΓYi ,t 1  ui ,t , i  1,  N , t  1, T ,
            ui ,t   i ft i 2  ε i ,t ,                                                                                 (A2)
             ft   ft 1  t ,

where Yi ,t  (yi ,1,t , yi ,2,t ) ' , α i  ( i ,1 ,  i ,2 ) ' ,  i , j ~ i.i.d . N (0,1) for j=1, 2, i 2  (1,1) , ft is

an unobservable common factor across cross-section units i,  i is the heterogeneous factor

                                                                                                          1  
loading, εi ,t  ( i ,t ,1 ,  i ,t ,2 ) is a vector of idiosyncratic errors with Ω  E (εi,t εi ,t )      .
                                                                                                           1
                                                                            0.12 0.12 
Α   (1, 1) is the cointegrating vector, Ψ   0.12,  0.04  , and Γ               are
                                                                            0.02 0.04 
coefficient matrices calibrated from the estimation results of (A1) based on our aggregate data
(e.g. , see Table 3, panel a for the elements of Ψ ). 19 The common factor ft is assumed to follow

an AR(1) process with the disturbance t being identically, independently and normally

distributed with a mean zero and variance one, i.e. i.i.d. N(0,1), and is also independent of εi ,t

and  i . 20




19
     Our calibration of Ψ and Γ implies 1,1  .12,  2,1  .04 , 1,1  .12, 1,2  0.12,  2,1  .02,  2,2  .04 .
20
     In terms of the variables in our paper Yi ,t  (eij ,t , pij ,t ) ' , where the cross-section unit index i corresponds to
the ij index of country pairs in the empirical analysis.

                                                                       44
         The factor loading  i characterizes the degree of cross dependence of variables ( Yi ,t )

across units and is assumed to be distributed i.i.d. U[-1,3] for the case of high cross dependence,
i.i.d. U[0, 0.2] for low cross dependence. The persistence of the factor measured by  is
assumed to be 0.2 and 0.8 for low and high persistence, respectively. The coefficient  in the
covariance matrix, Ω , reflects the degree of contemporaneous correlation of yi ,1,t and yi ,2,t

and is assumed to be 0.2 and 0.8 for low and high contemporaneous correlation. The coefficient
matrices Γ , Ω , Ψ , A are invariant across i and imply that ΨA ' has a reduced rank. Therefore,
one root of the model is equal to one and the other three are greater than one in absolute value.
The time and cross-section dimensions of the panel, T and N, respectively, are allowed take the
following values: {35, 50, 100} and {20, 50}. The estimators are compared in terms of mean
bias (mb), root mean squared error (rmse), standard deviation (stdv), and mean estimated standard
                 21
error (stde).
         The simulation procedure involves the following steps:
1. Drawing idiosyncratic residuals εi ,t from the bivariate normal distribution function, N (0, Ω) ,

       and common factor shocks t from a standard normal distribution, i.i.d. N(0,1), we generate

       a dataset Yi ,t  ( yi ,1,t , yi ,2,t ) ' for i=1,…N and t =1,…T, based on the DGP described in

       equation (A1).22
2. We estimate the following equations with Pesaran’s CCEP method including cross-sectional
       means of the regressand and regressors:

         yi ,1,t   i ,1  1,1 (eci ,t 1 )  1,1 (yi ,1,t 1 )  1,2 (yi ,2,t 1 )  ui ,1,t ,
                                                                                                                       (A3)
         yi ,2,t   i ,2   2,1 (eci ,t 1 )   2,1 (yi ,1,t 1 )   2,2 (yi ,2,t 1 )  ui ,2,t ,

        where, eci ,t 1  yi ,1,t 1  1.0 yi ,2,t 1 and obtain estimates of the vector of slope

        parameters   ( 1,1 ,  2,1 , 1,1 , 1,2 ,  2,1 ,  2,2 ) .



21
     Denoting ̂ as the estimate of  , we can define the mean bias of estimates as the average of   
                                                                                                       ˆ , stde as the
                                                          R                                        R
average of the standard error of ̂ , stdv              (ˆ  ˆ )2 / R     , and rmse          (ˆ  )2 / R , where R is the
                                                         i 1                                     i 1

number of iterations.
22
     We initialize the first two time series observations using values in our actual dataset.

                                                                        45
3. Repeating steps 1 and 2 2000 times, we construct the mean bias, root mean squared error of
  estimates, standard deviation and mean estimated standard error across all iterations.
        Simulation results are reported in Tables A1 – A4 for different configurations of
underlying parameters and dimensions of time series length and cross-section size. Results from
the benchmark model with high cross dependence of variables across units (  i ~ i.i.d. U[-1,3] ) ,

low persistence of common factor movements (  = 0.2), and low contemporaneous correlation
among variables(  =0.2) are reported in Table A1 for different panel dimensions.. Table A2
reports results with low cross-dependence across i (low  i ) , while leaving the other parameters

the same as in Table A1. Tables A3 and A4 report results with high  i and  , but low  , and

with high  i and  , but low  , respectively.
      Summarizing the most salient results: (i) An increase in panel size N, for a given T, has
only a limited effect on the magnitude of mean bias, but it decreases the standard deviation and
root mean squared error of estimates. However, an increase in time dimension T, for a given N,
decreases the magnitude of the bias as well as that of the other above-mentioned statistics; (ii)
The mean estimated standard error is generally very close to the standard deviation, implying
that it may be appropriate to use the standard error of CCEP estimates for statistical inference;
and (iii) For the estimated responses to the error correction terms, 1,1 ,  2,1 , our main variables of

interest, the mean biases are always positive, implying the CCEP estimates tend to overstate the
true speed of adjustment (in absolute value). Moreover the magnitude of the mean bias as well
as the standard errors associated with these coefficient estimates are comparable.


B. Derivation of omitted variable bias:


  Consider the following equation:
         qijk,t  cqkk ,ij  qkk1,ij qijk,t -1  qkk 3,ij qij ,t -1   qkk ,ij ,t .                         (A1)

Omitting qij,t 1 from (A1) and then augmenting the resulting equation with cross-section means:

         qijk,t  Wt ij  qkk1,ij qijk,t 1  vqkk ,ij ,t ,                                                  (A2)

where Wt  (1, qtk , qtk-1 ) and  ij =(cqkk ,ij , ij1 , ij2 ) . The matrix representation of equation (A2) is:


                                                                                   46
             Qijk  W  ij  Qijk,1 qkk1,ij  Vijk ,

where, Qijk  (qijk,2 , qijk,3 ,...., qijk,T ); W =(W2,W3,.....WT ); Qijk,-1  (qijk,1 , qijk,2 ,...., qijk,T 1 );

Vijk =(vijk,2 , vijk,3 ,.....vijk,T );

    Based on equation (A1), the regression equation augmented with cross-section means is:

             qijk,t  Rt ij  qkk1,ij qijk,t 1  qkk 3,ij qij ,t 1   qkk ,ij ,t ,

where, Rt  (Wt , qt -1 ); ij  (cqkk ,ij , ij1 , ij2 , ij )  ( ij , ij ). The matrix representation of the above

equation is :

             Qijk  Rij  Qijk,-1qkk1,ij  Qij ,-1qkk 3,ij  ijk .                                                          (A3)

where R  ( R2 , R3 ,....RT ); Qij ,-1  (qij ,1 , qij ,2 ,...., qij ,T 1 ); ijk =( ijk,2 ,  ijk,3 ,..... ijk,T ) .

    Plugging equation (A3) into the pooling estimates of ̂k1 from equation (A2), one can derive

the following equation with some simple manipulation.

                        N                                N                                   N                      N
             ˆ k1 =( Qijk,1 M w Qijk,1 ) 1  Qijk,1 M w Q1  ( Qijk,1 M w Qijk,1 )1 ( Qijk,1 M w Qij ,1  k 3 )
                       ij 1                            ij 1                               ij 1                  ij 1
                                N                                  N
                           ( Qijk,1 M w Qijk,1 ) 1 ( Qijk,1 M wijk )   k1
                               ij 1                              ij 1



where, M w  I - W ( W W )-1W  ; Q-1  (q2 , q3 ,....., qT ).

                k1             N                          N                       N                           N
             E      k1  ( Qijk,-1
                                     
                                         M w Qijk,-1 )1 ( Qijk,1 M w Q1 ) +( Qijk,1 M w Qijk,1 )1 ( Qijk,1 M w Qij ,1 )  k 3
                           ij 1                      ij 1                   ij 1                       ij 1




                          =  k1  Bias




                                                                                   47
    Table A1: Simulation results with high  i , low  and low 
T N                ρ11      δ11       δ12     ρ21       δ21     δ22
35 20      mb     0.046    0.023    -0.038   0.045    -0.040   0.032
          stdv    0.023    0.044    0.046    0.023    0.043    0.047
           stde   0.022    0.040    0.043    0.023    0.041    0.043
          rmse    0.052    0.049    0.060    0.051    0.059    0.057
50 20      mb     0.031    0.014    -0.026   0.029    -0.027   0.022
          stdv    0.017    0.036    0.039    0.018    0.035    0.038
           stde   0.016    0.033    0.035    0.016    0.032    0.035
          rmse    0.035    0.038    0.047    0.034    0.044    0.044
100 20     mb     0.014    0.007    -0.014   0.013    -0.014   0.010
          stdv    0.010    0.024    0.025    0.010    0.023    0.026
           stde   0.009    0.022    0.024    0.009    0.022    0.024
          rmse    0.017    0.025    0.029    0.017    0.027    0.028
35 50      mb     0.046    0.022    -0.038   0.043    -0.038   0.032
          stdv    0.016    0.027    0.029    0.017    0.026    0.029
           stde   0.014    0.026    0.027    0.015    0.025    0.027
          rmse    0.049    0.035    0.048    0.046    0.046    0.043
50 50      mb     0.030    0.015    -0.026   0.029    -0.028   0.022
          stdv    0.011    0.022    0.023    0.011    0.022    0.023
           stde   0.010    0.021    0.022    0.011    0.021    0.022
          rmse    0.032    0.027    0.035    0.031    0.035    0.032
100 50     mb     0.014    0.007    -0.013   0.013    -0.013   0.010
          stdv    0.006    0.015    0.016    0.006    0.014    0.016
           stde   0.006    0.014    0.015    0.006    0.014    0.015
          rmse    0.015    0.016    0.020    0.015    0.020    0.019

Notes: mb, stdv, stde, and rmse denote the mean bias, standard
deviation, mean estimated standard error, and root mean square of
CCEP estimates of equation system (A3) for parameters  i ~i.i.d. U[-
1,3],  =0.2,  = 0.2. T and N are the number of time-series
observations and cross-section units, respectively.




                                   48
Table A2: Simulation results with low  i , low  , and low 

 T N                ρ11     δ11       δ12      ρ21       δ21     δ22
 35 20      mb     0.045   0.021    -0.038    0.043    -0.037   0.029
           stdv    0.022   0.042    0.044     0.023    0.041    0.045
            stde   0.022   0.040    0.042     0.022    0.040    0.043
           rmse    0.050   0.047    0.058     0.049    0.056    0.054
 50 20      mb     0.029   0.014    -0.025    0.028    -0.027   0.022
           stdv    0.016   0.035    0.036     0.016    0.033    0.037
            stde   0.016   0.032    0.035     0.016    0.032    0.035
           rmse    0.033   0.037    0.044     0.033    0.042    0.043
100 20      mb     0.014   0.006    -0.014    0.013    -0.013   0.010
           stdv    0.009   0.023    0.025     0.010    0.023    0.025
            stde   0.009   0.022    0.024     0.010    0.022    0.024
           rmse    0.017   0.024    0.028     0.016    0.026    0.027
 35 50      mb     0.044   0.022    -0.037    0.042    -0.037   0.031
           stdv    0.016   0.027    0.029     0.016    0.026    0.029
            stde   0.014   0.025    0.027     0.014    0.025    0.027
           rmse    0.047   0.035    0.047     0.045    0.045    0.042
 50 50      mb     0.029   0.014    -0.026    0.028    -0.026   0.021
           stdv    0.011   0.021    0.023     0.011    0.022    0.023
            stde   0.010   0.021    0.022     0.010    0.020    0.022
           rmse    0.031   0.026    0.034     0.029    0.034    0.031
100 50      mb     0.014   0.006    -0.013    0.013    -0.013   0.010
           stdv    0.006   0.014    0.015     0.006    0.014    0.015
            stde   0.006   0.014    0.015     0.006    0.014    0.015
           rmse    0.015   0.016    0.020     0.014    0.020    0.018

Notes: mb, stdv, stde, and rmse denote the mean bias, standard
deviation, mean estimated standard error, and root mean square of
CCEP estimates for the parameter set  i ~i.i.d. U[0, 0.2],  =0.2,  =
0.2. T and N are the number of time-series observations and cross-
section units, respectively.




                                   49
 Table A3: Simulation results with high  i , high  , and low 

 T N                 ρ11     δ11       δ12     ρ21       δ21        δ22
 35 20      mb      0.059   0.031    -0.049   0.057    -0.047      0.040
           stdv     0.027   0.046     0.047   0.028    0.046       0.048
            stde    0.024   0.041     0.044   0.024    0.040       0.043
           rmse     0.064   0.055     0.068   0.063    0.066       0.062
 50 20      mb      0.038   0.021    -0.036   0.036    -0.034      0.027
           stdv     0.018   0.036     0.037   0.018    0.036       0.038
            stde    0.017   0.033     0.035   0.018    0.033       0.035
           rmse     0.042   0.042     0.052   0.040    0.049       0.046
 100 20     mb      0.017   0.009    -0.018   0.016    -0.017      0.012
           stdv     0.011   0.024     0.027   0.010    0.024       0.027
            stde    0.010   0.022     0.024   0.010    0.022       0.024
           rmse     0.020   0.026     0.032   0.019    0.029       0.029
 35 50      mb      0.060   0.031    -0.047   0.057    -0.048      0.042
           stdv     0.019   0.029     0.029   0.020    0.028       0.029
            stde    0.015   0.026     0.027   0.016    0.025       0.027
           rmse     0.063   0.042     0.055   0.060    0.055       0.052
 50 50      mb      0.038   0.022    -0.032   0.036    -0.032      0.028
           stdv     0.012   0.022     0.023   0.012    0.022       0.023
            stde    0.011   0.021     0.022   0.011    0.021       0.022
           rmse     0.040   0.031     0.040   0.038    0.038       0.036
 100 50     mb      0.017   0.010    -0.016   0.016    -0.016      0.014
           stdv     0.006   0.015     0.016   0.006    0.015       0.016
            stde    0.006   0.014     0.015   0.006    0.014       0.015
           rmse     0.018   0.018     0.022   0.017    0.021       0.021

Notes: mb, stdv, stde, and rmse denote the mean bias, standard deviation, mean estimated
standard error, and root mean square of CCEP estimates for the parameter set  i ~i.i.d.
U[-1, 3],  =0.2,  = 0.8. T and N are the number of time-series observations and cross-
section units, respectively.




                                    50
Table A4: Simulation results with high  i , low  and high 

T N                 ρ11     δ11         δ12    ρ21     δ21       δ22
35 20      mb      0.046   0.008    -0.023    0.043   -0.049    0.042
          stdv     0.021   0.066     0.072    0.021    0.067    0.074
           stde    0.020   0.062     0.069    0.020    0.062    0.069
          rmse     0.050   0.066     0.076    0.048    0.083    0.085
50 20      mb      0.031   0.006    -0.017    0.029   -0.032    0.026
          stdv     0.014   0.054     0.061    0.015    0.054    0.061
           stde    0.014   0.050     0.056    0.014    0.050    0.056
          rmse     0.034   0.055     0.064    0.032    0.062    0.066
100 20     mb      0.014   0.003    -0.009    0.013   -0.016    0.013
          stdv     0.008   0.037     0.041    0.008    0.037    0.041
           stde    0.008   0.034     0.039    0.008    0.034    0.039
          rmse     0.017   0.037     0.042    0.016    0.040    0.043
35 50      mb      0.046   0.010    -0.024    0.043   -0.046    0.041
          stdv     0.015   0.043     0.044    0.015    0.043    0.044
           stde    0.013   0.039     0.043    0.013    0.039    0.043
          rmse     0.048   0.044     0.050    0.046    0.063    0.061
50 50      mb      0.030   0.007    -0.016    0.028   -0.031    0.027
          stdv     0.010   0.035     0.037    0.010    0.034    0.036
           stde    0.009   0.031     0.035    0.009    0.031    0.035
          rmse     0.032   0.035     0.040    0.030    0.046    0.046
100 50     mb      0.014   0.003    -0.008    0.013   -0.016    0.014
          stdv     0.005   0.022     0.025    0.005    0.022    0.025
           stde    0.005   0.022     0.024    0.005    0.021    0.024
          rmse     0.015   0.022     0.026    0.014    0.027    0.028

Notes: mb, stdv, stde, and rmse denote the mean bias, standard deviation, mean
estimated standard error, and root mean square of CCEP estimates for the parameter
set  i ~i.i.d. U[-1,3],  = 0.2,  =0.8. T and N are the number of time-series
observations and cross-section units, respectively.




                                   51
