                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE TRADE CREATION EFFECT OF IMMIGRANTS:
                  EVIDENCE FROM THE REMARKABLE CASE OF SPAIN

                                          Giovanni Peri
                                        Francisco Requena

                                       Working Paper 15625
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15625


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2009




We are very thankful to Miklos Koren for very useful comments. Requena acknowledges financial
support from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (project number ECO 2008-04059/ECON),
Generalitat Valenciana (program PROMETEO/2009/098) and Jose Castillejo Schoolarship, which
sponsored his stay at University of California Davis during the academic year 2008-2009. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Giovanni Peri and Francisco Requena. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Trade Creation Effect of Immigrants: ¸˛ Evidence from the Remarkable Case of Spain
Giovanni Peri and Francisco Requena
NBER Working Paper No. 15625
December 2009
JEL No. F10,F22,R12

                                               ABSTRACT

There is abundant evidence that immigrant networks are associated with larger exports from the country
where they settle to their countries of origin. The direction of causality of this association is less clearly
established. Also, we do not know to what extent these increased exports are due to an increase in
the number of exporting firms (i.e. the extensive margin of trade) or due to larger values exported
by existing firm (i.e. the intensive margin). Using micro data on individual trade transactions from
Spanish provinces between 1995 and 2008 and data on the stock of immigrants in those provinces
by country of origin we can make progress on both fronts. The richness of our data allows us to control
for a large set of fixed effects and to use an instrumental variable strategy to isolate the export creation
effect of new immigrants. We are also able to quantify the impact of immigrants on the intensive and
extensive margin of trade and how it varies between homogeneous, moderately differentiated and
differentiated goods. Our findings can be interpreted, in the light of the Chaney (2008) gravity model,
as consistent with the idea that immigrants reduce the fixed costs of trade. As implied by a decrease
in fixed trade costs in that model we find that immigrants significantly increase exports (elasticity
of 0.10), that the effect is almost entirely due to an increase in the extensive margin and that the effect
is somewhat stronger for differentiated goods.


Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu

Francisco Requena
Universidad de Valencia, Spain
francisco.requena@uv.es
1     Introduction

Since the pioneering work of Gould (1994) and Head and Reis (1998) economists have found empirical evidence
that, controlling for bilateral transport costs, larger bilateral migration networks are associated with larger
trade flows. Immigration networks, by providing channels of knowledge diﬀusion, and enforcement mechanisms,
reduce the information, communication and set-up costs between locations (Rauch and Trindale, 2002). Gravity-
type regressions uncover a significant correlation between immigrant networks and trade, suggesting immigrants
create trade by reducing trade costs.
    Our paper goes beyond the existing literature in several important ways. First, as we can use micro-data on
individual trade transactions for 50 Spanish provinces and 77 foreign countries over 14 years (1995-2008), we
can decompose the eﬀects of immigrants on the extensive margin of trade (i.e. the number of transactions in
this study) and on the intensive margin of trade (i.e. the average amount per transaction). Second, as in Rauch
and Trindale (2002), we are able to use trade data for diﬀerent types of goods, classifying them according to
their elasticity of substitution across varieties. This allows us to identify the importance of networks in reducing
information costs which should be more relevant for more diﬀerentiated rather than for homogeneous goods.
Third, as we can include province-country bilateral fixed eﬀects (which, for example, control for bilateral trade
costs, geography and cultural similarity) and for country-time eﬀects we can identify the export creation eﬀect
on the within-pair change in trade as consequence of changes in the stock of immigrants. To reinforce our causal
interpretation, we use historical immigrant enclaves as an instrument for current immigration. The tendency of
people from the same country to settle in the same areas over time provides supply-driven variation in the inflow
of immigrants (see for instance Card 2001, 2007; Ottaviano and Peri 2006) that should be uncorrelated with
other sources of changes in exports. Finally, we analyze whether the elasticity of export creation to immigrants
varies with the size of the immigrant community. By splitting the sample across provinces and then over time
we can test whether the elasticity is significantly larger in provinces with larger shares of immigrants and/or in
periods of increased immigration.
    We have three main findings. First, we find an average eﬀect of immigrants on exports that is statistically
and economically significant. An increase by 10% of the immigrant community from a country in a Spanish
province increases the exports to that country between 0.5 and 1%. Second, in most cases the largest part of the
export creation eﬀect is due to an increase in the number of trade transactions (i.e. the extensive margin) with
little to no eﬀect on the volume of the average transaction (i.e. the intensive margin). Third, there is a pattern
of larger export creation for highly diﬀerentiated goods than for homogeneous goods towards most countries.
However, there is some heterogeneity in this result. For regions likely to have large fixed trade costs, such as
Africa, the export creation eﬀect is the same across all good categories. While for countries culturally similar
to Spain, such as those in Latin America, immigrants do not have a special role to play in reducing fixed trade


                                                         2
costs. Finally, we also find the elasticity of export to new immigrants is large in provinces with high density
of immigrants and it increased during the most recent period (2002-2008) when the immigrate population grew
substantially relative to the native population.
   Chaney’s (2008) theory provides a foundation for our empirical gravity equation and a theory of the relation
between trade costs and the margins of trade thus rationalizing our findings. In that model, a reduction in
the fixed bilateral costs of trade (e.g. start-up costs) should only act to increase trade on the extensive margin
(i.e. by increasing the number of exporting firms) and not on the intensive margin (i.e. by increasing the
volume of trade within firms). A decrease in the variable trade cost (e.g. ad valorem duties), however, increases
trade on both margins. Moreover, a decrease in the fixed trade costs has a larger eﬀect on the trade volume
of more diﬀerentiated goods (those with low elasticity of substitution) because the contribution to exports of
new entrants is larger for these goods while a decrease in variable costs will aﬀect all goods equally. Hence, the
empirical findings that immigrants mainly aﬀect the extensive margin of export and that they have a larger
eﬀect on diﬀerentiated goods can be consistently interpreted, within the context of the Chaney (2008) model,
as evidence that a larger community of immigrants reduces the fixed costs (rather than the variable costs) of
exporting to their countries of origin.
   Several studies, since Gould (1994), have analyzed the correlation between trade flows and the stock of
immigrants in the context of a gravity regression. Recently new data on trade between sub-national units (e.g.
US states and Canadian provinces) and foreign countries as well as on the stock of immigrants by nationality have
become available. These new data and a more solid theoretical foundation for the gravity equation of trade
flows1 , have spurred a series of analyses that explore connections between local agglomerations of migrants
and exports from the area to the countries of origin of immigrants. Those studies, whose sample, method of
estimation and main estimates are summarized in Table 1, have generally found a robust correlation between
stock of immigrants and exports. The estimated elasticities, reported in Column 2 of Table 1, range between
0.01 and 0.40 with most estimates in the interval 0.1-0.2, which contain our main estimate of 0.11 2 .                     Most
of the studies reported in Table 1 use national trade data (rather than provincial data), and a cross-sectional
approach (rather than panel). Notice that some of the cross-sectional regressions (Dunlevy 2006 and Rauch and
Trindale 2002) find elasticities much larger than ours (between 0.2 and 0.4). Most of the estimates, however,
are closer to our estimated range (around 0.10). Bandyopadhyay et al. (2008), the only study we found using
sub-national units in a panel (as we do), finds a coeﬃcient of immigrants on exports of 0.14 and Briant et
al. (2009), the only study we found using sub-national units in a European country (but in a cross section),
  1 Anderson   and Van Wincoop (2001), Helpman et al. (2008) and Chaney (2008).
  2 Other  studies of the impact of immigrants on trade (not reported in Table 1) include Co et al. (2004), Herander and Saavedra
(2005), for the U.S. Bryant and Law (2004) for New-Zealand, White and Tedesse (2007) for Australia. These studies usually find
complementarity between immigration and trade. For Spain, Blanes (2005) and Blanes and Martin-Muntaner (2006) investigate
the impact of immigration on intra-industry trade during the nineties, showing that the trade-immigration link is stronger among
highly diﬀerentiated products. Other studies such as, Combes, Lafourcade, and Mayer (2005) for France and Millimet and Osang
(2007) for the US have analyzed the connections between regional migration and regional trade within countries.


                                                               3
instrumenting for immigration flows find a coeﬃcient of immigrants on exports between 0.07 and 0.10, very close
to our range. Finally, Dunlevy and Hutchinson (1999) using historical data (1870-1910) from the US, Girma
and Yu (2002) using data from the UK and Wagner et al. (2002) using data from Canada find eﬀects not far
from 0.10 (elasticities of 0.08, 0.09 and 0.16 in order).
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the data on exports and immigration in
Spain. Section 3 provides a theoretical foundation for our augmented-gravity equation specification as well as
a framework to interpret the diﬀerential eﬀects of immigrants on the intensive and extensive margin and on
goods with diﬀerent degrees of diﬀerentiation. Section 4 presents the benchmark empirical results, discusses
several econometric issues and shows the decomposition of the export creation eﬀects between the intensive and
extensive margins. In that section, we also show the diﬀerential impact of immigrants on diﬀerentiated and
undiﬀerentiated goods. In Section 5 we explore some additional issues in the pro-trade eﬀect of immigration:
Did pro-trade eﬀects of new immigrants change over time? Do they vary systematically with the countries of
origin? Is the elasticity of trade to immigration changing with the size of immigrant network? Section 6 provides
some concluding remarks.



2     Data

Our dataset is obtained by merging two publicly available data sources. The trade data originate from the
ADUANAS-AEAT dataset provided by Ministerio de Economía y Hacienda. The information on the number
of foreign-born residents by province and country of origin is obtained from the Statistical Yearbook published
annually by the Spanish Statistical Oﬃce (INE). We define immigrants as residents born abroad with a foreign
nationality.3
    The trade dataset reports all the individual transactions (shipments) with detailed information on the
direction of trade (imports and exports), product, value (in thousands of Euros), weight, invoice currency,
type of product at the 8-digit Combined Nomenclature level between 52 Spanish provinces (Eurostat NUTS
III definition) and 190 trading partners since 1993. The data are measured in such a way that exports are
associated with the province of original shipment.4 The selection of trading partners limited to match the
available immigration data. There are 77 trading partners included in our analysis, which accounts for around
94 percent of total Spanish exports (and close to 100% of immigration) over the period analyzed. Table A1 in
the Appendix, lists the 77 countries of origin, grouped into 7 regions.5
   3 The trade data is publicly available at www.aeat.es/aeat/aeat.jsp?pg=aduanas/es_ES. The immigration stock data is publicly

available at www.ine.es/prodyser/pubweb/anuarios_mnu.htm
   4 Although the original database reports all the firm-level shipments, it is not possible to identify the firms. For that reason

we use the custom address of the transaction, that is, the province where the transaction was registered in order to aggregate the
number of shipments and the value of shipments at the 8-digit Combined Nomenclature level and at the province level.
   5 Table TA1 in the Technical Appendix reports the share of total Spanish trade with and the share of immigrants from each of

those seven world areas.



                                                                4
    We decompose total exports into the number of transactions, that we call the “extensive” margin, and the
average value per transaction, that we call the “intensive” margin. Each export transaction is invoiced by an
exporting firm to one foreign firm. Hence an increase in the number of export transactions captures either new
exporting firms or firms exporting a new product or new trading relations of existing firms with a new country
or higher frequency in transactions between existing trading partners. The first three elements constitute the
extensive margin of export at the firm-product level while the last one is part of the intensive margin considering
the firm-product as the unit. The correspondence between new exporting relations, considering the firm-product
as the relevant unit, and exporting transactions as we measure them is not perfect. Still we define the number of
transactions as our indicator of the extensive margin of exports, aware that it may produce a slight over-estimate
of such margin.
    Trade flows in our dataset are originally available at a very disaggregated product level (8-digit Combined
Nomenclature classification). We match this classification with the one proposed by Broda and Weinstein (2006)
to characterize the degree of diﬀerentiability of products. More specifically, they have calculated the import
demand elasticities for 2715 goods of the 5-digit SITC (rev. 3) system for the period 1990 and 2001. We first use
the correspondence table between 8-digit Combined Nomenclature (CN8) and the 5-digit SITC provided by the
European Statistical oﬃce (EUROSTAT).6 We then group the products into three broad categories according
to their elasticity of substitution as calculated by Broda and Weinstein (2006). Sectors with an elasticity below
2 across varieties are classified as highly diﬀerentiated; sectors with an elasticity between 2 and 3.5 are classified
as moderately diﬀerentiated and sectors with an elasticity above 3.5 are classified as less diﬀerentiated. Sectors
with low (high) elasticities of substitution correspond to goods that are more (less) diﬀerentiated.7 Table 2
reports the summary statistics for exports in each category of goods as well as for the average number of
transactions and the average value per transaction in representative years8 . Over the period 1995-2008 the
total value of exports has doubled between a typical Spanish province and a country of destination. While the
number of transactions by province-country pair has increased steady and has almost double at the end of the
period, the average value per transaction has decreased between 1995 and 2004 and then has increased strongly
over the period 2004-2008. By type of product, the number of transactions per province-country pair is larger
and the average value per transaction is smaller for highly diﬀerentiated products than for moderately and less
diﬀerentiated products.
    Our explanatory variable of interest is the stock of immigrants by country of origin and province of destin-
ation. Immigration is a recent phenomenon in Spain and it has increased very fast in recent years. In 2007,
the foreign-born represented about 10 percent of total population up from only 1 percent in 1993. The foreign
  6 Available  at http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/ramon.
  7 Broda   and Weinstein (2006) examine how well their estimates correspond to the classification proposed by Rauch (1999) to
characterize the degree of product diﬀerentiability of products: commodities, reference priced goods and diﬀerentiated goods. They
observe that the median elasticities of substitution are higher for commodities than for diﬀerentiated and reference priced goods.
   8 Table TA2 in the technical appendix reports the same figures relative to imports.




                                                                5
population grew steadily at an average rate of 17 percent per year from 0.4 million in 1993 to 4 million in
2007. The average yearly growth rate was 13 percent over the period 1993-2001 and accelerated to 23 percent
over the period 2002-2007. Table 3 shows the top 30 countries of origin of the immigrants in 2007 and (in the
last column) their ranking among top immigration countries in 1993. The comparison of the ranks gives an
idea of the change in composition of immigrants by country of origin. In 2007 the top five immigrant countries
measured by the number of foreign-born population were Morocco, Romania, Ecuador, Colombia and United
Kingdom. These five countries accounted for 53 percent of the total foreign population. The United Kingdom
was the most important country of origin in 1993 (13.6%) but British immigrants (and those from other EU
countries in general) have decreased in relative terms in the last fifteen years. In 2007 the UK was only the fifth
most important country of origin with a share of 5% of the total immigrant population. Other Non-EU coun-
tries have also gained positions in the 2007 ranking: a number of countries from Central and Eastern Europe
(Poland, Ukraine and Russia) and from South America (Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia) have also contributed in
large numbers to the growing number of immigrants in Spain. Another interesting feature of the immigration
in Spain is the uneven distribution of immigrants across Spanish provinces. Figure 1 shows the map of Spain
where provinces are colored according to their share of foreign-born in total population in 2007. While all but
three provinces in 1995 had a share of foreign-born in the population below 4 percent, in 2007 there were 17
provinces with shares above 10 percent.9
   An interesting example of the evolution over time of immigration and trade is illustrated in Figure 2. Before
2000, trade with Western Europe had been constant or growing and very large and similarly immigrants from
Western Europe were the most important group in relative terms. However, beginning in 1998 the stock of
immigrants from Western Europe decreased in relative importance. Figure 2, panel A, shows that immigrants
from Western Europe, as a share of total foreign-born, decreased beginning from 1998 to 2008 to only 40%
of its 1998 value. Following this trend with a short lag, Figure 2 panel A also shows that Western Europe
become a relatively less important trade partner. Its share in total trade decreased by 13 percentage points
over the 1998-2008 period. Conversely, panel B of Figure 2 shows that immigration from Eastern Europe picked
up dramatically between 1999 and 2008, increasing ten fold and trade with Eastern Europe also increased in
relative importance. Its share relative to total trade increased by 170 percentage points over the same period.
While this example is only suggestive, it reveals a correlation and implies a rough estimate for the elasticity of
export to new immigrants: associated with a 1% increase in the total share of immigrants, the share of trade
increased by around 0.2%. Obviously many other factors may have contributed to the joint shift of trade and
migration from Western to Eastern Europe and the role of migration on trade is not the only explanation for
the observed correlation. In the rest of the paper, we carefully analyze the trade creation eﬀect of immigrants.
  9 Table TA3 in the Technical Appendix shows the names of the Spanish provinces and whether their share of immigrants was

above 10%, between 4 and 10% of below 4% in 2007.



                                                            6
3      Foundations of the Empirical Model

The basic gravity-equation that we estimate to identify the impact of immigrants on exports describes the
logarithm of aggregate export  from province  to country  for period  as follows:


                                 ln( ) =  +  +   +  ln(  ) +  ln(  ).                                   (1)

    The term  represents a set of importing country by time eﬀects,  is a set of year dummies10 ,   are
                                                                                                                             11
province-country pair dummies,  and  are, respectively, the country and province gross output                               and
  is the total stock of immigrants from country  in province  in year . While this specification is
quite demanding as it controls for a very large set of fixed eﬀects, its advantage is that it is derived from the
recent model of Chaney (2008). For each sector, that model12 delivers the following equation describing the
determinant of exports  :

                                                                                                 µ          ¶
                                               −                                                     
                   ln( ) =  +     ln(  )   +   ln(  )   −  ln(  ) −           − 1 ln( )            (2)
                                                                                                     −1
                 −
    The term ln(  ) captures the exporting province wages ( ) and the exporting province income  .
It captures the competitiveness and the domestic market size for the exporting province. The term ln(  )
captures the importing country aggregate income ( ) and its remoteness from the rest of the world, ( ).13
The term   captures iceberg (proportional) transport costs (per unit of export) and  captures the fixed
costs for firms of province  to export in country . This equation is derived by aggregating the exports of firms
with heterogeneous productivity. By assuming that the bilateral variable costs,    are relatively constant over
time we can absorb the term  ln(  ) into a set of province-country dummies   . We can also absorb the eﬀect
                                                                             −
of remoteness ln( ) into the country by time eﬀects  and the term ln( ) assumed common to all provinces
will be captured by the time eﬀect   Hence the first four terms of equation (2) reduce to the corresponding
                                                                                             ³        ´
                                                                                               
four terms of equation (1). Once we account for these factors, the last term of equation (2), −1  − 1 ln( )
is the channel through which immigrants aﬀect trade. The presence of immigrants from country  in province 
allows firms in province  to know about rules and opportunities in country  and may reduce the information
costs and the costs of setting up business there. Immigrants may themselves become exporters and face much
lower set-up costs in exporting to their countries of origin. Hence an eﬀect of immigrants on fixed costs 
is likely. On the other hand variable costs   , proportional to the value of export, are usually associated
  1 0 Notice that when we will estimate equation 1 the pure time fixed eﬀect  will be absorbed by the country-year pair eﬀect  .
  1 1 Gross regional output and Gross Domestic Output are used to measure the variables  and  , respectively. Gross domestic
output is obtained from World Development Indicators (WDI 2008 on-line database) and gross regional output is reported in
Regional Accounts (INE). Regional values have been scaled to match Spanish GDP in WDI.
  1 2 See page 1714 of Chaney (2008).
  1 3 Remoteness is defined as a weighted average of the bilateral distances of a source country and its trading partners with weight

equal to the GDP of the trading partners.



                                                                    7
with transport and tariﬀ-costs which are less susceptible of being aﬀected by immigrants. We can represent
the relation between fixed costs and stock of immigrants as follows: ( ) = ln  (ln( )) with
                                                      ³          ´
                                                         
 ln   ln(Immigrants) 0. Hence the coeﬃcient  = − −1   − 1  ln   ln(Immigrants) 0 in equation (1),
is predicted by the model to be larger than zero and captures the eﬀect of immigrants on total exports through
a reduction of fixed costs. While the model is attractive because its natural to think immigrant networks reduce
the fixed (set-up) costs of trade,  , rather than the variable (proportional) costs,   , the advantage of using
the Chaney (2008) model is that it allows us to test two further implication of reducing fixed costs that would
diﬀer from those of reducing variable costs. First, the model predicts that the elasticity of total trade to fixed
bilateral costs depend inversely on , the elasticity of substitution across goods. Second, the elasticity to variable
costs depends only on , a measure of the dispersion of productivity across firms. Hence if we separate trade
flows into diﬀerentiated and homogeneous goods, the above equation would imply a larger coeﬃcient on ln( )
in the first case, while the coeﬃcient on ln(  ) would be the same in the two cases. Third, the model predicts
that if we decompose the total eﬀect of fixed costs  on total exports  , between the eﬀect on the intensive
margin of trade and on the extensive margin of trade we obtain no eﬀect on the first and the full eﬀect is on
the second margin14 . Change in variable costs, on the other hand, increase both the intensive and the extensive
margin of trade. In his notation (page 1717 of Chaney 2008):


                                ln                                                         
                           −             =              0
                                                       |{z}         +              −1       =       −1
                                ln                                     | −{z
                                                                                 1 }            −1
                                               Intensive margin
                                                                        Extensive margin
                                                     Elasticity
                                                                            Elasticity

    The intuitive rationale for the decomposition is as follows. The amount sold by each exporting firm in each
country  (that is optimal in monopolistic competition) depends on its own productivity and on the demand
of the good in country  that in turn depends on that country income  , its remoteness  and the variable
trade costs   . However, as in any model with CES utility (and constant elasticity demand) the optimal price
and quantity produced by a firm does not depend on the fixed trade costs. However, the productivity threshold
for the exporting firm does depend on the fixed trade costs, hence changing those will aﬀect only the extensive
margin (number of exporting firms) and not the amount exported by each individual firm.15
  1 4 The intensive margin in the Chaney model is defined as the increase in average product per firm for the existing trading firms

(rather than for all firms). The extensive margin is the increase in total export due to new firms. These are similar but not identical
to our definition of intensive margin as the change in average value per export transaction ( ) and extensive margin as the change
in number of export transactions ( )
  1 5 The decomposition of the eﬀect of variable costs on the two margins (page 1716 of Chaney 2008) is as follows:

                                       ln 
                                  −              =         −1          +       −−1           =
                                       ln                                
                                                     Intensive margin       Extensive margin
                                                         Elasticity            Elasticity
  Hence its variation would aﬀect both the extensive and intensive margin of trade.


                                                                    8
    In sections 4 and 5 we estimate equation (1) separately on highly, medium and less diﬀerentiated goods and
we also separate the eﬀect of immigrants on the extensive and on the intensive margin of exports estimating two
separate equations with the same right hand side as 1 but with ln( ) and ln( ) as dependent variables. The
first regression, respectively, identifies the eﬀect on the number of exporting relations  (extensive margin)
and the second identifies the eﬀect on the average value of an existing export relation  (intensive margin).
Recall that ln( ) = ln( ) + ln( ). As measure of immigrants,    we use the total number of
foreign-born individuals residing in province  at time  − 1 and born in country .16 These estimates, besides
their empirical relevance, would allow us to discriminate, within the context of the Chaney (2008) model,
whether the immigrant network operates through reducing fixed or variable trade costs.



4     Main Results

Table 4 shows the results of estimating equation (1) and two less demanding alternative specifications. The
preferred specification (1) accounts for a full set of 2800 trading partners-pair eﬀects (which capture bilateral
time-invariant transport costs due to distance, geography, culture and national and local institutions) and
988 country-year eﬀects (accounting for all importing-country aggregate shocks) over the period 1995-2008.
Estimates for this specification are shown in column (1) of table 4. In this specification the estimated eﬀect
of immigration on trade is identified only by the variation within a trading-pair over time. The estimated
elasticity is very significant and equal to 11%. As some of the cells have either no immigrants or no trade we
add one unit to the dependent variable  and to the explanatory variable   before taking logs. To
account explicitly for a diﬀerent baseline level of exports in cells with no immigrants in column (2) we include
a dummy variable,   , that takes value of 1 if   = 0 and a value of 0 otherwise. The estimated
coeﬃcient on   is not statistically significant and the change in the coeﬃcient of ln(  ) relative to
column (1) is small (-0.02) and not statistically significant. This implies that there is no discontinuous change
in the impact of immigrants on exports going from no immigrants to some of them or increasing their number
when some are already present. Quantitatively the estimate of column (1) implies that doubling the number of
immigrants from a country in a province would increase the exports of the province to that country by around
8% (20110 ≈ 1079). In columns (3) and (4) of table 4 we omit country-by-year eﬀects  in equation (1) (with
or without the zero-immigration dummy). This would be equivalent to assuming that the “remoteness” measure
of the importing country (ln( ) in equation (2)) does not change much over time. We still allow trade-pair
specific costs and include year eﬀects. The estimates of the coeﬃcient on ln(  ) are significantly higher
compared to those in our preferred specification, which suggests that some time-varying characteristics of the
countries of origin have an impact on trade and are correlated with ln(  ) and, if not controlled for,
 1 6 Similarly,   to reduce simultaneity issues we use total income at time  − 1 to measure the variable ln(  )


                                                                     9
can bias the estimated eﬀect up. In columns (5) and (6) we eliminate trading-pair fixed eﬀects and explicitly
include a set of time-invariant bilateral cost variables (log of distance, a contiguity dummy, a common language
dummy and a EU-EFTA dummy) as well as province plus country fixed eﬀects.17 This specification is similar
to those used to estimate gravity regressions in the cross-sectional regressions (e.g. Head and Ries 1998, Rauch
and Trindale 2002). While such specifications (with or without the no immigrant dummy) omit many fixed
eﬀects (that should be included according to Chaney’s model) they produce estimates on the variable of interest
(ln(  )) not too diﬀerent from those in columns (1) and (2).
   In table A2 of the Appendix we explore how sensitive is the estimated coeﬃcient on ln(  ) to the ex-
clusion of zero-trade observations using several alternative estimation methods. While in our main specification
we add one euro to all exports and hence include all observations, it is common practice to estimate gravity
equations using only non-zero observations (Bandyopadhyay et al, 2008). Column (1) in table A2 shows the
estimates obtained from the basic specification (Table 4, column 1) including and excluding zero export pairs
(row one and two, respectively), column (2) shows the estimates from the alternative specification (table 4,
column 3), column (3) uses a Tobit estimator censored at 0 to estimate the coeﬃcients and column (4) shows
the results using a Poisson estimator (to be preferred according to Santos-Silva and Tenreyro, 2006). The results
shown in table A2 imply that the estimated eﬀect with or without the inclusion of zero observations are close,
with slightly larger estimates when including the zeros. For instance, in the basic specification the eﬀect of
immigration on exports is estimated to be 0.11 when including the zero-export cells, and 0.068 when excluding
them. The Tobit specification, truncated at 0 and the Poisson specification (that estimates the dependent
variable in levels rather than in logarithm) estimate elasticity between 0.10 and 0.14.
   While our basic approach, based on a panel regression with a large set of dummies, is already much more
demanding relative to the one usually implemented in the literature, we take another step to ascertain that
we are identifying the causal export creation eﬀect of immigrants: we implement an instrumental variable
approach. While never applied to the trade and migration literature this approach is common in the literature
that analyzes the wage and employment impact of immigrants (e.g. Card 2001, Ottaviano and Peri 2006, Card
2009). In particular, in order to instrument the changes in immigrants in a particular province we use the
imputed net inflow of immigrants calculated as follows. Using the distribution of immigrants by nationality,
across provinces in 1993, (well before the extraordinary expansion of immigration flows) we attribute to each
group in each province the net growth of immigrants from that nationality to Spain. If immigrants tend to
settle, at least initially, where other persons of the same nationality are already settled, then this constructed
inflow of immigrants will be correlated to the actual one. On the other hand, as it is based on the distribution of
immigrants across provinces as of 1993, the constructed flows are not aﬀected by any province-specific demand
  1 7 Geodesic distance between Spanish provinces and countries have been constructed following the same methodology proposed

by www.cepii.fr. See Technical Appendix for details.



                                                             10
shock during the considered period.18 Column (1) of table 5 presents the results of the first stage of the two-step
least square estimation, using the described instrument. In our preferred specification including country-year
dummies in the first stage we obtained a coeﬃcient on the constructed immigration (instrument) of 0.554 with
an standard error of 0.003. The instrument has an F-statistics of more than 300 and hence is very strong.
In the second stage (Column 2) of table 5, the estimated coeﬃcient for immigrants on exports is about 0.05,
significantly diﬀerent from 0. As would be implied by the presence of endogeneity (and omitted variable) bias
the 2SLS estimate is smaller than the OLS one. It is, however, still significant and precisely estimated. An
exogenous change in the stock of immigrants by 1% would produce an increase in trade from the province to the
country of origin of those immigrants by 0.05%. In column (3) of Table 5 we also include among the controls the
lagged value of trade flows. Due to autocorrelation of bilateral trade flows such specification would identify the
eﬀect on new immigrants only on the change in trade flows from one year to the other. The eﬀects on exports
are estimated to be still significant with an elasticity close to 0.06.19
    Table 4 and 5 provide robust and consistent evidence that a causal eﬀect from immigrants to export flows
exists for Spanish provinces and its elasticity is between 0.05 and 0.11.20 We now decompose the eﬀect of
immigration on exports by estimating specification (1) but using ln  (the number of export transactions
between province  and country ) and ln  (the average value in Euros of each transaction between province
 and country ) as dependent variables. We consider the part of trade due to changes in ln  as the eﬀect
on the extensive margin of trade and the part due to changes in ln  as the eﬀect on the intensive margin of
trade.
    Table 6, panel A shows the eﬀects of immigrants on exports (estimated using OLS in column 1 and 2SLS
in column 4) and its decomposition on the extensive margin (reported in column 2 for OLS and 5 for 2SLS)
and on the intensive margin (reported in columns 3 and 6). In columns 1-3 we estimate the model using the
OLS estimator. In columns 4-6 we use 2SLS method with imputed immigrants as instrument. The sum of the
estimated coeﬃcients on the intensive and extensive margin of trade must be equal to the estimated coeﬃcient
on total value of trade in each specification (Bernard et al, 2007). Considering all traded goods together (panel
A of table 6), we find that immigrants aﬀect mostly the extensive margin of exports and very little, if at all,
the intensive margin. Immigrants in Spanish provinces increases the number of transactions from that province
to their home country. This is consistent with the interpretation that migration networks decrease the fixed
  1 8 Forsome countries of origin of the immigrants the initial year is 1996 or 1997. See Table A1 for the list of countries.
  1 9 Aswe have included trading-partner fixed eﬀects in our estimation and a lagged dependent variable we are aware of the potential
Nickell bias that may arise. We rely on the length of the time dimension of the panel (T=14 years) to reduce such bias that depend
inversely on T (Nickell, 1981).
  2 0 The structural model described in the previous chapter produces an estimating equation relative to exports from Spanish

provinces. This is what we estimate and present in the paper. We also estimated similar specifications for Spanish imports. Those
estimates are shown in Tables TA4-TA9 in the Technical Appendix. In general, we find that the eﬀect of migrant networks on
imports is usually smaller and less precisely estimated than on exports. On the one hand, immigrants may be crucial to reduce
information costs of exporting to less developed countries but not importing from them, as exporters from those countries already
know Spain well. On the other hand, it is more diﬃcult to identify the province of actual final use of the imported goods so that
the data on import may be aﬀected by larger measurement error that would produce an attenuation bias on the coeﬃcient.


                                                                 11
bilateral trade costs. Considering both the OLS and the 2SLS estimates, 82-100% of the positive total eﬀect
is explained by the eﬀect on the extensive margin. Also, in both the OLS and 2SLS estimates, the eﬀects are
estimated precisely so that we can reject any eﬀect on the intensive margin that is larger than 0.03.
    Panels B, C and D of Table 6 separate the estimates between non-diﬀerentiated, moderately diﬀerentiated
and highly diﬀerentiated goods.21             Again the largest eﬀect of immigration on exports in each category of
goods takes place through the extensive margin. The eﬀect on the extensive margin is always significant and
quantitatively larger than the eﬀect on the intensive margin that is significantly diﬀerent from 0 only in three
out of six cases. Hence, independently of the type of traded goods, immigrant networks seem to operate by
extending the number of new trade relations with the country of origin of immigrants.
    By separating goods according to their degree of diﬀerentiation, the estimates of Table 6 can also be used
to test another implication of immigration aﬀecting fixed trade costs: its eﬀect should be larger for more
diﬀerentiated goods. Panel B through D of Table 6 show the elasticity of trade to immigration for those three
types of goods. Our point estimates support only in part this implication. When ranked by magnitudes, the 2SLS
estimates conform to predictions: the elasticity of exports to immigration equal to 0.13 for highly diﬀerentiated
export goods, to 0.115 for medium diﬀerentiated goods and to 0.113 for less diﬀerentiated goods. The diﬀerences,
however, are not too large and not statistically significant. On the other hand the OLS estimates show that the
eﬀect of immigration is larger for moderately than for highly and less diﬀerentiated exports. Taken together
the estimates by type of good do not contradict, (but do not provide strong support either) for the model
predictions. Closer inspection (described in the next section), however, reveals that these eﬀects, especially
those obtained with OLS method, can be explained when we allow the eﬀect of immigrants on trade to be
heterogeneous across region of origin.



5     Extensions

In this section we examine other dimensions of our data that may aﬀect the export-immigration nexus. Two
issues are of particular interest to us. First we test if the export creation eﬀect of immigrants is particularly
large for countries of origin whose level of development is lower or whose cultural distance from Spain is larger.
Both instances would contribute to increase the initial fixed costs of trade so that immigrants may have a larger
impact in reducing it. Second we would like to know if the elasticity of export creation to immigrants is roughly
constant or if it depends on the size of the specific immigrant community or on the overall density of immigrants
in the province or on the period considered.
    Dunlevy (2006) shows that immigrates eﬀect on US exports is less important when Spanish or English is the
language of the origin country. Girma and Yu (2002), Dunlevy (2006) and Briant et al. (2009) have noticed
 2 1 The   definition follows Broda and Weinstein (2006) and is specified in Section 2.


                                                                  12
that the largest trade-creation eﬀect of immigrants in the UK, US and France, respectively, tend to be towards
those countries whose institutions are less developed and whose cultural and development distance is larger.
These findings suggest heterogeneity of the export creation eﬀect of immigrants across origin countries and
regions. Our expectation is that in trading with countries where there are severe problems of ineﬃciency of
institutions, lack of contract enforcement as well as diﬀerences in habits and cultural norms relative to Spanish
ones (e.g. African countries), the fixed trade costs are very high. Hence the presence of immigrant networks
could decrease fixed trade costs and this would increase trade no matter how diﬀerentiated is the good. On
the other hand, when trading with developed or culturally similar countries (e.g. European countries), fixed
costs of trade are not large and the presence of a network of immigrants would be expected to predominantly
aﬀect the transmission of complex information that is likely to be more relevant in the trade of complex and
diﬀerentiated goods.22 Finally when trading with countries with similar language and norms (such as Latin
American countries), fixed costs of trade may be low to begin with and so the eﬀect of immigrants on those cost
may be minimal. This suggests immigrants impact on exports will be small for these countries.
    In table 7, therefore, we estimate the eﬀects of immigration on exports (still using specification 1) separately
across regions of immigration (and trade), across types of goods and across the intensive and extensive margins.23
The results reveal a pattern that for the most relevant regions is very consistent with our priors and with the
interpretation of migrants reducing fixed trade costs. For trade between Spanish provinces and European
countries reported in the first two rows of table 7 (Western and Eastern/Southern Europe that together account
for more than 70% of Spanish exports) the pattern of the coeﬃcients is exactly as predicted by a reduction of
fixed costs. Considering the total eﬀect of immigrants, the coeﬃcient is largest on export of highly diﬀerentiated
goods, it is intermediate on the export of moderately diﬀerentiated goods and it is the smallest on the export
of less diﬀerentiated goods. The diﬀerences, especially between the coeﬃcients in column (1) and (7) are very
significant. Moreover the estimated coeﬃcients are statistically significant only for highly diﬀerentiated goods.
Also, in most estimates of the first two rows the eﬀect on the extensive margin is larger and more statistically
significant than the eﬀect on the intensive one. The impact of immigration on exports to the other OECD and
Asian Countries (that together cover another 10% of total Spanish exports) is also broadly consistent with an
eﬀect on fixed costs: the impact of immigrants is greater on exports of moderately and highly diﬀerentiated
products than for less diﬀerentiated products, however moderately (rather than highly) diﬀerentiated seem to
experience the strongest eﬀect. Also the estimated eﬀect through the extensive margin is usually larger than
the eﬀect on the intensive margin and significantly so. The eﬀect for Africa and Latin America are diﬀerent but
   2 2 Bandyopadhyay et al. (2008) investigates the individual immigration eﬀect of 29 foreign countries on US exports and find that

it is important only for a subset of 6 foreign countries. However they do not explain why the immigration-trade nexus works for
some countries and not for others.
   2 3 In table 7 we only report the OLS estimates. For several regions (e.g Europe and the OECD) the immigration instrument

is quite weak and we obtain very large standard errors. We also obtain some negative estimates which are hard to interpret and
probably reflect noise.



                                                                13
confirm our idea that larger (smaller) eﬀects for all types of goods should be found for countries with initially
very high (very low) trade costs. For Latin America (about 3% of Spanish exports) none of the estimated
coeﬃcients are statistically significant, suggesting that exports do not benefit much from ethnic networks of
these immigrants. The importance of historical links between Spain and its former colonies as well as the
common language and culture could justify low initial fixed trade costs and no significant cost-reducing eﬀect
of immigrants. To confirm this idea we also run (not reported in the tables) a specification like (1) in table 4
with an extra term that interacts a Spanish language dummy with ln(  ) The coeﬃcient on this variable
identifies the diﬀerential eﬀect on total trade creation of immigrants from Spanish-speaking countries relative
to other countries. The estimate of the coeﬃcient on this interaction is -0.106 (standard error 0.026) while the
estimate of the coeﬃcient on ln(  ) remains almost unchanged at 0.125 (standard error 0.013). This means
that the export creation eﬀect of immigrants from Spanish speaking countries is essentially zero (0.125-0.106)
consistent with the idea that the common language/culture is associated with low initial trade costs and no
cost-reducing eﬀect of immigrants. For Africa, the region with the largest cultural diﬀerences with Spain and
the lowest level of development, however, the networks of immigrants have the largest eﬀect in reducing fixed
trade costs, not only for trade of diﬀerentiated products but for all types of trades. This is why we observe
a positive and similar eﬀect of immigrants on trade of all types of goods. Still, confirming that this eﬀect is
mostly on fixed costs, the export creation eﬀect is always larger on the extensive margin.
   Combining the estimates in table 7, there are ten significantly positive estimates of the eﬀects of immigrants
on export of highly diﬀerentiated goods, nine significant eﬀect on export of moderately diﬀerentiated goods and
only five significant eﬀects for the less diﬀerentiated goods. The decomposition of immigrants and trade by
region helps us to correctly interpret the eﬀects of immigration on exports and how they may depend on the
initial level of country-specific fixed costs so that larger reductions (due to immigrants) are likely associated
with countries with initially large fixed costs. The estimated magnitudes from table 7 also suggest that the rise
in immigration from Eastern Europe and the decline of immigration from western Europe (shown in figure 2)
can explain about half of the increase and half of the decrease of trade with those two regions, respectively.
Immigration, therefore, acted causally on exports from Spain and this eﬀect was quantitatively significant.
   Another aspect that is interesting to explore is whether the elasticity of export creation to immigrant networks
varies with the immigrant density in the province or with the size of the specific immigrant community or with
the time period or the length of stay of the immigrants. Equation (1) assumes that there is a simple log-linear
relation between the volume of exports  and the size of the immigrant’s network   . However the
cost-reducing role played by the community of immigrants may need a minimum scale or a minimum density in
the province to be eﬀective, or the community may need some time to establish itself in order to act as trade
mediator. On the other hand, it may be possible that the best opportunities for trade-creation are the first to



                                                       14
be exploited by new immigrants and as the size of the community increases, the density of immigrants grow
and time passes there are decreasing beneficial eﬀects of immigration on trade. Empirically such issue could be
addressed in several ways. In panel A of table 8, we look at the export creation eﬀect of immigrants in earlier
years (when the immigrant communities were very small in Spain) versus later years. In panel B we also look
at that eﬀect splitting the sample between provinces with low (4%), intermediate (between 4 and 10%) or
high (10%) percentage of immigrants.24 The results show that the elasticities tend to be larger in provinces
with higher immigrant density and in the later period. In particular, notice that the eﬀect of immigrants on
total exports and on the extensive margin was significantly larger in the period 2002-2008 (elasticity of total
eﬀect of 0.20) than earlier (elasticity of total eﬀect of 0.085). Similarly the export creating eﬀect of immigrants
in provinces with a very small presence of immigrants (less than 4% of the population) is quite small and
insignificant, while in communities where immigrants account for 10% or more of the population the eﬀect
on export is 0.12 (before 2002) and 0.26 (after 2002). These results suggest that the export creation eﬀect
of immigrants increases (and certainly does not decrease) with larger immigration density and as immigrant
communities establish themselves over time.25 We conducted two further checks of these hypotheses. First, to
inquire if the elasticity of export creation with respect to immigrants changes with the size of the country-specific
community in the province (rather than with the overall immigrant density in the province) we rank immigrant
communities (defined by country of origin and province) by size and estimate an elasticity of trade creation
specific to each quartile of the distribution. These OLS estimated coeﬃcients for specification (1), similar to
those in table 4, (not reported) are all between 0.11 and 0.13 and not significantly diﬀerent from each other.
Second, to distinguish the role of long-term and new immigrants in trade creation we separate the stock of
immigrant in each community (country of origin by year) in year  into the stock at  − 4 (4 years earlier) and
the net flow in the last 4 years. We then estimate a specific elasticity of export to each of the two variables.
The correspondence between these two variables and long-term and new immigrants is imperfect as immigrants
move inside Spain (so net inflow in a province does not correspond to inflow in the country). However as we do
not know the composition of immigrants by date of entry (within a province and country of origin) this is the
best we can do. The OLS estimates of the basic specification produce a coeﬃcient on the stock at (−4) of 0.125
(standard error 0.015) and on the new flow over the last four years of 0.044 (standard error of 0.013). These
estimates are consistent with the presence of a stronger eﬀect on trade from the more established community
of immigrants. In conclusion the increase in size of the specific immigrant communities does not seem to aﬀect
the impact of immigration on trade, while the larger density in the province and the increased length of stay
seem to encourage the export creation.
  2 4 Table 8 shows the estimates using OLS method. The 2SLS estimates, not reported and available upon request, are quite

consistent with those, showing a pattern of increase coeﬃcient in the second sub-period and significantly positive coeﬃcient only
for provinces with immigrants above 4% of the population.
  2 5 This is consistent with previous studies such as Herander and Saveedra (2005) who found that the eﬀect of migrants on trade

requires a minimal size of the network in order to produce a measurable eﬀect on the volume of trade


                                                               15
6     Conclusions

This paper uses the rapid and large increase of immigrants from several countries into Spanish provinces that
took place in the years between 1995 and 2008, and especially after 2002, to estimate the causal eﬀect of
immigrants on exports, separating the intensive and extensive margin and diﬀerentiating between types of
goods. The estimates of those eﬀects on total export, export margins and export by type of good can be used
to verify if the presence of immigrants is consistent with trade creation due to a reduction in fixed trade costs.
Using a panel of bilateral trade flows for 50 Spanish provinces and 77 countries and corresponding data for
immigrant stocks by Spanish province and country of origin we find a very strong and robust elasticity of export
to immigrants close to 0.10. Instrumenting immigration flows with flows constructed using the distribution of
immigrants in 1993, we also find a very significant elasticity, closer to 0.05. The decomposition of the export-
creating eﬀect of immigrants between increased number of export transactions and average value of export per
transaction shows that most of the eﬀect is due to an increase in the number of transactions.26 Finally the
analysis of export creation eﬀects across categories of goods, once we allow diﬀerent eﬀects for diﬀerent regions,
shows that in most of the cases and particularly in the relation with developed countries (e.g. Europe and
OECD), the network of immigrants aﬀects mostly the trade of diﬀerentiated goods. On the other hand, the
eﬀects of immigrants applies rather uniformly to the export of all types of goods to less developed countries (e.g.
Africa), suggesting that in trading with those countries, the most important eﬀect is that of decreasing the high
initial fixed costs of trade independently of the nature of traded goods. As the surge of immigrants came to a
halt and reversed in 2009, due to the economic and financial crisis in Spain, it is possible that some of these
export creation eﬀects will be reversed. As immigrants go back to their countries this may reduce the volume
of trade between Spain and the rest of the world. In a proper calculation of costs and benefits of immigration
this export creating eﬀect should certainly be accounted for.
  2 6 While our data allowed us to identify number of transactions and value per transaction defining in this way an extensive and

intensive margin of export, it would be very interesting (but so far impossible with the Spanish data) to do the exercise decomposing
the margins at the firm-product rather than transaction level.




                                                                 16
References

Anderson, James, and Eric van Wincoop (2003) “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border Puzzle,”
American Economic Review, 93(1), 170—192.

Bandyopadhyay, Subhayu, Cletus. C. Coughlin, and Howard J. Wall (2008) “Ethnic Networks and US Exports,”
Review of International Economics, 16(1), 199—213.

Bernard, Andrew, Jensen, Bradford, Redding, Stephen, and Schott, Peter (2007) “Firms in International Trade”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(3), 105-130.

Blanes, Jose V. (2005) “Does immigration help to explain intra-industry trade?         Evidence for Spain,”
Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv/Review of World Economics, 141, 244-270.

Blanes, Jose V., and Joan Martin-Muntaner (2006) “Migration Flows and Intra-Industry Trade Adjustments,”
Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv/Review of World Economics, 142(3), 567-584.

Briant, Anthony, Pierre-Philippe Combes, and Miren Lafourcade (2009) “Product Complexity, Quality of In-
stitutions and the Pro-Trade Eﬀect of Immigrants,”, Working paper 2009/06, Paris School of Economics.

Broda, Christian, David Weinstein (2006) “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 121(2).

Bryant, John, David Law (2004) “Trade and Migration to New Zealand,” New Zealand Treasury Working Paper
04.

Card, David (2001) “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of Higher
Immigration”. Journal of Labor Economics 19 (1), 22-64.

Card, David (2007) “How Immigration Aﬀects U.S. Cities,” CReAM Discussion Paper, no. 11/07.

Card, David (2009) “Immigration and Inequality”, American Economic Review, 99(2): 1—21.

Chaney, Thomas (2008) “Distorted Gravity — Heterogeneous firms, market structure and the geography of
international trade,” American Economic Review, Vol. 98, No. 4. pp 1707-1721.

Co, Catherine, Patricia Euzent, Thomas Martin (2004) “The Export Eﬀect of Immigration into the USA,”
Applied Economics 36, 573—83.

Combes, Pierre-Philipppe, Miren Lafourcade, and Thierry Mayer (2005) “The Trade-Creating Eﬀects of Business
and Social Networks: Evidence from France,” Journal of International Economics, 66(1), 1—29.




                                                     17
Dunlevy, James (2006) “The Influence of Corruption and Language on the Pro-trade Eﬀect of Immigrants:
Evidence from the American States,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(1), 182—186.

Dunlevy , James, and William Hutchinson (1999) “The impact of immigration on American import trade in
the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries,” Journal of Economic History 59: 1043-62.

Girma, Sourafel, and Zhihao Yu (2002) “The Link between Immigration and Trade: Evidence from the United
Kingdom,” Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 138(1), 115—130.

Gould, David (1994) “Immigrant Links to the Home Country: Empirical Implications for U.S. Bilateral Trade
Flows,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 76(2), 302—316.

Head, Keith, and John Ries (1998) “Immigration and trade creation: econometric evidence from Canada,”
Canadian Journal of Economics, 31(1), 47—62.

Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein (2008) “Trading Partners and Trading Volumes,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 441-487.

Herander, Mark, and Luz Saavedra (2005) “Exports and the Structure of Immigrant-Based Networks: the Role
of Geographic Proximity,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(2), 323—335.

Nickell, Stephen (1981) “Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed Eﬀects,” Econometrica 49, 1417—1426

Millimet, Daniel, and Thomas Osang (2007) “Does State Borders Matter for U.S. Intranational Trade? The
Role of History and Internal Migration,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 40(1), 93—126.

Ottaviano Gianmarco, and Giovanni Peri (2006) “The Economic Value of Cultural Diversity: Evidence from
U.S. cities”, Journal of Economic Geography, Vol. 6, Issue 1, Pages 9-44.

Rauch, James R. (1999) “Networks versus Markets in International Trade,” Journal of International Economics,
48, 7-35.

Rauch, James R., and Vitor Trindale (2002) “Ethnic Chinese Networks In International Trade,” The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 84(1), 116—130.

Santos Silva J., and Silvana Tenreyro (2006) “The Log of Gravity,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
Vol. 88(4), 641-658.

Wagner, Don, Keith Head, and John Ries (2002) “Immigration and the Trade of Provinces,” Scottish Journal
of Political Economy, 49(5), 507—25.

White, Roger, and Bedassa Tedesse (2007) “Immigration Policy, Cultural Pluralism and Trade: Evidence from
the White Australia Policy,” Pacific Economic Review, 14(2), 489-509.


                                                      18
Figures and Tables
                                       Figure 1:
                     Percentage of foreign-born in total population
                                Spanish Provinces, 2007




                                          19
                                                                      Figure 2:
                                 Trade with and Immigration from Western Europe and South/Eastern Europe (1995=100)

                                                       Panel A                                                                                                 Panel B
                                Western European Countries                                                                            South and East European Countries

   120                                                                                                               1100

   100
                                                                                                                     900

    80
                                                                                                                     700
    60
                                                                                                                     500
    40

    20                                                                                                               300


     0                                                                                                               100
         1995

                1996

                         1997

                                  1998

                                         1999

                                                2000

                                                       2001

                                                               2002

                                                                      2003

                                                                             2004

                                                                                    2005

                                                                                           2006

                                                                                                  2007

                                                                                                         2008




                                                                                                                            1995

                                                                                                                                   1996

                                                                                                                                          1997

                                                                                                                                                 1998

                                                                                                                                                        1999

                                                                                                                                                               2000

                                                                                                                                                                      2001

                                                                                                                                                                             2002

                                                                                                                                                                                    2003

                                                                                                                                                                                           2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                  2005

                                                                                                                                                                                                         2006

                                                                                                                                                                                                                2007

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2008
                       share in total trade                   share in foreign born population                                            share in tootal trade                 share in foreign population



Note: Total trade is the sum of imports and exports. Immigration is lagged one period. Each of the two measures is measured as share of total (trade volume or
immigration) and is standardized so that the level in 1995 is equal to 100.




                                                                                                                20
                                                                 Table 1
                                       Estimated elasticity of Export to Immigrants:
                                Summarizing some influential contributions from the Literature


Authors                                      Estimated elasticity of   Sample                     Specification-Method
                                             Export to immigrants
Bandyopadhyay, Coughlin and Wall. (2008)     0.14                      Panel: 50 US states, 29    Panel, OLS with country-time
                                                                       Countries, 1990, 2000      and trading partner pairs FE
Briant, Combes and M. Lafourcade (2009)      0.07-0.10                 93 French Departments,     Pooled cross section, 2SLS,
                                                                       1999-2001                  country and Department FE
Dunlevy (2006)                               0.24-0.47                 50 US states, 87           Pooled cross-section, OLS
                                                                       Countries, 1990-1992       with country and state FE
Dunlevy and Hutchinson (1999)                0.08                      US, with 17 countries,     Pooled cross-section, simple
                                                                       1870-1910                  gravity specification
Head and Ries (1998)                         0.10                      Canada and 136 trading     Pooled Cross section, simple
                                                                       partners, 1980-1992        gravity specification
Girma and Yu (2002)                          0.16                      UK and 48 trading          Pooled Cross section, simple
                                                                       partners                   gravity specification
Rauch and Trindale (2002)                    0.22-0.47                 Ethnic Chinese in 120      Pooled Cross section, simple
                                                                       countries                  gravity specification
Wagner, Head and Reis (2002)                 0.09                      5 Canadian provinces,      Pooled Cross-section, OLS
                                                                       160 countries, 1992-1995   with country FE




                                                              21
                                              Table 2:
               Export Values by year, type of product and extensive/intensive margin.

                                Highly differentiated Moderately differentiated                   Less differentiated
                All products                products                  products                              products
       Total value by province-country pair
Year   (Thousands of current Euros)
1995                  21107                     1863                      5907                                 6760
1999                  24931                     2218                      6527                                 8072
2004                  34399                     2840                      9675                                11235
2008                  45427                     3956                    12235                                 14792
       Number of transactions by province-country pair
1995                    300                      101                         84                                   76
1999                    326                      107                         92                                   84
2004                    476                      153                       141                                   118
2008                    563                      177                       170                                   140
       Average value per transaction by province-country pair
        (thousands of current Euros)
1995                      83                       30                        52                                   81
1999                      96                       29                        48                                   69
2004                      75                       30                        43                                   68
2008                    137                        47                      118                                   130

            Note: Own elaboration using Spanish Custom detailed international transaction data for a
            selection of 77 destination countries (93 percent of total exports in 2008).




                                                      22
                                                        Table 3: Immigrants by country of origin
Ranking in 2007 Country of origin      Number of immigrants in % on total immigrants Annual growth rate 1993-2007 (%) Ranking in 1993
                                       2007                    in 2007
             (1)   Morocco                             648735                    16.3                              18.9             (2)
             (2)   Romania                             603889                    15.2                              59.5            (46)
             (3)   Ecuador                             395808                     9.9                              49.5            (40)
             (4)   Colombia                            254301                     6.4                              30.2            (16)
             (5)   United Kingdom                      198638                     5.0                               8.9             (1)
             (6)   Bulgaria                            127058                     3.2                              43.7            (49)
             (7)   Italy                               124936                     3.1                              16.1             (7)
             (8)   China                               119859                     3.0                              21.7            (14)
             (9)   Peru                                116202                     2.9                              18.8            (10)
            (10)   Portugal                            101818                     2.6                               8.9             (4)
            (11)   Argentina                            96055                     2.4                              11.3             (6)
            (12)   Germany                              91670                     2.3                               7.0             (3)
            (13)   Poland                               70850                     1.8                              21.3            (21)
            (14)   Dominican Rep.                       70775                     1.8                              15.4            (11)
            (15)   Bolivia                              69109                     1.7                              37.0            (48)
            (16)   France                               68377                     1.7                               7.1             (5)
            (17)   Ukraine                              62409                     1.6                              48.9            (70)
            (18)   Algeria                              45825                     1.2                              21.2            (30)
            (19)   Cuba                                 45068                     1.1                              19.1            (25)
            (20)   Brazil                               39170                     1.0                              16.8            (23)
            (21)   Pakistan                             36384                     0.9                              35.6            (58)
            (22)   Venezuela                            33262                     0.8                              12.0            (15)
            (23)   Senegal                              33217                     0.8                              17.1            (27)
            (24)   Uruguay                              31092                     0.8                              15.9            (24)
            (25)   Netherlands                          30055                     0.8                               7.0             (9)
            (26)   Russia                               29297                     0.7                              27.7            (44)
            (27)   Philippines                          25051                     0.6                               7.7            (12)
            (28)   Chile                                24841                     0.6                              10.8            (19)
            (29)   Nigeria                              23524                     0.6                              32.1            (60)
            (30)   India                                20776                     0.5                               9.1            (17)
                   Top 30 countries                   3638051                    91.4
                   TOTAL                              3979014                     100                              17.0
                              Source: Statistical Yearbook (Anuario Estadístico), various issues, published by INE


                                                                      23
                                                        Table 4:
                                  Trade-Creation Effect of Immigrants on Export flows
                                      50 Spanish provinces, 77 Countries, 1995-2008
                                        Trading partner pair &           Trading partner pair          Origin, destination & year
                                        country-year dummies             & year dummies                dummies and geography
                                        (1)           (2)                (3)          (4)              (5)          (6)
ln IMM                                  0.110*        0.102*             0.275*       0.254*           0.132*       0.122*
                                        (0.012)       (0.015)            (0.008)      (0.010)          (0.016)      (0.017)
ln (YiYj)                               0.316*        0.330*             1.165*       1.170*           0.839*       0.840*
                                        (0.141)       (0.142)            (0.009)      (0.009)          (0.090)      (0.090)
NID                                                   0.015                           -0.040                        -0.061
                                                      (0.036)                         (0.036)                       (0.051)
ln distance                                                                                            -0.254*      -0.252*
                                                                                                       (0.110)      (0.110)
Contiguity                                                                                             0.911*       0.921*
                                                                                                       (0.299)      (0.299)
EU/EFTA                                                                                                0.085        0.089
                                                                                                       (0.258)      (0.258)
Language/colonial ties                                                                                 -1.588*      -1.593*
                                                                                                       (0.392)      (0.392)
Trading pair dummies                    Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes
Country-year dummies                    Yes             Yes
Year dummies                                                             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
Country and province dummies                                                                           Yes             Yes
Adjusted R2                             0.848           0.848            0.808          0.808          0.783           0.783
Observations                            51600           51600            51600          51600          51600           51600
    Note: The dependent variable in each regression is the logarithm of exports in Euros plus one between province i and country j.
    Specifications (1) and (2) include 2800 trading-pair dummies and 988 country-year dummies. Specification (3) and (4) include 2800
    trading-pair dummies and 13 year dummies. Specifications (5) and (6) include 77 country dummies, 50 province dummies and 13 year
    dummies. *=significant at 5%.




                                                                  24
                                                                  Table 5:
                                                   Instrumental Variables estimation
                                                        First Stage of         Second stage of IV          Including lagged
                                                        the IV                 (instrumented ln            dependent variable
                                                                               IMM)
                                                        (1)                    (2)                         (3)
             ln (YiYj)                                  0.403*                 0.367*                      0.184
                                                        (0.005)                (0.146)                     (0.118)
             ln (Trade)t-1                                                                                 0.475*
                                                                                                           (0.007)
             ln IMM                                                            0.049*                      0.063*
                                                                               (0.016)                     (0.010)
             Imputed IMM (instrument)                   0.554*
                                                        (0.003)
             Trading pair dummies                                              Yes                         Yes
             Country-year dummies                       Yes                    Yes                         Yes

             F test                                     302.04
             Prob>F                                     0.00
             Adjusted R2                                0.848                  0.853                       0.883
             Observations                               51600                  51600                       51600
Note: The dependent variable in each specification is equal to the logarithm of the total value of exports in Euros plus one between province i
and country j. The Instrument used in specification (1) for the variable ln (IMM) is the imputed presence of immigrants of a certain nationality in
the province. This is obtained by allocating the total immigration to Spain by nationality of origin, for each year, proportionally to the initial size
of each nationality in the province. The standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by province-country pair.
*=significant at 5%.




                                                                        25
                                                               Table 6:
                                        Decomposition of the Effects of Immigrants on Exports;
                              The Extensive and Intensive Margin and The Extent of Product Differentiation

                                                 OLS estimates                                   IV estimates
                                        Total       Extensive       Intensive         Total       Extensive                    Intensive
                                        Value        Margin          Margin           value        Margin                       Margin
                                         (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)                        (6)
                                                                   Panel A:
                                                                  All Goods
                   Ln (IMM)            0.110*         0.082*         0.028*          0.049*         0.083*                      -0.034
                                       (0.011)        (0.005)        (0.009)         (0.023)        (0.010)                     (0.018)
                                                                   Panel B:
                                     Highly differentiated products (elasticity of substitution less than 2)
                   Ln (IMM)            0.097*         0.073*         0.023*          0.130*         0.113*                       0.017
                                       (0.011)        (0.005)        (0.008)         (0.023)        (0.010)                     (0.018)
                                                                   Panel C
                                  Medium differentiated products (elasticity of substitution between 2 and 3.5)
                   Ln (IMM)            0.122*         0.088*         0.034*          0.115*         0.061*                      0.054*
                                       (0.013)        (0.006)        (0.009)         (0.030)        (0.014)                     (0.020)
                                                                   Panel D:
                                       Low differentiated products (elasticity of substitution above 3.5)
                   Ln (IMM)            0.098*         0.080*          0.018          0.113*         0.095*                       0.019
                                       (0.012)        (0.005)        (0.010)         (0.025)        (0.012)                     (0.018)

 Note: Each cell reports the estimates of the coefficient on the variable ln(Imm) from equation (1) in the text. All regressions include trading-pair dummies and
country-year dummies. Specification (1) and (4) use as dependent variable the total value of export from the Spanish province to the country, specification (2)
and (5) use as dependent variable the number of transactions between province j and country i –whose variation we call the extensive margin- and specification
(3) and (6) use as dependent variable the average value per transaction between province j and country I –whose variation we call the intensive margin. Standard
errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by trading-pair. *= significant at 5% level.




                                                                              26
                                                             Table 7:
                                            Effect of Immigration on Exports by Region

                             Highly Differentiated                Moderately Differentiated                     Less Differentiated
                          Total Extensive Intensive               Total Extensive Intensive                Total Extensive Intensive
                           (1)       (2)         (3)               (4)     (5)         (6)                  (7)        (8)         (9)
  EU/EFTA                0.094*    0.045*      0.049              0.089  0.052*       0.037               0.025      0.055*      -0.030
                         (0.041) (0.015)      (0.033)            (0.052) (0.023)    (0.037)              (0.041) (0.018)        (0.030)
  East Europe            0.110*    0.055*     0.055*              0.031   0.024       0.006               -0.001     -0.008      -0.009
                         (0.033) (0.015)      (0.024)            (0.033) (0.020)    (0.024)              (0.032) (0.015)        (0.023)
  Africa                 0.174*    0.118*     0.056*             0.165*  0.094*      0.079*              0.182*      0.128*      0.054*
                         (0.023) (0.011)      (0.016)            (0.027) (0.014)    (0.017)              (0.027) (0.011)        (0.020)
  Latin America          -0.008     0.009      -0.017             0.005   0.005      0.001                0.033      -0.002      -0.031
                         (0.029) (0.011)      (0.022)            (0.031) (0.012)    (0.024)              (0.030) (0.012)        (0.023)
  Asia                    0.038    0.045*      -0.007            -0.047   0.011      -0.058              -0.059       0.002      -0.061
                         (0.053) (0.020)      (0.039)            (0.054) (0.020)    (0.041)              (0.054) (0.021)        (0.036)
  Rest OECD               0.016    0.041*      -0.024            0.111*  0.043*       0.068               0.016      0.041*      -0.024
                         (0.056) (0.021)      (0.030)            (0.047) (0.019)    (0.038)              (0.056) (0.021)        (0.043)
  Middle East             0.046     0.011      0.036             0.204*  0.072*      0.132*              -0.025      -0.007      -0.018
                         (0.074) (0.028)      (0.056)            (0.073) (0.027)    (0.058)              (0.073) (0.029)        (0.053)

Note: Each cell reports the elasticity of export to immigrants estimated using specification (2) with total exports or number of transaction or
value per transaction as dependent variable. All regressions include trading-pair dummies and country-year dummies. The sample is restricted,
for each row, to countries in the region only. Specifications (1)-(3) include only trade in highly differentiated goods; (4)-(6) include trade in
moderately differentiated goods and (7)-(9) include only less differentiated goods. The Method of estimation is OLS,. The Standard errors are
heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by trading-pair. *= significant at 5% level.




                                                                      27
                                                                Table 8
                                                  Effects of immigrants on Exports:
                                     Separating periods and initial province-density of immigrants
                                                 Total value                   Extensive                           Intensive
                                                     (1)                          (2)                                 (3)
                                                 Panel A:
                                    Time dimension: Before and after 2002
  period 1995-2001                     0.085*                0.069*                        0.016
                                       (0.019)               (0.008)                      (0.014)
  period 2002-2008                     0.197*                0.131*                       0.066*
                                       (0.017)               (0.008)                      (0.012)
                                                 Panel B:
                   By provinces: grouped by immigrants as % of the total population in 2007
                                                            period 1995-2001
  <4%                                                0.023                  0.048*                                  -0.025
                                                    (0.034)                 (0.013)                                 (0.026)
   [4-10%]                                           0.067                  0.055*                                   0.012
                                                    (0.036)                 (0.015)                                 (0.027)
  >10%                                              0.122*                  0.083*                                   0.039
                                                    (0.031)                 (0.014)                                 (0.023)
                                                            period 2002-2008
  <4%                                                0.055                  0.076*                                  -0.022
                                                    (0.034)                 (0.016)                                 (0.025)
   [4-10%]                                          0.146*                  0.093*                                  0.054*
                                                    (0.034)                 (0.015)                                 (0.025)
  >10%                                              0.260*                  0.168*                                  0.112*
                                                    (0.026)                 (0.014)                                 (0.018)
Note: Each cell reports the elasticity of export to immigrants estimated using specification (2) with total exports (column 1), number of
transaction (column 2) or value per transaction (column 3) as dependent variable. All regressions include trading-pair dummies and country-
year dummies. The sample is split by years in the upper part of the Table and two regressions are run separately for each period. In the lower
part the sample is split by year and province according to the density of immigrants in 2007. Method of estimation is OLS. Standard errors are
heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by trading-pair. *= significant at 5% level.


                                                                      28
Table Appendix
                                                             Table A1
                                Countries included in the study (77 countries and 7 regional groups)
                                South-East                              Latin                        Rest of           Middle
        Western Europe           Europe              Africa           America          Asia          OECD               East
            Austria              Bosnia*            Angola*           Argentina    Bangladesh      Australia           Egypt*
           Belgium               Bulgaria            Algeria           Bolivia        China          Canada             Iran*
           Denmark               Croatia *         Cape Verde           Brazil       Pakistan         Japan            Israel*
           Finland                Czech*             Gambia             Chile         India          Korea             Jordan
            France               Hungary            Ghana**           Colombia     Philippines       Mexico           Lebanon*
           Germany                Poland            Guinea**         Costa Rica     Thailand*     N. Zealand            Syria
            Greece                Serbia*          Guinea-B*         Dom. Rep.                      Turkey*
            Ireland              Romania           Guinea Eq.         Ecuador                         USA
             Italy               Russia*             Mali **         El Salvador
         Netherlands             Ukraine*           Morocco          Guatemala
           Norway                                  Mauritania         Honduras
           Portugal                                  Nigeria         Nicaragua
           Sweden                                    Senegal           Panama
         Switzerland                             Sierra Leone**          Peru
              UK                                    Tunisia*          Paraguay
                                                                      Uruguay
                                                                     Venezuela
              N=15                 N=10                 N=15             N=17             N=6             N=8            N=6

      Note: We included only those countries for which we could reconstruct a consistent and uninterrupted series of observations on
      the stock of immigrants in each Spanish province between 1993 and 2007. * Series starts in 1996 and ** series starts in 1997.




                                                                   29
                                                         Table A2
                                  Robustness Checks: Dealing with 0-trade observations.
                        Basic Specification  Origin & destination      Tobit        Poisson                              Number of
                            log (y+1)            fixed effects       log (y+1)         (y)                              observations
                                                   log (y+1)
                                (1)                   (3)               (4)            (5)                                   (6)
      Exports>=0              0.110*                0.132*            0.146*         0.105*                                 51600
                              (0.012)               (0.016)           (0.008)        (0.008)
      Exports >0              0.068*                0.119*            0.120*         0.104*                                 46133
                              (0.013)               (0.014)           (0.007)        (0.007)


Note: The dependent variable is the logarithm of exports plus one. The first row indicates whether we include all observations in the estimation
or only those strictly positive. Standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by trading-pair. *= significant at 5% level.




                                                                      30
Technical Appendix.


                                                               Table TA1
                                  Shares of exports, imports and Immigrants by Regions of the World.

                                           Share of exports (%)              Share of imports (%)      Share of immigrants (%)
                                           1993      2002      2008          1993      2002     2008     1993      2002     2008
       Western Europe                     74.10     73.05     67.47         67.77     65.80    53.13    49.24     29.99    17.45
       Eastern and Southern
       Europe                             1.71       3.65       5.92         2.46     3.88     5.92      1.81     6.13    22.89
       Africa                             2.70       2.72       4.29         3.00     4.21     6.46     16.77    27.02    20.85
       Latin America                      4.01       2.67       2.78         3.02     2.86     3.71     17.07    23.16    29.08
       Asia                               1.68       1.16       1.97         3.16     4.66     8.84      5.54     6.94     5.27
       Rest OECD                          8.27       9.32       9.67        12.56    10.26    10.05      6.04     2.94     1.31
       Middle East                        1.49       1.31       1.35         1.40     1.03     2.00      1.02     0.44     0.19
       Rest of the World                  6.05       6.12       6.55         6.64     7.30     9.89      2.50     3.38     2.97
       World                            100.00     100.00     100.00       100.00   100.00   100.00    100.00   100.00   100.00

      Note: See Table A1 for list of countries included in each geographic area.




                                                                       1
                                             Table TA2
                           Description of Imports by year, type of product and extensive/intensive margin


                                                 Highly differentiated   Moderately differentiated             Less differentiated
                        All products             products                Products                              products
                                                                Imports
                        Total value by province- country pair (Thousands Euros)
        Year
                 1995                   26491                       6388                       8750                                   9257
                 1999                   30582                       7582                       9783                                  10759
                 2004                   43009                      10402                      13699                                  14563
                 2008                   56750                      13305                      16683                                  18334
                        Number of transactions by province-country pair
                 1995                       432                      148                         131                                   111
                 1999                       483                      158                         134                                   112
                 2004                       670                      228                         215                                   164
                 2008                       807                      270                         250                                   193
                        Average value per transaction by province-country pair (thousands Euros)
                 1995                       117                       48                          77                                   160
                 1999                       169                       56                          81                                   252
                 2004                       110                       43                          59                                   152
                 2008                       179                       60                          97                                   178




Note: Authors´ calculations using trade data for 50 provinces and 77 countries. Exports and imports flows include zeros. Products are classified
into three broad categories: High differentiated products (elasticity of substitution below 2), medium differentiated products (elasticity of
substitution between 2 and 3.5) and low differentiated products (elasticity of substitution above 3.5).


                                                                         2
                                                 Table TA3
        Spanish Provinces divided between high, intermediate and low presence of immigrants in 2007

   High Immigration Provinces      Intermediate Immigration Provinces       Low Immigration Provinces
IMMIGRANTS/POPULATION >10%           IMMIGRANTS/POPULATION               IMMIGRANTS/POPULATION <4%
                                         Between 4% and 10%

            Alicante                             Álava                                Badajoz
            Almería                            Albacete                                Cáceres
            Balears                              Ávila                                  Cádiz
           Barcelona                            Burgos                                Córdoba
           Castellón                            Ciudad                                 Coruña
            Girona                              Cuenca                               Guipúzcoa
          Guadalajara                           Granada                                 Jaén
            Huesca                              Huelva                                  Lugo
             Lleida                              León                                 Ourense
             Rioja                              Navarra                               Asturias
            Madrid                              Tenerife                              Palencia
            Málaga                               Soria                               Pontevedra
            Murcia                               Teruel                              Salamanca
          Las Palmas                            Toledo                                Cantabria
            Segovia                            Valencia                                Sevilla
          Tarragona                            Valladolid                             Vizcaya
           Zaragoza                                                                    Zamora




                                                    3
                                                            Table TA4: Imports
                                                    Trade-Creation Effect of Immigrants
                                                50 Spanish provinces, 77 Countries, 1995-2008
                                          Pair FE & country-year            Trading partner pair           Origin & destination
                                          dummies                           effects                        effects
                                          (1)          (2)                  (3)          (4)               (5)         (6)
ln (YiYj)                                 0.066        -0.063               1.248*       1.244*            -0.142      -0.146
                                          (0.179)      (0.181)              (0.011)      (0.011)           (0.110)     (0.110)
ln IMM                                    0.050*       0.101*               0.237*       0.272*            0.087*      0.082*
                                          (0.014)      (0.018)              (0.009)      (0.012)           (0.019)     (0.021)
NID                                                    0.200*                            0.381*                        0.006
                                                       (0.050)                           (0.044)                       (0.076)
ln distance                                                                                                -0.685*     -0.686*
                                                                                                           (0.204)     (0.204)
Contiguity                                                                                                 1.358*      1.361*
                                                                                                           (0.291)     (0.291)
EU/EFTA                                                                                                    5.646*      5.650*
                                                                                                           (0.431)     (0.431)
Language/colonial ties                                                                                     4.787*      4.794*
                                                                                                           (0.733)     (0.733)
Trading pair dummies                      Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes
Country-year dummies                      Yes              Yes
Year dummies                                                                Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
Country and province dummies                                                                               Yes            Yes
Adjusted R2                               0.856            0.856            0.827           0.827          0.771          0.771
Observations                              51600            51600            51600           51600          51600          51600
Note: The dependent variable in each regression is the logarithm of imports in Euros plus one between province i and country j. The explanatory
variables are lagged one period. Specifications (1) and (2) include 2800 trading-pair dummies and 988 country-year dummies. Specification (3)
and (4) include 2800 trading-pair dummies and 13 year dummies. Specifications (5) and (6) include 77 country dummies, 50 province dummies
and 13 year dummies. *=significant at 5%.



                                                                     4
                                             Table TA5. Import flows.
                 Trade-Creation Effect of Immigrants: IV estimation and controlling for Lagged trade

                                                       2SLS                   2SLS (instrumented          Including lagged
                                                       (stage 1)              ln IMM)                     dependent variable
                                                       (1)                    (2)                         (3)
             ln (YiYj)                                 0.403*                 0.367*                      -0.099
                                                       (0.005)                (0.146)                     (0.151)
             ln (Trade)t-1                                                                                0.521*
                                                                                                          (0.007)
             ln IMM                                                           0.056*                      0.021*
                                                                              (0.028)                     (0.011)
             Imputed IMM (instrument)                  0.554*
                                                       (0.003)
             Trading pair dummies                                             Yes                         Yes
             Country-year dummies                      Yes                    Yes                         Yes

             F test                                    302.04
             Prob>F                                    0.00
             Adjusted R2                               0.848                  0.859                       0.895
             Observations                              51600                  51600                       51600
Note: The dependent variable in each specification is equal to the logarithm of the total value of imports in Euros plus one between province i
and country j. The Instrument used in specification (1) and (2) for the variable ln(IMM) is the imputed presence of immigrants of a certain
nationality in the province. This is obtained by allocating the total immigration to Spain by nationality of origin, for each year, proportionally to
the initial size of each nationality in the province. The standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by province-country pair.
*=significant at 5%.




                                                                        5
                                                   Table TA6. Imports
                                 Robustness Checks: Dealing with 0-Import observations.
                        Basic Specification Origin & destination      Tobit         Poisson                              Number of
                            log (y+1)           fixed effects       log (y+1)         (y)                               observations
                                                  log (y+1)
                                (1)                  (3)               (4)            (5)                                    (6)

      Imports>=0               0.050*                      0.087*                   0.044*             0.141*              51600
                               (0.014)                     (0.019)                  (0.010)            (0.013)
      Imports >0                0.021                      0.040*                   0.038*             0.141*              40271
                               (0.017)                     (0.020)                  (0.010)            (0.013)


Note: The dependent variable is the logarithm of trade flows (imports or exports) plus one. The first row indicates whether we include all
observations in the estimation or only those strictly positive. Standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by trading-pair. *=
significant at 5% level.




                                                                      6
                                                                         Table TA7
                                                   Decomposition of the Effects of Immigrants on Imports;
                                            Extensive and Intensive Margin; The Extent of Product Differentiation

                                                                                     Imports
                                                  OLS estimates                                   IV estimates
                                         Total       Extensive       Intensive         Total       Extensive                    Intensive
                                         Value        Margin          Margin           value        Margin                       Margin
                                          (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)                        (6)
                                                                             Imports
                                                                    Panel A:
                                                                   All Goods
                   Ln (IMM)             0.050*         0.050*         0.001*          0.056*         0.071*                       -0.014
                                        (0.014)        (0.006)        (0.010)         (0.028)        (0.011)                      (0.023)
                                                                    Panel B:
                                      Highly differentiated products (elasticity of substitution less than 2)
                   Ln (IMM)             0.079*         0.052*         0.027*          0.161*         0.101*                       0.060*
                                        (0.012)        (0.005)        (0.009)         (0.027)        (0.011)                      (0.021)
                                                                    Panel C
                                   Medium differentiated products (elasticity of substitution between 2 and 3.5)
                   Ln (IMM)             0.043*         0.040*          0.003           0.032         0.066*                       -0.034
                                        (0.012)        (0.005)        (0.009)         (0.029)        (0.011)                      (0.023)
                                                                    Panel D:
                                        Low differentiated products (elasticity of substitution above 3.5)
                   Ln (IMM)             0.081*         0.044*         0.038*          0.140*         0.074*                        0.046
                                        (0.012)        (0.005)        (0.010)         (0.031)        (0.011)                      (0.026)

 Note: Each cell report the estimates of the coefficient on the variable ln(Immjt) from equation (2) in the text. All regressions include 3500 trading-pair dummies
and 1001 country-year dummies. Specification (1) and (4) use as dependent variable the total value of export from the Spanish province to the country,
specification (2) and (5) use as dependent variable the number of transactions between province j and country i –that we call the extensive margin- and
specification (3) and (6) use as dependent variable the average value per transaction between province j and country I –that we call the intensive margin.
Standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by trading-pair. *= significant at 5% level.

                                                                                7
                                                       Table TA8:
                            Effect of Immigration on Imports by Region of Origin of Immigrants

                             Highly Differentiated                 Moderately Differentiated                     Less Differentiated
                          Total Extensive Intensive                Total Extensive Intensive                Total Extensive Intensive
                           (1)       (2)         (3)                (4)     (5)         (6)                  (7)        (8)         (9)
  EU/EFTA                 0.006     0.004      0.002               0.074  0.072*       0.002               0.078*     0.061*       0.017
                         (0.040) (0.018)      (0.030)             (0.039) (0.018)    (0.030)               (0.039) (0.017)       (0.030)
  East Europe             0.032    -0.007     0.039*              0.104*   0.022      0.082*               0.162*      0.021      0.141*
                         (0.036) (0.015)      (0.008)             (0.040) (0.017)    (0.031)               (0.042) (0.015)       (0.033)
  Africa                 0.197*    0.102*     0.095*              0.226*  0.111*      0.116*               0.213*     0.097*      0.116*
                         (0.024) (0.011)      (0.017)             (0.026) (0.013)    (0.017)               (0.030) (0.013)       (0.021)
  Latin America          -0.020    0.046*     -0.065*             -0.024  0.043*     -0.067*                0.023     0.032*      -0.010
                         (0.031) (0.021)      (0.023)             (0.028) (0.011)    (0.021)               (0.030) (0.011)       (0.023)
  Asia                   0.113*     0.032     0.081*              -0.175 -0.087*     -0.089*               -0.073 -0.074*          0.001
                         (0.039) (0.023)      (0.034)             (0.049) (0.026)    (0.037)               (0.047) (0.023)       (0.036)
  Rest OECD               0.004     0.024      -0.020             -0.032   0.002      -0.033               0.115*     0.056*       0.059
                         (0.052) (0.021)      (0.041)             (0.050  (0.021)    (0.041)               (0.056) (0.020)       (0.044)
  Middle East            -0.026    -0.001      -0.025              0.018  -0.003      0.021                 0.052     -0.012      0.064
                         (0.066) (0.021)      (0.054)             (0.055) (0.024)    (0.041)               (0.076) (0.023)       (0.061)

Note: Each cell reports the elasticity of export to immigrants estimated using specification (2) with total imports or number of transaction or
average value per transaction as dependent variable. All regressions include trading-pair dummies and country-year dummies. The sample is
restricted, for each row, to countries in the region only. Specifications (1)-(3) include only trade in highly differentiated goods; (4)-(6) include
trade in moderately differentiated goods and (7)-(9) include only less differentiated goods. The Method of estimation is OLS, with Standard
errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by trading-pair. *= significant at 5% level.




                                                                         8
                                                                          Table TA9
                                                             Effects of immigrants on Imports:
                                                Separating periods and initial province-density of immigrants

                                                                               Imports
                                               Total value                Extensive                    Intensive
                                                    (1)                      (2)                          (3)
                                                        Before and after 2002
           period 1995-2001                        0.026                   0.045*                       -0.019
                                                  (0.021)                  (0.009)                      (0.015)
           period 2002-2008                       0.152*                   0.079*                       0.073*
                                                  (0.021)                  (0.009)                      (0.016)
                            Provinces grouped by percentage of immigrants in the total population in 2007
                                                                       period 1995-2001
           <4%                                                 -0.018                  0.042*                                    -0.060*
                                                               (0.037)                 (0.016)                                   (0.028)
            [4-10%]                                            0.091*                  0.057*                                     0.034
                                                               (0.035)                 (0.014)                                   (0.026)
           >10%                                                 0.017                  0.039*                                     -0.022
                                                               (0.036)                 (0.015)                                   (0.017)
                                                                       period 2002-2008
           <4%                                                 0.180*                  0.114*                                    0.066*
                                                               (0.042)                 (0.019)                                   (0.032)
            [4-10%]                                            0.178*                  0.076*                                    0.102*
                                                               (0.036)                 (0.016)                                   (0.027)
           >10%                                                0.123*                  0.070*                                    0.058*
                                                               (0.037)                 (0.017)                                   (0.028)
Note: Each cell reports the elasticity of export to immigrants estimated using specification (2) with total imports (column 1), number of transaction
(column 2) or value per transaction (column 3) as dependent variable. All regressions include trading-pair dummies and country-year dummies. The
sample is split by years in the upper part of the Table and two regressions are run separately for each period. In the lower part the sample is split by year
and province according to the density of immigrants in 2007. Method of estimation is OLS. Standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered
by trading-pair. *= significant at 5% level.

                                                                                  9
