                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             MEASURING THE RETURNS TO R&D

                                           Bronwyn H. Hall
                                           Jacques Mairesse
                                            Pierre Mohnen

                                        Working Paper 15622
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15622


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2009




Chapter prepared for the Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, B. H. Hall and N. Rosenberg
(editors). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Bronwyn H. Hall, Jacques Mairesse, and Pierre Mohnen. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring the Returns to R&D
Bronwyn H. Hall, Jacques Mairesse, and Pierre Mohnen
NBER Working Paper No. 15622
December 2009
JEL No. O3

                                            ABSTRACT

We review the econometric literature on measuring the returns to R&D. The theoretical frameworks
that have been used are outlined, followed by an extensive discussion of measurement and econometric
issues that arise when estimating the models. We then provide a series of tables summarizing the major
results that have been obtained and conclude with a presentation of R&D spillover returns measurement.
In general, the private returns to R&D are strongly positive and somewhat higher than those for ordinary
capital, while the social returns are even higher, although variable and imprecisely measured in many
cases.


Bronwyn H. Hall                                    Pierre Mohnen
Dept. of Economics                                 UNU-MERIT
549 Evans Hall                                     Maastricht University
UC Berkeley                                        P.O. Box 616
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                            6200 MD Maastricht
and NBER                                           Netherlands
bhhall@nber.org                                    mohnen@merit.unu.edu

Jacques Mairesse
CREST-INSEE
15, Boulevard Gabriel PERI
92245 MALAKOFF CEDEX
FRANCE
and NBER
mairesse@ensae.fr
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                                                                November 2009




                                                                Table of Contents


1.                 INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................... 3
     1.1   BRIEF    HISTORY OF THE LITERATURE .......................................................................................................... 4

2.                 GENERAL THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK .............................................................. 5
     2.1   THE PRIMAL APPROACH ............................................................................................................................. 5
     2.2   THE DUAL APPROACH ................................................................................................................................ 9
3.                 MEASUREMENT ISSUES ........................................................................................... 12
     3.1   MEASUREMENT OF PRODUCTIVITY ........................................................................................................... 12
     3.2   MEASUREMENT OF KNOWLEDGE CAPITAL ................................................................................................. 15
     3.3   ECONOMETRIC ISSUES ............................................................................................................................. 18
4.                 EMPIRICAL ESTIMATES OF THE PRIVATE RETURNS TO R&D ...................... 21
     4.1   R&D ELASTICITY AND RATE OF RETURN: ESTIMATES BASED ON THE PRODUCTION FUNCTION ..................... 22
     4.2   R&D RATE OF RETURN: ESTIMATES BASED ON THE COST OR PROFIT FUNCTION........................................... 24
5.                 R&D SPILLOVERS AND THE SOCIAL RETURNS TO R&D ................................. 24
     5.1   CASE STUDIES ......................................................................................................................................... 26
     5.2   PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH ACCOUNTING AT THE AGGREGATE LEVEL ............................................................ 27
     5.3   MEASURING SPILLOVERS ......................................................................................................................... 27
6.                 CONCLUSIONS ............................................................................................................ 33




                                                                                2
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                            November 2009


                              Measuring the Returns to R&D

                     Bronwyn H. Hall, Jacques Mairesse, and Pierre Mohnen

1. Introduction
Returns to investments in R&D and other innovation assets are a subject of considerable interest
to accountants, firm managers, policy makers, and economists in general. The reason is obvious:
investment in R&D and innovation is expensive and one would like to be sure that there is a
positive return, and would also like guidance as to how to direct investments in the future. Policy
makers are especially interested in the social or economy-wide returns to R&D investment,
which can be greater or less than the private returns to individual firms, while economists and
managers are more often interested in the private returns, the former because they are interested
in the incentives firms face for undertaking such investment, and the latter because they are the
decision makers in question. That is, accountants and firm managers are interested in this topic
because they would like to use the information to help guide their investment decisions and
evaluate the success of various strategies.
For half a century, economists have been developing various methods of estimating the rate of
return to research and development spending (R&D). For the most part, the literature has used
the familiar growth accounting framework augmented with measures of R&D investment or
capital, at various levels of aggregation from plant level all the way up to the macro-economy.
This approach essentially relates the growth of total factor productivity (TFP) to R&D. To put it
another way, the residual growth factor in production that is not accounted for by the usual
inputs (labor, capital, intermediate inputs) is assumed to be the product of R&D that produces
technical change.
R&D expenditures may differ in type but their object is always to increase the stock of
knowledge in order to find new applications and innovations. A distinction is usually made
between basic research, applied research, and development, according to how close the research
is to commercial applications. In general the closer it is, the larger the expenditure share devoted
to it. Similarly, a distinction is made between R&D directed toward invention of new methods of
production (process R&D) and R&D directed towards the creation of new and improved goods
(product R&D). R&D can also be broken down on the basis of its funding source, either private
or public, or on the basis of whether it is carried out by businesses or by other organizations such
as universities and research institutes. Finally, R&D statistics are available classified by
economic sector or industry and, for the portion of R&D devoted to research, by scientific and
technical fields.
R&D can increase productivity by improving the quality or reducing the average production
costs of existing goods or simply by widening the spectrum of final goods or intermediate inputs
available. As a consequence, we may observe profit increases, price reductions, and factor
reallocations as well as firm entry and exit. Moreover, R&D carried out in one
firm/sector/country may produce positive spillover effects in other firms/sectors/countries. Such
spillovers are all the more likely and significant as the sender and the receiver are closely related.
“Pecuniary” spillovers occur when new or improved intermediate goods or investment goods are
sold to other firms at prices that reflect less than the full value of the progress they incorporate.

                                                  3
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                         November 2009


In contrast, “Non-pecuniary” spillovers are those that come from the knowledge created by R&D
as it disseminates and becomes useful to other firms.
Before continuing, we would like to caution the reader that the “return” to R&D is not an
invariant parameter, but the outcome of a complex interaction between firm strategy, competitor
strategy, and a stochastic macro-economic environment, much of which is unpredictable at the
time a firm chooses its R&D program. Therefore, there is no reason to expect estimates of the ex
post returns to be particularly stable over time or across sectors or countries. And in the case of
social returns, they are not even tied to some kind of cost of capital. However, these estimates
can still be useful for making comparisons between various financing systems, sectors, or
countries, and can also be a guide to policy-making toward R&D. Nevertheless, keep in mind
that the measurement process is not a search for a “scientific constant.”

1.1   Brief history of the literature
There are a number of prior surveys of the literature on the economic measurement of returns to
R&D. Some have catalogued the various results and others have discussed the many analytical
problems that confront a researcher in this area. The first and pioneering analytic survey was that
by Griliches (1979) in the Bell Journal of Economics, although some of the issues discussed
there were anticipated in his 1973 survey. In that article Griliches laid out the structure of the
problem in the production function context and discussed two major measurement difficulties:
the measurement of output when a great deal of R&D is devoted to quality improvement and
nonmarket goods and the measurement of input, specifically, of the stock of R&D capital. He
returned to these themes in Chapter 4 of the Kuznets lectures of 1996, published posthumously
(Griliches, 2000). Also see his 1998 book, which collects all the articles he wrote on this topic.
Hall (1996) reviews what was known to that date about the private and social returns to R&D,
and discusses some of the measurement problems. Hall (2007) presents a detailed analysis of the
problem of estimating the depreciation of R&D capital at the firm level. Mairesse and Sassenou
(1991) focus on the econometric studies dealing with firm data, while Mairesse and Mohnen
(1995) expand the topic to take in econometric studies at all levels of aggregation and to include
measures of R&D spillovers. The surveys by Debresson (1990), Mohnen (1990a), and Griliches
(1992) deal exclusively with spillovers.
The concern with which government policy makers view the problem of measuring the returns to
R&D is reflected in a large number of government publications on the topic. For example, see
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (1989) and Sveikauskas (2007), as well as past issues of the
OECD STI Review. For the UK, see the report by Griffith et al. (2003), and for Canada, Longo
(1984) and Mohnen (1992a).


This chapter will concentrate on the econometric approach to measuring returns to R&D that is
based on the production function and its cost or profit dual. By far the largest number of
quantitative studies has been performed using this approach, which can be applied in various
ways at the plant, firm, industry, or country level.
There are alternative approaches to valuing R&D econometrically, the most important of which
is the market value or Tobin’s q methodology, which relates the current financial value of a firm
to its underlying assets, including knowledge or R&D assets. This methodology is clearly limited
                                                4
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                        November 2009


in use to the firm level, and to economies with thick publicly traded financial markets and we
will not survey it extensively here. There are recent surveys of this literature by Hall (2000),
Czarnitzki et al. (2006), and Grandi et al. (2009). For an overview of the accounting approach to
the problem together with recommendations for improvements in reporting, see Lev (2001).
In the following pages we first present the general theoretical framework for the models
customarily used in estimating returns to R&D, and then we discuss in some detail the complex
measurement issues that arise in practice. This is followed by a review of the empirical results
that have been achieved using these models that includes an extensive set of tables which
organize the various results. The final substantive section of the paper discusses the measurement
of R&D spillovers and presents some of the results on their impact across firm and across
country. We conclude with a brief discussion of future research topics.

2. General theoretical framework
As observed earlier, much if not most of the literature that measures the returns to R&D, whether
at the micro or the macro level, relies on a production function framework, where the output of a
firm, a sector, or an economy is related to its stock of R&D or knowledge capital, and potentially
to the stock of external R&D capital, along with other inputs. Two major approaches have been
followed: the primal approach, which estimates a production function with quantities as inputs,
and the dual approach, which estimates a system of factor demand equations derived from a dual
(cost function) representation of technology.1 We present each of these approaches in the next
two sections of the chapter.

2.1    The primal approach
The Cobb-Douglas production function augmented with knowledge capital terms takes the
following (stylized) form:
                                                        λ       ϕ
                                      Y = ALα C β [ K ]  K o  eu                                   (1)


where Y is a measure of production,2 L is a measure of labor input, C is ordinary (tangible)
capital, K is own knowledge (intangible) capital, Ko is external knowledge capital and u is a
disturbance. External knowledge capital can be that held by other firms in the sector, or, in the
case of economy-wide estimation, that held by other countries. The coefficient γ measures the
elasticity of output with respect to own R&D capital and φ the elasticity of output with respect to
external R&D capital (the spillover term).

1
  There are also a couple of studies, few thus far, which have examined the R&D productivity connection using
technological frontier analysis (see Fecher 1992, Fecher and Perelman (1989, 1992) and Perlman 1995). The idea is
to estimate frontier (or best practice) production functions instead of average production functions, to decompose
productivity growth into movements of the frontier and toward the frontier and then to regress the estimated changes
in these two components on, among other things, R&D. The estimation of best practice technology can be achieved
from a cost function or from a production function.
2
 This formulation has abstracted from the presence of intermediate inputs such as energy and materials. Therefore
production should be measured by value added in their absence; by gross output if these inputs are available.

                                                         5
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                                       November 2009


Ordinarily, logs are taken of this equation, converting it to a linear model that can be easily
estimated. Writing the equation using t to denote time and i to denote firm or sector:
                                yit = ηi + λt + α lit + β cit + γ kit + ϕ kito + uit           (2)

In deriving this equation, we have implicitly assumed that the log of technical progress (A) can
be written as the sum of a sector or firm-specific effect ηi and a time effect λt. Many variations of
this assumption are possible, although not all will be identified, given the data available.
Frequently equation (2) is converted to a growth rate version by first differencing:
                              ∆yit = λt + α∆lit + β ∆cit + γ∆kit + ϕ∆kito + ∆uit (3)


In this case, an expression for TFP growth as a function of R&D capital stocks and a
disembodied trend can be derived by subtracting the terms involving the other inputs from the
left hand side of the equation. Note that the additive sector or firm effect has disappeared, and
that the time effect is now a growth rate effect rather than a level (that is, it is relative to the
initial observation).
By definition, the elasticity γ = ρ(K/Y), where ρ is the marginal productivity of R&D capital.
Consequently and dropping the external R&D capital term for the moment, equation (3) can be
rewritten as
                                                              ( Rit − δ K i ,t −1 )
                           ∆yit = λt + α∆lit + β ∆cit + ρ                             + ∆uit                           (4)
                                                                          Yit

where R is gross R&D investment, and δ is the depreciation rate of R&D capital. If we assume a
constant marginal product γ and a constant discount rate r along with an infinite planning
horizon, then ρ can be given the economic interpretation of a marginal gross (of depreciation)
internal rate of return.3 After subtraction of the R&D depreciation rate, we obtain a marginal net
internal rate of return. As opposed to specification (3), specification (4) estimates the gross rate
of return to R&D directly. As usually implemented, the depreciation rate is assumed to be
approximately zero, so that a simple measure of R&D intensity (R&D to output ratio) can be
used on the right hand side.
At the aggregate level, using gross R&D to measure the R&D intensity may not be a bad
approximation, but at the firm level, it is clearly problematic, since much of their R&D
investments are “replacement” investments.4 The true net investment rate may be substantially

3
    The internal rate of return is the one that equates a dollar of investment in R&D to the present value of the
                                                                     ∞
marginal productivities of that investment in the future: 1 −    ∫
                                                                 0
                                                                         ρ e− ( r +δ ) dt . Solving this integral yields ρ = r+δ.
4
  For a derivation of the bias involved in ignoring the R&D depreciation rate, see Mairesse and Sassenou 1991,
footnote 19). Goto and Suzuki (1989) report large differences depending on whether net or gross R&D intensities
are being used. Hall and Mairesse (1995) find that the rates of return increase by an increment of about 5-7% when
net intensities are used.

                                                             6
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                                             November 2009


lower than that measured by the gross R&D spending-sales ratio. To see the consequences of this
assumption, we use the equation for capitalized R&D presented later in the chapter to construct
an approximation to net R&D investment:


                     Rit − δ K i ,t −1       Rit − δ Ri ,t −1 / (δ i + gi )        Rit               δi           
            ∆kit =                       ≅                                    =             1 −                   
                         K i ,t −1                      K i ,t −1                 K i ,t −1  (1 + gi )(δ i + gi ) 
                                                                                                                         (5)
                                δi                gi 
            ⇒ ρˆ ≅ 1 −                       ρ ≅          ρ
                       (1 + g i )(δ i + g  )
                                           i        δ
                                                    i + g i 




This equation shows that the estimated gross rate of return in the R&D intensity formulation
underestimates the true rate of return by the ratio of R&D growth to the sum of R&D growth
plus depreciation. In a typical sample, the median growth of real R&D ranges from about 3 to 10
per cent per annum. If the depreciation rate is 15 per cent, this implies that the true gross rate of
return will be 2.5 to 5 times the estimated value, a point which seems to have gone unnoticed in
the literature.
Recall that ρ and γ are related simply by the ratio K/Y, so that in principle, estimates obtained for
one can be easily translated into estimates of the other. However, in most samples the R&D
intensities are very heterogeneous, so it will make quite a bit of difference whether one estimates
ρ or γ directly and derives the other one. Conceptually it seems preferable to assume that the rate
of return ρ is constant across units rather than the elasticity γ (which is more likely to vary
directly with the share of R&D capital itself), but such estimates have proved less stable than the
elasticity estimates. The explanation lies in the uncertainty of R&D output: the ex ante expected
rate of return is what the firms consider when investing and it is likely to be roughly equal to the
cost of capital (possibly with a risk adjustment and lemons’ premium), but the ex post returns,
which is what we measure, could be highly variable.
Using the production function framework, it is possible to estimate the model in another way. If
we assume constant returns to scale, competitive behavior, and profit-maximizing levels of
factors of production, we can replace the production elasticities with the appropriate total cost
shares. For example, the elasticity with respect to labor would be equal to the labor share in total
cost.5 Equations (3) and (4) can then be replaced by the following:
                                               ∆TFPit = λt + γ∆kit + ∆uit                                                  (6)


                                                                ( Rit − δ K i ,t −1 )
                                     ∆TFPit = λt + ρ                                    + ∆uit                             (7)
                                                                        Yit



5
 Using ideas in Hall (1998) and Griliches and Mairesse (1984), the constant returns assumption can be relaxed to an
assumption of homogeneity, that is, proportionality among the production coefficients that varies with their shares.
We develop this later in this section.

                                                                       7
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                          November 2009


where ∆TFPit = ∆yit – sLit ∆lit – sCit ∆cit is the Divisia index of total factor productivity growth.6
The same kind of simplification could be applied to the equation in levels (2).
In the last two specifications, additional information is added to the model regarding producer
behavior and market structure. A more general model would allow for scale economies, mark-up
pricing in the presence of imperfect competition and intertemporal R&D investment decisions.
Such a model is developed by Klette (1994) following on the work of Hall (1988). In the version
presented here, we have added an additional variable factor, materials Mit that is needed for
identification. Starting with equation (3), multiply the output elasticities for the variable inputs
labor and materials by µ, where µ is the mark-up ratio of price to marginal revenue (or marginal
cost). The output elasticity of the quasi-fixed factor (physical capital) is given by the difference
between the scale elasticity σ and the sum of the other output elasticities:
               ∆yit = λt + µ [α (∆lit − ∆cit ) + θ (∆mit − ∆cit )] + σ∆cit + γ∆kit + ∆uit                (8)


The model as it has been presented so far basically concerns process R&D, although in
estimation on firm-level data with sector or economy-wide deflators, some of the benefits of
product R&D will be present in the output measure in the form of higher relative prices for the
output of particular firms. That is, the production function being estimated is a form of revenue
production function with relative price times quantity on the left hand side. But a richer approach
is to actually model the demand side. Suppose we have a log-linear expansion of the demand
growth function in terms of price and quality change (proxied by R&D capital growth):
                                           ∆yit = η∆pit + ξ∆ktt                                          (9)

where η is the price elasticity of demand, pit is the price of the firm’s output relative to the sector
or economy, and ξ is the elasticity of demand to a change in product quality. Defining sales as Sit
= pitYit, equation (9) can be rewritten as
                                    ∆yit = (1 + η )−1 (η∆sit + ξ∆ktt )                                  (10)


If we combine equations (8) and (10) and ascribe the price markup entirely to the price elasticity
of demand, i.e., µ = η(1+η)-1, then we obtain the following:
       ∆sit = λɶt + α (∆lit − ∆cit ) + θ (∆mit − ∆cit ) + (σ / µ )∆cit + (γ / µ − ξ / η )∆kit + ∆uɶit   (11)

The tildas on the time dummies and disturbances reflect the fact that these now contain both
supply and demand influences. Equation (11) could also be estimated in a TFP growth form
under the assumptions that allow the shares to be measured directly. It combines the cost-
reducing and product-creating aspects of R&D, as well as allowing for imperfect competition,
scale economies and markup pricing. The real output variable, which is hard to measure because
of firm-specific changes in quality, has been substituted out in favor of a simple gross sales

6
  In discrete time, the Divisia index of TFP growth would be approximated by a Tornqvist index, where the weights
are the arithmetic means of the cost shares over two successive periods.

                                                         8
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                             November 2009


variable. The R&D elasticities are now a combination of output elasticities and price elasticities,
and cannot be identified separately by this equation alone, although identification might be
achieved if firm-specific prices are available, as they are in some establishment censuses.

2.2      The dual approach
The dual approach relies not just on a technological representation but also on the assumption of
some kind of optimizing behavior. Under the assumptions of cost minimization, profit
maximization, or firm value maximization, the theorems of duality can be exploited to represent
the technology by a cost function, a profit function or a value function, and to derive from them
the factor demand and/or output supply equations. A distinction can be made between variable
and quasi-fixed inputs, i.e., those that are optimized and those which for various reasons such as
adjustment costs are not at their optimal long-run value. Equations describing the adjustment of
the quasi-fixed inputs to their long-run value can also be derived, by formulating some kind of
dynamic model, such as the adjustment cost model based on an intertemporal optimization. The
model can moreover be enlarged to incorporate financial choices, pricing decisions, or multiple
outputs. A great deal of structure is imposed on the estimation, allowing the estimation of a
number of economic effects within a unified framework and increasing the efficiency of the
estimation, if the assumed specification is correct. The technology is often represented by a
flexible functional form, which does not assume a priori that the rates of return on R&D are
constant, but allows them to vary in conjunction with variations in factor prices, R&D spillovers,
output and quasi-fixed inputs.
To illustrate the dual approach, we present a simplified version of the model constructed by
Bernstein and Nadiri (1991). The technology is represented by a variable cost function:
                                         C V = C V ( wt , Yt , Ct −1 , ∆Ct , At )         (12)

Where CV is the variable cost (the sum of the costs of the variable inputs only), wt is the n-
dimensional vector of variable input prices, Ct-1 is the m-dimensional vector of quasi-fixed input
quantities, Yt is the level of output, At is a shift variable reflecting technical change, and ∆Ct = Ct
- Ct-1 is the m-dimensional vector of net investment in the quasi-fixed inputs, entering because of
adjustment costs.7 The R&D stock of knowledge K is a component of the vector C. At period t,
the capital stocks at the end of the preceding period (Ct-1) are the relevant inputs. Adjustment
costs to R&D are justified by the installation costs of R&D equipment, the search costs for R&D
personnel, the setup costs of R&D projects, and the fact that R&D programs generally take time
and are not easily sped up.
As in the primal approach, the demand function and hence the differential role of product and
process R&D can be explicitly modeled. The inverse product demand function is given by
                                                pt = D(Yt , K t −1 , zt )                 (13)




7
    To simplify the presentation, the firm or sector index i is omitted.

                                                                 9
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                                             November 2009


where pt is the output price, Kt-1 is the R&D stock, and zt is a vector of exogenous variables
affecting demand.
The producer’s input and output choices over his planning horizon (assumed to be infinity for
simplicity) are determined by maximizing the expected present value of the net inflow of funds:
                  ∞
 max{Ys ,Vs ,Cs } ∑ Etα t , s  D (Ys , K s −1 , zs )Ys − C V ( ws , Ys , Cs −1 , ∆Cs , At ) − qs ( K s − ( I m − δ ) K s −1 )  (14)
                 s =t



where Et is the conditional expectation operator, V is the n-dimensional vector of variable inputs,
αt,s is the discount factor, q is the row vector of quasi-fixed input prices, Im is the m-dimensional
identity matrix, and δ is the m-dimensional diagonal matrix of depreciation rates of the quasi-
fixed inputs.
A flexible functional form (such as a translog, a generalized Leontieff, or a generalized
McFadden) is used for the demand and variable cost functions. The input demand and output
supply functions are then readily derived from them. By Shephard’s lemma, the variable input
demand function in competitive factor markets are given by
                                           ∂C V 
                                    vis =                   i = 1,..., n    s = t ,..., ∞                                 (15)
                                           ∂wi  s

In monopolistic or imperfectly competitive markets, the output supply is given by
                                     ∂ log D    ∂C V 
                               psY 1 +           =                           s = t ,..., ∞                            (16)
                                        ∂ log Y  s  ∂Y  s

This equation includes a price mark-up over marginal cost that is determined by the inverse of
the price elasticity of the demand function.
The accumulation of R&D (or other capitals) is given by the following Euler equation:
                          e                                            e              e
          e ∂C V                ∂C V   ∂C V        ∂D 
        w +
          rs       + (1 + ρ s )        −      −              Yse+1 = 0                             s = t ,..., ∞     (17)
            ∂K  s +1            ∂∆K  s  ∂∆K  s +1  ∂K  s +1

where wers = (1+ρs) qrs - (1-δr) qer,s+1 is the R&D capital rental rate, (1+ρs) = αs,s+1, the index r
denotes the R&D component of a vector and the superscript e denotes the conditional
expectation of a variable. Similar Euler equations, except for the absence of the last term from
the demand equation, describe the accumulation of the other quasi-fixed inputs.
The equations describing the technology (12), the inverse product demand (13), the factor
demands (15), (17), and the output supply or pricing equation (16) are then estimated jointly.
More restricted versions of this kind of model do not account for the demand effects of R&D
(equations (13) and (16) are not estimated), or do not model the accumulation of the quasi-fixed
inputs. In the latter versions, referred to as temporary equilibrium models, the quasi-fixed inputs
are completely fixed, their variation does not appear as an argument in the cost function and
                                                                    10
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                        November 2009


hence the Euler equation (17) is eliminated. Alternatively all inputs can be treated as variable
(static equilibrium models) and then equation (15) holds for all inputs.8
Ex ante, in the model of intertemporal maximization, over the planning horizon R&D earns the
normal rate of return under the expectations which hold at the time of decision making. Ex post,
those expectations might not materialize, and hence the marginal R&D investment could earn
more or less than the normal rate of return. If we are interested in short-run growth accounting,
we need only the short-run rate of return, earned in the period just following the investment.
Whereas, in the primal approach, this rate of return is estimated by its marginal (revenue)
productivity, in the dual approach it is estimated by its shadow price, normalized by the
acquisition price of R&D. In the presence of a demand effect, the shadow price consists of the
marginal cost and marginal revenue effects. Again, if we assume the constancy of the shadow
price of R&D, the R&D depreciation rate and the discount rate, and an infinite planning horizon,
the shadow price of R&D less its depreciation rate can be interpreted as a net rate of return.
As can be seen from equation (17), if we were in the long run without growth, that is, when Kt =
Kt-1, adjustment costs would disappear in the model as formulated above, and the shadow price
of R&D would equal the normal rate of return plus the depreciation rate less the inflation rate, in
other words the net (of depreciation) normal real rate of return.9 In the short run, however, which
corresponds to the observed data, the shadow price at period t matches the long-run rate plus the
difference in the marginal adjustment costs between two adjacent periods. The short-term rate of
return can thus fall above or below the normal rate of return.
The differences of specification in the studies using the dual approach are even more numerous
than in the primal approach. First, the choice of how to represent the technology (by a total cost,
variable cost, profit, or value function) implies an a priori assumption about which inputs are
variable and which ones are quasi-fixed and about which inputs and output decisions are
considered endogenous or exogenous in the model. Second, the choice between a temporary
equilibrium and a dynamic model implies a choice between adding or not equations describing
the evolution of the quasi-fixed inputs. Third, an indicator of autonomous technological progress
(time dummies or a time trend) is generally not included given its collinearity with the stock and
output variables, and this may imply some misspecification. Finally, the choice of functional
form takes us back to the choice between a constant rate of return and a constant elasticity of
R&D. A translog function will estimate elasticities, while a quadratic functional form estimates
marginal productivities as a function of levels of the explanatory variables. In addition, any
flexible functional forms, the quadratic being a major exception, are not amenable to aggregation
and make the fitting of micro models to macro data problematic.
Having presented the basic framework for estimating the returns to R&D, in the next section we
turn to some measurement issues.



8
  Even more general models would allow for monopsonistic input markets, strategic competition with R&D reaction
functions, or induced technical change.
9
  If the adjustment costs had been formulated in terms of gross investment, the long-run rate of return would be the
normal discount rate augmented by an expression involving the marginal adjustment costs associated with
replacement investment.

                                                        11
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                         November 2009


3. Measurement Issues
In this section, we discuss a certain number of technical and conceptual problems that arise in the
econometric studies of R&D and productivity. Some of them pertain to productivity analysis in
general, others are specific to R&D. After a brief presentation of the issues, we summarize what
has been learned regarding their important and relevance, confining ourselves to those issues
which are particular to R&D. Most of the work exploring these problems of sensitivity to
measurements and specifications and of various sources of bias in the estimation has been done
using the primal approach. To organize our presentation, we distinguish three categories: the
measurement of productivity, the measurement of the R&D stock of knowledge, and the issues
of exogeneity and heterogeneity.

3.1   Measurement of productivity
Productivity can broadly be defined as the ratio of an output index to an input index. Hence the
first issue is how to properly measure output and input and how to separate out the R&D effect
from other determinants or explanations of productivity.

3.1.1 Measurement of output
Output can be measured by gross output, value-added, or sales. Value-added is the output
obtained from the combined use of labor and capital, and can be defined as gross output less
purchased inputs such as materials. Thus gross output is the value of the combined use of these
two primary inputs plus the intermediate inputs. Frequently sales, which is gross output less
increases in inventories of finished goods, is used as a proxy for output. Theoretically, gross
output is to be preferred over value-added as a measure, because it allows for substitution
between materials and the other two inputs. However, there are reasons to prefer the use of
value-added, especially when using firm data. First, the materials-output ratio can vary a great
deal across firms because of different degrees of vertical integration; second, proper modeling of
the demand for intermediate inputs would probably require modeling adjustment costs related to
the stocking of materials; third, good data on materials and value-added are often not available
when using data based on public firm accounts instead of the census data available within
national statistical agencies.
The studies by Cunéo and Mairesse (1984) and Mairesse and Hall (1994) on French data show
that the estimates of R&D elasticities derived from a value-added specification do not differ by
much from those obtained using sales without including materials. As exposited in Griliches and
Mairesse (1984), omitting materials in the sales regression yields an upward bias in the R&D
elasticity, because materials are correlated with R&D. In the cross section dimension, where the
proportionality of materials to output is likely to hold, the bias in the R&D elasticity is
predictable, being roughly equal to the estimated R&D elasticity times the materials share in
output. However, in the within dimension, materials may be sluggish in responding to output
changes, and hence the bias is less easy to quantify. These predictions are confirmed in the
previously mentioned studies by Mairesse and co-authors.
A more substantial problem, particularly acute in relation to R&D, is the incorporation of quality
changes in price deflators. New or improved products make their way into the price indices only
with a substantial lag, if at all. The consequence is that R&D-intensive goods, as outputs or as
inputs, are underestimated and that their prices are overestimated. For a striking illustration of
                                                12
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                            November 2009


the difference the use of hedonic prices can make to the estimated rates of returns to R&D, see
Griliches (1994a). Regressing TFP growth rates on R&D intensities across industries, he obtains
an estimated rate of return to R&D of 35.7% for the 1973-89 period. When the computer
industry, which is the only that has quality changes incorporated in its output price index, is
excluded from the regression, the rate of return drops to 13.4%. But when TFP growth in
semiconductors and pharmaceuticals is also corrected for quality change in outputs, and TFP
growth in the computer industry is corrected for quality change in the inputs of semiconductors,
the estimates rise again to 34.8%, even without including the computer industry. Hanel (1994),
using Canadian industry data, and Mairesse and Hall (1994), using U.S. firm data, also report an
outlier effect in the computer industry.
With panel data, quality differences can be captured by sector-time dummies, even in the
absence of good prices, leaving only the inter-firm differences. The R&D estimates are thus
biased but only to the extent that sector prices or dummies do not fully capture the quality
differences and the latter are correlated with the explanatory variables. Note that if one is
interested in the private returns to R&D, this potential bias is not a problem, as those returns can
come either through increased productivity, or through increased prices or markups relative to
competitors, and it would be incorrect to omit the latter effects. See the earlier discussion of
incorporating the demand equation into the model for way of identifying these effects separately.

3.1.2 Measurement of the inputs
Three issues regarding the correct way to measure the inputs in productivity analysis are
particularly relevant for R&D: the R&D double-counting and expensing bias in the estimated
returns to R&D, the sensitivity of these estimates to corrections for quality differences in labor
and capital, and the sensitivity with respect to variations in capital utilization. We discuss each of
these in turn.
First, since R&D expenditures are composed of labor, capital, and material costs, they are likely
to be counted twice, unless the conventional inputs are cleared of their R&D components.
Moreover, when output is measured by value-added, value-added should include net R&D on the
output side, because often value-added does not include R&D when the latter is expensed.
Schankerman (1981) shows that double-counting of R&D results in mismeasured input
quantities and cost shares. The bias due to expensing can go either way depending on the
evolution of R&D intensity.
Cunéo and Mairesse (1984) found a substantial downward bias in the R&D elasticity when the
inputs were not corrected for R&D double-counting and expensing. The bias was mostly
prevalent in the cross-section dimension and not in the time or within-firm dimension. In Hall
and Mairesse (1995), Harhoff (1994), and Mairesse and Hall (1994), the bias appears in both
dimensions. When the rate of return is estimated from levels in the variables, the excess rate of
return interpretation, although empirically plausible, is theoretically questionable. Schankerman
(1981) shows that it is not necessarily correct, even using a simple Cobb-Douglas functional
form; what matters is the correlation between the measurement errors and R&D. Cunéo and
Mairesse (1984) argue that the excess rate of return interpretation is theoretically correct with a
linear production function, but that empirically it depends on what varies and what remains
relatively constant over the sample. Interpretation as an excess rate of return is more likely when
the bias appears in the cross-section but not in the within firm dimension.

                                                 13
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                           November 2009


Ideally, when aggregating the various inputs, individual productivity differences should be
allowed for by adopting a weighting scheme such as the Divisia index to construct TFP.
Mairesse and Cunéo (1985), Mairesse and Sassenou (1989), and Crépon and Mairesse (1993)
obtain lower R&D elasticities when different kinds of labor, corresponding to different levels of
educational qualifications are introduced separately into the production function. Their
elasticities for French manufacturing firms in the cross-sectional dimension decline by one half
when labor qualifications are accounted for. This result is due to the positive correlation between
highly qualified labor and R&D, indicating a complementarity between the two. This
phenomenon does not show up in the within dimension as differences in the quality of the inputs
do not change much over time. In a similar way to labor, differences in the quality of the
physical capital stock have been modeled by adding a capital age variable to the regression.
However, Mairesse and Sassenou (1989) and Crépon and Mairesse (1993) find little different in
the estimates of R&D coefficients when this is done.
Finally, whereas first differencing controls for permanent differences across firms, it leaves too
much cyclical noise and measurement error in the data. In the within firm dimension, the rates of
return to R&D are therefore difficult to estimate. Long-differencing (i.e., over 5 to 10 years)
helps in removing the cyclical variation. Hall and Mairesse (1995) report more significant R&D
elasticities (but not rates of return) using long-differenced rather than first-differenced data. The
cyclical effect (although not the measurement error) can also be captured by a variable
measuring the rate of capacity utilization, as in Mohnen (1992a). Some studies using the dual
approach (e.g., Mohnen et al. 1986 and Bernstein and Nadiri 1991) have modeled adjustment
costs to explain the sluggishness of input adjustments to cost changes.

3.1.3 The form of the technology
When assessing the role of R&D in productivity growth, one has to keep in mind that other
factors affect the level and the growth rate of TFP, among which are the returns to scale and
technical change that is not a direct result of R&D. If not accounted for, these other determinants
of productivity could bias the estimates of the returns to R&D.
In the studies based on the production function, returns to scale tend to be constant in the cross
section dimension (across firms). Controlling for permanent firm effects (that is, within firm), the
elasticities and rates of returns to R&D tend to be higher when constant returns to scale is
imposed or when factor elasticities are replaced by observed factor shares (see Griliches and
Mairesse 1984, Cunéo and Mairesse 1984, Griliches 1986, Griliches and Mairesse 1990, and
Hall and Mairesse 1995). Consistent with this result, the decreasing returns to scale tend to
reduce the conventional input elasticities as well (especially that for capital). Griliches and
Mairesse (1984) explain this result by the fact that the sources of downward bias such as
measurement error are stronger in the within dimension, where much of the relevant information
has been removed. Griliches and Hausman (1986) provide a useful analysis of the effects of
measurement error on panel data estimates in general, with an application to the production
function.
In the cross-sectional study of productivity, account should be taken of firm-specific variations in
management skills, sector-specific appropriability or technological opportunity conditions. In
panel data, these factors will be captured by dummy variables, either at the industry or the firm
level. There are also variations across the time dimension that may have little to do with the real
R&D-productivity relationship, such as macro-economic conditions, errors in deflators that are
                                                 14
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                            November 2009


common to a sector or the economy, or other economy-wide measurement errors. Thus it is
invariably a good idea to include time dummies when doing the analysis at the plant, firm, or
sector level. At the macro-economic level, this option is not available, which renders the analysis
effectively impossible due to the confounding effects of other changes on the relationship
between R&D and productivity.10

3.2    Measurement of knowledge capital
The underlying assumption behind the econometric measurement of the returns to R&D is that
R&D creates a firm-level stock of knowledge that yields returns into the future. Constructing
such a stock from a string of R&D investments requires depreciating the past stock in some way.
How fast do R&D expenditures enter and exit the relevant stock of knowledge? What is the
starting point? How should we convert nominal flows into real terms? We now turn to these
issues.
Almost all the studies reviewed here have used a simple perpetual inventory or declining balance
methodology with a single depreciation rate to construct the knowledge capital produced by
R&D investments:
                                           K it = (1 − δ ) K i ,t −1 + Rit                                (18)


where K is the knowledge stock of firm i at time t, R denotes real R&D investment at time t and
δ is a suitably chosen (private) depreciation rate.11 A few authors (Hall and Hayashi 1989, Klette
1994) have suggested a simple variation of this model that incorporates the idea that the
productivity of R&D depends on the level of the current stock:
                                 log K it = σ log K i ,t −1 + (1 − σ ) log Rit                            (19)


In this multiplicative formulation, the R&D impact on next period’s knowledge stock depends on
the level of last period’s stock. Exploring the impact of alternative specifications of this kind
may be a useful avenue for future work. See Bitzer and Stephan (2007) for another alternative.
However, the workhorse of R&D stock estimation remains the perpetual inventory model,
leaving us with the problem of choosing a depreciation rate. From the perspective of a firm, this
is the rate at which the private returns to past R&D investments decline if no further R&D is
undertaken. Determining this rate is difficult if not impossible, for at least two reasons. First, the
appropriate depreciation rate is endogenous to the firm’s own behavior and that of its

10
  Obviously, including a full set of time dummies in a single time series relationship leaves nothing else to identify
the impact of R&D. Some researchers have tried to avoid this problem in the past by including only a time trend or a
quadratic in time, but this is a fairly unsatisfactory solution.
11
   For future reference, note also that under the assumption of constant depreciation and constant R&D growth at the
firm level, equation (18) implies that the “true” R&D capital K* (K computed using correct economic depreciation)
                                       δ i + gi
is given by the equation K it = K it
                             *
                                                   , where δi0 is the depreciation rate used to construct the measured K
                                       δ i0 + gi
(usually 15 per cent).
                                                              15
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                       November 2009


competitors, in addition to depending to some extent on the progress of public research and
science. Therefore there is no reason to assume that it is constant over time or across firms,
although it will usually (but not always) change slowly in the time dimension. Second,
identifying the depreciation rate independently from the return to R&D requires determination of
the lag structure of R&D in generating returns. But years of experience with the specification of
production functions, market value equations, or even patent production functions (Hall,
Griliches, and Hausman 1986) has shown convincingly that this is extremely difficult, because of
the lack of appropriate natural experiments. That is, in practice R&D does not vary much over
time within firm, so that trying to identify more than one coefficient of R&D is problematic and
leads to very unstable results. In the data used in Hall (2007), which is a fairly heterogeneous
time series-cross section of firms, the variance of R&D growth rates within firms is only about 4
per cent of the variance of the levels. In addition, as has been observed by earlier authors (e.g.,
Hall and Mairesse 2005), the log R&D series exhibits close to random walk behavior.12 The
implication of these properties is that including more than one linear function of the (log) R&D
series in an equation will be a futile exercise.
In spite of these difficulties, some researchers have attempted to estimate the private (firm-level)
depreciation rate for R&D directly. One approach is to estimate the rate of obsolescence using
patent renewal data; obviously this is not ideal, since the knowledge may remain useful even if
patent protection is not required and since this method covers only certain kinds of knowledge,
that which can be patented. Bosworth (1978) estimates the rate of obsolescence to lie in the 10%
to 15% range and to be variable across cohorts, whereas Pakes and Schankerman (1984) obtain a
point estimate of 25%. Klette (1994) estimates a 20% physical R&D depreciation rate using the
model in equation (19) in combination with a revenue growth equation. Bernstein and Mamuneas
(2006) estimate industry-specific rates that range from 18% for chemicals to 29% for electrical
products. Hall (2005) uses a Tobin’s q market value equation together with data on a large panel
of U. S. manufacturing firms over the 1974-2003 period. She obtains an overall estimate of 27%,
with estimates ranging from 15% for pharmaceuticals to 36% for electrical product firms.
An alternative approach to estimating the magnitude of knowledge depreciation is to experiment
with different rates in constructing the knowledge stock. Griliches and Mairesse (1984),
Mairesse and Cunéo (1985), Bernstein (1988), Bernstein and Nadiri (1989), Hall and Mairesse
(1995), and Harhoff (1994) report small differences, if any, in the estimated R&D effects when
the rate varies from about 8% to 25%. Because of this evidence, most researchers use the 15 per
cent that Griliches had settled on in his early work.
It is easy to see why the resulting elasticity is not sensitive to the choice of depreciation rate:
assume that R&D grows over a sufficiently long period at a constant (firm-specific) rate gi and
that knowledge capital K depreciates at a firm-specific rate δi. Then one can show that
                                        Rit
                            K it ≅            or log K it ≅ log Rit − log(δ i + gi ) (20)
                                     δ i + gi




12
  A typical correlogram for the first three lags of the log R&D series in the US data is (0.99, 0.97. 0.96) and the
partial correlogram is (0.99, 0.00, 0.00).

                                                          16
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                           November 2009


As long as the growth rate and depreciation do not change very much within firm over time, they
will be incorporated into the firm effect, and the estimated elasticity of output with respect to
either K or R will be the same, and that for K will not depend on the choice of depreciation rate.
Note that the fact that we also observe little sensitivity to the choice of depreciation rate in the
cross section dimension suggests that depreciation and growth rates are not very variable across
firms when compared to the level of R&D spending, or that they are not very correlated with the
R&D level.
However, although the elasticity of output with respect to R&D may not be affected by the
choice of the depreciation rate, the same is not true of the rate of return derived from the
elasticity. To see this, note that the gross and net rates of return to K are:
                                    ∂Y    Y           Y
                             ρG ≡      = γ * and ρ = γ * − δ                            (21)
                                    ∂K    K           K

where Y is output or value added, K* is the true knowledge stock, and ρG and ρ are the gross and
net rates of return respectively. Therefore the production function approach to measuring returns
requires knowledge of δ both to compute the correct level of K and also to convert gross returns
to net returns.

3.2.1 Lag effects
The use of a particular rate of R&D depreciation in the construction of the R&D stock by the
perpetual inventory method presumes a certain distribution of the R&D effects over time.
However, it is unlikely that the latest addition to the R&D stock becomes productive
immediately, because of the lag from expenditure to innovation, and from innovation to
commercialization. It seems reasonable to expect even longer lags for spillovers because of the
additional diffusion lag and also for basic R&D because of the longer invention to innovation
lag. Often only contemporaneous stocks are used in estimation, because of the shortness of the
available time-series of R&D expenditures.
A few examples exist in the literature where the use of alternative lag distributions has been
explored. Mansfield et al. (1971) report a median lag from R&D to innovation of about three
years for firms. Leonard (1971) reports that “the effect of R&D upon growth on the average
begins in the second year after the R&D investment and continues with steadily rising influence
for at least nine years after the initial input year.” Ravenscraft and Scherer (1982) cite survey
responses from companies stating that 45% reported a typical time lag between the beginning of
development and the first introduction of a new product of one to two years, 40% reported a lag
between two and five years and 5% a lag of more than 5 years.
Using patent renewal data, Pakes and Schankerman (1984) derive a gestation lag between R&D
outlay and its first revenues in the range of 1.2 to 2.5 years. From their econometric analysis,
Ravenscraft and Scherer (1982) conclude that the lag structure is roughly bell-shaped, with a
mean lag from 4 to 6 years. Seldon (1987) discriminates among different lags in the forest
products industry on the basis of correct signs and t-statistics. The best-fitting lags were found at
two years, for both private and public R&D. Adams (1990) obtains best fitting lags of 20 years
for the effect of own R&D on productivity growth and of 10 to 30 years for the effects of
spillovers from basic research and science. Using a similar procedure to Adams, Ducharme and
Mohnen (1996) generally find lags of 5 to 6 years for own R&D and of 7 to 11 years for
                                                17
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                     November 2009


spillovers. Griliches and Mairesse (1984) obtain some evidence that the lag effect drops sharply
after two years, but that the lag structure hardly matters for estimates obtained across firms.
Hanel (1994) also obtains more significant results with lagged R&D up to a certain lag. Geroski
(1989) finds that innovations continue exerting an effect on productivity growth three years after
their introduction.

3.2.2 Benchmark stock and R&D deflator
The perpetual inventory method used to construct an R&D stock of knowledge from past R&D
expenditures needs to have an initial benchmark stock. Generally the latter is measured by
dividing the first observation of R&D expenditure by the sum of the R&D depreciation rate and
an estimate of the R&D growth rate as in equation (20). Various methods are used to estimate the
growth rate: the ex post R&D growth rate, the output or capital stock growth rate, or merely a
notional value such as 3 or 5 per cent. Griliches and Mairesse (1984) and Mairesse and Hall
(1995) find somewhat higher R&D elasticities within firm but not across firms when they use
stocks constructed from longer R&D series.
The ideal for constructing a deflator for R&D expenditures would be a Divisia index of the
prices of the various components of R&D, as done for example by Bernstein for Statistics
Canada (1986). However, in practice the choice of R&D deflator does not seem to matter greatly.
The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (1989) study reports little difference between the use of the
Jaffe-Griliches R&D deflator, which is constructed as an index of the hourly compensation index
and implicit output deflator for non-financial corporations, and the GDP deflator. The Jaffe-
Griliches index itself was found to approximate fairly well the Mansfield, Romeo, and Switzer
(1981) Laspeyres index of price components of R&D. Harhoff (1998) reports very small
differences when using sector-specific investment deflators vs. R&D deflators for Germany.

3.3      Econometric issues

3.3.1 Definition of the sample
One problem facing the econometrician is the definition of the sample from which to infer his
estimates, i.e., the issues of selection bias, cleaning the data for outliers and incorrect numbers
and accounting for heterogeneity.
Is there selection bias if only R&D-performing firms are included in the sample? The studies by
Mairesse and Cunéo (1985), Mairesse and Sassenou (1989), and Crépon and Mairesse (1993),
which in various ways impute a stock of knowledge for non-R&D-performing firms tend to show
that the rate of return on R&D is not fundamentally different for the firms with and without
R&D. R&D-performing firms have a higher stock of knowledge or benefit from more spillovers
than those without apparent R&D activities; still the estimated stock of knowledge for non-R&D
firms can be quite sizeable. However, Klette (1994) reports that non-R&D performing firms have
a lower productivity performance.
Given the presence of extreme outliers with firm data, it is customary to clean the sample by
removing the observations for which some variables are abnormally high or low.13 The estimates


13
     For an example of the criteria used to clean the dataset, see Hall and Mairesse (1995).

                                                            18
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                            November 2009


can be very sensitive to the removal of outliers as the following two examples illustrate.
Lichtenberg and Siegel (1989) report 3.8% lower rates of return on total R&D when influential
outliers are discarded and 29.5% lower when a robust estimator is used instead of least squares.
Severe jumps in firm data are often the results of mergers and acquisitions. As Griliches and
Mairesse (1984) illustrate, excluding the firms that merged during the sample period sharply
drops the estimated R&D elasticity in the within firm dimension, but not in the across firm (total)
dimension. Merger firms have higher R&D growth rates and apparently more R&D. A similar
phenomenon is reported by Hall and Mairesse (1994), using a much larger sample.
As mentioned earlier, the estimates can also differ according to the R&D-intensiveness of the
firms, industries, countries, and time periods. Many studies obtain higher R&D elasticities for
the scientific (R&D-intensive) firms, at least in the cross section dimension (see Griliches 1980,
Griliches and Mairesse 1984, Cunéo and Mairesse 1984, Mairesse and Cunéo 1985, Sassenou
1988, Odagiri 1983, Englander et al. 1988, Bartelsman 1990b, Hall 1993 and Ortega-Argilés et
al. 2009). If R&D is earning an approximately normal rate of return, this result, that the R&D
elasticity varies with the R&D share, is to be expected. However, in the time-series dimension,
where the R&D elasticities tend to decline or even become insignificant, the difference between
the two types of firms tends to shrink (Griliches and Mairesse 1984). An analogous result is
found by Verspagen (1995) with industry data: in the within dimension he only obtains
significant R&D elasticities for the high-tech industries. But recall that within estimates are
likely to have more downward bias from measurement error, and in both these cases, much of the
variation in R&D intensity is removed when firm or industry effects are controlled for. Finally,
using aggregate data, Soete and Verspagen (1992) and Coe and Helpman (1992) find that the
productivity of R&D is higher in the more developed countries.
The estimated rates of return to R&D can also vary a great deal between sectors. Link (1981)
estimates rates of return for large firms that range from 25% in chemicals to 160% in
transportation equipment. Spreads of that order of magnitude in the rates of return are reported
by Bernstein (1988, 1989), Bernstein and Nadiri (1988, 1989, 1991), and Mohnen and Lépine
(1991) using industry data. The variation is even more pronounced for the estimated social rates
of return. The reasons for these variations are likely to be quite different from those for elasticity
differences. As discussed earlier, we would expect ex ante rates of return to be equalized across
sectors, but there can be wide variations in ex post measures due to the great uncertainty of
success that accompanies R&D.

3.3.2 Disaggregation of R&D
Most studies find a higher rate of return for process as compared to product R&D (Clark and
Griliches 1984, Griliches and Lichtenberg 1984a, Link 1982, Terleckyj 1982, Scherer 1982,
1983, Hanel 1994). Why should product R&D have lower return? First, the impacts of the two
types of R&D are difficult to disentangle and to a certain extent they are complementary.
Second, the effects of product R&D are difficult to measure because of the poor reflection of
quality improvements in the price indices. Third, new products imply adjustment costs that lower
productivity in the short run: as Clark and Griliches (1984) put it “new products involve a start-
up and debugging phase of varying length in which new equipment and new tasks are specified
and learnt.”


                                                 19
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                             November 2009


Regarding the sources of R&D funding, a lower rate of return (or a less significant one) is
reported by many authors to public rather than private R&D, both at the private and social level
(Bartelsman 1990a, Griliches 1980, 1986, Griliches and Lichtenberg 1984b, Hanel 1988,
Leonard 1971, Levy and Terleckyj 1989, Lichtenberg and Siegel 1991, Mansfield 1980, Nadiri
and Mamuneas 1994, Patel and Soete 1988, Park 1995, Soete and Verspagen 1992, Terleckyj
1974, Hanel 1994). Lichtenberg (1993) and Poole and Bernard (1992) even report instance of
negative contributions of government R&D.
Although it is likely that private firms are less efficient in their research when using the public
purse, there are other reasons that explain this lower return for public R&D. First, the studies are
generally restricted to the manufacturing industries, where a good deal of government R&D is
directed to the service sectors, where a large share of the externalities thus created can only be
measured imprecisely if at all, because of measurement difficulties of the output in the service
sector in addition to quality problems (Griliches 1994). Second, a large share of public funds is
spent precisely in areas where the risk is higher or where the government is already active
because there is a public goods problem (such as the areas of defense and health). Third, public
R&D can encourage private R&D and hence have an indirect rate of return (see David and Hall
2000 for a review of this evidence, which is mixed). Fourth, as Leonard (1971) reports, in the
U.S., there is empirical support for the hypothesis that federal funds are concentrated in a few
industries, such as aircraft and communications, where the returns are lower because of the
magnitude of the R&D – that is, there is indeed overinvestment. Note that government R&D can
yield high returns in basic research (see Link 1981 for US evidence), or in firms with high R&D
budgets and a sizable government share of the market (see Cunéo 1984 and Hall and Mairesse
1995 for France).
A higher return is also generally reported on basic R&D as opposed to applied or development
R&D (Lichtenberg and Siegel 1989, Lichtenberg 1992, Link 1981, Griliches 1986, Mansfield
1980). As Mansfield’s (1980) results suggest, basic R&D is really long-term R&D. So the higher
reward for basic R&D could simply reflect a higher risk factor associated with long-term R&D
commitments. Again, the interaction effect or complementarity of different types of R&D may
be important. For example, Link and Rees (1990) estimate higher rates of return to R&D for
firms involved in university research, this effect being higher for smaller than for larger firms.

3.3.3 Simultaneity
Another potential source of bias in the estimate of the elasticity or rate of return to R&D from a
production function is the simultaneity in the choices of output and inputs (see Griliches and
Mairesse 1984 for a formal derivation of the bias expression). In the absence of data on factor
prices (as is typically the case with firm data), a semi-reduced form can be estimated, where
labor, materials, and output are expressed as functions of the fixed factors capital and R&D. If
the left-out factor price variables are uncorrelated with the capital variables, it is then possibly to
obtain unbiased estimates at least of the ratio of the capital and R&D elasticities. This
assumption is more likely to be true in the within than in the total or cross section dimension.
Griliches and Mairesse 1984 obtain higher R&D-capital elasticity ratios with the reduced form
estimates, especially within firm. In contrast, Hall and Mairesse (1995) report lower R&D
elasticities with the reduced form specification in both the total and the long differenced
dimension, and hardly any differences in the within dimension.


                                                  20
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                         November 2009


Another way of handling the simultaneity issue is to use instrumental variable or Generalized
Method of Moments (GMM) techniques, exploiting the orthogonality between instruments (e.g.,
appropriately lagged explanatory variables) and the error term. This approach has been followed
by a number of researchers (among others, Hall and Mairesse 1995, Klette 1992, Bond et al.
2005, Griffith et al. 2006). Experience suggests that GMM estimates based on differences alone
can be very imprecise, whereas GMM using both level equations and difference equations yields
more precise estimates that are often close to those obtained by OLS (Blundell and Bond 2000).
The dual approach goes further in this direction by estimating a set of reduced form factor
demand equations as functions of factor prices (more readily available at the aggregate or
industry level), quasi-fixed inputs, and output (if the optimizing framework is one of cost
minimization and not profit maximization). But even the dual approach can be affected by a
simultaneity bias, to the extent that aggregate factor prices are correlated with aggregate input
levels and that output is itself endogenous. Little systematic work has been done to verify the
importance and the likelihood of these types of bias.
A simultaneity bias can also explain why some studies (e.g., Griliches and Mairesse 1984,
Mairesse and Hall 1994) find higher R&D elasticities with end-of-period than with beginning-of-
period R&D stocks (especially in the within firm dimension), because of the feedback from sales
to current levels of investment. See also Hall et al. 1999 for some evidence on causality between
output, profits, R&D, and investment.

4. Empirical estimates of the private returns to R&D
Measuring the private returns to R&D is a subject that has received a great deal of attention since
early work of Griliches, Mansfield, and others. A number of approaches to the problem have
been advanced and the increasingly widespread availability of large panel datasets of firms has
led to a corresponding increase in the use of various econometric methods for estimating returns.
In parallel with these developments, the econometrics of panel data has made enormous
progress, so that we now have a wide range of techniques to address the problems of
simultaneity and unobservables that are inherent in such data. In this section of the paper we give
an overview of the literature and discuss some of the results that have been obtained using these
methods and data.
Table 1, which is in four parts (firm production functions, industry production functions, country
production functions, and cost or profit functions) gives an idea of the literature that has been
created since the 1960s. Clearly, there is too much here to survey in detail. We have made a
selection based on a number of criteria such as publication in easily accessible journals, the use
of more developed methodologies, and our own familiarity with the work in question. In what
follows we present a series of tables that summarize the results for this selection of papers.
However, we encourage the reader who is interested in a particular question, methodology, or
geographical area to go back to the original papers, as our summary does not do justice to the full
richness of many of them, and there are differences that we have not been able to catalogue,
owing to lack of space. Among these are the details of the data construction, variation in the
control variables included, and variations in methods of estimation.
In the tables, we have classified the empirical studies with which we are familiar according to
four criteria:

                                                21
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                           November 2009


      1. Whether the model is in the primal or dual form (Tables 2, 3 vs. 4).
      2. Whether the data are at the firm, establishment, industry, or aggregate (country) level (all
         Tables, although some methods are better suited to particular levels of aggregation).
      3. Whether the estimates are cross-sectional or temporal, or both (Table 2 only, the other
         tables are temporal only).
      4. Whether or not spillovers are accounted for (Table 5 as opposed to Tables 2-4).
In each of the subsequent Tables (2 through 5), we show the author(s) and dates of the studies,
the country or countries covered, the number of cross-sectional observations, and the time
period. Table 2 shows results for firm and industry-level data estimated using the primal or
production function approach with the log of R&D capital stock included, in two parts: 2a for
cross-sectional and pooled results and 2b for temporal or within results. Here we show the
estimated R&D elasticities and the rate of return to R&D, where it can be derived. We also give
a brief indication of the model used (sales or value added as the dependent variable, the presence
or not of industry dummies, and occasionally the method of estimation if it is not OLS). In a few
cases, we indicate that the variables have been corrected for the double counting of R&D inputs.
Table 3 presents the estimated rates of return that are based on the R&D intensity version of the
production function regression and Table 4 those from various versions of the dual approach. All
of the models in these tables are essentially estimated in the temporal dimension. In the case of
Table 3, the regression is a growth rate regression; in Table 4, the identification typically comes
from the temporal variation of the data. We often give a range of estimates in both Tables 3 and
4, which correspond to the range estimated across the individual industries or countries.

4.1     R&D elasticity and rate of return: estimates based on the production function
Table 2 shows the estimates of research elasticity and rate of return obtained using firm data and
based on specifications of the (Cobb-Douglas) production function with R&D capital. The two
panels 2a and 2b show estimates based on the cross-sectional dimension and those exploiting the
temporal dimension of the data respectively. Overall, the results are plausible, with figures for
research elasticity ranging from 0.01 to 0.25 but centered on 0.08 or so. In general, the cross-
sectional estimates are higher than the within estimates, which are often not even statistically
significant.
Cross-sectional estimates use the information on individual differences in the levels of the
variables, whereas temporal estimates rest on the individual differences in the evolution of the
variables, independently of their levels. That is, cross-sectional estimates are based on the levels
of the variables for a given year or on individual means over a certain number of years
(“between” estimates). Temporal estimates are based on the growth rates of the variables, or on
the deviations from the individual means (”within” estimates). Total estimates are pooled across
the cross-sectional and temporal dimension, but because the cross-sectional variation is much
larger than the temporal variation within firm or industry, they tend to be close to the between
estimates.
It should also be pointed out that, with a few exceptions, the cross-section estimates tend to be
somewhat lower when sectoral dummies are included in the specification. The interpretation is
ambiguous. On the one hand, the indicators may correct the estimates for the bias resulting from

                                                  22
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                             November 2009


the erroneous omission of structural variables correlated to the sectoral characteristics. On the
other hand, the dummies themselves may be a source of distortion to the extent that they reflect
in part the return to research resulting from technological opportunities that differ by sector. The
latter are probably essential for explaining the greater tendency to carry out R&D in certain
sectors.
The fact that the estimates are lower and more fragile in the temporal dimension can be
explained in a number of ways. A simple but important reason relates to the collinearity between
the physical capital and research capital variables and the time effects reflecting autonomous
technical change. Another reason is the previously mentioned one that measurement errors have
a much more serious impact on growth rates than on the levels of variables (Griliches and
Hausman 1986). A further factor is no doubt the omission of cyclical variables in the production
function, such as person hours rather than simply employment, capacity utilization, and, more
generally, the difficulties of providing a satisfactory specification of the lags and the dynamic
evolution of the variables. A few of the more recent papers, such as Klette 1994, Coe and
Helpman 1995, Kao et al. 1999, Los and Verspagen 2000, and Guellec and van Pottelsberghe
2001, take some steps in the direction of proper time series modeling in the panel data context.
The rate of return estimates in Table 2 are mostly based on multiplying the estimated elasticity
by the average output-R&D capital ratio in the sample and are generally quite high because of
the skew distribution of this variable. Table 3 presents the estimates obtained directly using the
R&D intensity formulation of the model (equation (4) or (7) with depreciation set to zero). As
we noted, in principle, the choice between estimating an elasticity or a rate of return hinges on
which one of the two is more likely to be constant. Griliches and Lichtenberg (1984b) obtain
significant coefficients only with the constant rate of return assumption. Hall (1993) reports that
the latter formulation proved to be very unstable across minor sample changes and was also
sensitive to outliers. But Crépon and Mairesse (1993) show great heterogeneity in R&D
elasticities when the translog functional form is used. In fact, the elasticities tend to increase with
R&D intensity, suggesting that the constant rate of return is perhaps not unreasonable. It is
interesting to compare the estimates of the R&D elasticity with those of the rates of return, at
least for those studies where the sample characteristics necessary to make the conversion are
available. As can be seen from Table 3, the estimates of the rates of return are consistent with
those derived from the research elasticity. As the results in Hall and Mairesse (1995) show, the
estimated rates of return are closer to the elasticities estimated within firm or industry, as we
would expect, given that both of them are temporal estimates.
On the whole, although the studies are not fully comparable, it may be concluded that R&D rates
of return in developed economies during the past half century have been strongly positive and
may be as high as 75% or so, although they are more likely to be in the 20% to 30% range.
Looking at these studies, we also confirm two findings made earlier about the R&D elasticity:
the estimated returns tend to decrease and become less significant when sector indicators are
introduced and when the returns to scale are not constrained to be constant. We find that
estimates based on industry data are generally quite close to those obtained from firm data.
Finally, studies based on plant or establishment data produce results similar to those obtained
with firm data, not surprisingly, since they are invariably forced to use firm level R&D data due
lack of disaggregated data on R&D. Given the presence of “within firm” spillovers, it is not even
clear that disaggregation would be useful. The only exception is Clark and Griliches (1984), who

                                                  23
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                   November 2009


have line of business data on R&D and even they report rates of return similar to the lower ones
obtained at the firm level.

4.2   R&D rate of return: estimates based on the cost or profit function
Turning to the results obtained using the dual approach, we note first that because they rely
mostly on variation in factor prices for identification, they are for the most part conducted at the
industry level or higher. In addition, they are sometimes estimated with separate coefficients for
each industry and/or country; in that case we observe a range of estimates in Table 4. Because of
major differences in specification, comparing the results of the various studies is sometimes
difficult. For example, the rates of return are constrained to be the same across industries in
Bernstein (1988) and Bernstein and Nadiri (1989), in the former because R&D is being treated as
a variable rather than a quasi-fixed factor and in the latter because the estimated rates are long-
term rates of return (ignoring adjustment costs).
Looking at the estimates, we note that most of them are quite reasonable, on the order of 10% to
20%, although Bernstein (1989) and Mohnen and Lépine (1991) obtain a range across industries
that is somewhat higher using a translog cost function applied to Canadian data. In general, the
rates of return to R&D exceed those for physical capital in these papers. Bernstein (1989), who
estimates the two types of rates in a comparable manner, finds the rates of return to R&D in
Canada to be 2.5 to 4 times greater than those to physical capital.
In principle, one of the advantages of the dual approach as it has been implemented is that it
allows measurement of the adjustment costs for R&D capital (as well as those for physical
capital). For example, Bernstein and Mohnen (1998) find that R&D stock adjustment in the U.S.
is relatively slow, with 5% taking place in the first year, whereas for Japan 41% takes place in
the first year. Mohnen (1992) notes that these estimates can vary quite a bit and are often
insignificantly different from zero. In his comparison of OECD countries, the amount of R&D
gap closed in the first year ranged from zero in France to 30% in Japan.

5. R&D Spillovers and the social returns to R&D
The R&D executed in one firm can affect the productivity performance of other firms operating
in the same industry or in other industries, either locally or abroad. A discovery in one firm,
sector or country can trigger new avenues of research, inspire new research projects or find new
applications in other firms, sectors or countries. For example, the synthetic fiber initially
developed in the chemical industry and subsequently applied in the textile industry. Or the well-
known examples of laser technology, which has found applications in many areas, and the
invention of the microprocessor, upon which an entire industry has been built.14

Conceptually it is useful to distinguish two kinds of spillovers: rent spillovers and knowledge
spillovers (Griliches, 1992). The first type occurs when a firm or consumer purchases R&D-
incorporated goods or services at prices that do not reflect their user value, because of imperfect
price discrimination due to asymmetric information and transaction costs, imperfect

14
  For more examples in the history ot technical change, see the series of books by N. Rosenberg, in particular
Rosenberg (1976, 1982a, 1982b).

                                                     24
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                           November 2009


appropriability and imitation, or mismeasurement of the true value of the transaction due to the
lack of hedonic prices. The more competitive are markets, the less ability firms have to
appropriate the benefits of their R&D and the more pecuniary spillovers will take place. By
contrast, the more prices are corrected for quality improvements, the less we should observe
spurious R&D spillovers.

The second type of spillover occurs when an R&D project produces knowledge that can be
useful to another firm in doing its own research. Knowledge is a rival and only partially
excludable good. Because of weak or incomplete patent protection, inability to keep innovations
secret, reverse engineering and imitation, some of the knowledge and benefits from R&D are not
kept within the firm. The more knowledge is codified and the higher is the absorptive capacity of
other firms, the more knowledge spillover will take place. The concept of knowledge spillovers
is very relevant for growth and development, because it lays the foundation for further
knowledge creation and diffusion. It is important here to distinguish between spillovers and
technology transfer. Technology transfer refers to trade in technology, which occurs when an
agent sells a piece of technology with a price attached to the transaction. A non-pecuniary
spillover, on the contrary, refers to an unintended transfer of knowledge, in which no payment is
involved.

It is important to note that the topic of social returns to R&D is closely intertwined with that of
R&D spillovers. From the perspective of a firm, spillovers can come from R&D done 1) by other
firms in the sector, 2) by firms in other industries, 3) by public research laboratories and
universities, and even 4) by firms, laboratories, and governments in other countries. From the
perspective of the economy, the first three are components of the social or aggregate return,
whereas the fourth is again an (unpriced) spillover. So whether we label something a spillover
depends on whether it is being created by the unit under investigation or by an entity external to
that unit.
How large are the social rates of return on R&D that result from the sum of private rates and the
within economy spillovers? This question has been investigated in two fashions. The first one is
based on case studies and relates to specific R&D projects. Due attention is paid to the various
costs and benefits, private and social, present and future, associated with a particular innovation
or R&D project, some of which may require the econometric estimation of the consumer and the
producer surpluses derived from R&D. The second one is the econometric approach, which
estimates a general relationship between productivity and R&D, irrespective of the particular
environment that is being analyzed.
In this section of the chapter, we first discuss a few illustrative case studies, and then we present
some aggregate productivity-R&D results. This is followed by a more detailed examination of
the literature that traces spillovers via connections between firms, industries, and countries.
Before proceeding, we note that one of the important questions about R&D spillovers is the
extent to which they are localized to an urban area, region, or even country. The work we discuss




                                                 25
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                       November 2009


here has little to say on this topic, and we refer the reader to Feldman and Kogler in this volume,
as well as to the recent survey by Autant-Bernard, Mairesse, and Massard (2007).15

5.1    Case studies
A prime example of the case study approach is the pathbreaking paper by Griliches (1958) on the
calculation of the social rate of return to research in hybrid corn. He adds up all private and
public R&D expenditures on hybrid corn between 1910 and 1955, cumulated to 1955 using an
external interest rate of 10%, and compares them to the net social returns over that period,
cumulated to 1955, plus the projected future returns, where the net returns are assumed to be
equal to the value of the increase in corn production with a price change adjustment. He arrives
at a perpetual annuity of returns of 7$ per dollar spent on R&D, or to an equivalent internal rate
of return equalizing R&D expenditures and net social returns of 35% to 40%.
Much work on the social returns to R&D has been done on agriculture in the form of detailed
case studies and estimations of producer and consumer benefits (see Ruttan (1980), Griliches
(1992), and Huffman and Evenson (1993) for a list of references to such studies). Most conclude
to underinvestment in agricultural research with social rates of return as high as 100%. In the
same vein Seldon (1987) computes internal rates of return for R&D in the US Forest Product
Industry that are even higher than those reported for agricultural research.
Mansfield et al. (1977) compute the private and social internal rates of return of 17 industrial
innovations. Private benefits are measured by the profits to the innovator, net of the costs of
producing, marketing and carrying out the innovation, and net of the profits the innovator would
have earned on products displaced by the innovation, with an adjustment for the unsuccessful
R&D. Social benefits are obtained by adding to the private benefits the change in consumer
surplus arising from the possible price reduction and profits made by the imitators and by
subtracting the R&D costs towards the same innovation incurred by other firms as well as
possible environmental costs. The results indicate that the social rate of return generally exceeds
the private rate by a substantial margin: the median social rate of return is about 56% against a
median private rate of return of about 25%. Along the same lines, Tewksbury et al. (1980)
examine the rates of return on 20 innovations. They obtain a median social rate of return of 99%
against a median private rate of 27%.
Bresnahan (1986) evaluates the welfare gain from the reduction in the price-performance ratio of
computers used in the financial services (banking, insurance, brokerage and related business). As
no real output is available for these services, he assumes that the sector acts as an agent for its
consumers. The value of the computer price-reducing innovation in this sector is inferred from
the willingness to pay by the firm and its downstream customers. He estimates that between 1958
and 1972 the spillover from the adoption of mainframe computers in the financial services sector
of the U.S. was at least five times the size of the expenditure for it in 1972.



15
  For surveys on R&D spillovers in general, see Griliches (1992, 1995), Nadiri (1993) and Mohnen (1990, 1996);
on international R&D spillovers in particular, see Mohnen (1998), Branstetter (1998), Cincera and van Pottelsberghe
de la Potterie (2001).



                                                        26
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                             November 2009


In the area of medical research, Weisbrod (1971) applies a cost-benefit framework to estimate
the internal rate of return to poliomyelitis research. Comparing the basic research and
vaccination costs to the benefits of saving mortality, morbidity and treatment costs, he estimates
a return of about 12%. Trajtenberg (1989) estimates the welfare effect of computed tomography
(CT) scanners from a multivariate accounting for hedonic prices. Comparing them to the R&D
expenditures in CT scanners he comes up with a capitalized benefit/cost ratio of 270%.
Bach et al (1992) do not provide figures but describe the various ways in which the European
Space Agency (ESA) program was beneficial to society on the basis of interviews with ESA
contractors: the emergence of new products, new technologies, improved product characteristics,
new organizational modes, the creation of networks, the training of scientists, managers and
personnel.
The case studies described above illustrate how valuable this approach can be, given the long and
variable lags between R&D and the full social returns, which render empirical estimation very
difficult. However, such case studies tend to focus on “winners,” innovations that have been
successful, and may therefore undercount the full cost of excavating the dry holes which was
also necessary before these innovations took place. That is, given uncertainty of outcomes, not
all research projects will lead to success, and those that do will need to earn a high rate of return
to cover the ones that fail. So there is a role for aggregate analysis, even though it can be difficult
to tease out the effects of R&D from other factors.

5.2   Productivity growth accounting at the aggregate level
In principle, the econometric approach to estimating the aggregate or social returns to R&D
offers a simpler and more comprehensive way of measuring these returns. It usually involves the
inclusion of an aggregate economy-wide R&D stock in the usual TFP growth equation.
Unfortunately, a single TFP time series can be driven by other factors that are correlated with
R&D as well as R&D itself, and it is difficult to adequately control for them. The best one can do
is the kind of growth accounting exercise now being performed by national statistical agencies,
which simply impose a cost of capital on R&D and are therefore able to construct its share (e.g.,
see Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel 2005, 2009 and Hulten (this volume)).
A few of the studies in Table 5 contain regressions of this form, but the majority go further by
specifying the channel through which the spillovers come and estimating a return to this external
R&D. We defer the discussion of the results in the table until after we present the methods used
to measure the spillovers.

5.3   Measuring spillovers
Most of the results in Table 5 have been obtained by adding a measure of external R&D to the
standard production or cost function framework used in the earlier tables. The R&D spillover
variable is measured as a weighted sum of the R&D stocks from sources outside of the firm:

                                       Sit = ∑ j ≠i a ji R jt                             (22)




                                                     27
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                          November 2009


where the ajt weights are proportional to some flows or proximity measures between firm,
industry, or country i, the receiver of R&D spillover, and firm, industry, or country j, the source
of R&D spillover. Various flow related weights have been used in the literature: intermediate
input transactions (Terleckyj, 1980), investments in capital goods (Sveikauskas, 1981), hiring of
R&D personnel, attendance at workshops, seminars or trade fairs, collaborations, adoption of
new technologies, flows of patents (Scherer, 1984) or innovations (Sterlacchini, 1989) from
industry of origin to industry of use, and patent citations. The intuition is that the more j trades
with i, invests in i, collaborates with i or gets cited by i, the more it is likely to diffuse its
knowledge to i. Spillovers can also be measured independently of any economic transaction
simply on the basis of proximities in various types of space. These proximities can be uncentered
correlation coefficients between positions in patent classes (Jaffe, 1986), fields of research
(Adams and Jaffe, 1996), qualifications of personnel (Adams, 1990) or lines of business.
Measures of proximity that are independent of any economic transactions are expected to capture
pure knowledge spillovers. Rent spillovers, in contrast, are likely to occur whenever monetary
transactions take place, i.e. with trade, direct investment, technology payments, hiring of
workers, research collaborations, and mergers and acquisitions. In practice the two types of
spillover are hard to dissociate, because, on the one hand, knowledge flows are often
concomitant with user-producer transactions and the capture of rents, and on the other hand,
knowledge gains can be used to reap economic rents.
Taking the primal approach as an example, this measured R&D spillover term is then introduced
into an extended Cobb-Douglas production function besides the stock on own R&D:
                                 Qit = f ( X it , Rit , Sit , Tit , ε it )              (23)

where Qit is output, Xit are the conventional inputs, Rit denotes the own stock of Research and
Development (R&D), a proxy for the stock of knowledge, Tit is an index of technological change
and εit is a random error term. The return from outside R&D is then estimated as the marginal
effect of Sit, which represents an elasticity or a marginal productivity depending on the chosen
functional form of the production function.
A couple or remarks are worth making at this point. First, while rent or knowledge spillovers are
expected to be positive, there can also be negative spillovers associated with R&D. Bloom et al.
(2007) find evidence for a market stealing effect for spillovers in the industry segment space as
opposed to the technology space. This is the case at the firm level when new products render old
products obsolete (creative destruction) and at the social level when R&D is used as a mere
strategy to preempt competition or when patent races lead to duplicative R&D (what Jones and
Williams (1998) call congestion externalities). Second, while it is reasonable to assume that
knowledge gets transmitted more easily the closer are the issuer and the receiver, it may be
argued that there is more knowledge to gain if the cognitive distance between them is larger
(Nooteboom et al. 2007). Third, whereas most studies have aggregated the diverse sources of
R&D knowledge into some kind of index, some authors have followed the vectorization
approach, i.e. included all individual sources of outside R&D as separate arguments in a
production function (Bernstein and Nadiri 1988). While this approach does not choose a priori a
certain ad hoc weighting scheme, it suffers from multicollinearity and consequent difficulty of
identifying the individual contributions of spillover sources.

                                                         28
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                          November 2009


Fourth, the rate of return on R&D can also be estimated from a dual representation of
technology, e.g. a variable cost function, where it appears as a quasi-fixed input (Bernstein 1988,
1996, 1998, Bernstein and Nadiri 1988, 1989, Nadiri and Prucha 1990, Mohnen and Lépine
1991, Mohnen 1992a, Nadiri and Mamuneas, 1994, Bernstein and Mohnen 1995, Nadiri and
Kim 1996b, Bernstein and Yan 1996, 1997, and Rouvinen, 2002). As discussed earlier, these
models can describe a static equilibrium where all factors of production, in particular R&D, are
at their optimal level, or they can model a partial equilibrium where some factors are quasi-fixed
and describe a dynamic adjustment process to the long-run equilibrium via the modeling of
adjustment costs. They models are generally based on a flexible functional form for the dual
representation of technology that allows through the estimation of derived factor demand
equations and cross-equation parameter restrictions to estimate separate rates of return for each
industry and a possible factor bias of own R&D and R&D spillovers. Fifth, the R&D spillovers
are usually expressed in terms of productivity increases, but they could also be captured in terms
of patents (Jaffe 1986, 1989), market values (Jaffe 1986), or innovation counts (Acs et al. 1992).
Spillovers have been estimated at various levels of aggregation - countries, sectors, firms,
projects – and combinations thereof – intra-sectoral and inter-sectoral, domestic and
international. In general they have been found to be quite large, but rather imprecisely estimated.
In addition, many of the estimates are obtained using models without time trends or time effects,
so that the external R&D coefficients may be biased upward due to the presence of confounding
influences and the general increase in the R&D share in developed country economies during the
time periods covered.
The social rate of return is obtained by adding the private rate of return (the benefit to the firm
that performs the R&D) to the sum of the returns on outside R&D for all recipients of spillovers
from that firm:
                                     ∂Qit           ∂Q jt
                                           + ∑ α ij                                     (24)
                                     ∂Ri ,t j ≠i    ∂S jt


The magnitude of the social rate of return depends of course on the number of spillover
receivers. For example the social rate of return of U.S. R&D will be greater if all countries of the
world are included as potential U.S. R&D spillover recipients than if only the G-7 countries are
involved. E.g., compare the estimates of Coe and Helpman 1995 for spillovers from the G-7 with
those of Coe, Helpman, and Hoffmaister 1997 for spillovers from 22 developed countries.
Which weighting matrix is more appropriate and to the extent that the weighting reflects the
channels of transmission of R&D spillover, which channel is the most important? Van Meijl’s
(1997) results clearly show that the estimated social rates of return may vary a great deal
depending on the weighting matrix used. Kaiser (2002) tests various ways of aggregating outside
knowledge into a spillover construct on the assumption that horizontal (intra-industry) spillovers
should be associated with high scores for horizontal sources of knowledge indicated by firms in
innovation surveys (i.e. from competitors) and the vertical (inter-industry) spillovers are
associated with vertical sources of knowledge (i.e. from customers and suppliers). Intra-industry
spillovers are hard to measure. Uncentered correlations of firms’ characteristics or skill mix
predict inter-industry spillovers better than the Euclidian distance between firm characteristics,
geographical distance between firms, or a measure of imitation hazard (from perceived obstacles

                                                  29
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                           November 2009


of innovation revealed in innovation surveys). In a special issue of Economic Systems Research
(vol. 9(1), 1997) a number of authors have tried to compare the performance (in significance and
economic returns) of different types of spillovers (on the basis of patent flows, patent citations,
intermediate inputs and capital goods transactions). The ideal aggregator differs by sector and the
identification of spillover channels from the simultaneous use of different spillover measures
quickly runs into collinearity problems.
Crespi et al. (2008) also use the direct measures of knowledge flows, as they are revealed in the
innovation surveys, for explaining TFP growth in the UK. They find that flows from
competitors, suppliers and plants that belong to the same group explain half of TFP growth.
Information from competitors is considered to be pure knowledge spillovers; this is correlated
with the presence of multinational enterprises.
Using an endogenous growth model, Jones and Williams (1998) argue that the social rate of
return of R&D should include, besides the output expansion effect examined so far, the
intertemporal spillover effects, namely the increase in knowledge that will lead to more
knowledge in the future and the capital gain effect that allows a decrease of the knowledge
investment in favor of more consumption in the future. Along a balanced growth path they
evaluate the social rate of return to exceed the static marginal productivity of R&D by a factor of
2 to 4. In a later paper, Jones and Williams (2000) build an endogenous growth model that
incorporates four market distortions related to R&D investment: the appropriability problem, the
presence of knowledge spillovers, creative destruction, and the externalities from R&D
duplication. They use this model to show that unless the duplication externality is extremely high
together with a high interest rate, a decentralized economy will underinvest in R&D, again
implying higher social returns than private.

5.3.1 Empirical evidence on industry-level spillovers
Table 5 presents the results from a selection of models that have been estimated at the firm,
industry, or country level. A wide range of spillover measures are used, which makes it difficult
to compare the estimates, although with a few exceptions the elasticities with respect to external
R&D are similar, around 0.05 to 0.09. As we alluded to earlier, one difficulty is that unlike the
private returns case there is no “cost of capital” that provides a focal point for these returns. In
addition, many of the dual estimates are obtained without time effects, and to some extent this
may bias the external R&D coefficient upwards. In general, the rates of return obtained using the
dual approach are somewhat higher than the others.
As we saw, estimates of the own rate of return based on industry data are quite close to those
obtained from firm data. In contrast, the estimated rates of return to outside R&D vary
considerably across studies: from 80% in Goto-Suzuki (1989) to statistically negligible in one
version of Wolff and Nadiri (1993). As shown by the detailed results in Griliches and
Lichtenberg (1984a), the rate of return to outside R&D seems to be highly variable, depending
on the period, and in general estimates of it are less precise than those for the own rate of return.
In most cases, however, the estimates are significant and indicate the existence of major
spillovers of research from one industry to another. In Table 5, we can see that when the
estimates are obtained separately for each industry, they range from close to zero to a full 100%
(or even larger in a few cases).


                                                 30
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                     November 2009


As noted previously, the spillover estimate vary much more across studies than the own rate of
return estimates. There are a number of reasons for this. First, the spillover effect gets larger the
more receiving sectors are include in the computation of the social rate of return to R&D.
Second, there is no a priori reason to expect the estimates obtained with various measure of
proximity to yield similar results, since the proximities are measured in different spaces. The
results might even depend on the date of the chosen weighting matrix, if the proximity between
sectors evolves over time. Third, spillovers are expected to reduce variable cost, since it is
reasonable to assume that firms would not adopt new ideas that are variable cost increasing.
However, for strategic and absorptive reasons, firms may also feel obliged to enter the R&D race
and incur the research costs that go with it. On the demand side, R&D spillovers can increase or
decrease the price that a producer can charge for his product, depending on whether the new
product based partly on outside R&D is substitutable or complementary to the firm’s own
product (Bernstein and Nadiri 1991). Adams (1990) also advances the argument that adjustment
costs in knowledge absorption might cause perverse sign effects on the spillover variable in the
short run. For all these reasons, spillovers can in principle be negative.16 A final explanation for
large variations in spillover return is of course the fact that nothing in the system constrains them
to take on any particular value, precisely because they are unpriced and to a great extent, an
accidental side effect of firm R&D strategy, even if some conscious management of disclosure
does occasionally take place.

5.3.2 Empirical evidence on international spillovers
International R&D spillovers are transmitted through the same channels as those documented in
the literature on technology transfer: international trade in final goods, intermediate inputs,
capital goods, b) foreign direct investment (FDI), especially if it comes with manpower training
to operate the new machines and to assimilate new production and management techniques, c)
migration of scientists, engineers, educated people in general, or their attendance at workshops,
seminars, trade fairs and the like, d) publications in technical journals and scientific papers,
referencing other publications, invention revelations through patenting, patent citations, e)
international research collaborations or international mergers and acquisitions, f) foreign
technology payments, i.e. royalties on copyrights and trademarks, licensing fees, the purchase of
patents, the payments for consulting services and the financing of R&D conducted abroad.
A highly cited study of the impact of international R&D spillovers on TFP was conducted by
Coe and Helpman (1995). In this study, conducted for 22 developed countries, they used the
share of imports from the sending country as weights to aggregate the R&D, confining the
possible set of sending countries to the G-7 economies (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan,
the UK, and the US). They were able to estimate the own rate of return to R&D as 123% for the
G-7, and 85% for the other 15 countries, and the spillover return from the G-7 as 32%, implying
that roughly a quarter of the benefits from R&D in G-7 countries accrues to their trading
partners.
Their study has been critiqued and revisited in many subsequent studies. Keller (1998) cast doubt
on the trade-related interpretation of Coe and Helpman’s R&D spillover by showing that


16
  For some examples of negative spillover estimates in the literature, see Jaffe (1986), Englander et al. (1988),
Fecher (1992), Griliches and Mairesse (1984), Hanel (1994), and Yamada et al. (1991).

                                                       31
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                         November 2009


significant foreign R&D spillovers can be obtained when the weights in the construction of the
spillover are random rather than based on import shares. This result suggests that the important
identifying variation was in the total amount of external R&D rather than being mediated by
trade. Lichtenberg and van Pottelsberghe (1998) critique Coe and Helpman’s weighting of the
foreign R&D stocks by means of the proportion of total imports originating from the foreign
R&D sources for being too sensitive to the aggregation of the data and propose instead to
normalize the imports from the recipient country by the GDP of the sending country. van
Pottelsberghe and Lichtenberg (2001) provide evidence for outward FDI as another channel of
international R&D spillovers. Kao, Chiang and Chen (1999) find cointegration between the TFP
and R&D variables, using cointegration tests that are appropriate for panel data. When they
reestimate the Coe and Helpman specification with a dynamic ordinary least squares (DOLS)
estimator (which is not biased in small samples, unlike the ordinary estimator) they no longer
obtain a significant effect for the trade-related foreign R&D spillover, although the domestic
R&D impact is essentially unchanged.
Abdelmoula (2009) adds spatial correlations (via a spatial lag model or a spatial error model) to
the Coe and Helpman specification. In the presence of other spatial effects, the foreign R&D
spillover remains significant whether the weights in the spatial correlation are proportional to
imports or to the inverse of the geographical distance between the countries.
The relative importance of domestic and foreign R&D contributions to total factor productivity
growth depends on the channels of transmission used to estimate foreign R&D spillovers, but all
channels combined it is likely that small R&D spenders have relatively more to gain from
foreign R&D than big R&D spenders by the sheer size of the absorbable knowledge. It depends
of course on the absorption capacity of the receiver and her openness to transmission channels,
and therefore the output elasticity to foreign R&D may be higher or lower than the output
elasticity of domestic R&D (as shown by van Pottelsberghe and Lichtenberg, 2001).

5.3.3 Studies of channels of transmission of R&D spillovers
At the micro level, the knowledge management literature has given rise to a new series of studies
that looks in more detail at the ways in which knowledge is transmitted from firm to firm and
from public research to firm, both within and across borders. A complete survey of this literature
would take us well beyond the scope of this survey, but we provide a few references and
comments in this section.
The first is the literature on R&D spillovers that treats the individual researcher as a carrier of
tacit knowledge. There are two approaches: either researcher mobility across firms or countries
brings with it the transmission of knowledge, or alternatively, researchers do not move, but their
personal connections help knowledge to diffuse across borders. Almeida and Kogut (1999)
discuss this phenomenon and provide an empirical example. For other examples of this literature,
see Moen 2005, Kerr 2008, and Maliranta, Mohnen, and Rouvinen 2010.
A particular source of knowledge spillover that has received a fair amount of attention is the
impact of academic research. Adams (1990) measures for each industry a stock of academic
science by the count of past and present academic publications by science field weighted by the
share of industrial scientists per field of science as well as a knowledge spillover measure by
weighting the other industries knowledge stocks by the closeness of industries in the
employment in science fields. For 18 U.S. manufacturing industries he estimates that academic

                                                32
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                            November 2009


scientific knowledge in the own industry accounts for 50% of total factor productivity growth
and academic knowledge in other industries account for 25% of TFP growth, with lags of
scientific publications on TFP of 20 years and 30 years respectively. Jaffe (1989) presents
evidence that university research in a state produces spillovers in terms of corporate patents
granted in that state: the direct elasticity is approximately 0.1 and rises to 0.6 when the
inducement effect of corporate R&D is taken into account. Acs et al (1992) estimate an effect at
least twice as high when the innovation output is measured by innovation counts rather than by
patents granted.
One of the drivers of the empirical literature on knowledge flows has been the widespread
availability of data on patent citations and scientific paper citations. For more on research in this
area, we refer the reader to the chapters by Nagaoka et al. and Foray and Lissoni in this volume.

6. Conclusions
This chapter has surveyed a very large literature from the past 50 years of economic research,
almost all of which has been directed to answering a few simple questions: What is the private
rate of return to investing in research and development? What is the social rate of return? Are
there spillovers? The questions may be simple but the answers turn out to be complex. First, it
has become very clear during the course of this research that the stochastic nature of R&D
outcomes means that there is nothing like a single private “rate of return” that is close to a cost of
R&D capital. Second, the need for a measure of R&D depreciation or obsolescence in order to
compute the net or even gross rate of return has become increasingly obvious, even though such
a measure is not necessary if we simply want to measure the production R&D elasticity. Finally,
we have seen that a number of fairly complex econometric methods to deal with omitted
variables, measurement errors, adjustment costs, etc. have been developed in response to
perceived problems in the earlier round of estimates.
In spite of the revealed complexity of the problem, we have learned something about the rates of
return to R&D. They are positive in many countries, and usually higher than those to ordinary
capital. The adjustment costs are also greater than that to ordinary capital. The depreciation rates
appear to vary across industrial sector, probably reflecting the nature of competition and the ease
of appropriability. When the production function is estimated in first-differenced form, there is a
very substantial downward bias to the R&D coefficient that can be mitigated by imposing
constant returns or performing GMM-SYS estimation.
As to social returns, these are almost always estimated to be substantially greater than the private
returns, and often to be quite asymmetric among trading partners and industries. In addition,
most estimates for public government-funded R&D suggest that it is less privately productive
than private R&D, as it should be, given the fact that it targets goals that either do not show up in
conventional GDP or have substantial positive externalities.
Where should this research go now? One thing we would like to know more about is the impact
of increased R&D in mid-level developing countries and how this interacts with R&D spillovers
to these countries. Given the general internationalization of R&D activities, it might be useful to
develop the channels of knowledge transmission literature and revisit some of the international
spillover estimates to see if they are changing.


                                                 33
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                         November 2009


Looking at the samples in the tables, one can see that almost all of the results have been obtained
for the manufacturing sector, which is an increasingly small share of the economy in most
developed countries. So the challenge here is to apply the methods that have been developed for
that sector to data from the service and financial sectors, where there is now quite a bit of R&D
and innovation. This would require some attention to the problem of under and non-reported
R&D in these sectors and some rethink on what the production function actually should be.
On the data and econometrics side, much of the industry work has been done using quite
aggregate sectors, partly because of R&D data availability limitations. As more of this data has
become available worldwide, it may be possibly to produce more informative disaggregated
industry samples. A second open set of question has to do with repeating the R&D analysis using
newly available data for some countries via the Community Innovation Survey (Mairesse and
Mohnen, this volume) on total innovation expenditures rather than just R&D. Clearly this would
require a somewhat new conceptual framework given the varied nature of these expenditures.
Finally, because of the difficulties uncovered in constructing an R&D capital and choosing the
appropriate depreciation and because the additive model is not really a very good description of
knowledge production, further work on the best way to model the R&D input would be
extremely desirable.




                                                34
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                     November 2009


References
Abdelmoula, M. (2009), R&D et externalités: une comparaison européenne. PhD dissertation, Université
      Panthéon-Assas Paris II.
Acs, Z., D. Audretsch and M. Feldman (1992), Real effects of academic research: comment, American
        Economic Review, 82(1), 363-367.
Adams, J.D. (1990), Fundamental stocks of knowledge and productivity growth, Journal of Political
       Economy, 98(3), 673-702.
Adams, J. D., and A. B. Jaffe (1996), Bounding the Effects of R&D: An Investigation Using Matched
       Establishment-Firm Data, Rand Journal of Economics, 27, 700-721.
Almeida, P., and B. Kogut (1999), Localization of Knowledge and the Mobility of Engineers in Regional
       Networks. Management Science 45 (7), 905-917.
Antonelli, C. (1994), Technological districts, localized spillovers and productivity growth. International
       Review of Applied Economics 8(1), 18-30_.
Autant-Bernard, C., J. Mairesse, and N. Massard (2007), Spatial knowledge diffusion through
       collaborative networks. Papers in Regional Science 86(3), 341-350.
Bach, L., P. Cohendet, G. Lambert and M.J. Ledoux (1992), Measuring and managing spinoffs: the case
       of the spinoffs generated by ESA programs, in Space Economics, J.S. Greenberg and H.R.
       Hertzfeld (eds.). American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
Bartelsman, E. J. (1990a), Federally-Sponsored R&D and Productivity Growth. Working paper.
Bartelsman, E. J. (1990b), R&D Spending and Manufacturing Productivity: An Empirical Analysis.
        Washington, DC: Federal Reserve Board of Governors Finance and Economics Discussion Series
        #122.
Bartelsman, E. J., G. van Leeuwen, H. Nieuwenhuijsen, and K. Zeelenberg (1996), R&D and productivity
        growth: evidence from firm-level data for the Netherlands. Netherlands Official Statistics 11
        (Autumn), 52-69.
Bayoumi, T., D. T. Coe, and E. Helpman (1996), R&D Spillovers and Global Growth, London: CEPR.
Bernstein, J. I. (1988), Costs of Production, Intra- and Interindustry R&D Spillovers: Canadian Evidence.
        Canadian Journal of Economics XXI (2), 324-347.
Bernstein, J. I. (1989), The Structure of Canadian Inter-industry R&D Spillovers, and the Rates of Return
        to R&D, Journal of Industrial Economics, XXXVII (3), 315-328.
Bernstein, J. I. (1996), International R&D spillovers between industries in Canada and the United States,
        Canadian Journal of Economics, 29, Special issue, 463-467.
Bernstein, J. I. (1998), Factor intensities, rates of return, and international spillovers: The case of
        Canadian and U.S. industries, Annales d'Economie et de Statistique, 49/50, 541-564.
Bernstein, J. I., and T. P. Mamuneas (2006), R&D Depreciation, Stocks, User Costs and Productivity
        Growth For US Knowledge Intensive Industries, Structural Change and Economic Dynamics,
        17(1), 70-99.
Bernstein, J. I., and P. Mohnen (1998), International R&D Spillovers Between U.S. and Japanese R&D
        Intensive Sectors, Journal of International Economics, 44, 315-338.
Bernstein, J.I. and M. I. Nadiri (1988), Interindustry R&D spillovers, rates of return, and production in
        high-tech industries, American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 78(2), 429-434.

                                                       35
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                  November 2009


Bernstein, J. I., and M. I. Nadiri (1989), Research and Development and Intra-Industry Spillovers: An
        Empirical Application of Dynamic Duality, Review of Economic Studies, 56, 249-269.
Bernstein, J. I., and M. I. Nadiri (1990), Rates of return on physical and R&D capital and structure of the
        production process: cross section and time series evidence. In Advances in Econometrics and
        Modeling, edited by B. Raj. London: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Bernstein, J. I., and M. I. Nadiri (1991), Product demand, cost of production, spillovers, and the social
        rate of return to R&D. Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No. w3625.
Bernstein, J. I. and X. Yan (1996), Canadian-Japanese R&D spillovers and productivity growth, Applied
        Economics Letters, 3, 763-767
Bernstein, J. I., and X. Yan (1997), International R&D Spillovers Between Canadian and Japanese
        Industries, Canadian Journal of Economics, 30, 276-294.
Bitzer, J., and A. Stephan (2007), A Schumpeter-inspired approach to the construction of R&D capital
         stocks. Applied Economics 39, 179-189.
Bloom, N., M. Schankerman, and J. Van Reenen (2007), Identifying technology spillovers and product
       market rivalry. London, UK: CEPR Discussion Paper 4912.
Blundell, R., and S. R. Bond (2000), GMM Estimation with persistent panel data: an application to
       production functions. Econometric Reviews 19 (3), 321-340.
Bond, S., D. Harhoff, and J. Van Reenen (2003), Corporate R&D and Productivity in Germany and the
       United Kingdom, Annales d’Economie et Statistique 79/80, -----.
Booz-Allen-Hamilton. (2006), Smart Spenders: The Global Innovation 1000. Web page presenting the
      report: www.boozallen.com/capabilities/services_article/18054973
Bosworth, D. (1978), The rate of obsolescence of technical knowledge – a note. Journal of Industrial
       Economics 26(3), 273-79.
Branstetter, L. (1998), Looking for international knowledge spillovers: A review of the literature with
        suggestions for new approaches, Annales d'Economie et de Statistique, 49/50, 517-540.
Bresnahan, T. (1986), Measuring spillovers from 'technical advance”, American Economic Review, 76,
       741-755.
Cameron, G. (2003), Why Did U.K. Manufacturing Productivity Growth Slow Down in the 1970s and
      Speed Up in the 1980s?, Economica, 70, 121-141.
Capron, H. (1992), The applied econometrics of R&D public funding: what’s that for? In The
       Quantitative Evaluation of the Impact of R&D Programmes, edited by H. Capron. Brussels:
       Commission of the European Communities.
Capron, H. and M. Cincera (1998), Exploring the spillover impact on productivity of world-wide
       manufacturing firms, Annales d'Economie et de Statistiques, 49/50, 565-588.
Cardani, A. and P. Mohnen (1984), Labor productivity slowdown in a dynamic model with energy,
        capital, and R&D for Italian and French manufacturing. Giornale degli Economisti e Annali di
        Economia 43 (7-8), 471-490.
Chakrabarti, A. K., H. H. Glismann and E.-J. Horn (1992), Defence and Space Expenditures in the US:
       An Inter-Firm Analysis, Defence Economics, 3, 169-189.
Cincera, M. and B. van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie (2001), International R&D spillovers: A survey,
        Cahiers Economiques de Bruxelles, 169, 3-32.

                                                     36
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                               November 2009


Clark, K. B. and Z. Griliches (1984), Productivity growth and R&D at the business level: Results from
        the PIMS data base. In R&D, Patents and Productivity, edited by Z. Griliches. Chicago, IL:
        University of Chicago Press.
Coe, D. T. and E. Helpman (1995), International R&D Spillovers, European Economic Review, 39, 859-
        887.
Coe, D.T., E. Helpman and A. Hoffmaister (1997), North-South R&D Spillovers, Economic Journal, 107,
       134-149.
Coe, D., E. Helpman and A. Hoffmaister (2009), ”International R&D Spillovers and Institutions”,
        European Economic Review, 53, 723-741.
Cohen, W. M. (1995), Empirical studies of innovative activity, in P. Stoneman (ed.), Handbook of the
       Economics of Innovation and Technological Change, Blackwell Handbooks in Economics, 182-
       264.
Cohen, W. M. and R. C. Levin (1989), 'Empirical studies of innovation and market structure, in
       Handbook of Industrial Organization, Vol. II R. Schmalensee and R.D. Willig (eds.), Elsevier
       Science Publishers B., Amsterdam.
Commission of the European Communities (1993), Economic Quantitative Methods for the Evaluation of
      the Impact of R&D Programmes A State of the Art. Office for Official Publications of the
      European Communities, Luxembourg.
Corrado, C., C. R. Hulten, and D. E. Sichel (2005), Measuring Capital and Technology: An Expanded
       Framework. In Measuring Capital in the New Economy, edited by C. Corrado, J. Haltiwanger,
       and D. E. Sichel, Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 65. Chicago: The University of Chicago
       Press, 11-41.
Corrado, C., C. R. Hulten, and D. E. Sichel (2009), Intangible Capital and Economic Growth. Review of
       Income and Wealth 55 (3), 661-685.
Crépon, B., E. Duguet, and J. Mairesse (1998), Research, Innovation, and Productivity: An Econometric
       Analysis At the Firm Level, Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 7, 115-156.
Crépon, B. and J. Mairesse (1993), Recherche et développement, qualification et productivité des
       entreprises, in D. Guellec (ed.), Innovations et compétivité, INSEE-Méthodes no. 37-38, Paris:
       Economica.
Crespi, G., C. Criscuolo, J. Haskel and M. Slaughter (2008), Productivity growth, knowledge flows and
        spillovers, NBER working paper 13959.
Cunéo, P. (1984), L’impact de la recherche-développement sur la productivité industrielle. Economie et
       Statistique 164, 3-18.
Cunéo, P. and J. Mairesse (1984), Productivity and R&D at the firm level in French manufacturing”, in Z.
       Griliches (ed.), R&D, Patents and Productivity. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 375-
       392.
Czarnitzki, D., B. H. Hall, and R. Oriani (2006), Market Valuation of US and European Intellectual
        Property. In The Management Of Intellectual Property, edited by D. Bosworth and E. Webster.
        Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
David, P. A., and B. H. Hall (2000), Heart of Darkness: Public-Private Interactions Inside the R&D Black
        Box. Research Policy 29, 1165-1183.
Debresson C. (1990), Analyse inter-industrielle et le changement technologique, Revue d'Economie
       Politique, 100 (6), 833-869.
                                                   37
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                   November 2009


Doraszelski, U., and J. Jaumandreu (2006), R&D and Productivity: the Knowledge Capital Model
       Revisited, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University.
Ducharme, L. M. and P. Mohnen (1996), Externalités et taux de rendement sociaux de la R&D,
      Économies et Sociétés, série Dynamique technologique et organisation, série W, 8, 189-213..
Duguet, E. (2006), Innovation Height, Spillovers and TFP Growth At the Firm Level: Evidence From
       French Manufacturing, Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 15(4-5), 415-442
Englander, S., R. Evenson and M. Hanazaki (1988), Recherche-développement, innovation et
       fléchissement de la productivité totale des facteurs. Revue Economique de l’OCDE 11, 7-47.
Falvey, R., N. Foster and D. Greenaway (2004), Imports, exports, Knowledge Spillovers and Growth,
        Economics Letters, 85, 209-213.
Fecher, F. (1989), Effets directs et indirects de la R-D sur la productivité: une analyse de l’industry
        manufacturière belge. Cahiers Economiques de Bruxelles 128, 459-483.
Fecher, F. (1992), Croissance de la productivité, rattrapage et innovation: une analyse des secteurs
        manufacturiers de l’OCDE. Economie et Prévision 102-103(1/2), 117-127.
Fecher, F. and S. Perelman (1989), Productivity growth, technological progress and R&D in OECD
        industrial activities. In Public Finance and Steady Economic Growth, Proceedings of the 45th
        Congress of the International Institute of Public Finance, edited by G. Krause-Junk. The Hague:
        Foundation Journal Public Finance.
Fecher, F. and S. Perelman (1992), Productivity growth and technical efficiency in OECD industrial
        activities. In Industrial Efficiency in Six Nations, edited by R. Caves, Cambridge, MA: The MIT
        Press, 459-488.
Fisher, F. M. and J. J. McGowan (1983), On the misuse of accounting rates of return to infer monopoly
        profits. American Economic Review 73 (1): 82-97.
Funk, M. (2001), Trade and International R&D Spillovers Among OECD Countries, Southern Economic
       Journal, 67(3), 725-736.
Geroski, P. A. (1989), Entry, Innovation and Productivity Growth. Review of Economics and Statistics
        71(4), 572-578.
Globerman, S. (1972), The empirical relationship between R&D and industrial growth in Canada. Applied
       Economics 4, 181-195.
Goldberg, L. (1979), The influence of federal R&D funding on the demand for and returns to industrial
       R&D. Public Research Institute, CRC 388.
Goto, A. and K. Suzuki (1989), R&D capital, rate of return on R&D investment and spillover of R&D in
       Japanese manufacturing industries, Review of Economics and Statistics, 71(4), 555-564.
Grandi, A., B. H. Hall, and R. Oriani (2009), R&D and Financial Investors. In V. Chiesa and F. Frattini
        (eds.), Evaluation and Performance Measurement of Research and Development, Cheltenham,
        UK: Edward Elgar, 143-165.
Griffith, R., R. Harrison, and M. Hawkins (2003), Report On Estimating Private and Social Rates of
         Return to R&D Using Matched ARD and BERD Micro Data, London: Institute For Fiscal
         Studies.
Griffith, R., R. Harrison, and J. Van Reenen (2006), How Special Is the Special Relationship? Using the
         Impact of U.S. R&D Spillovers On U.K. Firms As a Test of Technology Sourcing, American
         Economic Review, 96(5), 1859-1875.

                                                     38
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                 November 2009


Griffith, R., S. Redding, and J. Van Reenen (2004), Mapping the Two Faces of R&D: Productivity
         Growth in a Panel of OECD Manufacturing Industries. Review of Economics and Statistics 86(4),
         883-895.
Griliches, Z. (1958), Research cost and social returns: hybrid corn and related innovations, Journal of
        Political Economy, 66, pp. 419-431.
Griliches, Z. (1964), Research expenditures, education and the aggregate agricultural production function.
        American Economic Review 54(6), 961-974.
Griliches, Z. (1973), Research expenditures and growth accounting, in Science and Technology in
        Economic Growth, R.B. Williams (ed.), John Wiley and Sons, New York.
Griliches, Z. (1979), Issues in assessing the contribution of research and development to productivity
        growth, Bell Journal of Economics, 10(1), 92-116.
Griliches, Z. (1980a), Returns to Research and Development Expenditures in the Private Sector, in New
        Developments in Productivity Measurement and Analysis, Ed. By J. W. Kendrick, and B. N.
        Vaccara. Chicago, Ill.: Chicago University Press, 419-462.
Griliches, Z. (1980b), R&D and the productivity slowdown. American Economic Review 70(2), 343-348.
Griliches, Z. (1981), Market Value, R&D, and Patents. Economic Letters 7: 183-87.
Griliches, Z. (1986), Productivity, R&D, and Basic Research At the Firm Level in the 1970s, American
        Economic Review, 76, 141-154.
Griliches, Z. (1992), The search for R&D spillovers, The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 94, 29-47.
Griliches, Z. (1994), Productivity, R&D and the data constraint, American Economic Review, 84(1), 1-23.
Griliches, Z. (1995), R&D and Productivity: Econometric Results and Measurement Issues, in P.
        Stoneman (ed.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation and Technical Change, Blackwell
        Handbooks in Economics.
Griliches, Z. (1998), R&D and Productivity: The Econometric Evidence. Chicago, IL: University of
        Chicago Press.
Griliches, Z., Hall, B. H., Pakes, A. (1991), R&D, Patents, and Market Value Revisited: Is There a
        Second (Technological Opportunity) Factor? Economics of Innovation and New Technology 1:
        183-202.
Griliches, Z., and J. A. Hausman (1986), Errors in Variables in Panel Data. Journal of Econometrics 31
        (1), 93-118.
Griliches, Z., and F. R. Lichtenberg (1984a), Interindustry Technology Flows and Productivity Growth: a
        Reexamination, Review of Economics & Statistics, 66, 325-329.
Griliches, Z., and F. R. Lichtenberg (1984b), R&D and Productivity Growth At the Industry Level: Is
        There Still a Relationship?, in R&D, Patents, and Productivity, Ed. By Z. Griliches. Chicago, Ill.:
        Chicago University Press, 465-501.
Griliches, Z., and J. Mairesse (1984), Productivity and R&D At the Firm Level, in R&D, Patents, and
        Productivity, Ed. By Z. Griliches. Chicago, Ill.: Chicago University Press, 339-374.
Griliches, Z., and J. Mairesse (1990), R&D and Productivity Growth: Comparing Japanese and U. S.
        Manufacturing Firms, in Productivity Growth in Japan and the United States, Ed. By C. R.
        Hulten. Chicago: Chicago University Press, 317-340.


                                                    39
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                 November 2009


Guellec, D. (1993), Recherche-développement et croissance: une analyse macroéconomique
        internationale. In Innovation et Compétitivité, edited by D. Guellec. Paris: INSEE Methodes no.
        37-38, Economica.
Guellec, D., and B. Van Pottelsberghe De La Potterie (2001), R&D and Productivity Growth: Panel Data
        Analysis of 16 OECD Countries, OECD Economic Studies, 33, 103-126.
Hall, B. H. (1993), Industrial Research During the 1980s: Did the Rate of Return Fall?, Brookings Papers
         On Economic Activity, Micro (2), 289-344.
Hall, B. H. (1996), The private and social returns to research and development, in Technology, R&D, and
         the Economy, Bruce L.R. Smith and Claude E. Barfield (eds.), The Brookings Institution,
         Washington D.C.
Hall, B. H. (2000), Innovation and Market Value. In Productivity, Innovation, and Economic
         Performance, edited by R. Barrell, G. Mason and M. OﾒMahoney. Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press.
Hall, B. H. (2005), Measuring the Returns to R&D: The Depreciation Problem. Annales d’Economie et
         Statistique 79/80, -----. Also NBER Working Paper No. 13473 (September 2007).
Hall, B. H., L. Branstetter, B. Crépon, and J. Mairesse (1999), Does Cash Flow Cause Investment and
         R&D: An Exploration using Panel Data for French, Japanese, and United States Firms in the
         Scientific Sector. In Audretsch, D., and A. R. Thurik (eds.), Innovation, Industry Evolution and
         Employment, Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 129-156.
Hall, B. H., D. Foray, and J. Mairesse (2009), Pitfalls in Estimating the Returns to Corporate R&D Using
         Accounting Data. Revised version of a paper presented at the First European Conference on
         Knowledge for Growth, October 8-9, 2007, Seville, Spain.
Hall, B. H., Z. Griliches, and J. A. Hausman (1986), Patents and R and D: Is There a Lag? International
         Economic Review 27 (2), 265-283.
Hall, B. H., and J. Mairesse (1995), Exploring the Relationship Between R&D and Productivity in French
         Manufacturing Firms, Journal of Econometrics, 65, 263-293.
Hall, R. E. (1988), The Relation between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry. Journal of Political
        Economy 96 (5), 921-947.
Hanel, P. (1988), L’effet des dépenses en R&D sur la productivité de travail au Quebec. Actualité
        Economique 64(3).
Hanel, P. (1994), R&D, Inter-Industry and International Spillovers of Technology and the Total Factor
        Productivity Growth of Manufacturing Industries in Canada, 1974-1989. Sherbrooke, Canada:
        Université de Sherbrooke, Cahier de recherche 94-04.
Hanel, P., and A. St-Pierre (2002), Effects of R&D Spillovers On the Profitability of Firms, Review of
        Industrial Organization, 20, 305-322.
Harhoff, D. (1998), R&D and productivity in German manufacturing firms, Economics of Innovation and
        New Technology, 6(1), 29-49.
Harhoff, D. (2000), R&D Spillovers, Technological Proximity, and Productivity Growth - Evidence From
        German Manufacturing Firms, Schmalenbach Business Review, 52, 238-260.
Huffman, W.E. and R.E. Evenson (1993), Science for Agriculture. Ames, Iowa State University.
Jaffe, A.B. (1986), Technological opportunity and spillovers of R&D: Evidence from firms' patents,
         profits, and market value”, American Economic Review, 76(5), 984-1001.

                                                    40
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                   November 2009


Jaffe, A. B. (1988), Demand and supply influences in R&D intensity and productivity growth, Review of
         Economics and Statistics, 70(3), 431-437.
Jaffe, A.B. (1989), Real effects of academic research, American Economic Review, 79(5), 957-970.
Janz, N., H. Loof, and B. Peters (2003), Firm Level Innovation and Productivity - Is There a Common
        Story Across Countries?, Mannheim: ZEW.
Joly, P. (1993), Le ralentissement de la productivite: faits et causes. In Innovation et Compétitivité, edited
         by D. Guellec. Paris: INSEE Methodes no. 37-38, Economica.
Jones, C. and J. Williams (1998), Measuring the Social Rate of Return to R&D, Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 113(4), 119-35.
Jovanovic, B., and Y. Nyarko (1995), Research and Productivity, National Bureau of Economic Research
       Working Paper No., 5321, 1-25.
Kafouros, M (2005), R&D and productivity growth: Evidence from the UK, Economics of Innovation and
       New Technology, 14(6), 479-497.
Kaiser, U. (2002), Measuring knowledge in manufacturing and services: An empirical assessment of
        alternative approaches, Research Policy, 31(1), 129-149.
Kao C., M. Chiang, B. Chen (1999), International R&D Spillovers: An Application of Estimation and
        Inference in Panel Cointegration, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 61, 691 - 709.
Keller, W. (1997), Are International R&D Spillovers Trade-Related? Analyzing Spillovers Among
        Randomly Matched Trade Partners, European Economic Review, 42, 1469-1481.
Keller, W. (2004), International Technology Diffusion, Journal of Economic Literature, XLII, 752-782.
Kerr, William R. (2008), Ethnic scientific communities and international technology diffusion. Review of
       Economics and Statistics 90(3), 518–537
Klette, T. J. (1991), On the Importance of R&D and Ownership For Productivity Growth: Evidence From
         Norwegian Micro-Data 1976-1985. Oslo, Norway: Central Bureau of Statistics Discussion Paper
         No. 60.
Klette, T. J. (1992), On the relationship between R&D and performance when innovative opportunities
         differ between firms. Paper presented at the NBER Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass.
Klette, T. J. (1994), R&D, scope economies, and company structure: a 'not so fixed effect' model of plant
         performance. Oslo, Norway: Central Bureau of Statistics Discussion Paper No. 120.
Klette, T. J. (1996), the Accumulation of R&D-Capital and the Dynamic Performance of Manufacturing
         Firms, Oslo, Norway: Central Bureau of Statistics.
Klette, T. J., and Z. Griliches (1998), Empirical Patterns of Firm Growth and R&D Investment: a Quality
         Ladder Interpretation, Cambridge, Mass.: NBER.
Kortum, S. (1997), a Model of Research, Patenting, and Technological Change, Econometrica, 65, 1389-
       1919.
Lehtoranta, O. (1998), R&D, Patenting, and Firm Performance, Helsinki: Statistics Finland.
Leonard, W. N. (1971), Research and development in industrial growth, Journal of Political Economy
       79(2), 232-56.
Lev, B. (2001), Intangibles: Management, Measurement, and Reporting. Washington, DC: Brookings
        Institution.

                                                     41
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                  November 2009


Levin, R. and P. Reiss (1988), Cost-reducing and demand-creating R&D with spillovers. Rand Journal of
        Economics 19(4), 538-556.
Levy, D. and N. Terleckyj (1989), Problems identifying returns to R&D in an industry. Managerial and
       Decision Economics 1-2, 43-49.
Lichtenberg, F. R. (1993), R&D Investment and International Productivity Differences, in Economic
       Growth in the World Economy, Ed. By H. Siebert. Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), 89-
       110.
Lichtenberg, F. R., and D. S. Siegel (1991), the Impact of R&D Investment On Productivity-New
       Evidence Using Linked R&D-LRD Data, Economic Inquiry, XXIX, 203-228.
Lichtenberg, F. and B. Van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie (1998), International R&D Spillovers: A
       Comment, European Economic Review, 42(8), 1483-1491.
Link, A. N. (1978), Rates of induced technology from investment in research and development. Southern
        Economic Journal, 370-379.
Link, A. N. (1981), Basic research and productivity increase in manufacturing: some additional evidence.
        American Economic Review 71(5), 1111-1112.
Link, A. N. (1982), A disaggregated analysis of industrial R&D: product versus process R&D. In The
        Transfer and Utilization of Technical Knowledge, edited by D. Sahal. Lexington, MA: D. C.
        Heath.
Link, A. N. (1983), Inter-firm technology flows and productivity growth. Economics Letters 11, 179-184.
Longo, F. (1984), Industrial R&D and Productivity in Canada. Report prepared for the Science Council
       of Canada.
Los, B. and B. Verspagen (2000), R&D Spillovers and productivity: Evidence from U. S. manufacturing
        industries. Empirical Economics 25, 127-148.
Mairesse, J., and P. Cunéo (1985), Recherche-développement et performances des entreprises: Une étude
       économétrique sur données individuelles. Revue économique 36 (5), 1001-1041.
Mairesse, J., and B. H. Hall (1994), Estimating the Productivity of R&D in French and U.S.
       Manufacturing Firms: An Exploration of Simultaneity Issues With GMM, in International
       Productivity Comparisons, Ed. By K. Wagner. Amsterdam: Elsevier-North Holland.
Mairesse, J. and P. Mohnen (1990), Recherche-développement et productivité: un survol de la littérature
       économétrique, Economie et Statistique, 237-38, 99-108.
Mairesse, J., and P. Mohnen (1994), R&D and Productivity Growth: What Have We Learned From
       Econometric Studies? , Eunetic Conference on Evolutionary Economics of Technological
       Change: Assessment of Results and New Frontiers, 817-888, Strasbourg.
Mairesse, J., P. Mohnen, and E. Kremp (2005), The Importance of R&D and Innovation for Productivity:
       A Reexamination in Light of the 2000 French Innovation Survey, forthcoming in Annales
       d’Economie et Statistique 79/80, -----.
Mairesse, J., and M. Sassenou (1989), Les facteurs qualitatifs de la productivité : un essai d’évaluation.
       Economie et Prévision 91 (5), 35-42.
Mairesse, J. and M. Sassenou (1991), R&D and productivity: a survey of econometric studies at the firm
       level, STI Review, OECD, 8, 9-46.



                                                     42
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                November 2009


Maliranta, M., P. Mohnen and P. Rouvinen (2010), “Is inter-firm labor mobility a channel of knowledge
       spillovers? Evidence from a linked employer-employee panel?”, Industrial and Corporate
       Change, 18(6), 1161-1191.
Mansfield, E. (1965), Rates of Return from Industrial Research and Development. American Economic
       Review 55: 310-22.
Mansfield, E. (1980), Basic Research and Productivity Increase in Manufacturing, American Economic
       Review, 70, 863-873.
Mansfield, E. (1988), Industrial R&D in Japan and the United States: A comparative study. American
       Economic Review 78(2), 223-228.
Mansfield, E., J. Rapoport, A. Romeo, S. Wagner and G. Beardsley (1977), Social and private rates of
       return from industrial innovations, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 77, 221-240.
Mansfield, E., J. Rapoport, J. Schnee, S. Wagner, and M. Hamburger (1971), Research and Development
       in the Modern Corporation. New York: W. W. Norton.
Mansfield, E., A. Romeo, and L. Switzer (1983), R&D Prices Indexes and Real R&D Expenditures in the
       United States. Research Policy 12, 105-112.
Medda, G., C. Piga, and D. S. Siegel (2003), On the Relationship between R&D and Productivity: A
       Treatment Effect Analysis. Milano, Italy: Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei Nota di Lavoro 34-2003.
Minasian, J. R. (1969), Research and development, production functions and rates of return. American
       Economic Review 59, 80-85.
Moen, J. (2005). Is Mobility of Technical Personnel a Source of R&D Spillovers?, Journal of Labor
       Economics 23 (1): 81-114.
Mohnen, P. (1990), New technologies and interindustry spillovers, OECD STI Review, 7, 131-147.
Mohnen, P. (1992a), The Relationship Between R&D and Productivity Growth in Canada and Other
      Industrialized Countries. Minister of Supply and Services Canada, Ottawa.
Mohnen, P. (1992b), International R&D Spillovers in Selected OECD Countries. Montreal, Quebec:
      UQAM dept des sciences economiques cahier de recherche No. 9208.
Mohnen, P. (1996), R&D externalities and productivity growth, OECD STI Review, 18, 39-66.
Mohnen, P. (1998), International R&D spillovers and economic growth, in Information Technology,
      Productivity, and Economic Growth : International Evidence and Implications for Economic
      Development, Matti Pohjola (ed.), Oxford University Press, 2001.
Mohnen, P., R. Jacques, and J. S. Gallant (1996), R&D and productivity growth in two Canadian forest
      product industries. Forest Science, 42(4), 1-11.
Mohnen, P., and N. Lépine (1991), R&D, R&D Spillovers and Payments For Technology: Canadian
      Evidence, Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, 2, 213-228.
Mohnen, P. and M. I. Nadiri (1985), Demande de facteurs et recherche-développement: estimations pour
      les Etats-Unis, le Japon, L’Allemagne et la France. Revue Economique 36(5), 943-974.
Mohnen, P., M. I. Nadiri, and I. Prucha (1986), R&D, production structure, and rate of return in the US,
      Japanese, and German manufacturing sectors: a nonseparable dynamic factor demand model.
      European Economic Review 30, 749-771.




                                                   43
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                               November 2009


Mucchielli, J.-L., S. Negassi, and E. Pfister (2000), Efficiency of International R&D Cooperation and
       Foreign Source of Innovation: An Empirical Study, Paris, France: CNRS Les Cahiers De
       L'innovations.
Nadiri, M.I. (1980a), Sectoral productivity slowdown. American Economic Review 70(2), 349-355.
Nadiri, M.I. (1980b), Contributions and determinants of research and development expenditures in the U.
        S. Manufacturing industries. In Capital, Efficiency, and Growth, edited by G. M. von
        Furstenberg. Cambridge: Ballinger, 361-392.
Nadiri, M.I. (1993), Innovations and technological spillovers, NBER working paper 4423.
Nadiri, M. I., and S. Kim (1996a), R&D, Production Structure and Rates of Return in the U.S., Japanese
        and Korean Manufacturing Sectors: a Non-Sector Model, NBER working paper 5506
Nadiri, M. I. and S. Kim (1996b), International R&D Spillovers, Trade and Productivity in Major OECD
        Countries, NBER working paper 5801.
Nadiri, M. I. and S. Kim (1997), Sources of Growth of Output and Convergence of Productivity in Major
        OECD Countries, Ijprode, 52, 133-146.
Nadiri, M. I., and T. P. Mamuneas (1994), Effects of Public Infrastructure and R&D Capital on the Cost
        Structure and Performance of US Manufacturing Industries, Review of Economics and Statistics,
        76(1), 22-37.
Nadiri, M. I. and I. Prucha (1990), Comparison and analysis of productivity growth and R&D investment
        in the electrical machinery industries of the United States and Japan. In A Comparison of
        Productivity Growth in Japan and the United States, edited by C. R. Hulten. Chicago, IL:
        Chicago University Press.
Nguyen, S. V., and E. C. Kokkelenberg (1992), Measuring Total Factor Productivity, Technical Change
       and the Rate of Returns to Research and Development, Journal of Productivity Analysis, 2, 269-
       282.
Nooteboom, B., W. Van Haverbeke, G. Duysters, V. Gilsing, and A. van den Oord (2007), Optimal
       cognitive distance and absorptive capacity. Research Policy 36 (7), 1016-1034.
Odagiri, H. (1985), Research Activity, Output Growth and Productivity Increase in Japanese
        Manufacturing Industries, Research Policy 14(3), 117-130.
Odagiri, H., and H. Iwata (1986), The Impact of R&D On Productivity Increase in Japanese
        Manufacturing Companies, Research Policy 15(1), 13-19.
Olley, G. S., and A. Pakes (1996), The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications equipment
        industry. Econometrica 64 (6), 1263-1297.
Ornaghi, C. (2006), Spillovers in Product and Process Innovation: Evidence From Manufacturing Firms,
       International Journal of Industrial Organization, 24, 349-380.
Ortega-Argilés, R., M. Piva, L. Potters, and M. Vivarelli (2009), Is Corporate R&D Investment in High-
       Tech Sectors More Effective? Some Guidelines for European Research Policy. Bonn, Germany:
       IZA DP No. 3945.
O’Sullivan, L. and W. Roeger (1991), An econometric investigation of the interrelationship between
        R&D expenditures and technical progress. Brussels: Commission of the European Communities.
Pakes, A. (1985), On Patents, R&D, and the Stock Market Rate of Return. Journal of Political Economy
        93: 390-409.


                                                   44
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                November 2009


Pakes, A., and M. Schankerman (1984), The rate of obsolescence of patents, research gestation lags, and
        the private rate of return to research resources. In R&D, Patents, and Productivity, edited by Z.
        Griliches. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press, 73-88.
Park, W. G. (1995), International R&D Spillovers and OECD Economic Growth, Economic Inquiry, 33,
       571-591.
Patel, P. and L. Soete (1988), L’évaluation des effets économiques de la technologie. OECD STI Review
         4, 133-183.
Perelman, S. (1995), R&D, technological progress and efficiency change in industrial activities, Review of
       Income and Wealth, 41(3), 349-66.
Peri, G. (2004), Knowledge Flows and Productivity, Rivista Di Politica Economica, 21-59.
Poole, E. and J.-T. Bernard (1992). Defense innovation stock and total factor productivity growth.
        Canadian Journal of Economics 25(2), 438-452.
Postner, H. H. and L. Wesa (1983). Canadian Productivity Growth: An Alternative (Input-Output)
        Analysis. Report prepared for the Economic Council of Canada, Ministry of Supply and Services,
        Ottawa.
Raines, F. (1968), The impact of applied research and development on productivity. St Louis, MO:
        Washington University Working Paper No.. 6814.
Raut, L. K. (1993), R&D spillover and productivity growth: evidence from Indian private firms. San
        Diego, CA: UC San Diego Dept. of Economics Discussion Paper 91-29R.
Ravenscraft, D. J., and F. M. Scherer (1982), The Lag Structure of Returns to Research and Development.
       Applied Economics 14, 603-620.
Rogers, M. (2009), R&D and productivity: Using UK firm-level data to inform policy. Empirica. DOI
        10.1007/s10663-009-9111-x.
Rosenberg, N. (1976), The Direction of Technological Change: Inducement Mechanisms and Focusing
       Devices. In Perspectives on Technology, edited by N. Rosenberg. Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press, 108-125.
Rosenberg, N. (1982a), How Exogenous is Science? In Inside the Black Box, edited by N. Rosenberg.
       Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 141-162.
Rosenberg, N. (1982b), Technological Interdependence and the American Economy. In Inside the Black
       Box, edited by N. Rosenberg. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 55-80.
Rouvinen, P. (2002), The Existence of R&D Spillovers: A Cost Function Estimation With Random
       Coefficients, Economics of Innovation and New Technologies, 11(6), 525-542.
Ruttan, V. (1980), Bureaucratic Productivity: The Case of Agricultural Research, Public Choice, 5, 529-
        47.
Sassenou, M. (1988), Recherche-Développement et Productivité dans les Entreprises Japonaises: une
       Etude Econométrique sur Données de Panel. Thèse pour le doctorat de l’Ecole des Hautes Etudes
       en Sciences Sociales, Paris, France.
Schankerman, M. (1981), The Effect of Double Counting and Expensing on the Measured Returns to
       R&D. Review of Economics and Statistics 63(3), 454-458.
Schankerman, M., and A. Pakes (1986), Estimates of the Value of Patent Rights in European Countries
       During the Post-1950 Period. Economic Journal 96, 1052-1076.

                                                    45
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                               November 2009


Schankerman, M. and J. van Reenen (2009), Identifying Technology Spillovers and Product Market
       Rivalry, mimeo.
Scherer, F. M. (1965), Corporate inventive output, profits and growth. Journal of Political Economy 73
        (3): 290-97.
Scherer, F. M. (1982), Interindustry technology flows and productivity growth. Review of Economics and
        Statistics 64, 627-634.
Scherer, F. M. (1983), Concentration, R&D and productivity change. Southern Economic Journal 50,
        221-225.
Scherer, F. M. (1984), Using Linked Patent and R&D Data to Measure Interindustry Technology Flows,
        in R&D, Patents, and Productivity, Ed. By Z. Griliches. Chicago, Ill.: Chicago University Press,
        417-464.
Seldon, B. (1987), A Nonresidual Estimation of Welfare Gains from Research: The Case of Public R&D
        in a Forest Product Industry, Southern Economic Journal, 54(2), 64-80.
Soete, L. and P. Patel (1985), Recherche-développement, importations technologiques et croissance
        économique. Revue Economique 36(5), 975-1000.
Soete, L. and B. Verspagen (1993), Convergence and divergence in growth and technical change: an
        empirical investigation. Paper presented at the AEA annual meeting in Anaheim, Ca, January
        1993,
Statistics Canada (1986), Price Indexes for Canadian Industrial Research and Development Expenditures.
         Minister of Supply and Services, Ottawa.
Sterlacchini, A. (1989), R&D, innovations and total factor productivity growth in British manufacturing,
        Applied Economics, 21, 1549-1562.
Suzuki, K. (1993), R&D spillovers and technology transfer among and within vertical keiretsu groups:
        Evidence from the Japanese electrical machinery industry, International Journal of Industrial
        Organization, 11(4), 573-591.
Sveikauskas, L. (1981), Technology inputs and multifactor productivity growth, Review of Economics
       and Statistics, 63, 275-282.
Sveikauskas, L. (2000), R&D, Unmeasured quality change, and productivity growth. Paper presented at
       the NBER Summer Institute, Cambridge, MA.
Sveikauskas, L. (2007), R&D and Productivity Growth: A Review of the Literature. Washington, DC:
       U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics Working Paper 408.
Terleckyj, N. (1980), Direct and indirect effects of industrial research and development on the
       productivity growth of industries, in J. Kendrick and B. Vaccara (eds.), New Developments in
       Productivity Measurement and Analysis. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Tewksbury, J.G., M.S. Crandall and W.E. Crane (1980), Measuring the societal benefits of innovation,
      Science, 658-62.
Trajtenberg, M. (1989), The welfare analysis of product innovations, with an application to computed
        tomography scanners, Journal of Political Economy, 97(2), 444-479.
Torre, A. (1990), Quand les économistes mesurent l'intangible, Revue d'Economie Industrielle, 53(3), 87-
        98.
U. S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (1989), The Impact of Research and Development on Productivity
        Growth, U.S. Department of Labor, Bulletin 2331.
                                                   46
Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen                                                                 November 2009


van Meijl, H. (1997), Measuring intersectoral spillovers: French evidence, Economic Systems Research,
       9(1), 25-46.
van Pottelsberghe, B. and F. Lichtenberg (2001), Does foreign direct investment transfer technology
        across borders? Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(3), 490-497.
Verspagen, B. (1995), R&D and Productivity: A Broad Cross-Country Look. Journal of Productivity
       Analysis 6, 117-135.
Verspagen, B. (1997), Estimating international technology spillovers using technology flow matrices.
       Review of World Economics 133(2), 226-248.
Vuori, S. (1991), Returns to R&D in Nordic manufacturing industries, 1964 to 1983. Helsinki: ETLA
        Discussion Paper No. 357.
Wang, J.-C., and K.-H. Tsai (2003), Productivity Growth and R&D Expenditure in Taiwan's
       Manufacturing Firms. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
       Series No. 9724.
Weisbrod, B.A. (1971), Costs and benefits of medical research: a case study of polyomyelitis, Journal of
       Political Economy, 79(3), 527-544.
Wolff, E. N., and M. I. Nadiri. (1993), Spillover effects, linkage structure, and research and development.
        Structural Change and Economic Dynamics 4 (2), 315-331.
Yamada, T., T. Yamada and G. Liu (1991), Labor productivity and market competition in Japan.
      Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No. w3800.




                                                    47
                                           HallMairesseMohnen09_tables.xlsx                                       Page 1


                                                   Table 1
                                   A Guide through the Empirical Literature
                                              A. Production function
Cross-section or pooled                  Temporal                             Both
Firm or plant data
                                         Mansfield (1965)                     Minasian (1969)
                                                                              Bardy (1974)
Schankerman (1981)                       Mansfield (1980)                     Griliches (1980)
                                         Link (1981)                          Ravenscraft and Scherer (1982)
                                         Link (1983)*                         Clark and Griliches (1984)
                                         Odagiri (1983)                       Cuneo (1984)
Longo (1984)                             Clark and Griliches (1984)           Cuneo and Mairesse (1984)
                                         Jaffe (1986)*                        Griliches and Mairesse (1984)
                                         Odagiri and Iwata (1986)             Mairesse and Cuneo (1984)
Levin and Reiss (1988)*                  Jaffe (1988)*                        Griliches (1986)
Mairesse and Sassenou (1989)*            Lichtenberg and Siegel (1989)        Sassenou (1988)*
                                         Fecher (1989)*
                                         Griliches and Mairesse (1990)
                                         Link and Rees (1990)                 Klette (1991)
Jaian and Raut (1991)                                                         Lambert (1991)
                                         Klette (1992)*                       Hall (1993)
Crepon and Mairesse (1993)               Antonelli (1993)*                    Crott and Mairesse (1993)
Adams and Jaffe (1994)*                  Klette (1994)*                       Raut (1993)*
                                                                              Hall and Mairesse (1995)
                                                                              Mairesse and Hall (1996)
                                                                              Bartelsman et al. (1996)
Crepon, Duguet, Mairesse (1998)          Capron and Cincera (1998)            Harhoff (1998)
Medda, Piga, Siegel (2003)                                                    Los and Verspagen (2000)
Wang and Tsai (2003)                     Wakelin (2001)                       Harhoff (2000)*
Mairesse, Mohnen, Kremp (2005)                                                Griffith, Harrison, van Reenen (2004)
Ortega-Argiles et al. (2009)             Dorazelski and Jaumandreu (2008)     Bond, Harhoff, van Reenen (2005)
Hall, Foray, Mairesse (2009)                                                  Rogers (2009)
* estimates include spillover impacts.
                                          HallMairesseMohnen09_tables.xlsx                                        Page 2
                                          Table 1 (continued)
                                A Guide through the Empirical Literature
                                             A. Production function
Cross-section or pooled                  Temporal                             Both
Industry data
                                         Raines (1968)*
                                         Leonard (1971)
                                         Globerman (1972)
                                         Griliches (1973)
                                         Terleckyj (1974)*
Link (1978)                              Majer (1978)
                                         Goldberg (1979)
                                         Mansfield (1980)*
                                         Griliches (1980b)
                                         Terleckyj (1980)*
                                         Sveikauskas (1981)*
                                         Scherer (1982)*
                                         Postner and Wesa (1983)*             Griliches and Mairesse (1983)
                                         Scherer (1983)
                                         Griliches and Lichtenberg (1984a)*   Griliches and Lichtenberg (1984b)
                                         Scherer (1984)*
                                         Odagiri (1985)*
                                         Seldon (1987)*
                                         Englander, Evenson, Hanazaki (1988)*
                                         Hanel (1988)*
                                         Mansfield (1988)
                                         Levy and Terleckyj (1989)*
                                         Fecher and Perelman (1989)
                                         Geroski (1989)
                                         Goto and Suzuki (1989)*
                                         Sterlacchini (1989)*
                                         Adams (1990)*
                                         Bartelsman (1990)
Yamada, Yamada, Liu (1991)*              Ducharme and Mohnen (1991)*
                                         Vuori (1991)
                                         Fecher (1992)*
                                         Fecher and Perelman (1992)
                                         Martin and Jaumandreu (1992)
                                         Poole and Bernard (1992)
                                         Perelman (1993)
                                         Wolff and Nadiri (1993)*
                                         Griliches (1994)
                                         Hanel (1994)*
                                         van Meijl (1997)*                    Verspagen (1995)
                                         Sveikauskas (2000)
                                         Griffith, Redding, van Reenen (2004)
* estimates include spillover impacts.
                                          HallMairesseMohnen09_tables.xlsx                           Page 3

                                             Table 1 (continued)
                                   A Guide through the Empirical Literature
                                              A. Production function
Cross-section or pooled                  Temporal                              Both
Regional or country data
Griliches (1964)
                                         Nadiri (1980a)
                                         Nadiri (1980b)
                                         Soete and Patel (1985)
Jaffe (1989)*                            Patel and Soete (1988)
Acs, Audretsch, Feldman (1990)*          Mohnen (1990)
                                         O'Sullivan and Roeger (1991)*
                                         Nadiri and Prucha (1992)               Lichtenberg (1992)
                                         Capron (1992)
Joly (1993)                              Guellec (1993)
                                         Soete and Verspagen (1993)*
                                         Coe and Helpman (1993)*
                                         Park (1995)*
                                         Nadiri and Kim (1996b)*
                                         Coe, Helpman, Hoffmaister (1997)*
                                         Keller (1997)*
                                         Verspagen (1997)
                                         Kao et al. (1999)*
                                         van Pottelsberghe and Lichtenberg (2001)
* estimates include spillover impacts.
                                          HallMairesseMohnen09_tables.xlsx                                   Page 4

                                             Table 1 (continued)
                                   A Guide through the Empirical Literature
                                             B. Cost or profit function
Cross-section or pooled                  Temporal                            Temporal

Firm data                                Industry                            Region or country
                                                                             Cardani and Mohnen (1984)
Bernstein (1988) *                       Bernstein and Nadiri (1988)*        Mohnen and Nadiri (1985)
                                         Bernstein and Nadiri (1989)*        Mohnen, Nadiri, Prucha (1986)
                                         Bernstein (1989)*
Bernstein and Nadiri (1990)              Nadiri and Prucha (1990b)           Mohnen (1990)*
Suzuki (1991)                            Bernstein and Nadiri (1991)*
                                         Mohnen and Lepine (1991)*           Mohnen (1992b)*
                                         Mohnen, Jacques, Gallant (1993)     Mohnen and Gallant (1992)*
                                         Nadiri and Mamuneas (1994)*         Nadiri and Kim (1996a)
                                         Bernstein and Yan (1997)*           Nadiri and Kim (1996b)*
                                         Bernstein and Mohnen (1998)*
                                         Bernstein (1998)
* estimates include spillover impacts.
                                            HallMairesseMohnen09_tables.xlsx                                     Page 5

                                                 Table 2a
                          R&D elasticities of output and rates of return to R&D
                   Pooled estimates on firm or industry-level data using the primal approach
                                                                                                      R&D rate of
Study                     Sample               Period      Type of estimation        R&D elasticity     return
Firm data
                      US                                   VA prod function with
Griliches (1980)                                1963                                   0.07 (0.01)
                      883 firms                            sector dummies
                      US
Schankerman (1981)                              1963       Prod function                  0.16
                      110 firms
Griliches-Mairesse    U.S.
                                              1966-77      Prod function                  0.05           35% *
(1984)                133 firms
                      France                               VA prod function; corr.
Cuneo-Mairesse (1984)                         1974-79                                  0.20 (0.01)      ~90% *
                      182 firms                            for double counting
                      France
Mairesse-Cuneo (1985) 390 chem, elec,       1974-79        VA prod function            0.18 (0.02)     ~128% **
                      mech firms
                      US                                   VA prod function with
Griliches (1986)                            1967, 72, 77                              0.09 to 0.17    51% to 76% *
                      386 firms                            sector dummies
                      US
Hall (1993)                                   1964-90      Prod function             0.024 to 0.040   18% to 43% *
                      ~1200 firms
                      France
Hall-Mairesse (1995)                          1980-87      VA prod. function          0.25 (0.01)        78% *
                      197 firms
                      France                               VA prod. Function with     0.176 (0.004)
                                              1981-89                                                    75% *
                      1232 firms                           ind dummies                   (corr.)
Mairesse-Hall (1994)
                      US                                   Prod function with ind
                                              1981-89                                0.173 (0.013)       28% *
                      1073 firms                           dummies
                                                                                     0.006 to 0.014
                                                                                        (uncorr.)
                                                           Prod function
                                                                                     0.018 to 0.033
                            Netherlands                                                  (corr.)
Bartelsman et al (1996)                   1985, 89, 93
                           ~200 mfg firms                                            0.008 to 0.043
                                                                                        (uncorr.)
                                                           VA prod. function
                                                                                     0.046 to 0.099
                                                                                         (corr.)
                                                                                      0.14 (0.01)
                          Germany                                                       (uncorr.)
Harhoff (1998)                                1979-89      Prod function                                 71% *
                          443 mfg firms                                               0.11 (0.01)
                                                                                         (corr.)
Crépon-Duguet-            France
                                                1990       VA prod function            0.12 (0.01)
Mairesse (1998)           6,145 firms
                          U. S.
Los-Verspagen (2000)                          1974-93      VA prod. function, ECM     0.04 to 0.10
                          485 mfg firms
                          Italy
Medda-Piga-Siegel
                          1008 firms, 689     1992-95      treatment effect           0.026, 0.025     29%, 36%
(2003)
                          firms
                                              HallMairesseMohnen09_tables.xlsx                                             Page 6

                           Taiwan                             VA prod function with              0.20 (0.03)
Wang-Tsai (2003)                                1994-2000                                                       8% to 35% *
                           136 firms                          random effects                       (corr.)
                           Germany
                                                 1988-96      Prod. Function with               0.079 (0.042)       19%
Bond-Harhoff-van           234 firms
                                                              common factor (dynamic);
Reenen (2005)              UK
                                                 1988-96      GMM-SYS                           0.065 (0.024)       38%
                           239 firms
                           France
                                                   2000                                            0.043            16%
Mairesse-Mohnen-           488 firms
Kremp (2005)               France
                                                   2000                                            0.028            27%
                           351 firms
Griffith-Harrison-van      UK
                                                1990-2000 VA Prod. Function                     0.03 (0.01)        14% *
Reenen (2006)              188 mfg firms
                                                                                               0.12 to 0.16     40% to 58%
                           UK                             VA prod function with                (mfg; corr.)        (mfg)
Rogers (2009)                                   1989-2000
                           719 firms                      R&D flow as input                 0.12 to 0.23 (non- 53% to 108%
                                                                                                mfg; corr.)      (non-mfg)
Hall-Foray-Mairesse        US
                                                 2004-06      Prod function                        0.096           23% *
(2009)                     1513 firms
Ortega-Argilés et al.      EU                                 Prod function with sector
                                                 2000-05                                            0.10            35%
(2009)                     532 firms                          dummies
Industry data
                           US                                                                   0.11 to 0.15
                                                              TFP with R&D stock
Bartelsman (1990)          450 industries        1958-86                                           (0.03)
                           agg to 20 groups                   Prod function                     0.12 (0.03)
                                                                                                0.05 to 0.17
                           4 hi tech inds
                                                              Translog prod function              (uncorr.)
Verspagen (1995)           9 OECD                1973-88                                                        21% to 24% *
                                                              with ind dummies                  0.06 to 0.17
                           countries
                                                                                                   (corr.)

* computed using means or medians of the variables
** computed assuming an R&D/GDP ratio of 2% and an R&D flow/stock ratio of 1/7
Standard errors in parentheses
Production function dependent variable is gross sales unless otherwise noted.
uncorr = capital and labor not corrected for double counting of R&D inputs; corr. = corrected
Unless otherwise noted, estimates use uncorrected data.
                                           HallMairesseMohnen09_tables.xlsx                                         Page 7

                                                 Table 2b
                          R&D elasticities of output and rates of return to R&D
                 Temporal estimates on firm or industry-level data using the primal approach
                                                                                            R&D rate of
Study                 Sample              Period Type of estimation       R&D elasticity      return

Firm data
Griliches-Mairesse    U.S.
                                             1966-77    Within firm                       0.09             64% *
(1984)                133 firms
                      France
Mairesse-Cuneo (1985)                        1974-79    Growth rates                 0.022 (0.095)          0%
                      390 firms
                      US
Griliches (1986)                             1966-77    Growth rates                      0.12
                      652 firms
                      US
Hall (1993)                                  1964-90    Within firm                   0.06 (0.04)          22% *
                      ~1200 firms
                          France                        Growth rates                  0.05 to 0.17       23% (5%)
Hall-Mairesse (1995)                         1980-87
                          197 firms
                                                        Within firm                  0.069 (0.035)         8% *
                                                        VA prod function;
                                                                                     0.068 (0.014)         33% *
                          France                        within firm
                                             1981-89
                          1232 firms                    VA prod function;
                                                                                     0.080 (0.021)
                                                        growth rate
                                                        Prod function with
Mairesse-Hall (1994)
                                                        hedonic deflator; within     0.170 (0.014)        150% *
                          US                            firm
                                             1981-89
                          1073 firms                    Prod function with
                                                        hedonic deflator;            0.092 (0.026)
                                                        growth rate
                          Netherlands                   Long difference               0.051 (corr.)
Bartelsman et al (1996)                    1985, 89, 93
                          ~200 mfg firms                VA, long difference           0.104 (corr.)
                                                                                   0.09 (0.02) (corr.)
                                             1979-89    Within firm                    0.07 (0.02)         66% *
                          Germany
Harhoff (1998)                                                                          (uncorr.)
                          443 firms
                                                                                      0.10 (0.03)
                                                        Long diff growth rates                           86% (17%)
                                                                                       (uncorr.)
                          Multi-country      1987-94    Growth rates                  0.32 (0.04)
Capron-Cincera (1998)
                          625 firms                     Growth rates, GMM             0.13 (0.05)
                          U. S.
Los-Verspagen (2000)                         1974-93    VA prod. function                0.014
                          485 mfg firms
                          Germany
                                             1988-96    GMM-DIF estimates                 0.05             43% *
Bond-Harhoff-van          234 firms
Reenen (2003)             UK
                                             1988-96    sectoral level                  ~0.015             20%
                          239 firms
Griffith-Harrison-van     UK
                                            1990-2000 GMM-SYS estimates              0.024 (0.011)         11% *
Reenen (2006)             188 mfg firms
Dorazelski and            Spain                         OP estimation                  0 to 0.018
                                             1991-99
                                              HallMairesseMohnen09_tables.xlsx                                 Page 8
Dorazelski and             Spain
                                                 1991-99
Jaumandreu (2008)          1800 firms                         VA; OP estimation            0.017 to 0.075

Industry data
                           US
                                                              TFP with R&D stock         0.10 to 0.12 (0.05)
Bartelsman (1990)          450 industries        1958-86
                           agg to 20 groups                   Prod function                     0.18 (0.01)
** computed assuming an R&D/GDP ratio of 2% and an R&D flow/stock ratio of 1/7
Standard errors in parentheses
OP denotes Olley-Pakes estimates
The dependent variable is the log of sales unless otherwise noted.
uncorr = capital and labor not corrected for double counting of R&D inputs; corr. = corrected
Unless otherwise noted, estimates use uncorrected data.
                                             HallMairesseMohnen09_tables.xlsx                                                 Page 9

                                                   Table 3
                                      Estimated rates of return to R&D
                            Estimates from growth rates regressed on R&D intensity
Study                        Sample           Period Type of estimation            R&D rate of return

Plant data
                              US
                                                                 Growth rates on R&D                         18%
Clark-Griliches (1984)        924 business           1971-80
                                                                 intensity                          20% (with ind dummies)
                              units
Lichtenberg and Siegel        US
                                                     1972-81     TFP on R&D intensity                      29% (2.4%)
(1991)                        ~2000 firms
                              Norway                             Growth rates on R&D
Klette (1991)                                        1978-85                                            10 to 11% (corr.)
                              ~200 plants                        intensity lagged
Firm data
                          Japan                                  Growth rates on R&D
Odagiri -Iwata (1986)                                1966-82                                               17% to 20%
                          ~150 firms                             intensity
                          U.S.                                   Growth rates on R&D
                                                     1973-80                                                41% (9%)
                          525 mfg firms                          intensity
Griliches-Mairesse (1990)
                          Japan                                  Growth rates on R&D
                                                     1973-80                                               56% (23%)
                          406 mfg firms                          intensity
                          France                                                                            27% (6%)
Hall-Mairesse (1995)                                 1980-87     VA Growth rates
                          197 mfg firms                                                                       (corr.)
                                                                 4-yr growth rate                  30% (corr. for double ctg)
                              Netherlands
Bartelsman et al (1996)                           1985, 89, 93
                              ~200 mfg firms                                                         173% (corr. for double
                                                                 VA, 4-yr growth rate
                                                                                                             ctg)
                              Germany                                                                   74% (11%) net
Harhoff (1998)                                       1979-89     Long diff growth rates
                              443 mfg firms                                                             22% (4%) gross
                              UK                             Growth rates, R&D flow
Wakelin (2001)                                       1988-96                                               29% (19%)
                              170 firms                      intensity, ind dummies
                              UK                             VA prod function with R&D                40% to 58% (mfg)
Rogers (2009)                                      1989-2000
                              719 firms                      flow as input                          53% to 108% (non-mfg)
Industry data
                              US
                                                                 quality-adjusted TFP on
Sveikauskas (2000)            22 asset classes       1958-83                                                  72.9%
                                                                 R&D intensity
                              (ind sectors)
                              OECD
Griffith-Redding-van
                              12 industries          1974-90     VA Growth rates                           47% to 67%
Reenen (2004)
                              12 countries
* computed using means or medians of the variables
** computed assuming an R&D/GDP ratio of 2% and an R&D flow/stock ratio of 1/7
Standard errors in parentheses
OP denotes Olley-Pakes estimates
Unless otherwise noted, the dep. var. is the annual growth of sales and the variable of interest is the R&D-to-sales ratio.
uncorr = capital and labor not corrected for double counting of R&D inputs; corr. = corrected
Unless otherwise noted, estimates use uncorrected data.
                                                HallMairesseMohnen09_tables.xlsx                                         Page 10


                                                        Table 4
                                           Rate of return to R&D Estimates
                                                    Using the dual approach
                                                                                                        Private rate of return
Study                       Sample                    Period      Model                                       estimate
Firm data
                            Canada                                Translog cost function and factor
Bernstein (1988)                                     1978-81                                                    12%
                            680 mfg firms                         demand equations
Bernstein and Nadiri        US                                    Factor demand equations with adj
                                                     1959-66                                                 9% to 20%
(1990)                      35 firms                              costs; from quadratic cost function
Industry data
                        Canada                                 Truncated translog cost function
Bernstein (1989)                                     1963-83                                                24% to 47%
                        9 industries                           and factor demand eqs.
                        U. S.                                  Factor demand equations with adj
Bernstein-Nadiri (1989)                               1965-78                                                    7%
                        4 industries                           costs; from quadratic val function
                        Canada                       1975, 77, Truncated translog cost function                56%
Mohnen-Lepine (1991)
                        12 mfg industries            79, 81-83 and variable factor demand eqs.             (5% to 275%)
                        Canada, Japan                          Quadratic cost function plus capital       17.2% (Canada)
Bernstein-Yan (1997)                                  1964-82
                        10 industries                          factor demand eqs with adj costs            17.4% (Japan)
                        Canada and US                          Quadratic cost function plus capital         16.4% (US)
Bernstein (1998)                                      1962-89
                        11 industries                          factor demand eqs with adj costs           12.8% (Canada)
Bernstein-Mohnen        Canada, Japan                          Quadratic cost function plus capital          44% (US)
                                                      1962-86
(1998)                  11 industries                          factor demand eqs with adj costs             47% (Japan)
Country data
                     US, Japan,                                   Factor demand eqs derived from             11% (US)
Mohnen-Nadiri-Prucha
                     German                          1965-77      truncated quadratic cost function;        15% (Japan)
(1986)
                     mfg sectors                                  capital adj costs nonseparable           13% (Germany)
                                                                  Factor demand eqs derived from
                            Canadian
Mohnen (1990)                                        1965-82      truncated quadratic cost function;            20%
                            mfg sector
                                                                  capital adj costs; IV est.
                                                                  Factor demand eqs derived from
                            OECD
Mohnen (1992b)                                       1964-85      truncated quadratic cost function;          6% to 9%
                            5 countries
                                                                  capital adj costs; GMM est.
                                                                                                             12% (US)
                            US, Japan, Korea                      Translog cost function and factor
Nadiri-Kim (1996a)                                   1975-90                                                12% (Japan)
                            Total mfg                             demand eqs.
                                                                                                            19% (Korea)
                                                                  Translog cost function and factor
Nadiri-Kim (1996b)          7 countries              1964-91                                                14% to 16%
                                                                  demand eqs.
"Truncated" means that some interaction terms were dropped as insignificant.
Where a range is given, it is the range of values obtained across industries.
                                                             HallMairesseMohnen09_tables.xlsx                                                            Page 11

                                                                    Table 5
                                           Elasticities and rate of return to own and others' R&D
                                                                                            Own R&D                             External R&D
Study                  Sample              Period      Weighting scheme        Output elasticity   Rate of return   Output elasticity     Rate of return
Plant data
                       US chem sector                Spatial correlation in
Adams-Jaffe (1996)                         1974-88                               0.05 (0.005)                          0.07 (0.01)
                       21,546 plant-yrs              R&D product fields

Firm data
                       US                          Spatial correlation in
Jaffe (1988)                               1972-77                                0.03 (0.01)       27% (0.8%)         0.10 (0.04)
                       434 firms                   patent space
                       Canada                      Simple external sector-
Bernstein (1988)                           1978-81                                                      12%                                    22%
                       680 mfg firms               specific R&D stocks
                                                   external R&D stocks;
                       US
Los-Verspagen (2000)                       1977-91 weighted by patent flows       0.0 to 0.07                          0.33 to 0.68
                       859 firms
                                                   in several ways

Industry data
Griliches-Lichtenberg US                                                                            11% to 31%                             50% to 90%
                                           1959-78 Patent flows
(1984a)               193 mfg industries                                                               (8%)                                  (36%)
                      Japan                          Inter-industry
Odagiri (1985)                             1960-77                                                 157% to 315%                           -606% to 734%
                      15 mfg industries              transactions
                                                     Inter-industry
                       UK                                                                           12% to 20%                             19% to 20%
Sterlacchini (1989)                        1945-83   transactions
                       15 mfg industries
                                                     Innovation flows                                                                      15% to 35%
                     Japan                           Inter-industry
Goto-Suzuki (1989)                         1978-83                                                      26%                                    80%
                     50 mfg industries               transactions
                     Canada                          Simple external sector-
Bernstein (1989)                           1963-83                                                  24% to 47%                          29% to 94% (social)
                     11 mfg industries               specific R&D stocks
Bernstein-Nadiri     U. S.                           Simple external sector-
                                           1965-78                                                      7%                                  9% to 13%
(1989)               4 industries                    specific R&D stocks
                     Canada                1975, 77,                                                   56%                                    30%
Mohnen-Lepine (1991)                                 Patent flows
                     12 mfg industries     79, 81-83                                               (5% to 275%)                            (2% to 90%)
                                                             HallMairesseMohnen09_tables.xlsx                                                        Page 12

                                                     Inter-industry
                                           1947, 58,                                                      11%                             14%
                       U.S.                          transactions
Wolff-Nadiri (1993)                         63, 67,
                       19 mfg industries
                                             72,77 Investments (capital
                                                                                                         same                              0%
                                                     inputs)
                                                     Inter-industry
                                           1947, 58,                                                      19%                              8%
                       U.S.                          transactions
Wolff-Nadiri (1993)                         63, 67,
                       50 industries
                                             72,77 Investments (capital
                                                                                                         same                              9%
                                                     inputs)
                                                                                                                      0.03 (0.01)
                                                   Patents, imports and
                       14 countries                                                                                    (domestic)
Verspagen (1997)                           1974-93 indirect imports; ECM           0.10 (0.01)
                       22 industries                                                                                  0.05 (0.01)
                                                   model
                                                                                                                        (foreign)
                                                                                                                                      62% to 183%
                       Canada and Japan;             Simple external sector-                         17.2% (Canada)
Bernstein-Yan (1997)                       1964-82                                                                                      (Canada)
                       10 industries                 specific R&D stocks                              17.4% (Japan)
                                                                                                                                    9% to 56% (Japan)
                       Canada and US                                                                                                28% to 167% (US)
                                                     Simple external sector-                           16.4% (US)
Bernstein (1998)       11 mfg industries   1962-89                                                                                    19% to 145%
                                                     specific R&D stocks                             12.8% (Canada)
                       (separately)                                                                                                     (Canada)

Bernstein-Mohnen       Canada and Japan;             Simple external sector-                           44% (US)                         47% (US)
                                           1962-86
(1998)                 11 industries                 specific R&D stocks                              47% (Japan)                      0% (Japan)
                       OECD
Griffith-Redding-van                                 industry-level TFP gap
                       12 industries       1974-90                                                    47% to 67%                      57% to 105%
Reenen (2004)                                        from frontier
                       12 countries

Country data
Mohnen (1990b)         Canadian mfg sector 1965-83 Hi-tech imports                 0.01 (0.10)            20%         0.13 (0.09)         29%

                       OECD                          Simple foreign aggregate
Mohnen (1992b)                             1964-85                                                     6% to 9%                        4% to 18%
                       5 countries                   R&D stocks
                                                     None - external is own     0.07 (0.02) pooled                                    0.004 pooled
Lichtenberg (1993)     53 countries        1960-85
                                                     govt-funded                0.07 (0.03) within                                     0.0 within
                                                                        HallMairesseMohnen09_tables.xlsx                                                Page 13

                                                                                           0.22 (G7)       123% (G7)
Coe-Helpman (1995)        22 countries             1971-90 Imports                                                       0.06 (G7 to ROW) 32% (G7 to ROW)
                                                                                          0.09 (other)     85% (other)
                                                                                                                          0.07 (G7 to all
                          OECD
Park (1995)                                        1973-87 Imports                        0.17 (0.06)                       developing
                          10 countries
                                                                                                                            countries)
Nadiri-Kim (1996b)        7 countries              1964-91 Imports                                         14% to 16%                       6% to 11%
                          North
Coe-Helpman-              22 countries                         Imports; especially of                                      0.06 (0.02)
                                                   1971-90
Hoffmaister (1997)        South                                machinery & equipment                                     (North to South)
                          77 countries
                                                               Imports; cointegration       0.20 (G7)      120% (G7)
Kao et al (1999)          22 countries             1971-90                                                               0.04 (G7 to ROW) 29% (G7 to ROW)
                                                               analysis                   0.09 (other)     79% (other)
                                                                                            0.13 (G7)                       0.05 (G7 to
Keller (1997b)            22 countries             1971-90 Imports
                                                                                          0.035 (other)                        ROW)
                                                           Imports                         0.05 (0.02)                     0.067 (0.013)
van Pottelsberghe-                                                                                          68% (G7)
                          13 countries             1971-90 Inward FDI                      0.08 (0.02)                     0.006 (0.004)
Lichtenberg (2001)                                                                                         15% (other)
                                                           Outward FDI                     0.06 (0.02)                     0.039 (0.009)
Standard errors in parentheses
G7 = Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, UK, US
Where a range is given, it is the range of values obtained across industries.
