NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE "OTHER" IMBALANCE AND THE FINANCIAL CRISIS
Ricardo J. Caballero
Working Paper 15636
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15636

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2010

Prepared for the Paolo Baffi Lecture delivered at the Bank of Italy on December 10th, 2009. I thank
Francesco Giavazzi, Arvind Krishnamurthy, James Poterba and seminar participants at the Bank of
Italy for their comments, and Fernando Duarte, Jonathan Goldberg, and Matthew Huang for outstanding
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Ricardo J. Caballero. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The "Other" Imbalance and the Financial Crisis
Ricardo J. Caballero
NBER Working Paper No. 15636
January 2010
JEL No. E32,E44,E58,F30,G01,G30
ABSTRACT
One of the main economic villains before the crisis was the presence of large “global imbalances.”
The concern was that the U.S. would experience a sudden stop of capital flows, which would unavoidably
drag the world economy into a deep recession. However, when the crisis finally did come, the mechanism
did not at all resemble the feared sudden stop. Quite the opposite, during the crisis net capital inflows
to the U.S. were a stabilizing rather than a destabilizing source. I argue instead that the root imbalance
was of a different kind: The entire world had an insatiable demand for safe debt instruments that put
an enormous pressure on the U.S. financial system and its incentives (and this was facilitated by regulatory
mistakes). The crisis itself was the result of the negative feedback loop between the initial tremors
in the financial industry created to bridge the safe-assets gap and the panic associated with the chaotic
unraveling of this complex industry. Essentially, the financial sector was able to create “safe” assets
from the securitization of lower quality ones, but at the cost of exposing the economy to a systemic
panic. This structural problem can be alleviated if governments around the world explicitly absorb
a larger share of the systemic risk. The options for doing this range from surplus countries rebalancing
their portfolios toward riskier assets, to private-public solutions where asset-producer countries preserve
the good parts of the securitization industry while removing the systemic risk from the banks’ balance
sheets. Such public-private solutions could be designed with fee structures that could incorporate
all kind of too-big- or too-interconnected-to-fail considerations.

Ricardo J. Caballero
MIT
Department of Economics
Room E52-373a
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
caball@mit.edu

I.

Introduction

One of the main economic villains before the crisis was the presence of large “global
imbalances,” which refer to the massive and persistent current account deficits
experienced by the U.S. and financed by the periphery. The IMF, then in a desperate
search for a new mandate that would justify its existence, had singled out these
imbalances as a paramount risk for the global economy. That concern was shared by
many around the world and was intellectually grounded on the devastating crises often
experienced by emerging market economies that run chronic current account deficits.
The main trigger of these crises is the abrupt macroeconomic adjustment needed to
deal with a sudden reversal in the net capital inflows that supported the previous
expansion and current account deficits (the so called “sudden stops”). The global
concern was that the U.S. would experience a similar fate, which unavoidably would
drag the world economy into a deep recession.
However, when the crisis finally did come, the mechanism did not at all resemble the
feared sudden stop. Quite the opposite occurred: During the crisis net capital inflows to
the U.S. were a stabilizing rather than a destabilizing source. The U.S. as a whole never
experienced, not even remotely, an external funding problem. This is an important
observation to keep in mind as it hints that it is not the global imbalances per‐se, or at
least not through their conventional mechanism, that should be our primary concern.
I argue instead that the root imbalance was of a different kind (although not unrelated
to global imbalances, see below): The entire world, including foreign central banks and
investors, but also many U.S. financial institutions, had an insatiable demand for safe
debt instruments which put enormous pressure on the U.S. financial system and its
incentives (Caballero and Krishnamurthy 2008). The crisis itself was the result of the
interaction between the initial tremors (caused by the rise in subprime defaults) in the
financial industry created to supply safe‐assets and the panic associated to the chaotic

2

unraveling of this complex industry. Essentially, the financial sector was able to create
micro‐AAA assets from the securitization of lower quality ones, but at the cost of
exposing the system to a panic, which finally did take place.
In this view, the surge of safe‐assets‐demand is a key factor behind the rise in leverage
and macroeconomic risk concentration in financial institutions in the U.S. (as well as the
U.K., Germany, and a few other developed economies), as these institutions sought the
profits generated from bridging the gap between this rise in demand and the expansion
of its natural supply (more on this later on).2 In all likelihood, the safe‐asset shortage is
also a central force behind the creation of highly complex financial instruments and
linkages, which ultimately exposed the economy to panics triggered by Knightian
uncertainty (Caballero and Krishnamurthy 2007, Caballero and Simsek 2009a,b).
This is not to say that the often emphasized regulatory and corporate governance
weaknesses, misguided homeownership policies, and unscrupulous lenders, played no
role in creating the conditions for the surge in real estate prices and its eventual crash.
However, it is to say that these were mainly important in determining the minimum
resistance path for the safe‐assets imbalance to release its energy, rather than being the
structural sources of the dramatic recent macroeconomic boom‐bust cycle. 3
Similarly, it is not to say that global imbalances did not play a role. Indeed, there is a
connection between the safe‐assets imbalance and the more visible global imbalances:
The latter were caused by the funding countries’ demand for financial assets in excess of
their ability to produce them (Caballero et al 2008a,b), but this gap is particularly acute
for safe assets since emerging markets have very limited institutional capability to
2

Moreover, Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2008) show that, paradoxically, the risk premium initially drops rather
than rises as the demand for AAA‐assets grows at the margin. The reason for this is that the demand for safe assets
generates a stable income flow and positive wealth effect for the underlying asset producers.
3
Acharya and Schnabl (2009) document that it is precisely those developed economies where banks could exploit
regulatory arbitrage through conduits that issued the ABCP sought by money market funds around the world, and
that experienced the largest stock‐market declines during the crisis. Moreover, they show that there is no relation
between countries’ issuance of ABCP and their current account deficits.

3

produce these assets. Thus, the excess demand for safe‐assets from the periphery
greatly added to the U.S. economy’s own imbalance caused by a variety of collateral,
regulatory, and mandated requirements for banks, mutual funds, insurance companies,
and other financial institutions.4 This safe‐asset excess demand was exacerbated by the
NASDAQ crash which re‐alerted the rest of the world of the risks inherent to the equity
market even in developed economies.
The point, however, is that the gap to focus on is not along the external dimension we
are so accustomed to, but along the safe‐asset dimension. Shifting the focus to the
latter provides a parsimonious account of many of the main events prior to, as well as
during, the onset of the crisis ―something the global (current account) imbalances view
alone is unable to do.
Within this perspective the main pre‐crisis mechanism worked as follows: By 2001, as
the demand for safe assets began to rise above what the U.S. corporate world and safe‐
mortgage‐borrowers naturally could provide, financial institutions began to search for
mechanisms to generate triple‐A assets from previously untapped and riskier sources.
Subprime borrowers were next in line, but in order to produce safe assets from their
loans, “banks” had to create complex instruments and conduits that relied on the law of
large numbers and tranching of their liabilities. Similar instruments were created from
securitization of all sorts of payment streams, ranging from auto to student loans (see
Gorton and Souleles 2006). Along the way, and reflecting the value associated with
creating financial instruments from them, the price of real estate and other assets in
short supply rose sharply.

A positive feedback loop was created, as the rapid

appreciation of the underlying assets seemed to justify a large triple‐A tranche for
derivative CDOs and related products. Credit rating agencies contributed to this loop,

4

See Krishnamurthy and Vissing‐Jorgensen (2007) for persuasive evidence that safe‐asset demand is
quantitatively very significant and that it affects macro‐prices and quantities. See Gorton and Metrick (2009) for a
lucid description of some of the special features of safe debt (repos, in particular) that justify its high demand
(beyond risk aversion).

4

and so did greed and misguided homeownership policies, but most likely they were not
the main structural causes behind the boom and bust that followed.
From a systemic point of view, this new found source of triple‐A assets was much riskier
than the traditional single‐name highly rated bond. As Coval et al (2009) demonstrate,
for a given unconditional probability of default, a highly rated tranche made of lower
quality underlying assets will tend to default, in fact it can (nearly) only default, during a
systemic event. This means that, even if correctly rated as triple‐A, the correlation
between these complex assets distress and systemic distress is much higher than for
simpler single‐name bonds of equivalent rating.
The systemic fragility of these instruments became a source of systemic risk in itself
once a significant share of them was kept within the financial system rather than sold to
final investors. Banks and their SPVs, attracted by the low capital requirement provided
by the senior and super‐senior tranches of structured products, kept them in their books
(and issued short term triple‐A liabilities to fund them), sometimes passing their
(perceived) infinitesimal risk onto the monolines and insurance companies (AIG, in
particular). The recipe was copied by the main European financial centers (Acharya and
Schnabl 2009). Through this process, the core of the financial system became
interconnected in increasingly complex ways and, as such, it developed vulnerability to a
systemic event.
The triggering event was the crash in the real estate “bubble” and the rise in subprime
mortgage defaults that followed it.5 But this cannot be all of it. The global financial
system went into cardiac arrest mode and was on the verge of imploding more than
once, which seems hard to attribute to a relatively small shock which was well within
the range of possible scenarios. Instead, the real damage came from the unexpected
and sudden freezing of the entire securitization industry. Almost instantaneously,

5

The bubble was in itself a reflection of the chronic shortage of assets (Caballero 2006) and, as mentioned earlier,
of the indirect demand stemming from securitization and complex safe‐asset production.

5

confidence vanished and the complexity which made possible the “multiplication of
bread” during the boom, turned into a source of counterparty risk, both real and
imaginary. Eventually, even senior and super‐senior tranches were no longer perceived
as invulnerable. Making matters worse, banks had to bring back into their balance
sheets more of this new risk from the now struggling SIVs and conduits (see Gorton
2008). Knightian uncertainty took over, and pervasive flights to quality plagued the
financial system. Fear fed into more fear, causing reluctance to engage in financial
transactions, even among the prime financial institutions.
Along the way, the underlying structural deficit of safe assets that was behind the whole
cycle worsened as the newly found source of triple‐A assets from the securitization
industry dried up, and the spike in perceived uncertainty further increased demand for
these assets. Safe interest rates plummeted to record low levels. Initially, the flight to
quality was a boon for money market funds, which suddenly found themselves facing a
herd of new clients. In order to capture a large share of this expansion in demand from
these new clients that had a higher risk‐tolerance than their usual clients, some money
market funds began to invest in short‐term commercial paper issued by the investment
banks in distress. This strategy backfired after Lehman’s collapse, when the Reserve
Primary Fund “broke‐the‐buck” as a result of its losses associated with Lehman’s
bankruptcy. Perceived complexity reached a new level as even the supposedly safest
private funds were no longer immune to contagion. Widespread panic ensued and were
it not for the massive and concerted intervention taken by governments around the
world, the financial system would have imploded.
Global imbalances and their feared sudden reversal never played a significant role for
the U.S. during this deep crisis. In fact, the worse things became, the more domestic and
foreign investors ran to U.S. Treasuries for cover and treasury rates plummeted (and the

6

dollar appreciated). Instead, the largest reallocation of funds matched the downgrade
in perception of the safety of the newly created triple‐A securitization based assets.6
Note also that global imbalances per‐se were caused by a large excess demand for
financial assets more broadly (Bernanke 2007 and Caballero et al 2008b) which had as a
main consequence (and still has) the recurrent emergence of bubbles (Caballero 2006
and Caballero et al 2008a), but this was not a source of systemic instability in the
developed world until it began to drift toward safe‐assets. It was only then that the
financial system became compromised, as it was a required input to the securitization
process.7 This drift was probably the result of the rise in risk awareness following the
NASDAQ crash and the increase in the relative importance of global public savings in the
demand for financial assets.
One approach to addressing these issues prospectively would be for governments to
explicitly bear a greater share of the systemic risk. There are two prongs within this
approach. On one hand, the surplus countries (those that on net demand financial
assets) could rebalance their portfolios toward riskier assets. On the other hand, the
asset‐producer countries have essentially two polar options (and a continuum in
between): Either the government takes care of supplying much of the triple‐A assets or
it lets the private sector take the lead role with government support only during
extreme systemic events.
If the governments in asset‐producing countries were to do it directly, then they would
have to issue bonds beyond their fiscal needs, which in turn would require them to buy
risky assets themselves. From the point of view of a balanced allocation of risks across
6

Adelino (2009) documents that while the issuance prices of lower rated RMBS reflected their relative
exposure to a crisis even controlling for rating, this was not the case for triple‐A securities. Investors in these
securities seemed to have been less informed about the quality of the securitized assets than investors in riskier,
more information sensitive, securities.
7
From this perspective, the reason the NASDAQ‐bubble crash did not cause a major systemic event is because
banks were not a central input into the process of bubble‐creation. In contrast, banks played a central role in the
securitization process and they did not diversify away enough of the risk created by that process.

7

the world, this option appears to be dominated by one in which sovereigns in surplus
countries (e.g., China) choose to demand riskier assets themselves.
Rather than discussing these purely public options, which are relatively straightforward
to envision (although their implementation is subject to a large number of political
constraints), in this paper I will focus on the more cumbersome but potentially larger
public‐private option within asset‐producing countries. The reason this is an option at all
is that the main failure during the crisis was not in the private sector’s ability to create
triple‐A assets through complex financial engineering, but in the systemic vulnerability
created by this process. It is possible to preserve the good aspects of this process while
finding a mechanism to relocate the systemic risk component generated by this asset
creation activity away from the banks and into private investors (for small and medium
size shocks) and the government (for tail events). This transfer can be done on an ex‐
ante basis and for a fair fee, which can incorporate any concerns with the size,
complexity, and systemic exposure of specific financial institutions. There are many
options to do so, all of which amount to some form of partially mandated governmental
insurance provision to the financial sector against a systemic event.
The rest of the paper goes into a more detailed analysis of the three components
highlighted in this introduction: The prelude of the crisis, the crisis, and a discussion of
policies that can play the dual role of alleviating the safe‐asset shortage while increasing
the resilience of the financial system to panics.

II. The Prelude
The most visible anomaly in international financial markets prior to the crisis was the
large and sustained current account deficit of the U.S. Paradoxically, perhaps its biggest
danger was that it distracted attention from a more serious and critical imbalance, that
between the global demand for safe assets and the ability of the U.S. private sector to

8

generate these assets without over‐stretching its financial system. In this section I
develop this argument in more detail.

II.A Global Imbalances
Prior to the crisis, there was a widespread concern with “global imbalances,” which
essentially refer to the massive and persistent current account deficits experienced by
the U.S. and financed by the periphery (see Figure 1).
Figure 1.
Current Account
1.5

% of World GDP

1.1
0.7
0.3
-0.1
-0.5
-0.9
-1.3

USA
EU

-1.7

Rest of World

-2.1
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Source: IMF International Financial Statistics, author’s calculations.
In Caballero et al (2008a) we argued that the emerging market crises at the end of the
1990s, the subsequent rapid growth of China and other East Asian economies, and the
associated rise in commodity prices in recent years reoriented capital flows from
emerging markets toward the United States.8 In effect, emerging markets and
8

In Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2007) we described the emerging markets side of the story. We argued
there that the financial underdevelopment of these economies naturally led to the formation of domestic asset

9

commodity producers in need of sound and liquid financial instruments to store their
newfound wealth turned to the U.S. financial markets and institutions, which were
perceived as uniquely positioned as providers of these instruments. A related story was
developed in Bernanke’s (2007) famous savings glut speech.
Concern about these “imbalances” was intellectually grounded on the devastating crises
often experienced by emerging market economies that run chronic current account
deficits. The main trigger of these crises is the abrupt macroeconomic adjustment
needed to deal with a sudden reversal in the net capital inflows that supported the
previous expansion and current account deficits (the so called “sudden stops”).
Figure 2 from Calvo and Talvi (2005) and Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2006) captures the
dramatic events during a sudden stop such as the one that affected South East Asia at
the end of the 1990s. In a matter of months, net capital flows as a share of GDP declined
by double‐digits, with a corresponding adjustment in the current account and aggregate
demand. The exchange rate collapsed (and interest rates spiked), and along with it so
did national income.
The global concern by the mid‐2000s was that the U.S. would experience a similar fate,
which unavoidably would drag the world economy into a deep recession. However,
when the crisis finally did come, the mechanism did not at all resemble the feared
sudden stop. Quite the opposite occurred, during the crisis net capital inflows to the
U.S. were a stabilizing rather than a destabilizing source. The U.S. as a whole never
experienced, not even remotely, an external funding problem. Moreover, during the

bubbles during periods of large net capital inflows. The crash of these bubbles lead to large capital flow reversals.
The events of the late 1990s corresponded to a coordinated crash in emerging markets and hence a reallocation of
funds toward the U.S. large enough to lead to bubbles in the U.S. and other developed economies (Caballero et al
2008b).

10

early phase of the crisis, Sovereign Wealth Funds were the primary providers of fresh
capital to distressed U.S. banks.9

Figure 2.

Source: Calvo and Talvi (2005) and Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2006).
Figure 3 shows that the U.S. current account deficit was already experiencing a turn‐
around since 2006, and that it indeed dropped sharply after the Lehman episode. But
the key contrast with emerging markets experiencing large external adjustments is that
the U.S. dollar appreciated sharply (and U.S. interest rates plummeted) during this
episode. That is, the adjustment was the result of a contraction in aggregate demand
due to domestic financial problems rather than due to a sudden shortage of net external

9

They did so until Secretary Paulson decided to exemplary punish shareholders during the Bear Stearns
intervention.

11

funding resulting from a flight to quality away from the U.S.. This is an important
observation to keep in mind as it hints that it is not the global imbalances per‐se, or at
least not through their conventional mechanism, that should be our primary concern.

Figure 3.

US Current account and dollar‐euro exchange rate
‐2.0

1.6
Current Account
Exchange rate

Ju l‐0 9

A p r‐0 9

Ja n ‐0 9

Ju l‐0 8

O ct‐0 8

Ja n ‐0 8

A p r‐0 8

Ju l‐0 7

O ct‐0 7

Ja n ‐0 7

A p r‐0 7

Ju l‐0 6

1.1
O ct‐0 6

‐7.0
Ja n ‐0 6

1.2

A p r‐0 6

‐6.0

O ct‐0 5

1.3

Ju l‐0 5

‐5.0

A p r‐0 5

1.4

D o lla rs p e r e u ro

1.5

‐4.0

Ja n ‐0 5

% of GDP

‐3.0

Source: IMF International Financial Statistics

II.B

The Critical Safe Assets Imbalance

Since the 1980s, there has been a surge in financial assets to store value (in addition to
those for risk “diversification”). Figure 4 shows that U.S. financial assets grew from less
than 160 percent of GDP in 1980 to almost 480 percent in the third quarter of 2007.
Debt plays an important role in this surge, especially in the 1980s and in the post
September 11, 2001 and NASDAQ crash period.

12

Figure 4.
U.S. Financial Assets
600

Percentage of GDP

500

400

300

200

100

0
Jan- Jan- Jan- Jan- Jan- Jan- Jan- Jan- Jan- Jan- Jan- Jan52
57
62
67
72 77
82
87
92
97
02
07
Debt

Equity

Source: Federal Reserve, CRSP. 10
The growth in the ratio of debt to GDP was due to an increase in debt generated by the
private sector, especially the financial sector. The domestic financial sectors’ share of
U.S. debt outstanding rose from 12 percent in 1980Q1 to 34 percent in 2007Q3 (Figure
5). At the same time, the government share of outstanding U.S. debt fell from 24
percent to 15 percent.

(Unsurprisingly, this trend has been reversed of late.)

Households and non‐financial firms, which are the residual, were each responsible for a
relatively flat share of the growing debt‐outstanding pie.
A fundamental driver of this increase in debt liabilities was the insatiable demand for
safe debt instruments. This demand came from foreign central banks and investors, but
also from many U.S. financial institutions. The demand for safe debt instruments could
not be readily met by existing sources of triple‐A debt. Only a sliver of corporate debt,

10

Debt is the sum of debt outstanding for households, businesses (non‐financial), state and local
governments, the federal government and domestic financial sectors. Equity is the sum of market capitalizations
of the NYSE, Nasdaq and Amex exchanges.

13

for example, carries a triple‐A rating. Thus, the world economy experienced a massive
safe‐assets imbalance, which is not likely to go away any time soon.
Figure 5.
Government and financial sector debt
0.4

Share of debt outstanding

0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
Jan-80 Jan-84 Jan-88 Jan-92 Jan-96 Jan-00 Jan-04 Jan-08
Domestic financial sector

Government

Source: Federal Reserve. 11
This imbalance presented a large profit opportunity for the U.S. financial system.
However, creating safe assets to meet this demand put enormous pressure on the U.S.
financial system and its incentives. The U.S. financial system created safe assets from
unsafe ones by pooling assets and issuing senior claims on the payoffs of the pools. The
senior claims are protected against losses because more junior claims absorb losses
before the senior claims. The claims on these pools of assets are called collateralized
debt obligations, or CDOs.
Global issuance of CDOs grew from $185 billion in 2000 to $1.3 trillion in 2007.12 A large
share of these assets carried triple‐A ratings, at least before the crisis. As of June 2007,
11

Government includes federal, state, and local government. The denominator is total debt outstanding by
households, businesses (non‐financial), federal, state and local government, and the domestic financial sector.

14

Fitch, a ratings agency, gave a triple‐A rating to almost 60 percent of all global
structured products, according to a Fitch Ratings (2007) document cited in Coval, Jurek
and Stafford (2009).13 Benmelech and Dlugosz (2009) find that, in a large sample of
collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) issued between 2000 and 2007, 71 percent of
issuance was rated triple‐A, a percentage that is fairly stable throughout the period.
In contrast, Fitch (in June 2007) and S&P (in early 2008) gave a triple‐A rating to less
than one percent of single‐name corporate issuers. Moreover, the increase in issuance
of corporate debt was slower than the increase in the issuance of CDOs.
Figure 6 compares the volume of U.S. issuance of corporate debt and CDOs. Corporate
debt issuance grew between 2000 and 2006, but not nearly as fast as did CDO issuance.
In 2000, the volume of CDO issuance was only 18 percent of the volume of corporate
debt issuance; by 2006, this ratio had risen almost four‐fold.14

Corroborating the demand‐pull for these instruments, as the quantity of non‐
government triple‐A assets expanded, the yields required to hold them tightened. In
January 2002, the spread between Moody’s triple‐A seasoned corporate bond rate and
a 30‐year U.S. Treasury was 1.19 percentage points.15 In early 2007, before the crisis
began, the spread reached 0.55 percentage points. Figure 7 shows the spread for
Moody’s triple‐A seasoned corporate bond rate relative to a 20‐year Treasury bond.

12

IMF Global Financial Stability report (2009), Figure 2.2. These numbers include both CDOs and CDO^2.
“Inside the Ratings: What Credit Ratings Mean,” Fitch Ratings, August 2007.
14
Due to the crisis, issuance of CDOs collapsed to less than 24 billion dollars during the first five months of
2009, while corporations rushed to secure financing in the newly thawed debt markets, issuing 465 billion dollars
in the corporate debt market in the same period. Thus, for the first five months of 2009, CDO issuance volume as a
percentage of corporate debt issuance volume is only five percent.
15
The spread between Moody’s triple‐A rate and a 20‐year Treasury was 0.9 percentage points in January
2002. In early 2007, it reached 0.45 percentage points.
13

15

Figure 6.

A shift toward CDOs
0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009*

CDO issuance as a share of corporate debt issuance

Source: SIFMA, IMF Global Financial Stability report (2009).16

Coval, Jurek and Stafford (2008) find that CDX tranches – essentially, tranches of a CDO
with credit default swaps (CDS) as assets – carried similar yields to single‐name CDS with
similar loss rates (“despite their highly dissimilar economic risks”). Their period of
analysis is September 2004 to September 2007. This suggests that the tight pricing of
triple‐A corporate bonds carried over into the structured‐finance market.
The creation of CDOs and the leveraging in financial institutions helped meet the global
demand for safe assets. However, these securities and the linkages among firms
became very complex, leaving the system vulnerable to panic (Caballero and Simsek
2009a,b).

Also, senior CDO tranches concentrate macroeconomic risk, and banks

retained a large number of these assets. Thus, the response of the financial system to

16

U.S. corporate bond issuance includes “all non‐convertible debt, MTNs and Yankee bonds, but excludes
CDs and federal agency debt.” Both investment‐grade and high‐yield issues are included. Corporate debt issuance
volumes are from the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA) and based on Thomson
Reuters data. CDO issuance includes the issuance of CDOs and CDO^2, from the IMF Global Financial Stability
report (2009). The 2009 data covers through the end of June.

16

the safe‐assets imbalance produced conditions in which an episode of Knightian
uncertainty could do significant damage (Caballero and Krishnamurthy 2007).
Figure 7.

AAA corporate bond spread
2.5

Percentage points

2

1.5
jj

1

0.5

0
14-Dec-01

14-Jun-03

14-Dec-04

14-Jun-06

14-Dec-07

14-Jun-09

Sources: Federal Reserve17.

II.C From Global to Safe Assets Imbalances
Having downplayed the conventional concern with global imbalances, it is important to
note that there is a connection between the safe‐assets imbalance and the more visible
global imbalances: The latter were caused by the funding countries’ demand for
financial assets in excess of these countries’ ability to produce them (Caballero et al

17

This figure plots the spread between Moody’s triple‐A rate and a 20‐year constant maturity Treasury.
There is a small maturity mismatch because “Moody's tries to include bonds with remaining maturities as close as
possible to 30 years.” However, there is no 30‐year constant maturity Treasury bond for a good part of the 2000s,
since the Treasury stopped issuing 30‐year debt for a period. Thus, the spread shown in the figure is a noisy
measure of the maturity‐matched spread.

17

2008), but this gap is particularly acute for safe assets since emerging markets have very
limited institutional capability to produce them. Thus, the excess demand for safe‐
assets from the periphery greatly added to the U.S. economy’s own imbalance caused
by a variety of collateral requirements and mandates for mutual funds, insurance
companies, and others. The point, however, is that the gap to focus on is not along the
external dimension we are so accustomed to, but along the safe‐asset dimension.
Relative to the liabilities of the rest of the world owned by the U.S., the liabilities of the
U.S. owned by the rest of the world are skewed toward debt, rather than equity and
FDI. This is shown in Figure 8, which gives the ratio of debt to equity and FDI for U.S.
assets and liabilities, according to careful estimates by Gourinchas and Rey (2007). The
figure shows that after the emerging markets crisis of the late 1990s, there was a sharp
decline in the ratio of U.S. debt liabilities to U.S. equity and FDI liabilities as foreign
investors demanded U.S. assets across the board and particularly high return risky
assets.18 However, this trend turned around sharply after the dot‐com crash and the
September 11, 2001 attacks on the U.S. This is partially a price effect; but it also reflects
a shift in allocation toward debt and away from equity. We see this in Figure 9, which
shows the cumulated flows of foreign assets into U.S. debt liabilities and equity and FDI
liabilities since 1990.

Cumulated flows into debt were growing exponentially

throughout this period, whereas flows into equity and FDI reached an inflection point
after the dot‐com crash and 9/11 attacks, tapering off thereafter. After the crash the
world came to realize that there was substantial risk in U.S. assets as well and decided
to refocus on the safe tranches of the asset distribution.

18

This phase resembled the Japanese (real estate) asset shopping spree during the 1980s, which was not targeted
to safe assets or their safe tranche but to whole assets.

18

Figure 8.
Ratio of debt to equity and FDI
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
1990q1

1992q1

1994q1

1996q1

Gross liabilities of US

1998q1

2000q1

2002q1

2004q1

Gross assets of US

Source: Gourinchas and Rey (2007).

Figure 9.
Cumulated U.S. liabilities flows since 1990
3500

3000

USD millions

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

0
1990q1

1992q1

1994q1

1996q1

Debt

1998q1

2000q1

2002q1

2004q1

Equity and FDI

Source: Gourinchas and Rey (2007).

19

II.D

Complexity and Systemic Risk Build­up

“Banks” generated safe assets from risky ones by creating complex instruments that
pooled assets, such as subprime mortgages, and creatively divvied up the flows from
those assets.
Figure 10 shows a caricature of the balance sheet of a CDO. A CDO can be defined by
two properties: (1) pooling of assets; and (2) tranching of liabilities. The left (asset) side
of the figure shows individual assets owned by the CDO, represented by blue boxes; if
the CDO is a RMBS or CMBS CDO, the blue boxes are bundles of residential or
commercial mortgages. These blue boxes are the CDO’s assets. It is here on the asset
side that pooling takes place. The right (liability) side has the liabilities of the CDO; it is
here is where the tranching takes place. The bottom tranche is the equity tranche,
sometimes referred to as “toxic waste.” Although the implementation details vary from
CDO to CDO, a given non‐equity liability is protected from loss because equity and all
the more junior liabilities have to be wiped out before the given liability suffers any loss.
These more junior liabilities serve as a buffer. The arrow shows the direction of the cash
flows. Similar instruments were created from securitization of all sorts of payment
streams, ranging from auto to student loans.
Figure 10. The Balance Sheet of a CDO
Assets

Liabilities

AAA tranche

AA tranche
A tranche
BBB tranche
BBB- tranche
Toxic waste

20

Consider a CDO with two $1 mortgages as assets. Suppose the probability of default for
each mortgage is 10 percent and that if in default, the mortgage is worthless. Suppose
further the defaults are uncorrelated. There are (essentially) three states of the world:
no defaults; one default; and two defaults. What if the CDO had only one class of
liabilities consisting of two $1 liabilities that each received equal payoffs from the
assets? Then the $1 liability would pay in full 81 percent of the time; it would pay 50
cents 18 percent of the time; and it would be worthless one percent of the time. An
individual mortgage is worthless ten percent of the time, so this asset is “safer” than the
individual mortgages, because of diversification. But CDOs create even safer assets by
dividing their liabilities into tranches with different seniorities. Suppose there are a $1
junior tranche and a $1 senior tranche. The senior tranche pays in full 99 percent of the
time. Thus, a “safe” asset is created. However, it is key to note that the senior tranche is
very exposed to “systematic” risk; it only defaults when both of the mortgages default.
(Consider an additional asset in the economy, which also pays in full 99 percent of the
time; suppose the asset’s payoffs are uncorrelated with the mortgage payoffs. During
the global downturn, the new asset defaults only 1 percent of the time, whereas the
senior tranche defaults 100 percent of the time.)

This point has been rigorously

explored by Coval, Jurek, and Stafford (2009a,b), who call structured finance products
like CDOs “economic catastrophe bonds.” By design, it is precisely during economic
catastrophes when defaults on the asset side of the balance sheet are large enough to
eradicate the buffer protecting the senior tranches.
As private‐label securitizations increased, the price of real estate and other assets in
short supply rose sharply, in part reflecting the value associated with creating financial
instruments from them. A positive feedback loop was created, as the rapid appreciation
of the underlying assets seemed to justify a large triple‐A tranche for derivative CDOs
and related products. Credit rating agencies contributed to this loop, and so did greed

21

and misguided homeownership policies, but as stated earlier: They were not the root
cause.
Figure 11 shows the fast growth of global private‐label securitization issuance during
this period.19 The systemic fragility of these instruments became a source of systemic
risk in itself once a significant share of them was kept within the financial system rather
than sold to final unleveraged investors. Banks and their SIVs, attracted by the high
return and low capital requirement combination provided by the senior and super‐
senior tranches of structured products, kept them on their books, sometimes passing
their (then perceived as) infinitesimal risk onto the monolines and insurance companies
(AIG, in particular).20 They funded much of this direct and indirect hoarding by issuing
highly rated short‐maturity commercial paper, which was quickly absorbed by money
market funds and the many other institutions with insatiable appetite for safe assets.
Through this process, the core of the financial system became interconnected in
increasingly complex ways and vulnerable to a systemic event. According to Acharya
and Schnabl (2009), “about 30% of all triple‐A asset‐backed securities remained within
19

The light‐blue bars represent CDO^2, CDOs that have other CDOs as their assets. Global issuance of CDO^2
increased from $25 billion in 2000 to $338 billion in 2006. As Coval, Jurek, and Stafford (2009a,b) point out, the
use of CDO^2 only increases the correlation between default and systemic events.
20
An important reason for the creation of SIVs stemmed from regulatory arbitrage. From Brunnermeier
(2009): “In hindsight, it is clear that one distorting force leading to the popularity of structured investment vehicles
was regulatory and ratings arbitrage. The Basel I Accord (an international agreement that sets guidelines for bank
regulation) required that banks hold capital of at least eight percent of the loans on their balance sheets; this
capital requirement (called a ‘capital charge’) was much lower for contractual credit lines. Moreover, there was no
capital charge at all for ‘reputational’ credit lines – noncontractual liquidity backstops that sponsoring banks
provided to structured investment vehicles to maintain their reputation. Thus, moving a pool of loans into off‐
balance‐sheet vehicles, and then granting a credit line to that pool to ensure a AAA‐rating, allowed banks to
reduce the amount of capital they needed to hold to conform with Basel I regulations while the risk for the bank
remained essentially unchanged. The subsequent Basel II Accord, which went into effect on January 1, 2007 in
Europe but is yet to be fully implemented in the United States, took some steps to correct this preferential
treatment of noncontractual credit lines, but with little effect. While Basel II implemented capital charges based on
asset ratings, banks were able to reduce their capital charges by pooling loans in off‐balance‐sheet vehicles.
Because of the reduction of idiosyncratic risk through diversification, assets issued by these vehicles received a
better rating than did the individual securities in the pool. In addition, issuing short‐term assets improved the
overall rating even further, since banks sponsoring these structured investment vehicles were not sufficiently
downgraded for granting liquidity backstops.” According to Tett (2009), one reason the large banks kept exposure
to the super senior tranches on their books was that AIG, which in the early stages of the boom provided insurance
on these tranches, eventually decided it had too much exposure and stopped providing this insurance.

22

the banking system, and if one includes ABCP conduits and SIVs that had recourse, this
fraction rises to 50%." A November 2007 announcement by Citigroup shows its
investment bank had $43 billion in exposure in super senior tranches of ABS CDOs
“primarily” backed by subprime residential mortgages. Notably, Citi’s investment bank’s
total direct exposure to U.S. subprime mortgages was $55 billion, so almost 80 percent
of its exposure was through super senior tranches. By 2007, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York calculated that SIVs and similar vehicles had combined assets of $2.2
trillion, more than the assets of hedge funds ($1.8 trillion), and more than half the total
assets of the five largest broker dealers ($4 trillion) (Tett 2009).
Figure 11.
Global private‐label securitization issuance by type
5000
4500
4000

USD billions

3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
2000

2001

2002

2003

ABCP

2004

MBS

2005

ABS

2006

CDO

2007

2008

2009

CDO2

Source: IMF, Global Financial Stability Report, Figure 2.2.

III. The Crisis
The conditions were thus ripe for a severe systemic event, which eventually came with
far more force than anyone had anticipated. There was the shock from declining real
estate prices and the corresponding rise in subprime defaults, but even under the most

23

pessimistic scenarios, these shocks pale in comparison with the magnitude of the crisis
that eventually followed once the panic set in.

III.A

The Shock

The triggering event was the crash in the real estate “bubble” and the rise in subprime
mortgage defaults that followed it. But this cannot be all of it. The global financial
system went into cardiac arrest mode and was on the verge of imploding more than
once, which seems hard to attribute to a relatively small shock such as the real‐
estate/subprime combo (see Caballero 2009).

In Caballero and Kurlat (2009), we constructed an estimate of how much banks’ initial
mortgage‐related losses were amplified by the crisis that these losses sparked. For this
estimate, we computed the evolution of the market value (equity plus long term debt)
of the major U.S. banks since January 2007, which yielded an estimate of total losses on
the right side of these banks’ balance sheets.21 Absent any feedback effects, these losses
should be equal to the losses suffered by the assets on the left side of the balance
sheets. However, as illustrated in Figure 12, we find that losses on the right side are on
the order of three times the IMF’s (evolving) estimates of losses related to mortgage
assets accruing to U.S. banks.22

21

The procedure for estimating this was as follows: For equity, we simply tracked the evolution of each
bank’s market capitalization, excluding increases in the market cap due to issues of new shares. For debt, we
estimated the duration of each bank’s long term debt (including any preferred shares) from the maturity profiles
described in the 10‐K statements as of December 2007, assuming the interest rate was equal to the rate on 10‐
year Treasuries plus the spread on 5‐year CDS for each bank, obtained from JP Morgan. Assuming an unchanged
maturity profile, we then tracked the changes in the implied market value of each bank’s long term debt on the
basis of the evolution of the CDS spread. The banks included in the calculation are the 19 banks that underwent
the “stress tests” plus Lehman, Bear Stearns, Merrill Lynch, Wachovia, and Washington Mutual.
22
The IMF uses a projection of macroeconomic variables and default rates to estimate losses on loans, and
market values to estimate losses on subprime‐related securities. To the extent that market prices of securities
overreacted due to fire sales, our procedure understates the multiplier.

24

Beginning in 2008, and increasingly after the fall of Bear Stearns, the overall loss in
market value became larger than the losses from subprime assets alone. The market
began to price its losses from the overall disruption of financial markets, the severe
recession, and losses on other types of assets which far exceeded the estimated losses
from the mortgage market itself.

Figure 12. Losses from mortgage assets, total loss of market value and multiplier.

Total loss of market value (equity plus debt) of
banks

2000

Total losses from mortgage assets accruing to
US banks as estimated by IMF

1500

$ billion

1000

500

0
Jan 07

Mar 07 May 07

Jul 07

Sep 07

Nov 07

Jan 08

Mar 08 May 08

Jul 08

Aug 08

Oct 08

Dec 08

Mar 09 May 09

‐500

Sources: IMF Global Financial Stability Reports, banks’ financial statements and JP
Morgan. From Caballero and Kurlat (2009).

III.B

The Panic

The real damage came from the unexpected and sudden freezing of the entire
securitization industry. The blue line in Figure 13 is “New Issuance of Asset‐Backed
Securities in Previous 3 Months,” from Adrian and Shin (2009); the data originally come
from JP Morgan Chase.23 The crisis in this market is apparent from the disappearance of

23

The new issuance series is the sum over the following categories of ABS: “home equity (subprime)”;
commercial real estate; autos; credit cards; student loans; non‐US residential mortgages; and other. The data were
provided by Tobias Adrian.

25

new issuances. The red line is the implied spread on the 2006‐1 AAA ABX, which
measures the cost of insuring against default by triple‐A tranches of subprime
mortgage‐backed securities of the first‐half‐of‐2006 vintage. The spread data are from
JP Morgan Chase and not only corroborates the crisis impression from the quantity side
but also makes it clear that the collapse in quantity is demand rather than supply driven.

Figure 13.

350

600

300

500

250

400

200

300

150

200

100

100

50

bps

700

2006‐1 AAA ABX

9/30/2008

7/31/2008

5/31/2008

3/31/2008

1/31/2008

9/30/2007

11/30/2007

7/31/2007

5/31/2007

3/31/2007

1/31/2007

9/30/2006

11/30/2006

7/31/2006

5/31/2006

0
3/31/2006

0

USD billions

Freezing of the Asset‐Backed Securities (ABS) market

New Issuance of Asset‐Backed Securities

Sources: JP Morgan Chase, Adrian and Shin (2009).
Confidence vanished and the complexity which made possible the “multiplication of
bread” during the boom, turned into a source of counterparty risk, real and imaginary
(see Gorton 2008). Senior and super‐senior tranches were no longer perceived as
invulnerable, and making matters worse, banks had to bring back into their balance
sheets more of this new risk from the now struggling SIVs and conduits.

26

In December 2007, Citigroup provided a guarantee facility to its SIVs, essentially bringing
the SIVs’ $49 billion in assets onto its balance sheet.24 About 60 percent of the SIVs’
assets were financial‐institutions debt. Thirty‐nine percent were structured‐finance
assets, including: U.S. (7 percent of total assets) and non‐U.S. (12 percent) residential
MBS; CBOs, CDOs, and CLOs (6 percent); student loans (5 percent), and credit card (5
percent) assets. One hundred percent of the structured‐finance assets carried Moody’s
triple‐A ratings.
Knightian uncertainty took over, and pervasive flight to qualities plagued the financial
system. Fear fed into more fear, and caused reluctance to engage in financial
transactions, even among the prime financial institutions (see Figure 14).
Figure 14.

TED Spread
450
400

basis points

350
300
250
200
150
100
50
Sep‐09

Jul‐09

May‐09

Jan‐09

Mar‐09

Sep‐08

Nov‐08

Jul‐08

May‐08

Jan‐08

Mar‐08

Sep‐07

Nov‐07

Jul‐07

May‐07

Jan‐07

Mar‐07

0

Source: Global Financial Data.

24

“Citi Commits Support Facility for Citi‐Advised SIVs,” Citigroup press release, December 13, 2007. In
November 2008, Citi directly purchased the remaining assets of its SIVs. “Citi Finalizes SIV Wind‐down by Agreeing
to Purchase All Remaining Assets,” Citigroup press release, November 19, 2008.

27

As the crises spread there was a sharp shift of the maturity structure of asset‐backed
commercial paper (ABCP) toward very short‐term maturities. At the height of the crisis,
nearly 80 percent of the asset‐backed paper issued had a maturity of only one to four
days, an increase of more than 40 percentage points since January 2004.

This

shortening of the maturity structure was fairly gradual, but there was a pronounced
decline in September 2008, when Lehman collapsed. As shown in Figure 15, the average
maturity of newly issued ABCP declined from 17 days in August 2008, to 9 days in
September 2008. It has long been understood that funding through short‐maturity
liabilities generates rollover risk, but, as it has been documented in the context of
emerging market crises by Broner et al (2008), borrowers do not have many other
options during severe financial crises.
Figure 15.
Average maturity of newly issued ABCP (estimate)
25
23
21
19

Days

17
15
13
11
9
7
5
Jan-06

Jul-06

Jan-07

Jul-07

Jan-08

Jul-08

Jan-09

Jul-09

Sources: Federal Reserve, author’s estimate.25

In the months following Lehman’s collapse, there was also a sudden move toward very
short‐term maturities in the CP market for financial companies, as shown in Figure 16.26
25

The weighted average maturity is estimated as follows: [1‐4] day CP is treated as (4+1)/2 = 2.5 days; [41‐
80] day CP is treated as (80+41)/2 = 60.5 days; etc. For [80+] day CP, a value of 90 days was used.

28

The decline was precipitous because market participants were surprised by the depth of
financial firms’ difficulties and the chaotic aftermath of Lehman’s collapse, whereas
participants knew (since at least summer 2007) about problems in the ABS market. In
fact, as problems festered in the ABS market during the early phases of the crisis,
financial firms conservatively lengthened their CP maturities. In August 2008, 50 percent
of the commercial paper issued by financial companies matured in one to four days. By
November, 87 percent of the paper issued matured in one to four days.

Figure 16.

Average maturity of newly issued financial CP (estimate)
30

25

Days

20

15

10

5

0
Jan-06

Jul-06

Jan-07

Jul-07

Jan-08

Jul-08

Jan-09

Jul-09

Sources: Federal Reserve, author’s estimate.

Along the way, the underlying structural deficit of safe assets that was behind the whole
cycle, worsened as the newly found source of triple‐A assets from the securitization
industry dried up, and the spike in uncertainty further increased demand for safe assets.
Safe interest rates plummeted to record low levels (see Figure 17).

26

There was also substantial volatility of in the maturity structure during this period, likely the result of a
desire of financial firms to push out the maturity structure and a willingness of investors to absorb longer
maturities that varied with volatile market conditions and expectations of government involvement.

29

Figure 17.
3‐Month Treasury Bill rate
1
5.00

Lehman bankrupcy
0.9

Money funds break the buck
AIG bailout

0.8

WaMu seized

4.00

TARP
US buys bank equity
Fed rescues money
market funds

0.7

0.6

3.00

0.5

Countrywide
rescue

0.4

2.00

Monolines
downgrade

0.3

0.2

1.00

Bear Stearns
collapse

0.1

Oct‐09

Sep‐09

Jul‐09

Aug‐09

Jun‐09

Apr‐09

May‐09

Mar‐09

Jan‐09

Feb‐09

Dec‐08

Oct‐08

Sep‐08

Nov‐08

Jul‐08

Aug‐08

Jun‐08

Apr‐08

May‐08

Mar‐08

Jan‐08

Feb‐08

Dec‐07

Oct‐07

Nov‐07

Jul‐07

Sep‐07

Jun‐07

Aug‐07

Apr‐07

May‐07

Mar‐07

Jan‐07

0
Feb‐07

0.00

Source: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
Initially, the flight to quality was a boon for the money market funds, which suddenly
found themselves with a herd of new clients. In order to capture this expansion in
demand from clients having a preference for riskier assets than their usual clients, some
money market funds began to invest in short‐term commercial paper from the
investment banks in distress. This strategy backfired after Lehman’s collapse, when the
Reserve Primary Fund “broke‐the‐buck” as a result of its losses associated with
Lehman’s bankruptcy.

Perceived complexity reached a new level as even the

supposedly safest private funds were no longer immune to contagion. Widespread panic
took over and had it not been for the massive and concerted intervention taken by
governments around the world, the financial system would have imploded.27

27

Reserve Primary Fund had invested $785 million in Lehman debt, which constituted about 1.2% of its
assets. Immediately after Lehman filed for bankruptcy, the fund suffered a massive run, with over $30 billion in

30

While the end of the panic has removed some of the pressure on the safe‐assets world,
the crisis destroyed a significant share of the financial industry created by the private
sector to satisfy the large demand for safe assets around the world. The shortage of
triple‐A assets is now worse than it was before the crisis, and unless a solution to this
gap is found soon, many of the weaknesses that were created before the crisis will
reemerge in the same or a mutated form.

IV. The Policy Options
The core policy question is how to bridge the safe‐asset gap without over‐exposing the
financial sector to systemic risk.
One approach to addressing these issues prospectively would be for governments to
explicitly bear a greater share of the systemic risk. There are two prongs within this
approach. On one hand, the surplus countries (those that on net demand financial
assets) could rebalance their portfolios toward riskier assets. On the other hand, the
asset‐producer countries have essentially two polar options (and a continuum in
between): Either the government takes care of supplying much of the triple‐A assets or
it lets the private sector take the lead role with government support only during
extreme systemic events.
Should the governments in asset‐producing countries choose to do it directly, they
would have to issue bonds beyond their fiscal needs, which in turn would require them
to buy risky assets themselves. From the point of view of a balanced allocation of risks

redemption requests (about half of its total assets) before it stopped accepting redemption requests at $1 at 11
a.m. the following day. Money market funds had been considered extremely safe, and had indeed benefited from
the flight to quality during the previous year, growing by about $850 billion (34%) since mid 2007. The drop in the
Reserve Primary Fund’s NAV caused investors to question the safety of the entire industry. There were net
redemptions for about $170 billion during that week, as well as a large shift from prime funds towards funds
investing exclusively in government debt. In order to stem the panic, on September 19 the U.S. Treasury
announced a guarantee program that would compensate investors if the NAV of participating funds fell below $1.

31

across the world, this option appears to be dominated by one in which sovereigns in
surplus countries (e.g., China) choose to demand riskier assets themselves.
Rather than discussing these purely public options, in this paper I will focus on the more
cumbersome but potentially larger public‐private option within asset‐producing
countries.
The reason the public‐private venture is an option despite the recent crisis, is that that
the main failure was not in the private sector’s ability to create triple‐A assets through
complex financial engineering (although rating agencies may have excessively facilitated
the process), but in the systemic vulnerability created by this process. Public‐private
ventures preserve the successful parts of this asset creation activity while finding a
mechanism to reallocate the systemic risk component it creates from the banks’ balance
sheet to private unlevered investors (for small and medium size shocks) and the
government (for tail events).
Just raising capital requirements achieves the goal of reducing vulnerability but it does
so at the cost of exacerbating the structural problem of excess safe‐asset demand. In
this sense, it is not a stand‐alone policy.
There are two broad categories of recent proposals to reduce crisis risk without
excessively limiting the financial sector’s ability to bridge the safe‐assets gap:


Pre‐paid/arranged contingent capital injections, and



Pre‐paid/arranged contingent asset and capital insurance injections.

The basic purpose of the former, contingent capital injections, is to reduce the costs
associated with the holding of capital when it is not needed. However, and centrally,
this approach recognizes that access to capital during crises needs to be arranged in
advance, since it is often hard to raise capital during a severe crisis. Proposals of this
kind differ in their sources of this contingent capital, in particular, between the private
sector and the government. Within the former, in some proposals the contingent funds

32

come primarily from existing stakeholders (e.g., through contingent debt/equity swaps)
while in others the funds come from outsiders. However, outsiders’ commitments
problems limit the extent to which the private sector can serve as the source of this
capital during extreme events, a point highlighted by Holmström and Tirole (1998) in
theory and AIG (and the monolines) in practice.
Flannery’s (2002) proposal made one of the first significant steps in this direction with
his proposal for “reverse convertible debentures.” Such debentures would convert to
equity whenever the market value of a firm’s equity falls below a certain threshold.
One problem of this early proposal is that it made no distinction between aggregate and
idiosyncratic shocks. The Kashyap et al (2008) proposal deals with this distinction and
calls for banks to buy capital insurance policies that pay off when the banking sector
experiences a negative systemic shock. Private investors would underwrite the policies
and place the amount insured into a “lock box” invested in US Treasuries. Investors who
are themselves subject to capital requirements would not be allowed to supply this
insurance. The insurance would be triggered when aggregate bank losses over a certain
number of quarters exceed some significant amount; losses at the covered bank would
not be included in determining whether the insurance is triggered.
Combining both contributions, the Squam Lake Working Group on Financial Regulation
has a proposal (2009) similar to Flannery’s except that conversion from debt to equity is
triggered only during systemic events and only for banks that violate certain capital‐
adequacy covenants.
Yet another variant on capital insurance is for the insurance policy to pay out to the
regulator, instead of the firm. Under this proposal, by Acharya and others (2009), the
amount of insurance required would be proportional to an estimate of the systemic
risk? posed by the bank, in order to discourage firms ex‐ante from taking on excessive
systemic risk.

33

Hart and Zingales (2009) advocate an alternative approach; when spreads on a bank’s
CDS rise above a certain threshold, a regulator allows the bank a window of time to
issue equity in order to bring the CDS spread back below the threshold. If the bank is
unable to reduce its CDS spread, the regulator reviews the bank’s books and determines
whether the bank’s debt is at risk. If the regulator determines the bank’s debt is not at
risk, the regulator invests in the bank by lending to the bank; otherwise, the regulator
replaces the CEO with a trustee, who will liquidate the bank and pass the proceeds to
the bondholders. Although this approach does have a contingent capital‐injection
component, it also relies heavily on the resolution of financial firms, which can be a
useful disciplinary device during normal times but can be highly counterproductive
during a systemic episode.
More generally, the contingent capital approach is most likely to restore stability when
the crisis is mostly one of fundamentals. However, if the panic component is significant,
a central feature of most financial crises, then it is not the most cost‐effective, and it
may well trigger further panic as fear of dilution and forced conversion increases.
This takes us to the second set of proposals, contingent insurance injections. The basic
idea of this approach is that the pure panic component of a crisis does not require a
costly capital injection to subside. All that is needed is a broad guarantee that resources
will be available should conditions worsen. Despite its high notional value, the expected
cost of such a policy is low because it derives its power from the very same feature that
underlies the panic. That is, the enormous distortion in perceived probabilities of a
catastrophe also means that economic agents greatly overvalue public insurance and
guarantees. Providing these can be as effective as capital injections in dealing with the
panic at a fraction of the expected cost (when assessed at reasonable rather than panic‐
driven probabilities of a catastrophe).
In Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2007) we showed that during an episode of Knightian
uncertainty, a government concerned with the aggregate will want to provide insurance

34

against extreme events even if it has no informational advantage over the private
sector. The reason is that during a panic of this kind, each individual bank and investor
fears itself to be in a situation worse than the average, an event that cannot be true for
the collective. By providing a broad guarantee, the government leads the private sector
to react more than one‐for‐one since it also closes the gap between the true average
and the average of panic‐driven expectations.
During the current crises, there were many asset‐insurance injection proposals.28 The
argument for why it may be optimal to support assets rather than inject capital during a
panic is developed in Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2008b). In practice, financial
institutions face a constraint such that value‐at‐risk must be less than some multiple of
equity. In normal times, this structure speaks to the power of equity injections, since
these are “multiplied” many times in relaxing the value‐at‐risk constraint. In contrast,
insuring assets reduces value‐at‐risk by reducing risk directly, which typically does not
involve a multiplier. However, when uncertainty is rampant, some illiquid and complex
assets, such as CDOs and CDO‐squared, can reverse this calculation. In such cases,
insuring the uncertainty‐creating assets reduces risk by multiples, and frees capital,
more effectively than directly injecting equity capital.
Moreover, it turns out that the same principle of insurance‐injection can be used to
recapitalize banks when this is the chosen solution. Rather than directly injecting capital,
the government can pledge a minimum future price guarantee for newly privately raised
capital (Caballero 2009a). This mechanism is very powerful because private investors
overvalue the guarantee, and because the recapitalization itself makes a catastrophic
event less likely. Caballero and Kurlat (2009a) quantified this mechanism and showed
that once the equilibrium response of equity prices is taken into account, this
mechanism significantly reduces the effective exposure of government resources
relative to a public equity injection.

28

See, e.g., Caballero (2009a,b), Mehrling and Milne (2008) and Milne (2009) for proposals.

35

Many of the actual programs implemented during the crisis had elements of guarantees
rather than being pure capital injections. Perhaps the clearest case of this approach is
that followed by the UK. Their asset protection scheme, announced in January 2009,
provided insurance against 90 percent of losses above a “first‐loss” threshold on
portfolios of corporate and leveraged loans, commercial and residential property loans,
and structured credit assets such as RMBS, CMBS, CLO, and CDO obligations. The
insurance is provided in exchange for a fee. The APS covered £552 billion portfolios of
RBS and Lloyds Banking Group, with a first‐loss amount of £19.5 billion and £25 billion,
respectively. The main criticism to the U.K.’s approach is that they charged such a high
fee for the insurance that most banks chose not to engage, leaving the overall economy
more exposed to their failure than socially optimal.
In Caballero and Kurlat (2009b) we discussed a policy framework which would not only
guarantee access to insurance in the event of an SFA episode, but it would do so in a
flexible manner that integrates the role of the government as an insurer of last resort
with private sector information on the optimal allocation of contingent insurance.
In that framework, the government would issue tradable insurance credits (TICs) which
would be purchased by financial institutions, some of which would have minimum
holding requirements. During a systemic crisis, each TIC would entitle its holder to
attach a government guarantee to newly‐issued and legacy securities. All regulated
financial institutions would be allowed to hold and use TICs, as well as private equity
funds, corporations, and possibly hedge funds. In principle, TICs could be used as a
flexible and readily available substitute for many of the facilities that were created
during the crisis. The basic mechanism would consist of attaching them to assets, but
variants could include attaching them to liabilities and even equity, depending on the
particular needs of the distressed institutions and markets, and they could also operate
as collateral‐enhancers for discount window borrowing.

36

TICs are equivalent to CDS during systemic crises but not during normal times. That is,
TICs are contingent‐CDS. They become activated only when a systemic crisis arises. By
targeting the event that needs protection, this contingent feature significantly lowers
the cost of insurance for financial institutions and therefore raises the amount of
protection they can be required to hold for unit of systemic risk they choose to hold.
Note also that TICs’ tradability would allow private agents to use markets to reallocate
the access to insurance toward financial institutions in most dire need. And if distressed
institutions chose to not seek to stock up on TICs and risk their survival for a higher
return (as probably Lehman did and failed), at the very least the rest of the financial
system would be better protected against the turmoil that could arise if the
misbehaving institution fails, as they would be holding the TICs.
To conclude, it is important to highlight that the point of these insurance arrangements
is to remove (for a fee) the systemic risk from leveraged and interconnected financial
institutions, while they continue to produce the triple‐A assets whose shortage is behind
many of the main global macroeconomic phenomena of the last two decades.

V. Final Remarks
The world entered the current financial crisis with a shortage of safe financial assets and
emerged from it with an even more acute deficit. The crisis itself was the result of the
collapse of the financial industry created to bridge the original gap, and of the severe
panic caused by the chaotic unraveling of this complex industry. One approach to deal
with this dual problem ― the shortage of safe assets and the financial fragility created
by the private sector’s solutions to it ― is for governments around the world explicitly
absorb a larger share of the systemic risk (and be compensated for it). This approach
would include modifying their portfolios and becoming the provider of insurance of last
resort, and not just the lender of last resort, for widespread panics.

37

Bibliography
Acharya, Viral V. and Philipp Schnabl. 2009. “Do Global Banks Spread Global
Imbalances? The Case of Asset‐Backed Commercial Paper During the Financial Crisis of
2007–09.” November.
Acharya, Viral V. and Philipp Schnabl. 2009. “How Banks Played the Leverage ‘Game’”,
Chapter 2 in Acharya, Viral V. and Matthew Richardson, eds., Restoring Financial
Stability: How to Repair a Failed System, New York University Stern School of Business,
John Wiley & Sons.
Acharya, Viral V., Lasse Pedersen, Thomas Philippon and Matthew Richardson. 2009.
“Regulating Systemic Risk.” NYU mimeo, January.
Adelino, Manuel. 2009. “Do Investors Rely Only on Ratings? The Case of Mortgage‐
Backed Scurities.” MIT mimeo, November.
Adrian, Tobias and Hyun Song Shin. 2009. “Money, Liquidity, and Monetary Policy.”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 99, No. 2.
Boberski, David. 2009. CDS Delivery Options. Bloomberg Press, NY.
Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Lasse Heje Pedersen. 2009. “Deciphering the Liquidity and
Credit Crunch 2007‐08,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 23, No. 1, 77‐100.
Caballero, Ricardo J., 2009a. “Dow Boost and a (Nearly) Private Sector Solution to the
Crisis.” VOX, February 22.
Caballero, Ricardo J., 2009b. “A Global Perspective on the Great Financial Insurance
Run: Causes, Consequences, and Solutions.” MIT mimeo, January 20.
Caballero, Ricardo J., 2006. “On the Macroeconomics of Asset Shortages.” In
The Role of Money: Money and Monetary Policy in the Twenty‐First Century

38

The Fourth European Central Banking Conference 9‐10 November, Andreas Beyer and
Lucrezia Reichlin, editors. Pages 272‐283.
Caballero, Ricardo J., 2003. “The Future of the IMF.” American Economic Review, Papers
and Proceeding, 93(2), 31‐38, May.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi and Pierre‐Olivier Gourinchas, 2008a. “Financial
Crash, Commodity Prices, and Global Imbalances.” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, Fall, pp 1‐55.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi and Pierre‐Olivier Gourinchas, 2008b. “An
Equilibrium Model of "Global Imbalances" and Low Interest Rates.” American Economic
Review, 98:1, pgs 358‐393.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2009. “Global Imbalances and Financial
Fragility,” American Economic Review, May.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2008a. “Collective Risk Management in
a Flight to Quality Episode.” Journal of Finance, Vol. 63, Issue 5, October.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2008b. “Knightian uncertainty and its
implications for the TARP,” Financial Times Economists’ Forum, November 24.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2006. “Bubbles and Capital Flow
Volatility: Causes and Risk Management.” Journal Monetary of Economics, 53(1), pp. 35‐
53, January.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2001. “International and Domestic
Collateral Constraints in a Model of Emerging Market Crises.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 48(3), 513‐548, December
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Pablo Kurlat, 2009. “Public‐Private Partnerships for Liquidity
Provison.” MIT mimeo, March.

39

Caballero, Ricardo J. and Pablo Kurlat, 2008. “Flight to Quality and Bailouts: Policy
Remarks and a Literature Review.” MIT mimeo, October.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Stavros Panageas, 2008. “Hedging Sudden Stops and
Precautionary Contractions.” Journal of Development Economics, 85 pp 28‐57.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Stavros Panageas, 2007. “A Global Equilibrium Model of
Sudden Stops and External Liquidity Management.” MIT mimeo, September.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Alp Simsek, 2009a. “Complexity and Financial Panics.” MIT
mimeo, June.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Alp Simsek, 2009b. “Fire Sales in a Model of Complexity.” MIT
mimeo, July.
Calvo, Guillermo A. 2005. "Crises in Emerging Market Economies: A Global Perspective,"
NBER Working Paper No. 11305.
Calvo, Guillermo A. and Talvi, Ernesto. 2005. "Sudden Stop, Financial Factors and
Economic Collpase in Latin America: Learning from Argentina and Chile," NBER Working
Paper No. W11153.
Calvo, Guillermo A., Izquierdo, Alejandro and Talvi, Ernesto. 2006. "Sudden Stops and
Phoenix Miracles in Emerging Markets," American Economic Review 96(2), May 2006.
Caplin, Andrew and John Leahy, 2004. “Business as Usual, Market Crashes and Wisdom
after the Fact,” American Economic Review, pp. 548‐565.
Coval, Joshua D., Jakub W. Jurek and Erik Stafford. 2008. “Economic Catastrophe
Bonds.” HBS Finance Working Paper No. 07‐102.
Coval, Joshua D., Jakub W. Jurek and Erik Stafford. 2009. “The Economics of Structured
Finance.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 23, No. 1, Winter.

40

Coval, Joshua, and Erik Stafford. 2007. "Asset Fire Sales (and Purchases) in Equity
Markets," Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 86, No. 2, November.
Flannery, Mark, 2002, “No Pain, No Gain? Effecting Market Discipline via ‘Reverse
Convertible Debentures’,” Working Paper, November.
Geithner, Timothy, and Lawrence Summers. 2009. “A New Financial Foundation.”
Washington Post, June 15
Gourinchas, Pierre‐Olivier and Hélène Rey. 2007. “From World Banker to World Venture
Capitalist: US External Adjustment and The Exorbitant Privilege,” in Richard Clarida,
editor, G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, The University of
Chicago Press, pp. 11‐55.
Gorton, Gary B. 2008. “The Panic of 2007.” In Maintaining the Stability in a Changing
Financial System. Proceedings of the 2008 Jackson Hole Conference, Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City.
Gorton, Gary B., and Andrew Metrick. 2009. “Haircuts.” NBER WP #15273, August.
Gorton, Gary B., and Nicholas Souleles. 2006. “Special Purpose Vehicles and
Securitization.” In The Risks of Financial Institutions, edited by Rene Stulz and Mark
Carey. University of Chicago Press.
Hart, Oliver and Luigi Zingales. 2009. “A New Capital Regulation for Large Financial
Institutions.” Harvard mimeo. September
Holmström, Bengt. 2008. “Comment on: ‘The Panic of 2007,’ by Gary Gorton,” in
Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System, Symposium sponsored by The
Federal Reserve of Kansas City at Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
Investment Company Institute. 2009. Report of the Money Market Working Group.

41

International Monetary Fund. 2009. Global Financial Stability Report: Navigating the
Financial Challenges Ahead, October.
Kashyap, Anil K., Raghuram G. Rajan and Jeremy C. Stein. 2008. “Rethinking Capital
Regulation,” in Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System, Symposium
sponsored by The Federal Reserve of Kansas City at Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing‐Jorgenses, 2007. “The Aggregate Demand
for Treasury Debt,” Kellogg mimeo.
Lehman Brothers. 2008. “Residential Credit Losses ‐ Going into Extra Innings?”
Mehrling, Perry and Alistair Milne, 20008. “Government’s role as credit insurer of last
resort and how it can be fulfilled,” mimeo October.
Milne, Alistair. 2009. The Fall of the House of Credit. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge and New York.
Office of the Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program. 2009.
Quarterly Report to Congress, July.
Roxburgh, Charles, Susan Lund, Charles Atkins, Stanislas Belot, Wayne W. Hu, Moira S.
Pierce. 2009. “Global Capital Markets: Entering a New Era,” McKinsey Global Institute
report. September.
Squam Lake Working Group on Financial Regulation. 2009. “An Expedited Resolution
Mechanism for Distressed Financial Firms: Regulatory Hybrid Securities.” April.
Tett, Gillian. 2009. Fool's Gold: How Unrestrained Greed Corrupted a Dream, Shattered
Global Markets and Unleashed a Catastrophe. Little, Brown.
Woodford, Michael. 1990. “Public Debt as Private Liquidity,” The American Economic
Review, Vol. 80, No. 2 (May), pp. 382‐88.

42

