                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCES OF EARLY LIFE HEALTH

                                             Anne Case
                                           Christina Paxson

                                        Working Paper 15637
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15637


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2010




Material in this paper was presented at the RAND Summer Institute on July 8-9, 2009. We thank Kimberly
Bryan for expert research assistance and seminar participants for many useful suggestions. We acknowledge
funding from the Demography of Aging Center at Princeton University, funded under the National
Institute of Aging grant P30 AG024361. We thank the Whitehall II Study team for providing us with
access to physical and cognitive test information on the Whitehall II cohort. Continuing data collection
for the Whitehall II study is funded by the Medical Research Council, the National Institute on Aging
(AG13196), National Heart Lung and Blood Institute (HL36310) and the British Heart Foundation.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Anne Case and Christina Paxson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Causes and Consequences of Early Life Health
Anne Case and Christina Paxson
NBER Working Paper No. 15637
January 2010
JEL No. D1,I12,J13

                                              ABSTRACT

We examine the consequences of childhood health for economic and health outcomes in adulthood,
using height as a marker of health in childhood. After reviewing previous evidence, we present a conceptual
framework that highlights data limitations and methodological problems associated with the study
of this topic. We present estimates of the associations between height and a range of outcomes, including
schooling, employment, earnings, health and cognitive ability, using data collected from early to late
adulthood on cohort members in five longitudinal data sets. We find height is uniformly associated
with better economic, health and cognitive outcomes – a result only partially explained by the higher
average educational attainment of taller individuals. We then turn to the NLSY79 Children and Young
Adult Survey to better understand what specific aspects of early childhood are captured by height.
We find, even among maternal siblings, taller siblings score better on cognitive tests and progress
through school more quickly. Part of the differences found between siblings arises from differences
in their birth weights and lengths attributable to mother’s behaviors while pregnant. Taken together,
these results support the hypothesis that childhood health influences health and economic status throughout
the life course.


Anne Case
367 Wallace Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
accase@princeton.edu

Christina Paxson
424 Robertson Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1022
and NBER
cpaxson@princeton.edu
Numerous studies have examined the association between economic status (as measured by

income, occupation or education) and health. Despite occasional anomalies, three general

patterns emerge from the data. The first is that health is strongly related to economic status:

wealthier people live longer and have lower morbidity. This is true whether one looks across

countries, within countries at any point in time, or over time with economic growth. The second

is that the association between health and wealth—the “gradient”—is evident throughout the

income distribution. The gradient does not merely reflect the association between poor health

and absolute poverty, but is evident in wealthy countries, and among wealthier individuals within

countries. The third is that the association between health and wealth is found across a wide

range of ages. Differences in health across economic groups are apparent at birth: newborns from

less well-off families or with less well-educated mothers have higher rates of mortality and lower

birth weights than more advantaged newborns. The association between health and wealth

becomes more pronounced until early old age but then eventually declines, possibly the result of

selective mortality.

   These patterns, although uncontroversial, have been subject to many interpretations. One

hypothesis is that poor health is the product of low socioeconomic status. This may be due to the

effects of material deprivation—less nutritious food, lower-quality medical care, and lower-

quality housing—on health. Or, those with lower income or less education may live in more

stressful environments, which could lead to greater physiological “wear and tear” on metabolic

and immune systems and to a greater reliance on unhealthy behaviors such as smoking (Adler et

al. 1994.) An alternative view is that poor health reduces economic status. Children in poor

health may have lower educational attainment, which reduces their adult earnings potential.

Adults with health problems may work less or may be less productive on their jobs, leading to

                                                  1
lower earnings, and they may be subject to great out-of-pocket medical costs, reducing asset

accumulation.

      These two views need not be mutually exclusive. Indeed, it is likely that there is a lifelong

interplay between health and wealth, with different factors coming into prominence at different

stages of the life cycle. Furthermore, the relationships between health and socioeconomic status

are certainly dynamic—health at one stage of life has implications for future socioeconomic

status, and socioeconomic status influences future health. In this paper, we focus on a specific

aspect of the health-wealth gradient: the association between childhood health, on one hand, and

economic and health outcomes later in life, on the other.

      Educational attainment is an especially important adult outcome to consider. Schooling is

obtained throughout childhood, and has a large influence on earnings, which may in turn affect

health. Education may also have a direct effect on health and health behaviors later in life (Cutler

and Lleras-Muney, 2008). Researchers have documented many dimensions of the association

between childhood health and educational attainment. 1 In many large, cross-sectional studies,

researchers have shown that cohorts affected by health insults in utero have lower educational

attainment, on average, than do preceding and following birth cohorts that did not face the same

health insult. Using a variety of data sets, researchers have also documented the association

between low birth weight and educational attainment. In addition, several birth cohort studies

allow researchers to trace the impact of childhood health (measured using birth weight, mothers’

assessments of children’s health, chronic conditions in childhood, days spent in bed, and

hospitalization episodes) on progress through school and educational attainment.

1
    Currie (2009) provides a thorough review of the relationships between health in childhood and

a range of outcomes, including education.


                                                   2
      Estimates of the importance of health in utero and childhood on educational attainment vary,

but are often found to be large and significant. Almond (2006), for example, estimates that

children born to women infected with influenza during the 1918 pandemic received on average 5

months less education than children born before or conceived after this event. Case, Fertig and

Paxson (2005) find, using data from the 1958 British birth cohort study, that children born at low

birth weight passed 0.5 fewer O-level exams (qualifying exams taken in British secondary

schools prior to 1988) than other children, on average. This effect is larger than that predicted for

moving a cohort member’s household from the 90th to the 10th percentile of family income at age

16. 2

      Less has been written on the impact of early life health on transitions to the labor force,

employment and earnings in young adulthood. This is in part because studies following

individuals from birth through middle age are still relatively scarce. Much of the evidence that

we have comes again from being able to identify the impact of a large health shock on a birth

cohort (for example, the 1918 influenza pandemic), or from a handful of panel studies, including

the Panel Study of Income Dynamics for the US, and the British birth cohorts of 1958 and 1970,

called the National Child Development Study (NCDS) and the British Cohort Study (BCS),

respectively. Case, Fertig and Paxson (2005) find that, for men followed in the NCDS, markers

2
    Not all studies find a significant effect of childhood health on educational attainment. Smith

(2009), for example, using retrospective reports on childhood health in the PSID finds a large

and significant association between health reports and educational attainment in OLS

regressions, but not in regressions that include maternal fixed effects. It is possible that the signal

to noise ratio is too low in the latter, where identification is derived from differences in

retrospective health reports among siblings.


                                                    3
of early life health make a large incremental contribution to the pseudo-R2 of being employed at

age 42. Specifically, with controls for family background, including mother and father school

leaving ages, and father’s and grandfathers’ social classes, they find that chronic conditions in

childhood and height at age 16 contribute 0.25 to the pseudo-R2 in a probit regression of

employment at age 42.

    To date, life course models have had to rely on data collected from birth to middle age (as in

the 1958 and 1970 British cohort studies), or from middle age to old age and death (as in the US

Health and Retirement Study and in the UK Whitehall II Study). Longitudinal studies that follow

cohort members from cradle to grave are, at this point, rare. An exception is the Helsinki Birth

Cohort Study, which David Barker, Johann Eriksson and colleagues have used to examine the

fetal origins hypothesis. Beyond this, estimates of the extent to which early life health affects

socioeconomic status and health in old age are based primarily on retrospective questions asked

in surveys currently being conducted on older adults.

       With a lack of information on health in childhood, researchers have begun to use height

as a marker of early life health and nutrition, which serves as a bridge from health in childhood

to health and socioeconomic status at older ages. Our paper follows in this relatively new line of

research. In the next section, we present a conceptual framework that captures the dynamic

associations between health and economic status over the life course. The conceptual framework

is used to highlight the methodological issues and data demands that complicate research on the

long run effects of childhood health, and to motivate the use of height as a bridge from childhood

into adulthood. We then present evidence on the associations between height and a range of

outcomes in adulthood, including educational attainment, employment, earnings, health and

cognitive function. Finally, we turn to consider the question of what aspects of the early life



                                                  4
environment height captures. Using data from the NLSY79—Children and Young Adults study,

we show that height is related to a variety of children’s health and developmental outcomes,

including health at birth and cognitive development within childhood.



CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The framework we discuss here, which follows that presented in Case, Fertig and Paxson (2005),

elucidates mechanisms through which early life experiences may influence later life outcomes.

For simplicity, we assume there are three stages in life: childhood, young adulthood, and older

adulthood. We also collapse “economics status” and “health status” into single variables,

although each could be thought of as containing several components. For example, “economic

status” could include earnings, asset income and transfer income; “health” could include chronic

conditions, acute conditions, and cognitive function. Distinguishing between these different

components may be important for empirical work, but not for laying out the framework.

       We express economic status in older adulthood (     ) and a measure of health in older

adulthood (   ) as linear functions of indicators of economic status and health in young

adulthood (   and     respectively), educational attainment ( ) and vectors of measures of

economic status and health in childhood (    and    ). Health in childhood can include prenatal

health, nutrition and illnesses in childhood, and cognitive development.

(1)

(2)

Health, economic status and educational attainment in young adulthood are assumed to be

functions of economic and health status in childhood:

(3)


                                                5
(4)

(5)

       Equations (1) to (5), taken together, are general enough to be consistent with many

hypotheses concerning the relationships between health and economic status at different stages

of the life cycle. Much of the literature on health and economic status has been concerned with

estimating equations (1) and (2), with a focus on the “cross effects” of adult health on later

economic status, and of adult economic status on later-life health. One hypothesis, which is most

closely associated with the work of Michael Marmot and colleagues, using data on British civil

servants, is that the economic gradient in health observed among adults is largely due to the

effects of economic status (defined in Whitehall by civil service grade) on disease risk (

0). (See, for example, Brunner et al. 1999, Marmot et al. 2001, and Chandola et al. 2003.) An

alternative hypothesis is that the gradient in adulthood reflects the effects of poor health on

earnings and assets (        0). Although this has been an active and sometimes contentious

area of research, our focus here is on the effects on childhood health on later life outcomes.

       Equations (3), (4) and (5) indicate that childhood health and economic status determine

the human capital that individuals carry into young adulthood, in the form of higher earnings

potential, better health, and greater levels of schooling. (In (3), the effect of schooling on

economic status has been subsumed in the effects of health and economic status in childhood.)

The effect of childhood circumstances on later adulthood depends on the parameters in (1) and

(2). These equations indicate that childhood circumstances may have direct effects, even

controlling for educational attainment, economic status and health in young adulthood, and

indirect effects that operate through the outcomes in young adulthood. Substitution of (3), (4)

and (5) into (1) and (2) yields reduced form equations for health and economic status in later


                                                  6
adulthood, expressed solely as functions of childhood characteristics. Estimates of these reduced

form equations provide information on the combined direct and indirect effects of childhood

circumstances.

       The data demands for estimating equations (1) through (5) are high: the model requires

data that follow individuals from early childhood through into later life. As we noted above, few

such data sets exist. However, if there are no direct effects of childhood health and economic

status on outcomes in older adulthood (i.e.                              0), then equations (1)

and (2) can be estimated using datasets that that follow individuals from younger to older

adulthood: provided that accurate measures of education, health and economic status in young

adulthood are available, further information on childhood is unnecessary. Likewise, equations

(3), (4) and (5) can be estimated using data that follows individuals from infancy to young

adulthood. This “separability” of equations (1) and (2) from equations (3), (4) and (5), if

appropriate, greatly eases data demands.

       A large body of research relies on the assumption of separability. For example, a

discussion of results from the Whitehall II data argues that, among British civil servants, “early

life circumstances are important because they influence adult social circumstances, which in turn

influence disease risk” (Marmot et al. 2001, page 305). In other work, Brunner et al (1999) state

that “whatever the salient features of the adult socioeconomic environment may be, it seems they

are equally or more important than circumstances in childhood” in determining cardiovascular

risk among British civil servants (page 762). Although it is convenient to assume that childhood

circumstances operate only through their effects on outcomes in early adulthood—especially

when working with data that do not contain information on childhood—another body of research

makes the case that this assumption is incorrect. For example, evidence on the well-known fetal



                                                 7
origins hypothesis supports the idea that fetal health has a direct effect on health in later life

(       0 ). (See, for example, Barker 1992 and Barker 1995.)

        Even with data sets that contain information over the lifespan, several econometric issues

can complicate estimation of the effects of childhood health on adult outcomes. One issue is that,

because of the well-documented associations between child health (         ) and childhood economic

circumstances (    ), it may be difficult to separately identify the effects of these variables on

health and economic status in adulthood. If good measures of economic status are unavailable,

their effects are likely to load onto measures of child health, and vice versa. This issue will be

important when interpreting estimates of the associations between height (as a marker for child

health) and outcomes in adulthood. As we discuss below, height is influenced by a wide range of

environmental factors experienced in childhood. Although a finding that height is associated

with adult outcomes provides support for the hypothesis that childhood circumstances have long-

lasting effects, it does not provide information on which aspects of the environment in childhood

are important.

        A closely related problem is unobserved individual heterogeneity. For example,

individuals may have unobserved personality traits or genetic characteristics that result in both

poor health and low socioeconomic status throughout the life span. If so, it may appear as if

childhood health (possibly measured as height) has effects on adult outcomes, when in fact the

association is driven by these unobserved characteristics. There may also be unobservable

differences across children in the quality of parenting they receive that is correlated with

children’s health, and which affects outcomes in adulthood.

        To the extent that these traits or genetic characteristics are family-specific, one strategy is

to use information on siblings or (in some cases) on twin pairs to control for unobserved


                                                   8
heterogeneity. Within-sibling or within-twin estimation techniques have been useful in

identifying the impact of early life circumstance such as low birth weight on educational and

health outcomes in adulthood (see, for example, Behrman and Rosenzweig 2004, and Black,

Devereux and Salvanes 2007). Within-twin studies have the advantage over sibling studies, in

that shared aspects of the uterine environment and (with monozygotic twins) genetic

endowments can be controlled for. However, there are also disadvantages to twin studies: it may

not be valid to draw inferences about singleton births from the experiences of twins.

Furthermore, most nationally representative surveys contain too few twin pairs to use for

analysis. In the last section of this paper, we rely in within-sibling methods to examine how

children’s heights are related to health and development in childhood.



HEIGHT, ECONOMIC STATUS AND HEALTH STATUS IN ADULTHOOD

This section presents estimates of the associations between height and several measures of

economic and health status, estimated using data collected at different points in adulthood in five

studies conducted in the United States and Britain. These results provide information on the role

of environmental factors, which influence growth in childhood, in determining health and

wellbeing much later in life. We begin with an overview of the determinants of growth and

height, with an emphasis on how environmental conditions in utero and early childhood

influence height.



Determinants of growth and height

Adult height reflects cumulative growth to maturity. After a period of rapid growth from ages 0

to 3, growth becomes relatively stable at approximately 6 cm a year until adolescence, at which



                                                 9
point an adolescent growth spurt accelerates growth to an (adolescent) peak height velocity of

approximately 10 cm a year. Final adult height depends on the timing and duration of the

adolescent growth spurt. (See Beard and Blaser 2002 for discussion and references.)

       Age-specific growth patterns and final adult height depend on a combination of factors,

including genes, environmental conditions (particularly under-nutrition and illness) and gene-

environment interactions. Although genes are key determinants of individual height, many

studies suggest that differences in average height across populations are due largely to

environmental factors (Steckel 1995). The increase in heights throughout the developed world

during the 20th Century was too rapid to be due to selection and genetic variation (Beard and

Blaser 2002).

       The environmental factors thought to influence adult height include intrauterine

conditions and conditions in early childhood. Both low birth weight and maternal smoking

during pregnancy are significant predictors of lower stature in adulthood (Saenger et al. 2007, Li,

Manor and Power, 2004). Adult height is also sensitive to environmental conditions experienced

in childhood. Health and nutrition in the period from birth to age three are important

determinants of adult height. The speed of growth is more rapid during this period than at any

other during the life course, and nutritional needs are greatest at this point. Infections (especially

gastrointestinal and respiratory) can be frequent and severe in early childhood, and such

infections and inflammatory responses to them can impair growth (Crimmins and Finch 2006).

In addition, children are at special risk from poor care-giving at youngest ages; once children are

more autonomous, they may be better equipped to protect themselves. Research on

institutionalized children who are adopted internationally shows that children experience rapid

catch-up growth after adoption, although the extent of catch-up declines with the age of adoption



                                                  10
(Rutter et al. 1998). These results provide striking evidence of the importance of children’s

nutritional and psychosocial environments on growth.

       Environmental factors that influence height may also affect health throughout life. Under-

nutrition, chronic infections and psychosocial stress acting at critical periods of development can

induce permanent changes in body organs and systems. These changes, initiated and

“programmed” early in life, may make individuals more susceptible to adverse health outcomes

later in life when body reserves decline. Adverse influences in early life may alter gene

expression and cell maturation, or change the structure of affected organs. The effects of

programming can also be mediated through changes in the homeostatic set-points of hormonal

and metabolic systems. 3 While research has focused primarily on fetal programming (Barker

1998), it has become increasingly clear that postnatal influences are also of utmost importance.

       The factors that influence height may also influence cognitive development. A large

literature indicates that height is correlated with intelligence. Although a portion of this

correlation is driven by genes, environmental factors are also important (Lynn, 1989). Sundet et

al. (2005) use differences in cross-trait (height and intelligence), cross-twin correlations between

monozygotic (MZ) and dizygotic (DZ) twin pairs to identify the roles played by shared

environments and shared genes. They conclude that the environment plays a large role and is

3 References include Barker (1998), Bateson et al. 2004, Bertram and Hanson (2001),

Dahlgren J. et al (2001), Dickerson and Kemeny (2004), Drake and Walker (2004),

Holmang (2001), Holness, Langdown and Sugden (2000), Jackson (2000), Kajantie (2003),

Kajantie, Dunkel, Turpeinen et al. (2003), Kajantie, Eriksson, Barker et al. (2003), Kajantie

et al. (2004), Langley-Evans (2000), McMillen and Robinson (2005), Nilsson et al. (1998),

Ozanne (2001), Phillips (2001), Samuelsson et al. (2004).


                                                  11
responsible for 65 percent of the height-intelligence correlation, with genes responsible for 35

percent of the observed correlation. These authors report that their results are very similar to

those on cross-trait cross-twin correlations found much earlier by Husén (1959) in a large study

of MZ and DZ twin pairs. Higher-birth-weight members of twin pairs are taller on average and

have higher IQs than the lighter twins (Black et al. 2007). Other evidence using American twins

finds that, within monozygotic twin pairs, greater fetal growth is associated with greater stature

and higher educational attainment (Behrman and Rosenzweig, 2004).

       The height-intelligence correlation may also be influenced by environmental conditions

experienced in early childhood. Several randomized experiments conducted in low-income

environments find that nutrition may be one of these environmental factors. In one study,

nutritional supplements given to growth-retarded children improved their cognitive tests scores,

although these gains dissipated after the supplementation ended (Grantham-McGregor 2002;

Walker et al. 2005). Research from Guatemala found that children who had been provided with

nutrition supplements during the first three years of life were taller, had higher scores on some

cognitive tests, and higher educational attainment than children who did not receive supplements

(Martorell et al. 2005). Observational studies also highlight the role of early childhood. For

example, Raikkonnen et al (2009) use the Helsinki Birth Cohort Study to show that, conditional

on health at birth, slower growth in height between birth and two years of age is associated with

poorer performance on a range of intelligence tests in young adulthood.



Associations between height and adult outcomes over the life course

The evidence discussed above indicates that height reflects a variety of environmental factors

experienced in utero and in early childhood, and that the environmental factors that influence



                                                 12
height may also affect health and cognitive development. Given this, it is not surprising that

height is associated with a wide range of economic and health outcomes in adulthood. Previous

research indicates that height is associated with educational status, earnings, and occupational

grade (Persico, Postlewaite and Silverman, 2004; Case and Paxson, 2008a; Case, Paxson and

Islam, 2008). Height is also associated with health and cognitive function at older ages (Case and

Paxson, 2008b). In this section, we summarize these associations using data from five American

and British surveys that capture individuals at different points in the life course, and that contain

roughly comparable measures of adult outcomes.

       The National Child Development Study (NCDS) tracks a cohort of all individuals born in

Britain in a single week in 1958. The British Cohort Study (BCS) tracks a cohort of children

born in a single week in 1970. For the NCDS, we use data from the surveys conducted when

cohort members were 33 and 42 years of age, and for the BCS we use data from the survey

conducted when the cohort members were 30 years old. The NCDS and BCS were designed to

collect the same measures of health and economic status, providing comparable data on

individuals in young to middle adulthood.

       We also use data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), a longitudinal study

of families, from which we draw information on household heads and their spouses between the

ages of 25 and 55 who were interviewed between 1988 and 1997. Over this time period, the

PSID collected detailed information on economic outcomes, but relatively little on health.

       In addition, we draw on the Whitehall II study, a longitudinal study of British civil

servants. We use information on individuals between the ages of 34 and 71, collected from 1985

to 2001. Because individuals had to be employed in the British civil service when the study

began, the sample is not representative of the population in Britain. (See Case and Paxson,



                                                 13
2009b, for details.) However, it contains a rich set of measures of health and cognitive

functioning in middle age to early old age. Our final data source is the Health and Retirement

Study (HRS), which is a panel study of Americans who were aged 51 to 61 years in 1992. We

use information on individuals ages 55 and older, interviewed between 1992 and 2004. The HRS

contains information on employment and earnings (among those who are still employed) as well

as health and cognitive function.

         For each of these surveys, we select measures of economic and health status that are

roughly comparable across the surveys, although not all measures were collected in all surveys.

For the PSID and HRS, schooling is measured as reported years of education. For the NCDS and

the BCS, individuals are asked to report the age at which they left full-time schooling, and we

measure years of education as the school-leaving age minus 5. Using this method, some

individuals have implausibly high values for years of education, possibly because they resumed

full-time schooling in adulthood after taking time off. For this reason, we truncate years of

schooling at 20 for these two surveys. 4 We also analyze employment and the logarithm of

average hourly earnings (conditional on employment). Our health measures include self-reported

health status, activity limitations and disability, problems with activities of daily living,

depression, and cognitive function. More details on these measures are provided below. We

4
    The NCDS, BCS and Whitehall II studies collected detailed information on highest academic

qualification attained by cohort members. These are better measures of educational achievement,

and ordered probits reveal a significant association between highest degree and height in all three

studies. However, it is difficult to map degrees onto years of education, or onto degrees

conferred in the United States. For these reasons, we use the school leaving age for comparison

with US cohorts.


                                                  14
regress these measures of economic and health outcomes on height in inches plus, where

appropriate, indicators for age, ethnicity, sex and survey wave. In cases where there are multiple

observations for an individual at different time periods, we use clustered standard errors.

       Table 1 reports results for the economic outcomes. Results for men and women are

reported separately because of their different labor force participation rates. We do not include

results from Whitehall in this table. Although the data has a rich set of health measures, it does

not include measures of hourly earnings, and there are numerous missing values for the measure

of the school-leaving age. Furthermore selection into the sample was, by construction, contingent

on being employed at the start of the study, so that the association between height and

employment is of less interest. For the HRS, we use only individuals ages 55 to 74, since labor

force participation is very low at older ages.

       The results in Table 1 indicate that height is associated with economic outcomes in all of

the samples. Each inch of height is associated with an increase in schooling of between 0.05

years (for 30-year-old women in the BCS) and 0.16 years (for men in the HRS). All coefficients

on height in the schooling regressions are statistically different from zero. Although we do not

present results from the Whitehall study here, in other work we show that height is significantly

associated with the highest level of educational qualification received (Case and Paxson, 2009b).

Employment is also associated with height for most groups. For men age 55 and under, each inch

of height is associated with an increase in the probability of working of between 0.2 and 0.6

percentage points. Women have similar coefficients, although these are less precisely estimated

among women in the NCDS. All groups show a substantial height premium in average hourly

earnings, ranging from 0.012 to 0.028 for men, and 0.007 to 0.027 for women. The magnitudes

of these coefficients are economically significant. For example, a height premium of 0.02 implies



                                                 15
that a 4-inch increase in height (a move from the 25th to 75th percentile in height) is associated

with an 8 percent increase in hourly earnings.

       Table 2 presents evidence on the association between height and a variety of health and

cognitive outcomes in adulthood. All surveys ask respondents to rate their health. For the NCDS

and BCS, self-reported health is measured on a four-point scale (1=excellent, 2=good, 3=fair

and 4=poor).The other three studies use five-point scales (1=excellent, 2=very good, 3=good,

4=fair and 5=poor). The NCDS and BCS ask questions about whether the individual has a long-

standing illness, or is registered as disabled; comparable questions do not exist in the other

surveys. Whitehall II and HRS, both of which surveyed older individuals, contain information on

problems with activities of daily living (ADLs). For Whitehall II, our measure of ADLs is the

number of problems the individual has with seven items, including problems with vigorous

activity, bathing or dressing, moderate activity, lifting, bending, walking several miles, and

climbing several flights of stairs. For the HRS, we used six activities that reflect serious

limitations: problems with dressing, walking across the room, bathing, eating, getting in and out

of bed, and using the toilet. Both the HRS and Whitehall II surveys contain a measure of

depression. Finally, both Whitehall II (in waves 3 and 5) and the HRS (in waves 3 through 6)

conducted cognitive tests. For Whitehall II, we show results for tests of word recall and ability in

arithmetic. For the HRS, we use a test of delayed word recall and an indicator of whether the

individual could count backwards from 10.

       In all samples, taller individuals report themselves to be in better health. In the NCDS

and BCS, taller individuals are also less likely to report having a long-standing illness or to be

registered as disabled. The magnitudes of these coefficients are large, in light of the fact that

relatively few of these younger adults have serious illness or are disabled. For example, in the



                                                 16
BCS, 23.2 percent of individuals report a long-standing illness, and 1.5 are registered as

disabled. The results imply that a 4-inch increase in height would reduce the probability of a

long-standing illness from 23.2 percent to 21.4 percent, and reduce the probability of disability

from 1.5 percent to 0.9 percent.

       The association between height and health persists into older adulthood. Results from

Whitehall II and the HRS indicate that taller individuals have fewer problems with activities of

daily living, and are less likely to be depressed. Although the two surveys use different measures

of depression, the results for both imply that a 4-inch increase in height is associated with a

decline in the depression score of 4 percent of one standard deviation of the depression measure.

Taller individuals also perform significantly better on cognitive tests, even among the (younger)

Whitehall II sample.



Interpretation of results

The finding that height is associated with a wide range of economic and health outcomes

throughout adulthood provides support for the hypothesis that early childhood circumstances

have long-lasting effects. However, as discussed in the conceptual framework, there are several

routes through which childhood circumstances could influence adult outcomes. One possibility is

that height operates solely through educational attainment and economic status in early

adulthood: children who are healthier and are raised in more advantaged circumstances achieve

higher levels of education and get better first jobs, which in turn improves economic

opportunities and health trajectories over adulthood. If so, then the “separability” discussed

above would hold, and information on early adulthood would be sufficient to capture the effects

of early life circumstances. Another possibility is that, although childhood circumstances may



                                                 17
influence education and economic status in early adulthood, they may also exert independent

effects on long-run health and economic outcomes.

       A number of studies have examined this issue by estimating reduced form models similar

to those presented above (with additional controls for child health and economic circumstances,

if available), and then examining whether the addition of controls for characteristics in young

adulthood account for the association between childhood circumstances and later life outcomes.

In some cases, the evidence suggests that childhood health influences adult outcomes, even

controlling for outcomes in young adulthood. For example, Case, Fertig and Paxson (2005) show

that, controlling for measures of socioeconomic status in childhood, chronic conditions in

childhood and height at age 16 predict socioeconomic status of 42 year-old men from the

National Child Development Study. This predictive power of chronic conditions and height at

age 16 for socioeconomic status at age 42 continues even after controlling for education, health

and socioeconomic status at ages 23 and 33. The same is true when examining self-reported

health status at age 42.

       Case and Paxson (2008b) find different results when using the Health and Retirement

Study to examine the effects of height on a set of cognitive and health measures among older

adults. In this case, although the reduced form estimates show that height predicts cognition and

health, the coefficients on height become much smaller and are typically not significantly

different from zero when controls for education are added. Older individuals who are more

highly educated have better cognitive function and health status. It is unknown whether the

“protective” effects of education are causal, or whether greater education reflects better cognitive

ability and health in childhood.




                                                18
       To extend this research, we re-estimated the models shown in Tables 1 and 2, including

controls for schooling, which are available for all of the data sets we use. (For Whitehall II, for

which we do not have years of education, we included indicator variables for the highest degree

attained.) In all cases, schooling is significantly associated with economic and health outcomes

in adulthood. However, although the coefficients on height decline when controls for schooling

are added, height continues to be significantly associated with adult outcomes in most cases. For

the BCS, which assesses outcomes at the earliest stage of adulthood, the addition of schooling

causes the coefficients on height to decline between 5 percent (for whether disabled) to 28

percent (for hourly earnings for women). The median decline in the coefficient on height is 30.3

percent for the NCDS; 54.9 percent for the PSID; and 7.5 percent for Whitehall II. Consistent

with Case and Paxson (2008b), the associations between height and outcomes in old age in the

HRS become much smaller once controls for years of schooling are included (the median decline

is 79.2 percent.) The smallest declines among the HRS results are for average hourly earnings

and the two cognitive tests, which remain significant even after schooling is included.

       These results indicate that height, as a marker of early childhood circumstances, is

associated with health, cognitive and economic outcomes throughout adulthood. This association

appears to be partially but not fully mediated by schooling. Although these results underscore the

importance of early childhood environment, they provide little information about what specific

aspects of early childhood are being captured by height. We turn to this issue in the following




                                                 19
section, where we use data from the NLSY79 Children and Young Adult Survey 5 to document

the associations between height, health and cognitive development among children.



HEIGHT AND EARLY LIFE HEALTH: EVIDENCE FROM THE NLSY

Beginning in 1986, data have been collected on the children of original female NLSY79 cohort

members, as part of the NLSY Child and Young Adults Survey. These data provide information

on a rich set of outcomes, including prenatal care and health at birth, children’s cognitive

function, schooling, and self perceptions of scholastic competence and self worth. In addition, all

children born to an original NLSY79 woman can be identified as maternal siblings, which allows

us to look at the associations between heights and developmental outcomes while controlling for

maternal fixed effects. We use data on children who are 14.5 years of age and younger, collected

every other year from 1986 to 2006. 6

      Table 3 provides descriptive statistics for these children. Eighteen percent of them were born

to teen mothers, while 8 percent were born to mothers older than age 35. Approximately 8

percent were born at low birth weight (2500 grams). One in three was born to a mother who

smoked during pregnancy, and one in five was born to a mother who did not seek prenatal care

in the first trimester. We have information on children’s heights and cognitive test score results,


5 The NLSY79 is a nationally representative longitudinal study of approximately 12,000 young

men and women who were ages 14 to 22 when the study began in 1979. For a complete

description of these data, go to http://www.bls.gov/nls/nlsy79ch.htm .
6
    Older children are included in the survey. However, because the NLSY79 consists of women

born between 1958 and 1965, the older children in the sample were born to an increasingly

selected sample of younger mothers.


                                                  20
both of which were collected in multiple waves of the survey. Information on mothers include

her educational attainment, whether she lived with both parents at age 14, whether at age 14 her

family received magazines and newspapers, whether her family had a library card, the

educational attainment of her parents, her height, and her ethnicity. We will include information

on mother’s characteristics in some regression specifications, and mother fixed effects in others,

to investigate whether there are unobservable mother-specific characteristics that affect

children’s heights and their development.

   Table 4 presents evidence on the association between height and cognitive ability in

childhood. The first panel presents results on PIAT-math and PIAT-word recognition scores for

children of ages 5 and 6. The second panel presents results for children at ages 10 and 11. In

addition to the earlier tests, older children are tested on PIAT-reading comprehension, digit span,

and the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT). The bottom panel includes test score results

for children at all ages. Each coefficient presented in Table 4 is the coefficient on the child’s

height-for-age z-score, in regressions of cognitive tests that include indicators for the child’s age

at testing (rounded to the nearest 6 months), an indicator for the child’s sex, whether he or she

was born to a teen-aged mother or an older (over 35) mother, the child’s birth order, and a set of

race and survey year indicators.

   For all tests at all ages, we find a positive and significant association between test scores and

heights in OLS regressions – with associations becoming larger at older ages. With two

exceptions, we continue to find a positive and significant association when mother fixed effects

are added to regressions. The addition of mother fixed effects diminishes the association between

height and cognitive tests for most tests, but does not eliminate it. The coefficient on height, in

regressions that include mother fixed effects, is identified solely off of differences in test scores



                                                  21
between siblings, when tested at a given age, and differences in their height-for-age z-scores at

that age. Siblings could differ in their heights and their test scores because the household

environment one was born into could have been healthier, an explanation we will examine later

in this section. Differences in heights could also be due to differences in the genetic material

inherited from parents, or the interaction between genes and environment. Without more

information, it is not possible to say more than this. However, we can say that, even controlling

for the genetic material siblings share, and for that part of their home environment that is

constant, children who were taller outperform shorter siblings on cognitive tests throughout

childhood.

   We also examine whether taller children progress more rapidly through school. We use two

measures of progress in school: the highest grade attained, and an indicator if a child is at the

appropriate grade, given his or her age. OLS regression coefficients on height are presented in

columns 1 and 3 of Table 5, and those from regressions that include mother fixed effects are

presented in columns 2 and 4. Results are reported for children ages 6 to 14, with the top panel

presenting information on highest grade attained, and the bottom panel on whether the child is at

an appropriate grade level (that is, whether children over 7 years and 6 months have completed

grade 1, those over 8 years and 6 months have completed grade 2, and so forth).

   Height-for-age z-scores at age five are significant predictors of children’s progress through

school, with or without controls for mother fixed effects. Using information on height at age five

interacted with age (columns 3 and 4), we can test whether this is because taller children start

school earlier, or because they advance more quickly through grades. At age 6, taller siblings are

no more or less likely to be at appropriate grade-for-age: results including mother fixed effects

suggest that a taller and shorter sibling differing by one standard deviation in height-for-age z-



                                                 22
scores are, at age 6, equally likely to reach grade-for-age (−0.0179 + 0.0024×6 = −0.0035).

However, by age 14, the taller sibling is 1.6 percentage points more likely to be observed at

grade-for-age.

   There are several reasons why taller children may progress more rapidly through school. One

is that they have better cognitive skills. Another is that taller children have greater self esteem,

perhaps because they are treated differently by parents, teachers or peers. We can distinguish

between these two possibilities using data that were collected directly from the children. At ages

12 to 14, children were asked a battery of questions about how well they perform at school, and

how pleased they are with their lives. Each individual item is scored from 1 (low) to 4 (high),

and the Total Scholastic Competence score and Total Self Worth score are sums of individual

items. Column 2 of Table 6 presents regression results in which a scholastic or self worth score is

regressed on height for age z-scores, with controls for mother and child characteristics. Results in

column 3 control in addition for mothers’ fixed effects.

   We find that taller children—and, within sib-ships, taller siblings—are more likely to report

that they are good students. On average, their Total Scholastic Competence score is significantly

higher, with or without mother fixed effects. These results are consistent with evidence that taller

children have better cognitive test scores and progress through school more quickly than less tall

children and siblings. In contrast, taller children and taller siblings are not more likely to report

being pleased with themselves, or that they are happy with how they do things. Taller children

are significantly less likely to report that they are “happy with the way I am.” Total Self Worth

scores are not significantly associated with height. The associations we find between height and

cognitive test scores, educational attainment, and self-perceptions of scholastic competence do

not appear to spill over into children’s sense of their worth.



                                                  23
   Previous research indicates that physical growth is related to children’s health. Results from

the NLSY Child and Young Adult Survey are consistent with this evidence. Children’s heights

are significantly associated with their health in childhood. Table 7 presents evidence that taller

children, and taller siblings within sib-ships, are significantly less likely to have a limiting

condition. Most prominently, taller children are less likely to be reported as having an emotional

or neurological limiting condition.

   Finally, the Children and Young Adults data allow us to investigate why some children, and

within a sib-ship why some siblings, are taller than others. Table 8 looks the association between

height-for-age z-scores in childhood and children’s birth weight, birth length, and mothers’

prenatal health. With or without mother fixed effects, we find that children who were heavier and

longer at birth are significantly taller throughout childhood. This suggests that, even within a sib-

ship, it may be difficult to place smaller newborns onto the same trajectory that larger siblings

are on. Controlling for birth weight and length, we find that children born to mothers who

received no prenatal care have height-for-age z-scores in childhood that are two tenths of a

standard deviation shorter on average. This is true for comparisons across all children in OLS

regression (column 1), or in mother fixed effect regressions, where identification comes from

comparing mothers’ behaviors and children’s heights within sib-ships (column 2).

   With controls for birth length and weight, we find maternal smoking and drinking while

pregnant do not appear to affect height in childhood. However, this is because their effects are

largely realized in birth weight and length. Columns 5 and 6 report the associations between birth

weight, birth length, and mothers’ behaviors while pregnant from regressions that include mother

fixed effects. Controlling for all the characteristics of mothers that do not change between

pregnancies, we find birth weight is significantly and negatively associated with smoking during



                                                  24
pregnancy, while birth length is significantly and negatively associated with reporting no

prenatal care, and with drinking alcohol while pregnant.



CONCLUSION

There are several reasons why it is important to study of the long-run consequences of health in

childhood. Knowledge about the effects of childhood health problems on economic and health

outcomes later in life is useful for assessing the benefits of interventions that improve child

health. Furthermore, an understanding of the childhood antecedents of adult disease may be

useful for making projections of future trends in adult morbidity and disability. However,

because of a lack of data that follows individuals from childhood to adulthood, it is difficult to

quantify the consequences of childhood health. In this paper, we have shown how height, which

reflects (in part) environmental conditions in the prenatal and early childhood periods, can be

used to understand the long-run consequences of childhood health.

       Physical growth in childhood is related to health in childhood. Data from the NLSY—

Children and Young Adult Survey demonstrate that, within families, a mother’s behavior during

pregnancy can result in significant differences between her children—differences that may play

out over the life course. Among children in general, and more strikingly among siblings, those

who are heavier and longer at birth are taller in childhood on average. Among children in

general, and among siblings more specifically, children who are taller are healthier, they score

significantly higher on cognitive tests and make their way more quickly through school. They are

also more likely to perceive themselves to be scholastically competent. All of these

characteristics send children on different trajectories into adulthood and old age—trajectories

that were, in part, set in place by mothers’ behaviors while pregnant.



                                                 25
       The evidence presented here on the associations between height and outcomes throughout

adulthood indicate that childhood circumstances are important. Taller individuals attain more

education, earn more, and are more likely to be employed. They are also more likely to have

better health and cognitive outcomes in middle age to old age. A substantial portion of the better

outcomes of taller individuals appears to be due to their higher levels of educational attainment.

However, education cannot explain all of the association between height and later life outcomes.

       When considering these results, it is important to keep in mind that the environments in

which children are being raised today are substantially different than those in which the oldest

individuals we examine—from the HRS and Whitehall—experienced as children. These older

individuals grew up in environments in which major causes of child deaths included diarrhea,

pneumonia, and diseases such as diphtheria, measles and typhoid (Case and Paxson, 2009a). A

large body of literature indicates that exposures to infectious disease can have adverse

implications for cognitive development and adult health (Finch and Crimmins, 2004; Costa,

2000). It may be tempting to speculate that, with the decline in infectious disease, childhood

health will have a smaller role in determining adult outcomes. However, the fact that less healthy

children born in the last two decades are shorter, and that these shorter children have worse

performance on cognitive tests and slower progress through school, indicates that child health is

likely to remain an important determinant of health and economic status once these children

reach adulthood.




                                                26
References

Abbott, R.D., L.R. White, G.W. Ross, H. Petrovitch, K.H. Masaki, D.A. Snowdon, and J.D.
       Curb. 1998. “Height as a Marker of Childhood Development and Late-life Cognitive
       Function: The Honolulu-Asia Aging Study.” Pediatrics 102(3): 602-9.
Adler, N.E., T. Boyce, M.A. Chesney, S. Cohen, S. Folkman, R.L. Kahn, and S. L.Syme. 1994.
       “Socioeconomic Status and Health: The Challenge of the Gradient,” American
       Psychologist, 15-24.
Almond, D. 2006. “Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long‐term Effects of in utero
       Influenza Exposure in the Post‐1940 U.S. Population.” Journal of Political Economy
       114(4): 672-712.
Barker, D.J.P. 1992.“The Fetal Origins of Diseases of Old Age,” European Journal of Clinical
       Nutrition 46 (Supplement 3): S3-9.
Barker, D.J.P. 1995. “Fetal Origins of Coronary Heart Disease,” British Medical Journal
       311(6998): 171-74.
Barker, D.J.P. 1998. “Programming the Baby,” Pp. 13-41 in Mothers, Babies and Health in Later
       Life, 2nd ed., Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh.
Barker, D.J.P. 2004. “The Developmental Origins of Well-being.” Philosophical Transactions of
       the Royal Society B 359: 1359-66.
Bateson, P., D.J.P. Barker, T. Clutton-Brock, D. Deb, B. D'Udine, R.A. Foley, P. Gluckman, K.
       Godfrey, T. Kirkwood, M.M. Lahr, J. McNamara, N.B. Metcalfe, P. Monaghan, H.G.
       Spencer, and S.E. Sultan. 2004. “Developmental Plasticity and Human Health.” Nature
       430:419-21.
Beard, A. S. and M. J. Blaser. 2002. “The Ecology of Height: The Effect of Microbial
       Transmission on Human Height.” Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 45 (Autumn):
       475-99.
Behrman, J. R. and M. R. Rosenzweig. 2004. “Returns to Birthweight.” Review of Economics
       and Statistics 86 (May): 586-601.
Bertram, C.E., and M.A. Hanson. 2001. “Animal Models and Programming of the
       Metabolic Syndrome.” Br Med Bull. 60:103-21.
Black, S.E., P.J. Devereux, and K.G. Salvanes. 2007. “From the Cradle to the Labor Market?
       The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122
       (February): 409-439.
Brunner, E., M. J. Shipley, D. Blane, G. Davey Smith, and M. G. Marmot. 1999. “When Does
       Cardiovascular Risk Start? Past and Present Socioeconomic Circumstances and Risk
       Factors in Adulthood,” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 53: 757-64.
Case, A. and C. Paxson, 2008a. “Stature and Status: Height, Ability and Labor Market
       Outcomes.” Journal of Political Economy 116(3): 499-532.
Case, A. and C. Paxson. 2008b. “Height, Health and Cognitive Function at Older Ages.”
       American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 98(2): 463-467.
Case, A. and C. Paxson. 2009a. “Early Life Health and Cognitive Function in Old Age,”
       American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 99(2): 104-109.
Case, A. and C. Paxson. 2009b. “The Long Reach of Childhood Health and Circumstance:
       Evidence from the Whitehall II Study,” mimeo, Center for Health and Wellbeing,
       Princeton University.


                                             27
Case, A., A. Fertig and C. Paxson. 2005. “The Lasting Impact of Childhood Health and
        Circumstance.” Journal of Health Economics 24: 365-389.
Case, A., C. Paxson and M. Islam. 2008. “Making Sense of the Labor Market Height Premium:
        Evidence from the British Household Panel Study.” Economic Letters 102(3): 174-6.
Chandola, T., M. Bartley, A. Sacker, C. Jenkinson, and M. Marmot. 2003. “Health Selection in
        the Whitehall II Study, UK” Social Science and Medicine 56: 2059-72.
Costa, D. “Causes of Improving Health and Longevity at Older Ages: A Review of the
        Explanations,” Genus LXI(1): 21-38.
Crimmins, E. M., and C.E. Finch. 2006. “Infection, Inflammation, Height and Longevity.”
        Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 (January 10): 498-503.
Currie, J. 2009. “Healthy, Wealthy and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in Childhood,
        and Human Capital Development.” Journal of Economic Literature 47(1): 87-122.
Cutler, D. and A. Lleras-Muney. 2008. “Education and Health: Evaluating Theories and
        Evidence,” Chapter 2 of Schoeni, R.F., J. House, G.A. Kaplan and H. Pollack, eds.
        Making American Healthier, New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Dahlgren, J., C. Nilsson, E. Jennische, H.P. Ho, E. Eriksson, A. Niklasson, P. Bjorntorp, K.
        Albertsson Wikland, and A. Holmang. 2001. “Prenatal Cytokine Exposure Results in
        Obesity and Gender-Specific Programming.” Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab.
        281:E326-34.
Dickerson, S.S. and M.E. Kemeny. 2004. “Acute Stressors and Cortisol Responses: A
        Theoretical Integration and Synthesis of Laboratory Research.” Psychological
        Bulletin 130:355-91.

Drake, A.J. and B.R. Walker. 2004. “The Intergenerational Effects of Fetal Programming:
       Non-genomic Mechanisms for the Inheritance of Low Birth Weight and
       Cardiovascular Risk.” J Endocrinol. 180:1-16.
Finch, C.E. and E.M. Crimmins. 2004. “Inflammatory Exposures and Historical Changes in
       Human Life Spans,” Science 305(5691): 1736-1739.
Grantham-McGregor, S. 2002. “Linear Growth Retardation and Cognition.” Lancet 359
       (February 16): 542.
Holmang, A. 2001. “Perinatal Origin of Adult Disease.” Scand Cardiovasc J. 35:178-85.
Holness, M.J., M.L. Langdown and M.C. Sugden. 2000. “Early-life Programming of
       Susceptibility to Dysregulation of Glucose Metabolism and the Development of
       Type 2 diabetes mellitus.” Biochem J. 1:349 Pt 3:657-65.
Husén, T. 1959. Psychological Twin Research. New York: Free Press.
Jackson, A.A. 2000. “Nutrients, Growth, and the Development of Programmed Metabolic
       Function.” Adv Exp Med Biol. 478:41-55.
Kajantie E. 2003. Mechanisms of Growth in Small Preterm Infants and Early Life Origins
       of Adult Cardiovascular Disease. Thesis. University of Helsinki, Hospital for
       Children and Adolescents 24.1.2003. Available at http://ethesis.helsinki.fi .
Kajantie, E, L. Dunkel, U. Turpeinen, U.H. Stenman, P.J. Wood, M. Nuutila and S.
       Andersson. 2003. “Placental 11β-hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase-2 and Fetal
       Cortisol / Cortisone Shuttle in Small Preterm Infants.” J Clin Endocrinol Metab
       88:493-500.
Kajantie, E., J. Eriksson, D.J.P. Barker, T. Forsén, C. Osmond, P.J. Wood, S. Andersson, L.
       Dunkel, and D.I.W. Phillips. 2003. “Birthsize, Gestational Age and Adrenal

                                              28
        Function in Adult Life: Studies of Dexamethasone Suppression and ACTH1-24
        Stimulation.” Eur J Endocrinol 149:569-75.
Kajantie, E., J. Eriksson, C. Osmond, P.J. Wood, T. Forsen, D.J.P. Barker and D.I. Phillips.
        2004. “Size at Birth, the Metabolic Syndrome and 24-h Salivary Cortisol Profile.”
        Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 60:201-7.
Langley-Evans, S.C. 2000. “Critical Differences Between Two Low Protein Diet Protocols
        in the Programming of Hypertension in the Rat.” Int J Food Sci Nutr. 51: 11-17.
Li, L., O. Manor and C. Power. 2004. “Early Environment and Child-to-Adult Growth
        Trajectories in the 1958 British Birth Cohort.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 80:
        185-92.
Lynn, R. 1989. “A Nutrition Theory of the Secular Increases in Intelligence, Positive Correlation
        between Height, Head Size and IQ.” British Journal of Educational Psychology 59: 372-
        77.
Marmot, M., M. Shipley, E. Brunner, and H. Hemingway. 2001. “Relative Contribution of Early
        Life and Adult Socioeconomic Factors to Adult Morbidity in the Whitehall II Study.”
        Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 55: 301-7.
McMillen, I.C. and J.S. Robinson. 2005. Developmental Origins of the Metabolic Syndrome:
        Prediction, Plasticity, and Programming. Physiol Rev 85: 571-633.
Nilsson, C., M. Niklasson, E. Eriksson, P. Bjorntorp, and A. Holmang. 1998. “Imprinting of
        Female Offspring with Testosterone Results in Insulin Resistance and Changes in
        Body Fat Distribution at Adult Age in Rats.” J Clin Invest. 101:74-8.
Ozanne, S.E. 2001. “Metabolic Programming in Animals.” Br Med Bull. 60:143-52.
Persico, N., A. Postlewaite, and D. Silverman, 2004, “The Effect of Adolescent Experience on
        Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(5),
        1019-53.
Phillips, D.I. 2001. “Fetal Growth and Programming of the Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal
        Axis.” Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 28:967-70.
Samuelsson, A.M., I. Ohrn, J. Dahlgren, E. Eriksson, B. Angelin, B. Folkow and A.
        Holmang. 2004. “Prenatal Exposure to Interleukin-6 Results in Hypertension and
        Increased Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal Axis Activity in Adult Rats.”
        Endocrinology 145:4897-911.
Räikkönen, K., T. Forsén, M. Henriksson, E. Kajantie, K. Heinonen, A. Pesonen, J.T. Leskinen,
        I. Laaksonen, C. Osmond, D.J.P. Barker and J.G. Eriksson. 2009. “Growth Trajectories
        and Intellectual Abilities in Young Adulthood, The Helsinki Birth Cohort Study.”
        American Journal of Epidemiology 170(4): 447-455.
Rutter, M. and the English and Romanian Adoptees (ERA) study team. 1998. “Developmental
        Catch-up and Deficit Following Adoption After Severe Global Early Privation.” Journal
        of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 39: 465-476.
Saenger, P., P. Czernichow, I. Hughes and E.O. Reiter. 2007. “Small for Gestational Age: Short
        Stature and Beyond,” Endocrine Reviews, 28(2): 219-251.
Smith, J.P. 2009. "The Impact of Childhood Health on Adult Labor Market Outcomes," The
        Review of Economics and Statistics 91(3):478-489.
Silventoinen, K. 2003. “Determinants of Variation in Adult Body Height.” Journal of Biosocial
        Science 35 (April): 263-85.
Steckel, R. H. 1995. “Stature and the Standard of Living.” Journal of Economic Literature 33
        (December): 1903-40.

                                               29
Sundet, J. M., K. Tambs, J. R. Harris, P. Magnus, and T. M. Torjussen. 2005. “Resolving the
       Genetic and Environmental Sources of the Correlation Between Height and Intelligence:
       A Study of Nearly 2600 Norwegian Male Twin Pairs.” Twin Research and Human
       Genetics 8 (August): 307-11.
Walker, S.P., S.M. Chang, C.A. Powell, and S. M. Grantham-McGregor. 2005. “Effects of Early
      Childhood Psychosocial Stimulation and Nutritional Supplementation on Cognition and
      Education in Growth-Stunted Jamaican Children: Prospective Cohort Study.” The Lancet
      366(9499): 1804-7.




                                             30
Table 1: Regressions of education, employment and earnings on height in inches

                                                NCDS            NCDS              BCS          PSID                 HRS
Dependent variable:
                                                age 33          age 42           age 30      ages 25-55          ages 55-74
                                                                Men
                                                           0.0913                 0.0679       0.0686              0.1571
Schooling (years)
                                                          (0.0114)               (0.0104)     (0.0111)            (0.0164)
                                                0.0061           0.0041           0.0037       0.0018              0.0015
Employed (indicator)
                                               (0.0015)         (0.0015)         (0.0014)     (0.0008)            (0.0019)
                                                0.0262           0.0248           0.0122       0.0145              0.0277
Log average hourly earnings, if employed
                                               (0.0037)         (0.0042)         (0.0023)     (0.0029)            (0.0051)
Maximum observations                                       5,833                  5,424        31,996              27,606
                                                              Women
                                                           0.0940                 0.0550       0.0454              0.1185
Schooling (years)
                                                          (0.0107)               (0.0104)     (0.0106)            (0.0119)

                                                0.0036           0.0028           0.0093       0.0023              0.0029
Employed (indicator)
                                               (0.0025)         (0.0022)         (0.0021)     (0.0010)            (0.0017)
                                                0.0170           0.0195           0.0114       0.0067              0.0272
Log average hourly earnings, if employed
                                               (0.0042)         (0.0048)         (0.0025)     (0.0030)            (0.0044)
Maximum observations                                       5,815                  5,757        31,999              35,927
Note: Each cell contains a coefficient and standard error on height in inches, from a regression of the dependent variable on height and
a set of ethnicity indicators. For results using the PSID and HRS, indicators for year of age are also included. For all outcomes except
schooling, the PSID and HRS contain multiple observations per person, and so survey wave/year dummies and included and standard
errors are clustered at the individual level. “Schooling” is defined as reported years of schooling for the PSID and HRS, and as the age
at which the individual left full-time education minus 5 for the NCDS and BCS. In some cases, regressions contain smaller numbers of
observations due to missing values of the dependent variables.




                                                                      31
Table 2: Regressions of measures of health and cognition on height in inches

                                        NCDS               NCDS                BCS              PSID             Whitehall II          HRS
Dependent variable:
                                        age 33             age 42             age 30          ages 25-55         ages 34-71          ages 55+
                                       –0.0171            –0.0150             –0.0126           –0.0085           –0.0241            –0.0118
Self-reported health status1
                                       (0.0026)           (0.0028)            (0.0023)          (0.0027)          (0.0032)           (0.0031)
                                       –0.0010            –0.0036             –0.0044
Has long-standing illness
                                       (0.0014)           (0.0017)            (0.0014)
                                       –0.0023            –0.0016             –0.0016
Is registered as disabled
                                       (0.0004)           (0.0006)            (0.0004)
                                                                                                                  –0.0141            –0.0024
# ADLs2
                                                                                                                  (0.0004)           (0.0020)
                                                                                                                  –0.0758            –0.0214
Depression score3
                                                                                                                  (0.0260)           (0.0047)
                                                                                                                   0.0574             0.0434
Word recall score4
                                                                                                                  (0.0101)           (0.0046)
                                                                                                                                      0.0041
Counting backwards5
                                                                                                                                     (0.0007)
                                                                                                                   0.4419
Numerical ability score6
                                                                                                                  (0.0278)

Maximum observations                                11,648                       11,181            63,995           29774              66,269
Notes: Each cell contains a coefficient and standard error on height in inches, from a regression of the dependent variable on height, an indicator
for the respondent’s sex, and (for all but Whitehall) a set of ethnicity indicators. For the PSID, Whitehall and HRS, indicators for year of age are
included. The PSID, Whitehall and HRS contain multiple observations per person, so survey wave/year indicators are included, and standard
errors are clustered at the individual level. For some outcomes, regressions contained smaller numbers of observations because data were not
collected in all waves, or because of missing values of the dependent variables.
1
  For NCDS and BCS: 1=Excellent, 2=Good, 3=Fair, 4=Poor; for PSID, Whitehall and HRS: 1=Excellent, 2=Very good, 3=Good, 4=Fair, 5=Poor
2
  For Whitehall, range=0 to 7, mean=0.28; for the HRS, range=0 to 5, mean=0.26.
3
  For Whitehall, range=0 to 45, mean=13.8, standard deviation=7.3; for HRS, range=0 to 8, mean=1.4, standard deviation=1.9.
4
  For Whitehall, range=0 to 18, mean=6.4, standard deviation=2.4; for HRS, range=0 to 10, mean=4.6, standard deviation=2.1;
5
  Coded as equal to 1 if the individual could accurately count backwards from 10, and 0 if not. Mean=0.88.
6
  Range=0 to 33, mean=22.4, standard deviation=6.5.

                                                                         32
Table 3: Descriptive Statistics, NLSY Child and Young Adult Sample (ages 0 to 14.5 years)

                                                      Mean      Std. Dev.      observations
                       Child characteristics (one observation per child)
Mother was teenager at child’s birth                  0.181                      10,324
Mother was older than 35 at child’s birth             0.078                      10.324
Child’s birth order                                    1.97                      10,324
Child female                                          0.489                      10,324
Child born at low weight                              0.075                      10,318
Mother smoked during pregnancy                        0.322                       9,422
Mother had no prenatal care                           0.015                       9,200
Mother began prenatal care in 1st trimester           0.799                       9,200
Mother began prenatal care in 2nd trimester           0.144                       9,200
Mother began prenatal care in 3rd trimester           0.039                       9,200
                     Child characteristics (multiple observations per child)
Piat—math: math test                                 100.35      (14.08)         31,175
Piat—rec: reading recognition test                   103.95      (14.85)         31,045
Piat—comp: reading comprehension test                101.17      (13.96)         26,199
Digit span test (range=1 to 19)                        9.78       (3.12)         16,968
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT)                90.45      (20.30)         17,341
Height-for-age z-score                                0.137       (1.36)         46,671
                                     Mother characteristics
Highest grade attained                                13.21                       3,778
Lived with intact family at age 14                    0.745                       4,433
Family at age 14 received magazines                   0.524                       4,445
Family at age 15 received newspaper                   0.724                       4,447
Family at age 14 had library card                     0.695                       4,446
Highest grade attained by mother’s mother             10.56                       4,206
Highest grade attained by mother’s father             10.59                       3,770
Mother’s adult height (inches)                        64.24                       3,248
Mother Hispanic                                       0.179                       4,471
Mother Black                                          0.267                       4,471




                                                     33
Table 4: Heights and test scores

                                                                       PIAT-         Digit
                                      PIAT-math         PIAT-rec                                PPVT
                                                                        comp          span
               Regressions of test scores on height-for-age z-scores, 5 and 6 year olds
No mother fixed effects                  0.637            0.395
                                        (0.124)          (0.121)
Mother fixed effects                     0.402            0.267
                                        (0.183)          (0.180)
Observations                             6,492            6,384
              Regressions of test scores on height-for-age z-scores, 10 and 11 year olds
No mother fixed effects                  0.734            0.559         0.548        0.133       0.753
                                        (0.151)          (0.161)       (0.147)      (0.035)     (0.196)
Mother fixed effects                     0.744            0.299         0.463        0.091       0.201
                                        (0.218)          (0.221)       (0.208)      (0.052)     (0.252)
Observations                             6,206            6,192         6,133        6,162      6,105
                    Regressions of test scores on height-for-age z-scores, all ages
No mother fixed effects                  0.713            0.587         0.520          0.175     0.971
                                        (0.087)          (0.095)       (0.087)        (0.024)   (0.136)
No mother fixed effects, mother          0.642            0.573         0.535          0.167     0.925
controls*                               (0.108)          (0.116)       (0.108)        (0.030)   (0.167)
Mother fixed effects                     0.376            0.192         0.248          0.089     0.362
                                        (0.078)          (0.083)       (0.084)        (0.025)   (0.148)
Observations                            30,421           30,296        25,606         16,579    16,853
Notes: All models include indicators for the child’s age (rounded to the nearest 6 months) at
testing, an indicator for the child’s sex, whether he or she was born to a teen-aged mother or an
older (over 35) mother, the child’s birth order, and a set of race and survey year indicators. The
models with “mother controls” include the mother’s highest grade; indicators for whether the
mother (at age 14) lived in a family that was intact, received magazines, a newspaper and had a
library card, and lived in an urban area; the highest grade attained by her mother and father, and
her adult height. For the top two panels, there is one observation per child. In the bottom panel,
with multiple observations per child, the standard errors are clustered at the child level.
*Samples with mother controls included are smaller than those noted in table, due to missing
values.




                                                   34
Table 5: Grade level in school and height, children ages 6 to 14

                                                 (1)               (2)           (3)       (4)
                                          Highest grade attained
                                               0.0177          0.0086         –0.0145    –0.0287
Height-for-age z-score at age 5
                                               (0.004)        (0.0051)        (0.0095)   (0.0109)
                                                                               0.0033     0.0038
Height-for-age z-score at age 5 * age
                                                                              (0.0010)   (0.0011)
                        At appropriate grade level given age (indicator, mean=0.873)
                                               0.0118          0.0056         –0.0092    –0.0179
Height-for-age z-score at age 5
                                              (0.0023)        (0.0029)        (0.0048)   (0.0061)
                                                                               0.0022     0.0024
Height-for-age z-score at age 5 * age
                                                                              (0.0006)   (0.0007)
Mother fixed effects?                            no                yes           No        Yes
Notes: Observation=23783. “At appropriate grade level” is defined to equal 1 if the children
over 7 years and 6 months of age have completed grade 1, if children over 8 years and 6 months
have completed grade 2, and so on. All models include a set of indicators for the child’s age
rounded to the nearest 6 months, an indicator for the child’s sex, whether he or she was born to a
teen-aged mother or an older (over 35) mother, the child’s birth order, and a set of race and
survey year indicators. Standard errors are clustered at the child level.




                                                       35
Table 6: Child’s self-perception and height, ages 12 to 14

                                                                   Coefficient on height-for-age z-score
                                                  Mean of
                                              dependent variable                           Mother fixed
                                                                    No fixed effects
                                                                                              effects
                                         Scholastic Competence
Good at school work                                                       0.030               0.025
                                                         2.93
                                                                         (0.011)             (0.018)
As smart as other kids the same age                                       0.035               0.019
                                                         3.06
                                                                         (0.011)             (0.018)
Does schoolwork quickly                                                   0.042               0.041
                                                         2.84
                                                                         (0.012)             (0.020)
Remembers things easily                                                   0.034               0.039
                                                         2.78
                                                                         (0.011)             (0.018)
Does class work well                                                      0.013               0.012
                                                         3.22
                                                                         (0.010)             (0.017)
Can figure out answers at school                                          0.028               0.027
                                                         2.66
                                                                         (0.011)             (0.019)
Total Scholastic Competence score                                         0.183               0.164
                                                      17.50
                                                                         (0.046)             (0.072)
                                                Self Worth
Pleased with self                                                        –0.010               0.008
                                                         3.44
                                                                         (0.009)             (0.014)
Likes the way leading life                                               –0.013              –0.004
                                                         3.41
                                                                         (0.010)             (0.016)
Happy with self as a person                                              –0.008              –0.002
                                                         3.60
                                                                         (0.008)             (0.013)
Likes who I am                                                            0.008               0.013
                                                         3.41
                                                                         (0.009)             (0.016)
Happy with the way I am                                                  –0.020              –0.029
                                                         3.43
                                                                         (0.009)             (0.015)
Happy with how I do things                                                0.004               0.010
                                                         3.29
                                                                         (0.010)             (0.017)
Total Self Worth score                                                   –0.043              –0.011
                                                      20.58
                                                                         (0.037)             (0.057)
Note: Observations= 7,438. Each individual item is scored from 1 (low) to 4 (high), and the
Total scores are sums of the individual items. All models include a set of indicators for the
child’s age rounded to the nearest 6 months, an indicator for the child’s sex, whether he or she
was born to a teen-aged mother or an older (over 35) mother, the child’s birth order, and a set of
race and survey year indicators. Standard errors are clustered at the child level.




                                                    36
Table 7: Regressions of health measures on height-for-age z-scores

                                                     Has a limiting condition that is:
                                   Has limiting
                                                       Emotional/neurological   Respiratory    Other
                                    condition
Mean of dependent variable            0.100                    0.022               0.045       0.040
No mother fixed effects             –0.0050                   –0.0026              0.0004     –0.0031
                                    (0.0014)                  (0.0007)            (0.0009)    (0.0009)
Mother fixed effects                –0.0031                   –0.0017              0.0007     –0.0018
                                    (0.0013)                  (0.0007)            (0.0008)    (0.0009)
Notes: Observations=46,101. All models include indicators for the child’s age (rounded to the
nearest 6 months) at testing, an indicator for the child’s sex, whether he or she was born to a
teen-aged mother or an older (over 35) mother, the child’s birth order, and a set of race and
survey year indicators. Standard errors are clustered at the child level.




                                                  37
Table 8: Prenatal health and height

                                                                             Birth weight   Birth length
                                  Height-for-age z-score in childhood
                                                                               z-score        z-score
Birth weight z-score            0.147      0.105
                               (0.013)    (0.015)
Birth length z-score            0.098      0.093
                               (0.010)    (0.011)
No prenatal care               –0.213     –0.227         –0.266    –0.264      –0.028         –0.325
                               (0.101)    (0.107)        (0.106)   (0.111)     (0.127)        (0.181)
Prenatal care, 2nd trimester    0.026      0.047          0.005     0.026      –0.130         –0.051
                               (0.033)    (0.033)        (0.034)   (0.034)     (0.038)        (0.055)
Prenatal care, 3rd trimester    0.082      0.096          0.085     0.095      –0.057          0.064
                               (0.055)    (0.051)        (0.057)   (0.052)     (0.066)        (0.095)
Smoking frequency              –0.008     –0.022         –0.067    –0.040      –0.097         –0.071
                               (0.018)    (0.032)        (0.019)   (0.033)     (0.035)        (0.050)
Drinking frequency              0.009      0.004          0.004    –0.003      –0.023         –0.060
                               (0.010)    (0.012)        (0.010)   (0.123)     (0.014)        (0.020)
Mother fixed effects?             no        yes            no       yes          yes            yes
Observations                                      37,568                        8,088          8,088

Notes: Regressions for which the dependent variable is the height-for-age z-score include
indicators for the child’s age (rounded to the nearest 6 months), an indicator for the child’s sex,
whether he or she was born to a teen-aged mother or an older (over 35) mother, the child’s birth
order, and a set of race and survey year indicators. Standard errors are clustered at the child level.
Regressions for which the dependent variable is birth weight or birth length include a cubic for
the mother’s age at the time of the birth, an indicator for the child’s sex, whether he or she was
born to a teen-aged mother or an older (over 35) mother, the child’s birth order, and a set of race
and survey year indicators. Standard errors are clustered at the child level.




                                                    38
