NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

QUALITY PROVISION, EXPECTED FIRM ALTRUISM AND BRAND EXTENSIONS
Julio J. Rotemberg
Working Paper 15635
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15635

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2010

I wish to thanks Mary Burke, Stephan Meier and Christina Wang for conversations and the Harvard
Business School Division of Research for support. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Julio J. Rotemberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Quality Provision, Expected Firm Altruism and Brand Extensions
Julio J. Rotemberg
NBER Working Paper No. 15635
January 2010
JEL No. D64,L15,L21
ABSTRACT
This paper studies quality choice in a model where consumers expect firms (or brands) to act altruistically.
Under plausible assumptions regarding this altruism and the reaction of consumers to firms that demonstrate
insufficient altruism, existing brands can face a larger demand for new products than new entrants.
Moreover, the failure of new products can reduce the demand for a brand's existing products even
if the quality of these existing products is well understood by consumers. The model provides an interpretation
for the dependence of the success of brand extensions on the ``fit" between the original product and
the extension. The model can also explain why a ``high-end" brand that is expected to care only for
its most quality sensitive customers can have an advantage in introducing a product relative to a brand
that is expected to be more widely altruistic.

Julio J. Rotemberg
Graduate School of Business
Harvard University, Morgan Hall
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jrotemberg@hbs.edu

While there exists an extensive theoretical literature on quality provision, the role of
altruism from firms to consumers in the supply of quality appears to have been completely
neglected. This paper seeks to fill this gap. It should be intuitive that this kind of altruism
can contribute to quality in the case of experience goods, where consumers only learn the
quality of the good after purchasing it. Managers (and employees) of altruistic firms obtain
vicarious benefits when consumers have a good experience after buying their goods. The
result is that, relative to selfish firms, they have more to gain from from providing a good
of higher quality.
The literature’s neglect of this straightforward mechanism of quality enhancement may
be due to skepticism about the relevance of altruism on the part of firms. It is worth noting,
however, that firms’s mission statements routinely assert their desire to serve customers.1
Consumers also appear to expect some suppliers to care for them, as evidenced by their
reactions when companies disappoint them. Fournier (1998, p. 355) discusses a consumer
she calls “Karen” who, recollecting a design change Mary Kay Cosmetics said: “I remember
feeling, ‘how could they do that to me?’.” Similarly, the price cut of Apple’s iPhone in 2007
led one customer to describe his reaction as “a feeling of betrayal of trust by a corporation
I adored.”2
Consumers know firms principally through their brands, and this paper tries to analyze
some sources and some consequences of consumer’s expectations regarding brand altruism.
Since altruistic firms provide higher quality goods, a consumer who is impressed by the
quality of her purchase should come to expect more altruism towards her from the brand
under which this good is sold. As a result, she should expect high quality when this brand
launches a new good (“a brand extension”) that is also directed at her. This raises the
demand for brand extensions, and this effect should be particularly strong when, as in
Rotemberg (2010), consumers become angry if they are able to reject the hypothesis that a
1

For example, the well publicized Johnson & Johnson “credo” starts with the words “We believe our
first responsibility is to the doctors, nurses and patients, to mothers and fathers and all others who use our
products and services.” Other examples can be found in Abrahams (2004).
2
See http://www.cultofmac.com/breaking-apple-gives-100-credit-to-iphone-early-adopters/1206

1

supplier has the level of altruism that they expect.3
Interestingly, expected quality need not be a monotonic function of the number of consumers a firm is expected to be altruistic towards. I show, in particular, that extensions
introduced by “high-end” brands who are seen as caring only for connoisseurs can be more
desirable than similar extensions by brands that are perceived as caring also for less qualitysensitive consumers.
One aim of this paper is to rationalize several empirical findings from the marketing
literature on brand extensions which, when taken together, seem difficult to reconcile with
existing formal models. The marketing literature has repeatedly shown that, at least in
the laboratory, two attributes of brand extensions are significant predictors of consumer
acceptance. The first is that the original brand be liked (or seen as having high quality)
and the second is that the extension “fit” with the original brand (Aaker and Keller (1990),
Broniarczyck and Alba (1993)). As Klink and Smith (2001) note, the concept of “fit” is not
very precisely defined in this literature.4
In the real-world examples of successful extensions described in Keller (1998), two types
of fit predominate. First, several successful extensions depend on an input that also plays a
key role in the original product. Examples of this include Hershey chocolate milk and Honda
lawnmowers. In these cases, consumers may believe that the technological knowledge used
to make the original product is helpful in making a high-quality extension. In a second set
of examples, the technologies used in the two products are unrelated but the target market
is similar. In these cases, altruism for the customers of the original product should extend
to those for the new product as well. A good example of this is provided by the successful
extension of Aunt Jemima, a brand focused initially on dry pancake mixes, into pancake
syrup. Another is the extension of the toothpaste brand Colgate into toothbrushes.
In these two examples, the extension is meant to be used at the same time as the original
3

See Anderson and Simester (2010) for evidence that consumers react in this way to firms that whose
prices lead them to regret their earlier purchases.
4
Klink and Smith (2001, p. 333-34) note, in particular that “This raises a more general and critical point,
however, related to construing perceived fit. If knowledge in this area is to progress in a meaningful manner,
it would be useful to arrive at some consensus about how to define and measure the perceived fit construct.”

2

product. Target customers seem to be similar also in less straightforward cases. Broniarczyk
and Alba (1993) show that their undergraduate survey respondents regard a potential extension of the Close-Up brand of toothpaste into breath mints as more attractive than a similar
extension by Crest.5 By contrast, an extension by Crest into toothbrushes was regarded
more favorably than a similar extension by Close Up.6 Broniarczyk and Alba (1993) also
observed statistically significant differences between the attractiveness of category extensions
by the cereals brands Cheerios and Froot Loops. While consumers said they would be more
attracted by an oatmeal offering from the former, they were more likely to be favorably
impressed by a lollipop offering from Froot Loops.
There does seem to be more overlap between the target market for lollipops (parents
who enjoy buying sweets for their children) and the target market for Froot Loops than
there is between the target market for Cheerios and that of lollipops. Similarly, the target
market for Cheerios appears relatively similar to the target market for oatmeal. In the case
of toothpastes, Close Up seems directed at people who are particularly concerned with the
smell of their breath (who should be the target market for breath mints) while the target
market for Crest seems more concerned with health and hygiene.
My basic assumption that consumers imbue brands with intentions fits with Fournier
(1998, p. 345) who says “Another form of animism involves complete anthropomorphization
of the brand object itself, with transference of the human qualities of emotionality, thought,
and volition.” The attribution of intentions to a brand “object” may seem like a particularly
extreme form of irrationality. It is important to remember, however, that the behavior of
brands is governed by people and these people may indeed have intentions vis-a-vis their
customers. It may thus not be entirely irrational to suppose that a brand that sells a wellliked product is managed by people with a particularly large degrees of empathy for the
customers that most enjoy this product.7
5

Interestingly, these survey respondents regarded Close-Up as being less attractive than Crest as a toothpaste, suggesting that the attractiveness of extensions does not depend on a unidimensional indicator of
“quality.”
6
Crest did enter the toothbrush market around 1992.
7
If people differ in the groups that they most empathize with, this difference in tastes presumably affects

3

An alternative hypothesis is that customers do not regard brands as having intentions but
see them as having only capabilities, where these capabilities may include their knowledge
of consumer tastes. Consumers might reason, for example, that brands which have demonstrated superior knowledge in the past by providing a high quality good would be particularly
adept at producing complementary goods that are valuable to the same consumers. Moreover, the pursuit of profits would provide these firms with an incentive to provide such goods.
Consumers would thus be able to count on the attractiveness of “related” category extensions
by successful brands.
One way of differentiating between the view that brands are treated as capabilities and the
view that they are seen as having intentions is to analyze the purchases of a brand’s original
products in those cases where category extensions fail. If consumers bought products only on
the basis of their beliefs about a firm’s capabilities, they would not reduce their purchases of
existing products unless the failure of the extension conveyed information about the quality
of the existing product. By contrast, if consumers care about firm intentions, their experience
with a brand extension can lead them to reevaluate a brand’s intentions and reduce their
purchases of existing products.
Two studies suggest that consumers do reduce their purchases of existing products when
new product carrying the same brand fail. Sullivan (1990) shows that, after the Audi 5000
was accused of having a problem with sudden acceleration, the demand for other Audi cars
fell. This was true even of the Audi Quattro, which used a different technology that was not
associated with any acceleration problem. It could be argued, however, that consumers did
not know enough about automobile technology to be certain of these differences across Audi
cars. The second study involves a product that customers knew better. Using scanner data,
Swaminathan et al (2001) examined the demand for a food product that had had a 53%
market share in its category before its manufacturer introduced an unrelated extension that
was withdrawn after 18 months. Swaminathan et al (2001) show that individuals who had
the employer that people most wish to work for. Workers should, in particular, flock to those firms whose
products are particularly well-liked by the groups that they feel close to.

4

bought the extension were significantly less likely to buy the original product afterwards.
If the failure of an extension changes the perceived quality of the original product, this
reduction in demand can be rationalized with the formal models of Wernerfelt (1988) and
Cabral (2000). In these models, consumers are uncertain about the quality of a brand’s
initial (or flagship) product. When the brand introduces an extension, consumers obtain a
signal of the new product’s quality. If this signal is adverse, so that consumers judge the
extension to be of low quality, they reduce their demand for the flagship product because
they reduce their estimate’s of this product’s quality.
In fact, many unsuccessful extensions do not appear to affect the demand for the original
product. Consistent with this, my model predicts that the demand for the original product
should be unaffected if the original product and the extension target different consumer
segments. In this case, the perception of altruism for the purchasers of the original product
is not contradicted by the failed extension.
A second advantage of focusing on altruism relative to quality is Roedder-John, Loken and
Joiner’s (1998) demonstration that the perceived quality of flagship products is fairly resilient
in consumers’ minds.8 They show that the attributes that subjects attribute to a flagship
brand (Johnson & Johnson Baby Shampoo) are essentially impervious to the introduction
of dissonant extensions carrying the same brand name. It is also possible to be somewhat
skeptical a priori of the idea that consumers change their mind about a product that they
have consumed repeatedly (which is their typical experience with well-known branded goods)
after a short experience with a new product from the same brand. This is particularly true
when the extension does not share any inputs with the original good.
As demonstrated in Choi (1998), if one modifies the Wernerfelt (1988) and Cabral (2000)
8

They build on an extensive earlier literature (see for example, Keller and Aaker (1992) and Loken and
Roedder-John (1993), Pina et al. (2006)) that focused on subjects’ overall ratings of brands after these are
described to them as having introduced either successful or failed extensions. This literature did not always
find statistically significant effects. Loken and Roedder-John (1993) showed that subjects who are told that
a brand has introduced an ungentle or low-quality product do sometimes reduce the degree to which they
subsequently associate a brand with “gentleness” or “high quality.” But this says little about the attitudes of
subjects towards the original product, since their overall brand evaluation is presumably a mixture of their
evaluation of the original product and their judgment regarding the extension.

5

models so that quality judgments of the original product are unaffected by failed extensions,
the demand for the existing product is unaffected as well. The result is that the use of an
existing brand in a new product loses some of its signaling value.9
The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 introduces the structure of the model and
analyzes the market for an existing good, which can act as a hostage when a new good is
introduced by an existing brand. Section 2 studies the introduction of a new good by a
new firm, and demonstrates that this firm is more likely to produce a high quality good if
it is altruistic. This sets the stage for section 3, which studies the provision of quality by a
firm that consumers expect to act altruistically. Section 4 considers firms that differ in the
breadth of altruism that consumers expect from them. Section 5 presents some concluding
remarks.

1

The Old Good

The structure of the model is close to Wernerfelt (1988) and Cabral (2000). There are three
periods 0, 1 and 2. In periods 0 and 2, an incumbent firm is the monopoly provider of an
“old” good with known quality. In period 1, either the incumbent or another firm can start
production of a new good. Before they produce, entrants determine the quality of their good,
where higher quality is more costly. Consumers do not learn this quality until after they
purchase the good in period 1. In period 2, this new good is available for sale once again.
This timing is illustrated in Table 1.
As in Rotemberg (2008, 2010), consumer j’s utility Uj depends on his material payoffs
xj , on the material payoffs of the firm he purchases from π, on his altruism towards the firm
aj and on his assessment of the extent to which the firm acts altruistically towards him. In
particular
Uj = xj + (aj − ξ(āj , â))π,
9

(1)

In Choi’s (1998) model, branding can still signal high quality because firms have a repeated choice
between high and low quality extensions. There is then a reputational equilibrium where brands introduce
only high quality extensions. While this is an attractive model, it should be noted that it would need to be
modified to be consistent with the common failure of newly introduced products.

6

where aj denotes his direct altruism towards the firm and the function ξ takes a value of
zero if given the information set â, consumers cannot reject the hypothesis that the firm acts
as if it had an altruism parameter greater than or equal to āj . Otherwise, ξ equals ξ¯ > 0.
For simplicity, aj is set equal to zero. A fraction γ of consumers is “altruism aware” and has
āj = ā > 0. For the rest, āj = 0.
Let πji and Bji denote, respectively, the profits and consumer surplus from the sale of the
good of type i in period j while a is a parameter giving a firm’s true altruism towards its
consumers. The distribution of firms’ actual altruism parameters is given by the pdf Ga . For
simplicity, discounting is ignored in this section and the three periods are assumed to be of
equal length. A firm that produces only the old good then has a level of welfare given by
W o = W0o + W2o

Wi0 = πio + aBio

where

and i = 0, 2,

while a new entrant that produces only the new good has a welfare level equal to
W n = W1n + W2n

Win = πin + aBin

where

and i = 1, 2.

In both these formulas, a firm values a unit of consumer surplus by a times the amount it
values a unit of profits. Finally, an incumbent firm that produces both the old and the new
good, has a welfare level W , which equals W 0 + W n .
There are K o potential consumers for the old good. The incremental material payoff
from consuming one unit of the good rather than none equals ψ, where this is drawn from
a distribution with pdf Fψ . Individuals gain nothing by buying additional units.
It is convenient to begin the analysis with period 2. Suppose first that ξ = 0 for all
consumers so that they are all “calm” and base their purchases exclusively on their material
payoffs. If the seller charges po2 , all consumers with ψ ≥ po2 buy the good so that total sales
equal K o (1 − Fψ (po2 )). I simplify the analysis by supposing that Fψ is uniform between 0
and Y so sales would equal K o (1 − (po2 /Y )).
Total consumer surplus is then
Z Y
K o (Y − po2 )2
o
(ψ − po2 )dFψ (ψ) =
.
K
2Y
po2
7

(2)

Let co be the constant cost of producing one unit. Consider a firm that acts as if its
altruism parameter were ao2 . When all consumers are calm, it would set the price po2 to
maximize

½µ
W2o (ao2 , co , po2 )

=K

o

po
1− 2
Y

¶
(po2

ao (Y − po2 )2
− co ) + 2
2Y

¾
.

(3)

After multiplying through by Y , the first order condition for this problem is
2po2 − Y + ao2 (Y − po2 ) = co ,

(4)

co + (1 − ao2 )Y
.
2 − ao2

(5)

so that its optimal price equals
o
po∗
2 (a2 , co ) =

The derivative of this price with respect to ao2 equals (co − Y )/(2 − ao2 )2 , which is negative
since the maximum willingness to pay Y must exceed marginal cost.
Rotemberg (2010) considers a signaling game where firms signal their altruism level
through their price. He shows that, regardless of the distribution of types Ga , there is
a unique equilibrium where firms whose actual altruism equals ā charge po∗
2 (ā, co ). His
demonstration relies on the assumption that a fraction greater than or equal to α of firms
whose altruism truly equals ā are naive in the sense that they neglect the effect of their price
on consumers’ inference regarding their altruism. The fraction α is the size of the test that
altruism-aware consumers use to test the hypothesis that firms’ altruism equals at least ā. I
neglect these details here and simply assume that altruism-aware consumers accept the price
of po∗
2 (ā, co ) as indicating sufficient altruism. Firms with an altruism level of ā then charge
this price, so that a statistician would not reject the null hypothesis that a firm charging
po∗
2 (ā, co ) does indeed have an altruism level of ā.
A higher price, on the other hand, immediately causes this hypothesis to be rejected
¯ These consumers then cease
so that altruism-aware consumers respond by setting ξ = ξ.
purchasing as long as ξ¯ is large enough and price exceeds marginal cost, so that profits rise
with each additional purchase. Whenever a firm’s altruism parameter is less than one, which
I assume, this latter condition is satisfied since charging a price below marginal cost would
8

not be optimal. Thus, the assumption that ξ¯ is large enough ensures that a firm that charges
more than po∗
2 (ā, co ) loses a fraction γ of its customers and faces a demand for its product
equal to (1 − γ)K o (1 − po2 /Y ). If it has an altruism parameter a < ā its objective function
becomes (1 − γ)W2o (a, co , po2 ) and its welfare maximizing price equals po∗
2 (a, co ). Such a firm
therefore charges po∗
2 (a, co ) if and only if ∆(a, co ) > 0 where
o
o∗
∆(a, co ) = W2o (a, co , po∗
2 (ā, co )) − (1 − γ)W2 (a, co , p2 (a, co ))
a
(Y − co )2
(1 − γ)(Y − co )2
λo2
(1
−
ā
+
=
)
−
(1
−
),
Y (2 − ā)2
2
Y (2 − λo2 )
2

(6)

and the second equality is established in the Appendix. Notice that ∆(a, co ) is unambiguously
rising in the altruism parameter a. A more altruistic firm has more to lose from the reduction
in demand by (1 − γ) because it obtains more utility from each unit that it sells.
To simplify the analysis, I suppose from now on that firms are either selfish so that a = 0
or their altruism a equals the level ā > 0 that is expected by altruism-aware consumers. The
first issue that arises, then, is whether selfish firms prefers charging the selfish price
the altruistic price

Y (1−ā)+co
.
2−ā

Y +co
2

or

Since W is just equal to profits in this case,

·
¸
1 − ā
(Y − co )2
1−γ
∆(0, co ) =
−
.
Y
(2 − ā)2
4
It is apparent from this that, as long as γ > 0, there exists a positive level of altruism ā such
that ∆(0, co ) > 0. Rotemberg (2010) shows numerically that fairly modest levels of γ lead
to ∆(0, co ) > 0 for nontrivial levels of ā.
I complete the analysis of period 2 by considering the case where altruism-aware consumers were able to reject the hypothesis a firm’s altruism level was greater than or equal
to ā in earlier periods. By assumption, this implies that these consumers set ξ equal to ξ¯ in
the second period regardless of the firm’s current price. While this assumption is somewhat
stark, it can be interpreted as resulting from consumers being unable to remember the details of a firm’s earlier violation and remembering only whether it was large enough to reject
the null hypothesis of altruism. The demand for such a firm is thus (1 − γ)K o (1 − po2 /Y ).
This implies that a firm with altruism parameter ā that takes an action before period 2 that
9

allows altruism-aware consumers to reject the hypothesis that it is in fact altruistic incurs a
period 2 cost of ∆(ā, co ). As we shall see below, this cost of being seen as selfish contributes
to the provision of high quality new goods.
If one ignores the possibility of introducing a new good, the analysis of the equilibrium
price of the old good in period 0 turns out to be identical to the pricing analysis we just saw
for period 2. I skip the analysis of this market, however. The reason is that it is inessential
for the main purpose of this paper, which is to study the quality of new goods in period 1.

2

The Provision of a New Good by New Entrant

There are K n potential consumers for this good. Each of these buys at most a single unit.
If the new good is of low quality, its value to all consumers equals L. A newly introduced
high quality good, by contrast, is valued differently by different consumers. Let θ denote this
valuation where θ is drawn from the pdf Fθ . To express the utility received by consumers,
let I h and I ` be indicator functions that take a value of 1 if the consumer buys a high quality
new good or a low quality new good respectively. Otherwise, these indicator functions equal
0. Since consumers cannot buy more than one of these goods, at most one of these indicator
functions can equal 1. Supposing that the consumer pays pn1 for a newly introduced good,
his material payoffs are
I h θ + I ` L − pn1 .

(7)

In period 1, a potential entrant has a probability β < 1 of having the capacity to produce
a new good that competes in this market. In other words, there is an indicator variable
σH , which equals 1 with probability β and equals zero otherwise. When it equals zero,
the potential entrant is unable to produce such a good. By contrast, when it equals 1, the
potential entrant can produce one of the two goods whose demand was described above. The
reason to set β < 1 is to ensure that, as in real-world markets, new goods are not introduced
in every period. From a modeling point of view, it implies that the non-introduction of a
good by an incumbent firm is not informative about the firm’s altruism. Even so, most of the

10

analysis is concerned with situations where σH = 1 so that firms have a nontrivial product
introduction decision.
For simplicity, I suppose that both the high and the low quality new goods have the same
marginal cost of production c̄. There is, however, a difference in the cost of the two goods in
that the high quality good has a setup cost κ while the low quality good involves no setup
cost. Consumers do not know the quality of the new good in period 1 though they do learn
it in time for making purchases in period 2.

2.1

Period 2

The analysis is simplified by supposing that c̄ > L so that low quality new goods are sufficiently unattractive that consumers are not willing to pay their marginal cost of production.
As a result, sellers of a new good that is known to be of low quality in period 2 cannot sell
this good profitably. It turns out to be convenient to let ² denote c̄ − L, the excess of the
cost of production relative to the consumers’ valuation of this good. In a sense to be made
precise below, I focus on situations where ² is relatively small.
If the new good is known in period 2 to be of high quality, people with θ ≥ pn2 increase
their material payoffs by buying it. The quantity demanded of this good is then
dn2 = K n (1 − Fθ (pn2 )).

(8)

As in the case of Fψ , the analysis is simplified if Fθ is set to be uniform between 0 and Y .
Indeed, the analysis is then the same as that for the old good in period 2. The demand
curve in (8) is then linear and consumer surplus B2n is given by the expression in (2) with po2
replaced by pn2 and K o by K n .
The incentives faced by the firm in period 2 depend to some extent on whether it is also
supplying the old good. If it does not, its welfare in period 2 is given by
½µ
¶
¾
pn2
a(Y − pn2 )2
n
n
n
n
1−
W2 (a, p2 ) = K
(p2 − c̄) +
,
Y
2Y
which is analogous to (3).
11

(9)

For a firm with altruism parameter ā, the equilibrium price is pn2 (ā), which equals po∗
2 (ā, c̄)
in (5). Its resulting level of period 2 welfare is W2n (ā, po∗
2 (ā, c̄))). A selfish firm also charges
n
n
o∗
po∗
2 (ā, c̄) if ∆(0, c̄) ≥ 0, and its period 2 welfare is then W2 (0) = W2 (0, p2 (ā, c̄))). If,

instead, ∆(0, c̄) < 0, the selfish firm charges pn2 (0) = po∗
2 (0, c̄) and its resulting welfare is
W2n (0) = (1 − γ)Wno (0, p2o∗ (0, c̄))). Note that, in either case, W2n (ā) > W2n (0). This occurs
both because the altruistic firm enjoys vicariously the welfare of its consumers and because
the altruistic firm is able to charge its optimal price without fear of punishment.

2.2

Period 1

If the entrant is altruistic, her utility depends on the level of consumer surplus, which depends
in turn on the quality of the good. While consumers only learn this quality after their
purchase is complete, the seller knows it before and can thus compute the surplus that
consumers will obtain ex post. This surplus depends on the quality provided, on the price
that consumers pay and on the quantity that they purchase. Using the equilibrium demand
curve, it can be written as a function of only price and quality so it equals B1n (pn1 , high)
when quality is high and B1n (pn1 , low) when it is low. As a result, an entrant with an altruism
parameter of a prefers to produce high to low quality in period 1 if
W2n (a) + a(B1n (pn1 , high) − B1n (pn1 , low)) ≥ κ.

(10)

Similarly, this entrant prefers to produce high quality rather than not producing the new
good if
W2n (a) + aB1n (pn1 , high) + q1n (pn1 − c̄) ≥ κ,

(11)

where q1n is the quantity sold. Lastly, this entrant prefers to produce a low quality good to
not producing the new good if
aB1n (pn1 , low) + q1n (pn1 − c̄) > 0.

(12)

An equilibrium where all entrants supply high quality exists if a price can be found such
that (10) and (11) are satisfied when the demand at this price is given by (8) and such that
12

the entering firm does not wish to deviate from this price. This equilibrium involves some
coordination between the actions of producers and the beliefs of consumers, since demand
is only given by (8) if consumers believe that high quality is forthcoming.
I first analyze a benchmark case where all entrants are selfish and γ = 0 so that firms are
not punished for their selfishness. Even so, W2n (0) still denotes the welfare of these entrants
in period 2 if they provide high quality. This benchmark case provides a useful contrast
for the analysis where consumers expect firms to be altruistic. The following proposition
characterizes equilibria in this case
Proposition 1. If γ = 0 and all firms have a = 0, entrants provide high quality if and only
if
W2n (0) ≥ κ

(13)

Proofs are in the Appendix.
Ignoring setup costs, profits in period 1 are the same whether the firm produces high
or low quality. Thus, the selfish firm’s choice of high as opposed to low quality is based
exclusively on whether second period profits cover the setup costs.
Consider now the incentives faced by an altruistic firm. For such a firm, the choice
between high and low quality depends also on the effect of quality on consumer welfare. The
benefits of high quality affect (11) and (10) equally (since both conditions involve comparing
the provision of high quality to an alternate course of action) while the losses from low
quality affect only (10). To determine the conditions under which (11) is a tighter constraint
than (10), one must compute the size of losses when quality is low.
From the utility function (7), consumers lose (L − pn1 ) = (c̄ − ² − pn1 ) for each low quality
unit that they buy at a price of pn1 . We thus have
B1n (pn1 , low) = (c̄ − ² − pn1 )q1n .

(14)

Conditions (11) and (10) are thus identical when the price pn1 is equal to the critical value
p̃n1 , such that
a(p̃n1 − c̄ + ²)q1n = (p̃n1 − c̄)
13

or

p̃n1 = c̄ +

a
².
1−a

(15)

For prices above p̃n1 , (10) is a tighter constraint because sales are so profitable that abstaining
from production is not attractive to the firm. By contrast, for a low price close to c̄, firm
profits are negligible but consumer losses are not because ² > 0. Thus, the vicarious losses
to an altruistic firm from providing low quality exceeds its profits and the constraint (11)
that keeps the firm from not producing at all is tighter than the constraint that the firm
prefer high to low quality.
As mentioned above, I let ² be relatively small. I suppose, in particular, that ² is small
enough that the critical price p̃n1 is smaller than the altruistic firm’s desired price. Using (5),
the latter equals (c̄ + (1 − ā)Y )/(2 − ā), so that it is always possible to find an ² such that
p̃n1 is below this.
It is useful to study the special case where all firms are known to have an altruism
parameter ā. Demand is then given by K n (1−pn1 /Y ) and consumer welfare can be computed
as in (2) so that B1n (pn1 , high) equals K n [Y − pn1 ]2 /2Y . If this price pn1 is above the critical
price p̃n1 , high quality is provided if (10) is satisfied. This requires that
·
µ
¶
¸
pn1
K n [Y − pn1 )]2
n
n
n
− ā K 1 −
(c̄ − ² − p1 ) ≥ κ.
W2 (ā) + ā
2Y
Y

(16)

Now consider the derivative of the left hand side of (16) with respect to price. This is
·
µ
¶¸
Y − pn1
1
pn1
āK n
n
n
āK −
+ (R − ² − p1 ) + 1 −
=
[c̄ − ² − pn ],
Y
Y
Y
Y
which is negative as long as firms do not charge prices below c̄ − ². Since c̄ − ² is below the
critical price, this analysis demonstrates that high quality becomes easier to sustain when
the price is lowered from the price that is optimal towards the critical price p̃n1 .
For pn1 below the critical price, high quality is provided if (11) is satisfied. This requires
that
W2n (ā)

µ
¶
K n (Y − pn1 )2
pn1
+ ā
+ 1−
(pn1 − c̄) ≥ κ.
2Y
Y

(17)

It is apparent that the left hand side reaches a maximum at po∗
2 (ā, c̄), the price that
firms wish to charge for high quality. Moreover, since the expression is quadratic in the
price, it declines monotonically as the price is lowered below this. This means that high
14

quality becomes harder to sustain as the price is lowered below the critical price. Putting
this together with the argument above, it follows that high quality cannot be sustained at
any price if it cannot be sustained at the critical price p̃n1 . If firms do supply high quality at
this price, the price that they charge in equilibrium is either the highest price that satisfies
(16) or the firms preferred price po∗
2 (ā, c̄), whichever is smaller.
Retaining for the moment the assumption that γ = 0, I now turn to the question of
whether high quality continues to be provided when some firms are altruistic while others
are not. Suppose that entrants have a probability µ of having an altruism parameter equal
to ā and that they have a probability (1 − µ) of being selfish. I focus on the case where
(13) is violated, because this assures that selfish firms prefer to provide low rather than high
quality. The question is then whether this incentive to provide low quality by a fraction
(1 − µ) of firms is sufficient to prevent altruists from offering high quality as well.
One determinant of this is the inequality
µY + (1 − µ)L ≥ c̄

or

µ(Y + ² − c̄) ≥ ².

(18)

If this inequality is satisfied, consumers who value the high quality good at Y (θ’s largest
possible value) are willing to pay the marginal cost of production of the new good even if
only altruistic suppliers provide high quality. If (18) is not satisfied, there is no equilibrium
where the altruistic firms provide high quality while the selfish ones provide low quality.
The reason is that selfish firms stand ready to sell low quality goods if the price equals at
least c̄, but the violation of (18) implies that there would be no demand for the new good
at a price of c̄ even if altruistic firms sold high quality goods at this price. Higher prices
reduce consumer’s willingness to buy a good of uncertain quality even further. Lower prices,
instead, lead the selfish low quality firms to leave the market. Note that (18) is more likely
to be violated when µ is low so that true altruism is relatively rare. Indeed, one can always
find a µ low enough that (18) is violated.
If, instead, (18) is satisfied, there is at least the potential for a “mixed” equilibrium
where altruistic firms sell high quality and selfish firms sell low quality. Consumers for
15

whom (µθ + (1 − µ)L) exceeds the price pn1 buy the good so that its demand dn1 is given by
µ
¶
pn1 − (1 − µ)L
n
n
d1 = K 1 −
.
(19)
µY
One immediate property of this demand worth curve is that its derivative with respect to µ
equals (K n /Y )(pn1 − L)/µ2 . Since L is smaller than the marginal cost c̄, this is positive if
any goods are actually sold. It follows that this demand rises when the firm is more likely
to be selling high quality.
A mixed equilibrium with a price above c̄ requires that (10) and (11) hold for the altruistic
firms at this price. The following proposition demonstrates that these conditions are more
stringent than in the case where it is common knowledge that all firms are altruistic (so that
µ = 1).
Proposition 2. For any p ≥ c̄, B1n (p, high) and −B1n (p, low) are higher when µ = 1 than
when µ < 1.
These conditions establish that, for any given price, the left hand side of (10) and (11)
are larger when µ = 1 so that these conditions are easier to meet. The intuition for this
result is straightforward. When some firms are providing low quality, demand is lower so
that a firm producing high quality generates less consumer surplus. Similarly, the reduced
sales mean that total customer losses are not as large if consumers buy low rather than high
quality. The vicarious benefits of providing high quality are therefore reduced and this mutes
altruists’ incentives to raise quality.
A selfish firm is unwilling to sell goods at a price below c̄ when (13) is violated. A firm
that is willing to sell at such a price is thus necessarily altruistic.10 Relative to not selling
any good at all, an altruistic firm is worse off selling a low quality good at a price below c̄,
since it incurs losses that cannot be made up by gains from consumers. Thus, a firm that
charges less than c̄ must be selling a high quality good with the result that its the demand
10

The model thus allows a low price to be used as a signal of quality. See Bagwell and Riordan (1991)
for a model where, because high quality goods cost more than low quality ones, it is high prices that can be
signals of quality.

16

curve is (8). If the price together with the resulting level of sales satisfies (10), the altruistic
firm is indeed willing to provide high quality at this price. This can yield an equilibrium
with high quality even if (18) is violated. Note, however, that if a price below c̄ satisfies (10)
so does a price equal to the critical value p̃n1 . This means that the parameters that lead all
new suppliers to supply high quality when µ < 1 also imply that all firms would produce
high quality if µ were equal to one.
The reverse is obviously not true, however. There are parameters such that (10) is
satisfied by the critical price, which can exceed c̄ by a substantial margin, but where this
condition is not satisfied by c̄ so that altruistic firms would be unwilling to sell high quality
at this price. If, in addition, (18) is violated, there is no mixed equilibrium in which altruistic
firms produce high quality.
This has established that the possibility that firms might be selfish reduces the range of
parameters for which high quality provision is an equilibrium. It is also immediately obvious
that in the cases where (18) is satisfied and altruistic firms produce high quality at a price
above c̄, the demand for the new good at a given price is lower than when selfish firms are
absent.
So far, the discussion in this section has been carried out setting γ = 0 so that consumers
are not concerned with the altruism of firms. As I now show, however, a positive γ does not
facilitate the provision of high quality by new entrants. Indeed, it makes this slightly more
difficult. To see this, note first that a positive γ has no effect on altruistic firms since these
are already acting in accord with the expectations of altruism-aware consumers. A positive
γ does affect selfish firms because it reduces W2n (0), the welfare of these firms in period 2 if
they provide high quality. The reason is that they must either charge a price they regard as
suboptimal or lose a fraction (1 − γ) of their customers. This reduction in W2n (0) makes it
more difficult to satisfy (13), and therefore more difficult for them to provide high quality.
When condition (13) is violated, the analysis of selfish firms is the same as when γ = 0.
As in that case, selfish firms provide low quality if they enter and charge the same price as
altruists. Consumers realize this and lower their demand for goods accordingly.
17

In summary, this section shows that the presence of selfish potential entrants reduces
the range of parameters such that high quality is provided by all firms that sell the new
good. When consumers do not expect to receive high quality, their demand for the new
good at any given price is obviously lower. In spite of this, there are circumstances where a
new good is provided either at a price so low that only altruistic firms sell it or at a higher
price that leads selfish firms to provide a low quality good. In either case, the provision
of a high quality good can demonstrate, ex post that the firm must have been altruistic to
start with. This matters for the analysis because it suggests that consumers may be rational
when they expect altruism from firms that already offer high quality products. This is true,
particularly, if the parameters are such that selfish firms would have either not introduced a
product at all or would have introduced a low quality good.

3

The Introduction of the New Good by an Incumbent
Brand

I now consider the possibility that the new good is introduced by the firm that produces
the old good. By using the same brand, the firm can make it clear to consumers that the
firm producing both goods is the same. If the old good is of sufficiently high quality that
consumers regard this firm as being altruistic towards its target customers, this common
branding can convey information about the altruism of the firm producing the new good. A
key issue, however, is the extent to which altruism for customers of the old good is related
to altruism for consumers of the new one. One possibility is that altruism is a general
disposition so that firms are either selfish or they are equally altruistic towards all people.
This seems implausible, in part because individuals often appear to be selective in their
generosity and their altruism. Krebs (1975), for example, presents evidence that individuals
are more likely to feel empathy and be generous towards people who are similar to themselves.
This fits with the fact that many successful businesses were started to solve a problem faced
by segments of the population that the founder belonged to.11 The selectivity of expected
11

Kevin Plank’s founding of the company Under Armour is a leading example of this.

18

firm altruism also fits with Fournier’s (1998) demonstration that many individuals have
personal relationships with particular brands, and that this leads consumers like the one
discussed in the introduction to expect particularly good treatment from them.
This selectivity implies that there exist two related measures of “fit” between a brand’s
existing product and its new product extension. The first is the extent to which consumers
believe that altruism towards consumers of the old product implies altruism towards the
consumers of the new. The second is the extent to which altruism-aware consumers of
the old product become angry when the new product’s quality allows them to reject the
hypothesis that the firm is altruistic towards the consumers of the new product.12 This
second measure of fit presupposes that altruism-aware consumers expect a brand that was
altruistic towards the consumers of the old good to be altruistic towards the consumers of
their brand extension as well. This second measure requires, in addition, that altruism-aware
consumers of the old product be aware of the quality of the new one, which is most easily
satisfied if they consume both. Fit should thus be very tight along both dimensions when
the old and new products of a brand are meant to be used at the same time by the same
consumers.
The first dimension of fit can be captured by the parameter µ, which gives the probability
that the new product is provided by an altruistic firm. Condition (18) is violated for µ
sufficiently low while it is satisfied for large values of µ. Thus, an increase in µ can allow
an equilibrium where altruistic firms provide high quality to exist where it would not exist
otherwise. Note, however, that true altruism by firms is still needed for high quality to be
forthcoming. Once (18) is satisfied, an increase in µ has the further effect of raising demand
for the new product, which is given by (19). Both of these effects facilitate the introduction
of new goods by incumbents whose old product leads them to be perceived as altruistic
12

This assumes that altruism-aware consumers who expect more altruism from a company become angry
in response to actions they would tolerate from others, so that they impose higher standard on these firms.
Some evidence for the view that expected altruism leads people to be more angry at selfish acts can be
found in Ohbuschi et al. (2004). They show that people are angered when people who are close to them
engage in actions that do not, for example, take proper account of their feelings while anger is less likely to
be triggered in response to such behavior from people who are less close.

19

towards the customers of the new good.
The importance of the second dimension of fit can be studied by analyzing whether the
potential willingness of altruism-aware consumers to become angry at firms that provide low
quality further increases the demand for new goods in equilibrium. To carry out this analysis,
I start by supposing that altruism aware consumers do indeed perceive the provision of a
low quality new good as demonstrating insufficient altruism. I demonstrate that this leads
altruistic firms to provide high quality in some circumstances. It follows that, under these
circumstances, there is an equilibrium in which it is rational for altruism-aware consumer to
become angry at an incumbent that introduces a low quality new good. One consequence of
this analysis is that, for certain parameters, selfish firms also provide high quality new goods
even though (13) is violated so that selfish firms would only provide low quality if there were
no altruism-aware consumers.
Under the assumption that altruism-aware customers become angry at the provision of
low quality, selfish firms that introduce a low quality good lose ∆(0, c) in the second period.
Thus, the condition under which a selfish firm prefers producing high quality rather than
low quality ceases to be (10) and becomes
W2n (0) + ∆(0, c) ≥ κ.

(20)

Similarly, the condition under which such a firm prefers to produce a low quality good rather
than not producing the new good at all is no longer (12) and is instead
q1n (pn1 − c̄) − ∆(0, c) > 0.

(21)

The condition (11) that the selfish firm prefer the production of high quality to not
producing the new good remains unchanged. It can be rewritten as
W2n (0) + q1n (pn1 − c̄) ≥ κ.

(22)

The changes in (10) and (12) make it easier for equilibria where high quality goods are
produced to exist. This is demonstrated in the next two propositions.
20

Proposition 3. Consider a price pn1 which is an equilibrium with high quality in the case
where µ = 1. Then both altruistic and selfish firms provide high quality new products at this
price when µ < 1 as long as a) (20) is satisfied and b) (22) is satisfied when q1n is given by
F n (1 − pn1 /Y ).
To see that this proposition implies that high quality is easier to provide when firms
have an existing product, note that selfish new entrants are unwilling to provide high quality
unless (13) is satisfied. Moreover (13) is more difficult to satisfy than either (20) or (22).
Thus, when (13) is violated while (20) and (22) are satisfied at pn1 , the fact that new goods
are being provided by existing brands ensures that all suppliers offer high quality. What is
attractive about this proposition is that it covers a case where firms provide high quality not
because they are in fact altruistic but only because they pretend to be.
In the next proposition, (22) is violated so that selfish firms are not induced to supply
high quality. Nonetheless, consumer anger continues to play a role in expanding the provision
of high quality goods by incumbents.
Proposition 4. Let p̂n1 denote the minimum of the critical price p̃n1 and the price that makes
(21) hold as an equality when q1n is given by F n (1 − p̃n1 /Y ). Then, if (10) and (11) are
satisfied at this price while (22) is not, altruistic firms provide high quality while selfish firms
do not sell the new good.
What occurs here is that the fear of losing customers for its old good is sufficient to
ensure that selfish firms do not provide low quality, though it is not enough to actually lead
them to produce high quality new goods. Nonetheless, the lack of low quality provision by
selfish firms helps altruistic ones sell high quality goods. Recall that, when new goods were
provided by new entrants, altruists had to charge a price below c̄ to prevent selfish firms
from selling low quality goods in the case where (13) was violated. When the new good is
sold by incumbent firms, selfish firms require a price premium above c̄ to be willing to sell a
low quality good (because doing so leads to a loss in period 2). The fact that selfish firms are
now deterred even with a price above c̄ helps altruistic firms provide high quality because
21

condition (11) becomes easier to meet as the price rises from c̄ to the critical price p̃n1 .

4

High-end versus Broad Brands

The previous section has shown that incumbent brands have an advantage over new entrants
when the perception that an incumbent is altruistic towards her existing customers leads
potential buyers of the new good to expect this altruism to be directed towards them also.
Being perceived as altruistic can thus be regarded as an asset, a form of brand equity. This
raises the question of whether the demand for a brand’s new products is strictly increasing
in the number of people that it is perceived as being altruistic towards, or whether it can
be more valuable for a brand to be regarded as being altruistic only towards a limited set of
customers. This section shows that the latter is true.
To demonstrate this, I suppose that there are two types of firms. Firms of type b are
altruistic towards all their potential customers while firms of type x are altruistic only towards
the most quality-sensitive subset of these customers. Consumers know the firms’ types as a
result of earlier purchases and, for this reason I neglect both the existence of selfish firms and
the possibility that consumers will be angry at firms that provide insufficient quality. Since
both types of firms are in fact altruistic towards their more quality conscious customers,
actions that are consistent with altruism towards this group of customers would not induce
anger according to (1). Actions that denote altruism only towards these individuals, and not
towards less quality conscious customers, have the potential for inducing anger by these less
quality conscious customers. This provides an additional incentive for firms whose altruism
is broader to act differently from those whose altruism is narrower. The section demonstrates
that these two kind of firms can act differently even without this additional incentive.
This section shows that firms of type x, whose altruism is narrower, sometimes have a
higher incentive to improve their quality. The reason is that they have less to gain from
doing what price-sensitive customers want, which is to ultimately cut costs. The result is
that firms of type x can have a higher demand for their new product than firms of type b.
Because type b firms would also like to have a high demand, the conditions that ensure this
22

are nontrivial. They are, in effect, conditions under which there is no price such that it is
credible for firms of type b to offer goods in high demand.
To develop these conditions, I once again consider a situation where firms can introduce
goods whose value to consumers depends on the consumer’s realized value of θ. The level
of quality of the new good is given by a parameter m so that the value of these goods to
consumers equals mθ.13 All consumers prefer goods with a higher value of m, and this
preference is particularly strong for people whose realized θ is large. The key choice faced
by firms in this section is whether to choose a high or a low value for m.
Since consumers with higher values of θ are more quality sensitive, it is appealing to
suppose that “high-end” firms care only about consumers with relatively high values of θ.
As a result, I assume that the altruism parameter of firms of type x equals ā for consumers
whose θ lies between X and Y while it equals zero for consumers with lower values of θ.
By contrast, firms of type b have an altruism parameter equal to ā for all their potential
customers.

4.1

Period 2

In period 2, customers know that the good is worth mθ to them. Since I am treating
customers as pursuing only their material rewards, they purchase the good if mθ exceeds the
price p2n so that demand is K n (1 − pn2 /mY ). Adapting the analysis of section 1, the logic
of (2) implies that total consumer welfare is K n (mY − pn2 )2 /2mY , while that of (5) implies
that the optimal price for firms that care about all their consumers is
pb2 =

mY (1 − ā) + c
,
2 − ā

(23)

where c is marginal cost and the superscript b denotes the firm’s type. For future reference,
it is worth recording θ− , the lowest θ which still leads customers to buy. Since this equals
pn2 /m, it is given by
θ− =
13

(1 − ā)Y + c/m
.
2 − ā

The earlier analysis corresponds to the case where m could effectively equal only 0 or 1.

23

(24)

Firm welfare for a firm of type b that charges the price in (23) equals
½µ
W2b (m, c)

=K

n

pb2
1−
mY

¶
(pb2

ā(mY − pb2 )2
− c) +
2mY

¾

µ
=K

n

mY − c
2 − ā

¶2 ³

ā ´ 1
1−
.
2 mY
(25)

The restriction that some firms care only for consumers with θ > X matters only if
X > θ− , and this fits with the idea that these firms care only about the keenest consumers.
I thus assume this is true for firms of type x. As I show momentarily, these firms then sell
to all individuals with θ ≥ X so that total consumer surplus for these consumers equals
µ
¶µ
¶
Z Y
X
m(X + Y )
n
n
n
n
K
(mθ − p2 )dFθ (θ) = K 1 −
− p2 .
(26)
Y
2
X
This expression can easily be interpreted. It equals the number of buyers with θ between X
and Y , which is K n (1 − X/Y ), times their average surplus, which is m(X + Y )/2.
In period 2, a firm of type x maximizes
¶
µ
¶µ
¶¸
·µ
m(X + Y )
X
pn2
n
n
x
n
(p2 − c) + ā 1 −
− p2
,
W2 (m, c, X) = K
1−
mY
Y
2

(27)

so that its optimal price is
px2 =

mY + c − ām(Y − X)
.
2

(28)

The maximum θ that buys at this price is px2 , and it is immediately verified that this is lower
than X if X > θ− , so that, indeed, all individuals with θ ≥ X buy the good. The price px2 is
increasing in X because higher values of X lead firms to care about fewer customers so that
their vicarious gain from lowering their price is reduced. A firm with X = Y cares about no
customers so that it acts as if its altruism parameter ā were equal to zero. At the opposite
extreme, a firm that cares for all its customers acts as if X were equal to θ− , and is optimal
price is (23).
One clear and unsurprising implication of (27) is that the firm is better off if either quality
m rises or marginal cost c declines. This can be verified by differentiating this equation and

24

obtaining
dW2x (m, c, X)
px
āY
= 22 (px2 − c) +
dm
mY
2
µ
¶
px
dW2x (m, c, X)
=− 1− 2 .
dc
mY

"
1−

µ

X
Y

¶2 #
(29)
(30)

The first of these expressions is positive because pn2 exceeds marginal cost while the second
is negative because demand is positive only if pn2 is smaller than mY . These signs imply that
one can always find a combination of an increase in c and an increase in m that leave overall
firm welfare constant.
The sign of the derivatives in (29) and (30) is independent of the size of the parameters
ā and X. It is immediately apparent, however, that the size of these derivatives depends on
X both directly and through the dependence of the price px2 on X. This is the basis of the
finding that increases in X starting at its lowest possible value of px2 /m raise the desirability
of increasing c and m simultaneously. This is demonstrated in the following proposition
Proposition 5. Consider a combination of infinitesimal increases in c and m that leaves
W2b unchanged when X = θ− . Then, this combination increases W2x (X) when X is strictly
above θ− .
Reductions in c (combined with reductions in m) tend to be relatively more attractive
to firms that care for all their customers for two main reasons. The first is that such firms
tend to charge lower prices and sell correspondingly more, so they obtain the savings from
cost reductions on more units. Second, all consumers benefit equally from a cost reduction
(though its effect on the price that they pay) whereas the benefits of an increase in m accrues
disproportionately to consumers with high values of θ. This means that, even though a firm
that cares about all its consumers receives a larger total vicarious benefit from an increase
in m than a firm that cares only for a subset (because all consumers gain something), its
vicarious benefits from a reduction in c are relatively larger.
While Proposition 5 deals only with marginal changes, its validity for all X > θ− implies
that it has global implications. Suppose, in particular, that we consider any pair of c and m
25

combinations that give the same welfare to a firm of type b. One can then reach the higher
{c, m} combination from the lower one by a series of infinitesimal changes, each of which
leaves the firm of type b indifferent and each of which makes the firm of type x better off.
This latter firm thus strictly prefers the combination with the higher m.
Figure 1 shows this graphically for Y = 10 and ā = .5. For each m between .3 and
1, the top panel depicts the level of c such that the combination {c, m} makes the value
of W2b the same as when m = 1 and c = 5. The bottom panel then depicts both W b
(which is a constant) and W x when X is such that the narrowly altruistic firm cares only
for those consumers that buy when m = 1 and c = 5 and the price is set according to (23).
At this point, both types of firms care about the same customers so the two welfare levels
are identical. For lower values of m, the firm that cares about the most quality conscious
consumers is worse off. It should be noted, however, that the reductions in firm welfare are
modest even though the changes in cost and quality considered in this Figure are substantial.
Figure 2 depicts the converse situation. For the same Y and ā, it lets c vary with m
so that W x is unaffected. Again, X is chosen so both firms get the same welfare when m
and c are at the highest values I consider. Now, however, reductions in m are matched by
reductions in c that keep W x constant. This means that W b rises with c, since a firm that
cares for all its consumers benefits more from simultaneous reductions in c and m.
This section thus has demonstrated that it is possible to find two {c, m} combinations
such that firms of type b derive more welfare in period 2 from the one with lower m while
those of type x derive more period 2 welfare from the one with higher m. This is not a
general result and there are, of course, numerous situations where both types of firms prefer
the same {c, m} combination. The model does make testable predictions, however, as to
when the two kinds of firms have the same preferences and when they do not.

4.2

Period 1

In this period, firms can either introduce a good with quality mH or one with quality mL <
mH . The marginal cost of these goods in the second period is cH and cL respectively, with
26

cL < cH . For illustration, I suppose that both goods have a marginal cost of cH in the first
period, though this is not essential for the results. Lastly, the period 1 setup costs for these
two goods are κH and κL .
The previous subsection established that there exist combinations of parameters such
that, once the welfare functions W2b (m, c) and W2x (m, c, X) have been maximized with respect
to their respective prices, they satisfy
W2b (mL , cL ) > W2b (mH , cH )

W2x (mL , cL , X) < W2x (mH , cH , X).

(31)

For the numerical example considered above, for example, these inequalities are satisfied
when cH = 5, cL = 1.43, mH = 1, and mL = .5. With these parameters, welfare is about 2
percent higher for the broadly altruistic firm when it has low costs and low quality rather
than high costs and high quality. For a firm that cares only about the equilibrium purchasers
of the good with high cost and high quality, welfare is about one third of one percent lower
when it has low costs and low quality instead.
In the analysis so far, periods 1 and 2 have been treated as having the same length and
discounting between the periods has been neglected. However, the length of time during
which the quality of a good is relatively uncertain might well be different from the length
of time during which this quality is relatively well understood and the good continues to
be sold. Indeed, one can imagine that for many products the uncertainty dissolves quickly
relative to the life of the product. In this case, the present value of the welfare the firm
obtains from the new product can be written as
W i = W1i + ρW2i

i = b, x.

The parameter ρ captures both discounting and the relative length of periods 1 and 2.14
One difference between period 1 and period 2 is that consumers do not know m in
the former. Letting me denote consumer’s expectation of m, consumer demand is K n (1 −
14

Suppose one slices period 2 into n periods of time of the same length as period 1 and lets ρ̃ denote the
discount rate between period 1 and the first of these subperiods of period 2. Then ρ = ρ̃(1 − ρ̃n )/(1 − ρ̃),
which rises with n and ρ̃.

27

pn1 /me Y )). The welfare in period 1 of a broadly altruistic firm that introduces a good of
quality m at a price pn1 is then
µ
¶
Z Y
p1n
θm − pn1
n
H
b
e n
W1 (m, m , p1 ) = 1 − e
(p1 − c ) + a
dθ
mY
Y
e
pn
1 /m
µ
·
¸
¶
p1n
2me − m (pn1 )2
mY
H
n
n
= 1− e
(p1 − c ) + a
+
− p1 .
mY
2
2(me )2 Y

(32)

The price that maximizes this is
pb1 (m, me ) =

me Y (1 − ā) + cH
.
2(1 − ā) + ām/me

(33)

Price is increasing in perceived quality (because this increases demand). It is declining
in actual quality, however. While an increase in actual quality would have no effect on the
price of selfish firms (since it affects neither cost nor demand), it leads altruistic ones to wish
to sell more because consumers gain more from their purchases.
Differentiating (32) with respect to me yields
³m
´i
dW1b
pn1 h n
H
n
p
−
c
+
a
=
−
1
.
1
dme
(me )2 Y 1
me

(34)

This expression is positive when pn1 > cH (which is guaranteed if the firm acts optimally) and
me ≥ m. A reduction in me (for given m) leads consumers to lower their purchases. This
has only a second order effect on consumer welfare when m = me because consumers are
then receiving zero surplus from marginal purchases. For firms, by contrast, the reduction
in purchases represents a first order reduction in profits. The result is that a firm supplying
a good of quality mH has nothing to gain from being expected to supply a good of quality
mL while a firm supplying quality mL would prefer to be seen as supply quality mH .
Supposing that all consumers with θ ≥ X buy the good, the period 1 welfare of a narrowly
altruistic firm equals
µ

W1x (m, me , pn1 , X)

¶
Z Y
pn1
θm − pn1
H
n
= 1− e
dθ
(p1 − c ) + ā
mY
Y
X
µ
µ
¶
¶
¶µ
pn1
X
m(X + Y )
H
n
n
= 1− e
− p1 .
(p1 − c ) + ā 1 −
mY
Y
2
28

(35)

Differentiating with respect to pn1 , the optimal price px1 (m, me ) depends only on me and is
given by the expression in (28) with m replaced by me . The earlier analysis thus demonstrates
again that the condition X ≥ θ− ensures that all consumers with θ ≥ X buy the good.
Inspection of (35) also shows that the derivative of W1x with respect to me is positive.
Since firms have nothing to gain by pretending to be offering quality mL , a firm that
offers this quality can charge the price that maximizes W i (mL , mL , p) with respect to p,
where i equals either b or x. Let piL denote this price, which equals either pb1 (mL , mL ) or
px1 (mL , mL ). By contrast, consumers would only believe that a firm is offering a good of
quality mH at a price piH if they are certain that the firm has no incentive to deviate and
offer quality mL instead. Thus, provision of quality mH is possible only if
W1i (mH , mH , piH ) − W1i (mL , mL , piL ) + ρ(W2i (mH , cH ) − W2i (mL , cL )) ≥ κH − κL

(36)

W1i (mH , mH , piH ) − W1i (mL , mH , piH ) + ρ(W2i (mH , cH ) − W2i (mL , cL )) ≥ κH − κL

(37)

where i equals either b or x. The first of these conditions says that the firm prefers to provide
high quality at piH , with consumers believing that quality is mH , to providing low quality
at piL when this price leads consumers to believe that quality is mL . This can be thought
of as ensuring that the firm does not want to deviate in an overt way from providing high
quality. The second of these conditions requires the firm to suffer a loss when it sells low
rather than high quality at the price piH even if the fact that it keeps the price constant at
piH leads consumers to believe that the firm provides high quality. This condition prevents
the firm from making a covert deviation in the quality it provides.
When these conditions are met, it is possible to sustain an outcome with high quality if
the price is piH . Among all outcomes with this level of quality, firms of type i prefer the one
that makes the left hand side of (36) as large as possible, and this is a natural choice for an
equilibrium price (since firms have no incentive to deviate from this price). It is also worth
noting that these conditions imply that firms of type i prefer all the outcomes with prices
that lead quality to be equal to mH to the feasible outcomes where quality equals mL so
that, again, it seems reasonable to suppose that the equilibrium involves m = mH .
29

Proposition 6. When (31) is satisfied, one can always find values of ρ and κH − κL such
that there exists no price for which firms of type b supply a good of quality mH while there
do exist prices for which firms of type x do so.
This proposition captures the idea that demand for new products from narrowly altruistic
firms can be higher than demand for new products from broadly altruistic ones. In particular,
it shows that, for certain model parameters, there exists an equilibrium price pxH such that
narrowly altruistic firms sell K n (1 − pxH /mH Y ) units. Since broadly altruistic would be
expected to sell a good of quality mL , they would only sell K n (1 − pxH /mL Y ) units if they
(counterfactually) charged this price.

5

Conclusions

This paper has sought to show that the association of a brand with altruism for a particular
group of consumers can explain some consumer attitudes for branded products. It can explain
both why consumers are quick to accept certain new product offerings from particular brands,
but also why some brand extensions are regarded by consumers with suspicion. The model
also shows why it may be difficult for brands to “move up” and acquire associations with
higher quality whereas “moving down” and generating demand by consumers with limited
quality sensitivity may be easier. The reason is that people expect high quality not so much
from brands that they regard as having a particular affection for themselves but rather from
brands that they regard as devoted to their most quality-sensitive purchasers.
While the model seems to have promise for explaining both some of the advantages and
some limitations of incumbent brands relative to newcomers, there may well be aspects
of this phenomenon that are not consistent with the model developed here. This model
emphasizes that brands obtain credibility from the identity of the customers that buy their
core product as opposed to obtaining it from other brand associations. This means that
evidence suggesting that other brand associations are important in determining the success
of extension would require some modification of the model.
30

A different dimension of the model that would benefit from further analysis is the way
in the perceptions of a firm’s altruism evolves over time. As emphasized by Tadelis (1999),
some firms lose their reputations for good quality over time. In the model of Tadelis (1999),
this is the result of reductions in quality that are the result of changes in ownership (where
some owners are intrinsically able to provide high quality while others are not). The model
developed here has the potential for providing a complementary explanation. This is that
new product introductions can lead customers to reject a hypothesis that they had earlier
accepted, namely that managers are sufficiently altruistic. Extending the model so that this
disappointment takes place in equilibrium (as opposed to being only a threat that induces
good behavior) would seem to be a promising avenue of future research.
The current paper focuses on only one aspect of the innovation process, namely the
extent to which firms knowingly keep quality and development costs low when consumer are
unable to ascertain a good’s quality before consumption. Altruism on the part of firms may
also play a role in other situations of imperfect information, as when firms are themselves
uncertain about the extent to which their development effort will ultimately yield a product
that consumers value. It thus seems worthwhile to gain a more general understanding of the
role of this kind of altruism in technical progress.

31

6

References
Aaker, David A. and Kevin L. Keller, “Consumer Evaluations of Brand Extensions,”
Journal of Marketing, 54, January 1990, 27-41.
Abrahams, Jeffrey, The Mission Statement Book: 301 Corporate Mission Statements
from America’s Top Companies, New York: Ten Speed Press, 2004.
Anderson, Eric T. and Duncan I. Simester, “Price Stickiness and Customer Antagonism,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010 forthcoming.
Bagwell, Kyle and Michael H. Riordan, “ High and Declining Prices Signal Product
Quality,” American Economic Review, 81, March 1991, 224–239.
Choi, Jay Pil, “Brand Extension as Informational Leverage,” Review of Economic Studies, 65, October 1998, 655-69.
Broniarczyk, Susan M. and Joseph W. Alba, “The Importance of the Brand in Brand
Extension,” Journal of Marketing, 21, May 1994, 214-28.
Cabral, Luis M. B., “Stretching Firm and Brand Reputation,” Rand Journal of Economics, 31, Winter 2000, 658–673.
Fournier, Susan, “Consumers and their brands: Developing relationship theory in consumer research,” Journal of Consumer Research, 24, March 1998, 343–373.
Keller, Kevin L., Strategic Brand Management, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall,
1998.
Keller, Kevin L. and David A. Aaker, “The Effects of Sequential Introduction of Brand
Extensions,” Journal of Marketing Research, 29, February 1992, 35-50.
Klink, Richard R. and Daniel C. Smith, “Threats to the External Validity of Brand
Extension Research,” Journal of Marketing Research,, 38, August 2001, 326-335.
Loken, Barbara and Roedder-John, Deborah, “Diluting brand beliefs: when do brand
extensions have a negative impact?, Journal of Marketing, 57, July 1993, 71-84.
Ohbuchi, Ken-Ichi, Toru Tamura, Brian M. Quigley, James T. Tedeschi, Mawaf Madi,
Michael Bind and Amelie Mummendey, “Anger, Blame, and Dimensions of Perceived Norm Violations: Culture, Gender, and Relationships,” Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, 34, August 2004, 1587–1603.

32

Pina, Jose M., Eva Martinez, Leslie de Chernatony and Susan Drury, “The effect of service brand extensions on corporate image An empirical model,” European Journal
of Marketing, 40, 2006, 174-197.
Roedder-John, Deborah, Barbara Loken and Christopher Joiner, “The Negative Impact
of Extensions: Can Flagship Products Be Diluted?,” Journal of Marketing, 62,
January 1998, 19-32.
Rotemberg, Julio J., “Minimally Acceptable Altruism and the Ultimatum Game.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 66, June 2008, 457–76.
— , “Fair Pricing,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2010, forthcoming.
Sullivan, Mary, “Measuring Image Spillovers in Umbrella Branded Products,” Journal of
Business, 63, 1990, 309-30.
Swaminathan, Vanitha, Richard J. Fox, and Srinivas K. Reddy, “The Impact of Brand
Extension Introduction on Choice,” Journal of Marketing, 65, October 2001, 1-15.
Tadelis, Steven, “What’s in a name? Reputation as a tradeable asset,” American Economic Review, 89, June 1999, 548–63.
Wernerfelt, Birger, “Umbrella Branding as a Signal of New Product Quality: An Example
of Signaling by Posting a Bond,” RAND Journal of Economics, 19, 1988, 458-66.

33

Appendix:
Derivation of ∆(a, co ) Using the formula in (5) to substitute for both po∗
2 (ā, co ) and
po∗
2 (a, co ) in (6), one obtains
µ
¶µ
¶
µ
¶2
co + (1 − ā)Y
co + (1 − ā)Y
ao2
co + (1 − ā)Y
∆(a, co ) = 1 −
− co +
Y −
(2 − ā)Y
(2 − ā)Y
2Y
(2 − ā)Y
(µ
¶
µ
µ
¶2 )
¶
co + (1 − a)Y
co + (1 − ao2 )Y
co + (1 − a)Y
a
Y −
− (1 − γ)
1−
− co +
(2 − a)Y
(2 − a)Y
2Y
(2 − a)Y
Rearranging, this becomes
µ
¶2
(1 − ā)(Y − co )2
ao2 Y − co
∆(a, co ) =
+
(2 − ā)2 Y
2Y
2 − ā
(
µ
¶2 )
(Y − co )2 (1 − ao2 )
ao2 Y − co
− (1 − γ)
+
(2 − ao2 )2 Y
2Y 2 − ao2
and the expression in the text follows immediately.
Proof of Proposition 1: When consumers expect high quality, the price po∗
2 (0, c̄) is
optimal for selfish firms. Since this yields positive profits, (13) implies that (10) and (11)
are satisfied at this price. Thus, the firm wishes to provide high quality and has no reason
to deviate from this price. This establishes that a high quality equilibrium exists when (13)
is satisfied.
Conversely, the violation of this condition implies that (10) is violated as well so the firm
prefers low to high quality at any price.
Proof of Proposition 2: B1n (p, high) is given by
Z Y
n
n
B1 (p, high) = K

p−(1−µ)(c̄−²)
µ

θ−p
dθ
Y

(38)

Moreover, p ≥ c̄ implies p − c̄ + ² > 0, which implies that (1 − µ)(p − c̄ + ²) > 0 when
µ < 1. Therefore, [p − (1 − µ)(c̄ − ²)]/µ > p. This means that, when µ < 1, θ goes between
a number strictly larger than p and Y in the integral above, whereas it goes between p and
Y when µ equals one. Therefore, B1n (p, high) is larger in the latter case.
Similarly, B1n (p, low) is given by
·
µ
¶¸
p − (1 − µ)(c̄ − ²)
n
n
−B1 (p, low) = K 1 − F
(p − c̄ + ²)
µ
34

so that B1n (p, low) is also larger when µ = 1.
Proof of Proposition 3: If consumers expect high quality at pn1 , the quantity demanded
is F n (1 − pn1 /Y ). Moreover, because this is an equilibrium price when µ = 1, altruistic firms
provide high quality if they expect selfish firms to do so. Moreover, if (20) and (22) are
satisfied at this price-quantity combination, selfish firms produce high quality as well since
they prefer this to producing low quality and to producing no new good. There is thus an
equilibrium where consumers expect high quality and both types of firms supply it.
Proof of Proposition 4: With (22) failing so that the selfish firm prefers not to produce
over producing a high quality good, the definition of p̂n1 leads the selfish firm not to produce
at all. This means that the altruistic’s firm’s actions are guided by (10), (11) and (12).
Given that the first two inequalities are satisfied, altruistic firms produce high quality.
Proof of Proposition 5: For clarity, I neglect most superscripts and subscripts of W ,
a and p in this proof. Using (25), the cost c that leads firms that care for all their consumers
to obtain a particular welfare level W satisfies
c = mY −

p

2(2 − a)mY W

(39)

Using (39) to substitute for c in (27), one obtains
a(2 − a)m(Y − X)2 a(Y − X) p
2−a
W−
+
2(2 − a)mY W
W (X) =
2
4Y
2Y
x

The derivative of this welfare with respect to m is then
dW x (X)
a(2 − a)(Y − X) a(Y − X)
=−
+
dm
4Y
4

r

2(2 − a)W
mY

When marginal cost is given by (39), the minimal value of X, namely θ− is
s
2Y W
θ− = Y −
(2 − a)m
Given this relationship. it turns out to be convenient to write X as
s
2Y W
X = Y − (1 − ζ)
(2 − a)m
35

so that X equals θ− when ζ is zero while it is strictly greater than θ− when ζ > 0. Note
that ζ is at most equal to one if the firm feels any altruism at all. Using this value of X in
the derivative above yields
dW x (X)
aW ζ(1 − ζ)
=
dm
2m
which is positive for all ζ between zero and one.
Proof of Proposition 6: Let
χio ≡ W1i (mH , mH , pi1 (mH , mH )) − W1i (mL , mL , piL )

(40)

χic ≡ W1i (mH , mH , pi1 (mH , mH )) − W1i (mL , mH , pi1 (mH , mH ))

(41)

The function W1b (mL , mH , p) is quadratic in p and reaches its maximum at pb1 (mL , mH ).
According to (33), pb1 (mL , mH ) > pb1 (mH , mH ) > pbL so that W1b (mL , mH , pb1 (mH , mH )) >
W1b (mL , mH , pbL ). In addition, the fact that the right hand side of (34) is positive implies
that W1b (mL , mH , pbL ) > W1b (mL , mL , pbL ). Therefore, χbo > χbc . This means that, at the price
pbH = pb1 (mH , mH ), condition (37) is more stringent than condition (36) for firms of type b.
Because the left hand side of (36) reaches a maximum at this price, any other price makes
condition (36) harder to meet. Therefore, if (36)) is violated at this price for firms of type
b, there is no price that leads these firms to supply quality mH .
In the case of firms of type x, px1 (mL , mH ) = px1 (mH , mH ). Nonetheless, the fact that
(35) implies that W1x is strictly increasing in me also implies, through the envelope theorem,
that W1x (mL , mH , px1 (mH , mH )) > W1i (mL , mL , piL ). Therefore, χxo > χxc . This implies that
condition (37) is more stringent than condition (36) for firms of type x when the price pxH
equals px1 (mH , mH ). As a result, firms of type x are willing to supply quality mH at the price
px1 (mH , mH ) if (37) is satisfied at this price.
The expressions for W1b and W1x in (32) and (35) respectively are linear in m with coefficients that depend only on ā, Y X and pb1 /mH . Therefore χic equals the derivative of W1i
with respect to m times (mH − mL ) Moreover, the coefficient on m is larger in the case of
W1b as long as pb1 (mH , mH )/mH < X. For X ≥ θ− , pb1 (mH , mH ) ≤ px1 (mH , mH ) ≤ mH X.
Therefore, χbc ≥ χxc , which in turn implies that χbo > χxc .
36

Now consider the equation system
χbo + ρ(W2b (mH , cH ) − W2b (mL , cL )) = κH − κL
χxc + ρ(W2x (mH , cH , X) − W2x (mL , cL , X)) = κH − κL
The solution ρ∗ , (κH − κL )∗ of this system satisfies ρ∗ > 0, (κH − κL )∗ > 0 as long
as χbo > χxc and (W2x (mH , cH , X) − W2x (mL , cL , X)) > 0 > (W2b (mH , cH ) − W2b (mL , cL )).
The former is demonstrated above and the latter is implied by (31). Therefore, ρ > ρ∗
and (κH − κL ) = (κH − κL )∗ lead to (37) being satisfied for firms of type x at a price of
px1 (mH , mH ) while (36) is not satisfied for firms of type b at a price of pb1 (mH , mH ).

Table 1
Period
Goods
Prices

Timing of the model
0
1
Incumbent good
New good
po0

pn1

37

2
Incumbent and
new goods
po2 and pn2

Figure 1: Variations in m and c that keep W b constant

5
4

c

3
2
1
0
0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

m

0.85

Firm Welfare

0.84
0.83

Wb

0.82
Wx

0.81
0.8
0.79
0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6
m

38

Figure 2: Variations in m and c that keep W x constant

6
5

c

4
3
2
1
0
0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

m

Firm Welfare

0.9

0.88

Wb

0.86

0.84
0.3

Wx
0.4

0.5

0.6
m

39

